{"id": "2003", "revid": "30793817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2003", "title": "Argument from morality", "text": "The argument from morality is an argument for the existence of God. Arguments from morality tend to be based on moral normativity or moral order. Arguments from moral normativity observe some aspect of morality and argue that God is the best or only explanation for this, concluding that God must exist. Arguments from moral order are based on the asserted need for moral order to exist in the universe. They claim that, for this moral order to exist, God must exist to support it. The argument from morality is noteworthy in that one cannot evaluate the soundness of the argument without attending to almost every important philosophical issue in meta-ethics.\nGerman philosopher Immanuel Kant devised an argument from morality based on practical reason. Kant argued that the goal of humanity is to achieve perfect happiness and virtue (the summum bonum) and believed that an afterlife must exist in order for this to be possible, and that God must exist to provide this. In his book \"Mere Christianity\", C. S. Lewis argued that \"conscience reveals to us a moral law whose source cannot be found in the natural world, thus pointing to a supernatural Lawgiver.\" Lewis argued that accepting the validity of human reason as a given must include accepting the validity of practical reason, which could not be valid without reference to a higher cosmic moral order which could not exist without a God to create and/or establish it. A related argument is from conscience; John Henry Newman argued that the conscience supports the claim that objective moral truths exist because it drives people to act morally even when it is not in their own interest. Newman argued that, because the conscience suggests the existence of objective moral truths, God must exist to give authority to these truths.\nContemporary defenders of the argument from morality are Graham Ward, Alister McGrath and William Lane Craig.\nGeneral form.\nAll variations of the argument from morality begin with an observation about moral thought or experiences and conclude with the existence of God. Some of these arguments propose moral facts which they claim evident through human experience, arguing that God is the best explanation for these. Other versions describe some end which humans should strive to attain that is only possible if God exists.\nMany arguments from morality are based on moral normativity, which suggests that objective moral truths exist and require God's existence to give them authority. Often, they consider that morality seems to be binding \u2013 obligations are seen to convey more than just a preference, but imply that the obligation will stand, regardless of other factors or interests. For morality to be binding, God must exist. In its most general form, the argument from moral normativity is:\nSome arguments from moral order suggest that morality is based on rationality and that this can only be the case if there is a moral order in the universe. The arguments propose that only the existence of God as orthodoxly conceived could support the existence of moral order in the universe, so God must exist. Alternative arguments from moral order have proposed that we have an obligation to attain the perfect good of both happiness and moral virtue. They attest that whatever we are obliged to do must be possible, and achieving the perfect good of both happiness and moral virtue is only possible if a natural moral order exists. A natural moral order requires the existence of God as orthodoxly conceived, so God must exist.\nVariations.\nPractical reason.\nIn his \"Critique of Pure Reason\", German philosopher Immanuel Kant stated that no successful argument for God's existence arises from reason alone. In his \"Critique of Practical Reason\" he went on to argue that, despite the failure of these arguments, morality requires that God's existence is assumed, owing to practical reason. Rather than proving the existence of God, Kant was attempting to demonstrate that all moral thought requires the assumption that God exists. Kant argued that humans are obliged to bring about the \"summum bonum\": the two central aims of moral virtue and happiness, where happiness arises out of virtue. As ought implies can, Kant argued, it must be possible for the \"summum bonum\" to be achieved. He accepted that it is not within the power of humans to bring the \"summum bonum\" about, because we cannot ensure that virtue always leads to happiness, so there must be a higher power who has the power to create an afterlife where virtue can be rewarded by happiness.\nPhilosopher G. H. R. Parkinson notes a common objection to Kant's argument: that what ought to be done does not necessarily entail that it is possible. He also argues that alternative conceptions of morality exist which do not rely on the assumptions that Kant makes \u2013 he cites utilitarianism as an example which does not require the \"summum bonum\". Nicholas Everitt argues that much moral guidance is unattainable, such as the Biblical command to be Christ-like. He proposes that Kant's first two premises only entail that we must try to achieve the perfect good, not that it is actually attainable.\nArgument from objective moral truths.\nBoth theists and non-theists have accepted that the existence of objective moral truths might entail the existence of God. Atheist philosopher J. L. Mackie accepted that, if objective moral truths existed, they would warrant a supernatural explanation. Scottish philosopher W. R. Sorley presented the following argument:\nMany critics have challenged the second premise of this argument, by offering a biological and sociological account of the development of human morality which suggests that it is neither objective nor absolute. This account, supported by biologist E. O. Wilson and philosopher Michael Ruse, proposes that the human experience of morality is a by-product of natural selection, a theory philosopher Mark D. Linville calls evolutionary naturalism. According to the theory, the human experience of moral obligations was the result of evolutionary pressures, which attached a sense of morality to human psychology because it was useful for moral development; this entails that moral values do not exist independently of the human mind. Morality might be better understood as an evolutionary imperative in order to propagate genes and ultimately reproduce. No human society today advocates immorality, such as theft or murder, because it would undoubtedly lead to the end of that particular society and any chance for future survival of offspring. Scottish empiricist David Hume made a similar argument, that belief in objective moral truths is unwarranted and to discuss them is meaningless.\nBecause evolutionary naturalism proposes an empirical account of morality, it does not require morality to exist objectively; Linville considers the view that this will lead to moral scepticism or antirealism. C. S. Lewis argued that, if evolutionary naturalism is accepted, human morality cannot be described as absolute and objective because moral statements cannot be right or wrong. Despite this, Lewis argued, those who accept evolutionary naturalism still act as if objective moral truths exist, leading Lewis to reject naturalism as incoherent. As an alternative ethical theory, Lewis offered a form of divine command theory which equated God with goodness and treated goodness as an essential part of reality, thus asserting God's existence.\nJ.C.A. Gaskin challenges the first premise of the argument from moral objectivity, arguing that it must be shown why absolute and objective morality entails that morality is commanded by God, rather than simply a human invention. It could be the consent of humanity that gives it moral force, for example. American philosopher Michael Martin argues that it is not necessarily true that objective moral truths must entail the existence of God, suggesting that there could be alternative explanations: he argues that naturalism may be an acceptable explanation and, even if a supernatural explanation is necessary, it does not have to be God (polytheism is a viable alternative). Martin also argues that a non-objective account of ethics might be acceptable and challenges the view that a subjective account of morality would lead to moral anarchy.\nWilliam Lane Craig has argued for this form of the moral argument.\nArgument for conscience.\nRelated to the argument from morality is the argument from conscience, associated with eighteenth-century bishop Joseph Butler and nineteenth-century cardinal John Henry Newman. Newman proposed that the conscience, as well as giving moral guidance, provides evidence of objective moral truths which must be supported by the divine. He argued that emotivism is an inadequate explanation of the human experience of morality because people avoid acting immorally, even when it might be in their interests. Newman proposed that, to explain the conscience, God must exist.\nBritish philosopher John Locke argued that moral rules cannot be established from conscience because the differences in people's consciences would lead to contradictions. Locke also noted that the conscience is influenced by \"education, company, and customs of the country\", a criticism mounted by J. L. Mackie, who argued that the conscience should be seen as an \"introjection\" of other people into an agent's mind. Michael Martin challenges the argument from conscience with a naturalistic account of conscience, arguing that naturalism provides an adequate explanation for the conscience without the need for God's existence. He uses the example of the internalization by humans of social pressures, which leads to the fear of going against these norms. Even if a supernatural cause is required, he argues, it could be something other than God; this would mean that the phenomenon of the conscience is no more supportive of monotheism than polytheism.\nC. S. Lewis argues for the existence of God in a similar way in his book \"Mere Christianity\", but he does not directly refer to it as the argument from morality."}
{"id": "2004", "revid": "40697375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2004", "title": "ASL (disambiguation)", "text": "ASL is a common initialism for American Sign Language, the sign language of the United States and Canada, and may also refer to:"}
{"id": "2005", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2005", "title": "Addictive", "text": ""}
{"id": "2006", "revid": "36069288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2006", "title": "Auschwitz concentration camp", "text": "The Auschwitz concentration camp () was a complex of over 40 concentration and extermination camps operated by Nazi Germany in occupied Poland during World War II and the Holocaust. It consisted of Auschwitz I, the main camp (\"Stammlager\") in O\u015bwi\u0119cim; Auschwitz II-Birkenau, a concentration and extermination camp with gas chambers; Auschwitz III-Monowitz, a labor camp for the chemical conglomerate IG Farben; and dozens of subcamps. The camps became a major site of the Nazis' Final Solution to the Jewish Question.\nAfter Germany sparked World War II by invading Poland in September 1939, the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) converted Auschwitz I, an army barracks, into a prisoner-of-war camp for Polish political prisoners. The first inmates, German criminals brought to the camp in May 1940 as functionaries, established the camp's reputation for sadism. Prisoners were beaten, tortured, and executed for the most trivial reasons. The first gassings\u2014of Soviet and Polish prisoners\u2014took place in block 11 of Auschwitz I around August 1941. Construction of Auschwitz II began the following month, and from 1942 until late 1944 freight trains delivered Jews from all over German-occupied Europe to its gas chambers. Of the 1.3 million people sent to Auschwitz, 1.1\u00a0million died. The death toll includes 960,000 Jews (865,000 of whom were gassed on arrival), 74,000 ethnic Poles, 21,000 Roma, 15,000 Soviet prisoners of war, and up to 15,000 other Europeans. Those not gassed died of starvation, exhaustion, disease, individual executions, or beatings. Others were killed during medical experiments.\nAt least 802 prisoners tried to escape, 144 successfully, and on 7 October 1944 two \"Sonderkommando\" units, consisting of prisoners who staffed the gas chambers, launched an unsuccessful uprising. Only 789 staff (no more than 15 percent) ever stood trial; several were executed, including camp commandant Rudolf H\u00f6ss. The Allies' failure to act on early reports of atrocities by bombing the camp or its railways remains controversial.\nAs the Soviet Red Army approached Auschwitz in January 1945, toward the end of the war, the SS sent most of the camp's population west on a death march to camps inside Germany and Austria. Soviet troops entered the camp on 27 January 1945, a day commemorated since 2005 as International Holocaust Remembrance Day. In the decades after the war, survivors such as Primo Levi, Viktor Frankl, and Elie Wiesel wrote memoirs of their experiences, and the camp became a dominant symbol of the Holocaust. In 1947, Poland founded the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum on the site of Auschwitz I and II, and in 1979 it was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.\nBackground.\nThe ideology of National Socialism (Nazism) combined elements of \"racial hygiene\", eugenics, antisemitism, pan-Germanism, and territorial expansionism, Richard J. Evans writes. Adolf Hitler and his Nazi Party became obsessed by the \"Jewish question\". Both during and immediately after the Nazi seizure of power in Germany in 1933, acts of violence against German Jews became ubiquitous, and legislation was passed excluding them from certain professions, including the civil service and the law.\nHarassment and economic pressure encouraged Jews to leave Germany; their businesses were denied access to markets, forbidden from advertising in newspapers, and deprived of government contracts. On 15 September 1935, the Reichstag passed the Nuremberg Laws. The Reich Citizenship Law defined as citizens those of \"German or related blood who demonstrate by their behaviour that they are willing and suitable to serve the German People and Reich faithfully\", and the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honor prohibited marriage and extramarital relations between those with \"German or related blood\" and Jews.\nWhen Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, triggering World War II, Hitler ordered that the Polish leadership and intelligentsia be destroyed. The area around Auschwitz was annexed to the German Reich, as part of first Gau Silesia and from 1941 Gau Upper Silesia. The camp at Auschwitz was established in April 1940, at first as a quarantine camp for Polish political prisoners. On 22 June 1941, in an attempt to obtain new territory, Hitler invaded the Soviet Union. The first gassing at Auschwitz\u2014of a group of Soviet prisoners of war\u2014took place around August 1941. By the end of that year, during what most historians regard as the first phase of the Holocaust, 500,000\u2013800,000 Soviet Jews had been killed in mass shootings by a combination of German \"Einsatzgruppen\", ordinary German soldiers, and local collaborators. At the Wannsee Conference in Berlin on 20 January 1942, Reinhard Heydrich outlined the Final Solution to the Jewish Question to senior Nazis, and from early 1942 freight trains delivered Jews from all over occupied Europe to German extermination camps in Poland: Auschwitz, Be\u0142\u017cec, Che\u0142mno, Majdanek, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka. Most prisoners were gassed on arrival.\nCamps.\nAuschwitz I.\nGrowth.\nA former World War I camp for transient workers and later a Polish army barracks, Auschwitz I was the main camp (\"Stammlager\") and administrative headquarters of the camp complex. Fifty\u00a0km southwest of Krak\u00f3w, the site was first suggested in February 1940 as a quarantine camp for Polish prisoners by Arpad Wigand, the inspector of the Sicherheitspolizei (security police) and deputy of Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski, the Higher SS and Police Leader for Silesia. Richard Gl\u00fccks, head of the Concentration Camps Inspectorate, sent Walter Eisfeld, former commandant of the Sachsenhausen concentration camp in Oranienburg, Germany, to inspect it. Around 1,000\u00a0m long and 400\u00a0m wide, Auschwitz consisted at the time of 22 brick buildings, eight of them two-story. A second story was added to the others in 1943 and eight new blocks were built.\nReichsf\u00fchrer-SS Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS, approved the site in April 1940 on the recommendation of SS-Obersturmbannf\u00fchrer Rudolf H\u00f6ss of the camps inspectorate. H\u00f6ss oversaw the development of the camp and served as its first commandant. The first 30 prisoners arrived on 20 May 1940 from the Sachsenhausen camp. German \"career criminals\" (\"Berufsverbrecher\"), the men were known as \"greens\" (\"Gr\u00fcnen\") after the green triangles on their prison clothing. Brought to the camp as functionaries, this group did much to establish the sadism of early camp life, which was directed particularly at Polish inmates, until the political prisoners took over their roles. Bruno Brodniewitsch, the first prisoner (who was given serial number 1), became \"Lager\u00e4ltester\" (camp elder). The others were given positions such as \"kapo\" and block supervisor.\nFirst mass transport.\nThe first mass transport\u2014of 728 Polish male political prisoners, including Catholic priests and Jews\u2014arrived on 14 June 1940 from Tarn\u00f3w, Poland. They were given serial numbers 31 to 758. In a letter on 12 July 1940, H\u00f6ss told Gl\u00fccks that the local population was \"fanatically Polish, ready to undertake any sort of operation against the hated SS men\". By the end of 1940, the SS had confiscated land around the camp to create a 40-square-kilometer (15 sq mi) \"zone of interest\" (\"Interessengebiet\") patrolled by the SS, Gestapo and local police. By March 1941, 10,900 were imprisoned in the camp, most of them Poles.\nAn inmate's first encounter with Auschwitz, if they were registered and not sent straight to the gas chamber, was at the prisoner reception center near the gate with the \"Arbeit macht frei\" sign, where they were tattooed, shaved, disinfected, and given a striped prison uniform. Built between 1942 and 1944, the center contained a bathhouse, laundry, and 19 gas chambers for delousing clothes. The prisoner reception center of Auschwitz I became the visitor reception center of the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum.\nCrematorium I, first gassings.\nConstruction of crematorium I began at Auschwitz I at the end of June or beginning of July 1940. Initially intended not for mass murder but for prisoners who had been executed or had otherwise died in the camp, the crematorium was in operation from August 1940 until July 1943, by which time the crematoria at Auschwitz II had taken over. By May 1942 three ovens had been installed in crematorium I, which together could burn 340 bodies in 24 hours.\nThe first experimental gassing took place around August 1941, when Lagerf\u00fchrer Karl Fritzsch, at the instruction of Rudolf H\u00f6ss, killed a group of Soviet prisoners of war by throwing Zyklon B crystals into their basement cell in block 11 of Auschwitz I. A second group of 600 Soviet prisoners of war and around 250 sick Polish prisoners were gassed on 3\u20135 September. The morgue was later converted to a gas chamber able to hold at least 700\u2013800 people. Zyklon B was dropped into the room through slits in the ceiling.\nFirst mass transport of Jews.\nHistorians have disagreed about the date the all-Jewish transports began arriving in Auschwitz. At the Wannsee Conference in Berlin on 20 January 1942, the Nazi leadership outlined, in euphemistic language, its plans for the Final Solution. According to Franciszek Piper, the Auschwitz commandant Rudolf H\u00f6ss offered inconsistent accounts after the war, suggesting the extermination began in December 1941, January 1942, or before the establishment of the women's camp in March 1942. In \"Kommandant in Auschwitz\", he wrote: \"In the spring of 1942 the first transports of Jews, all earmarked for extermination, arrived from Upper Silesia.\" On 15 February 1942, according to Danuta Czech, a transport of Jews from Beuthen, Upper Silesia (Bytom, Poland), arrived at Auschwitz I and was sent straight to the gas chamber. In 1998 an eyewitness said the train contained \"the women of Beuthen\". Saul Friedl\u00e4nder wrote that the Beuthen Jews were from the Organization Schmelt labor camps and had been deemed unfit for work. According to Christopher Browning, transports of Jews unfit for work were sent to the gas chamber at Auschwitz from autumn 1941. The evidence for this and the February 1942 transport was contested in 2015 by Nikolaus Wachsmann.\nAround 20 March 1942, according to Danuta Czech, a transport of Polish Jews from Silesia and Zag\u0142\u0119bie D\u0105browskie was taken straight from the station to the Auschwitz II gas chamber, which had just come into operation. On 26 and 28 March, two transports of Slovakian Jews were registered as prisoners in the women's camp, where they were kept for slave labour; these were the first transports organized by Adolf Eichmann's department IV B4 (the Jewish office) in the Reich Security Head Office (RSHA). On 30 March the first RHSA transport arrived from France. \"Selection\", where new arrivals were chosen for work or the gas chamber, began in April 1942 and was conducted regularly from July. Piper writes that this reflected Germany's increasing need for labor. Those selected as unfit for work were gassed without being registered as prisoners.\nThere is also disagreement about how many were gassed in Auschwitz I. Perry Broad, an \"SS-Unterscharf\u00fchrer\", wrote that \"transport after transport vanished in the Auschwitz [I] crematorium.\" In the view of Filip M\u00fcller, one of the Auschwitz I \"Sonderkommando\", tens of thousands of Jews were killed there from France, Holland, Slovakia, Upper Silesia, and Yugoslavia, and from the Theresienstadt, Ciechanow, and Grodno ghettos. Against this, Jean-Claude Pressac estimated that up to 10,000 people had been killed in Auschwitz I. The last inmates gassed there, in December 1942, were around 400 members of the Auschwitz II \"Sonderkommando\", who had been forced to dig up and burn the remains of that camp's mass graves, thought to hold over 100,000 corpses.\nAuschwitz II-Birkenau.\nConstruction.\nAfter visiting Auschwitz I in March 1941, it appears that Himmler ordered that the camp be expanded, although Peter Hayes notes that, on 10 January 1941, the Polish underground told the Polish government-in-exile in London: \"the Auschwitz concentration camp\u00a0...can accommodate approximately 7,000 prisoners at present, and is to be rebuilt to hold approximately 30,000.\" Construction of Auschwitz II-Birkenau\u2014called a \"Kriegsgefangenenlager\" (prisoner-of-war camp) on blueprints\u2014began in October 1941 in Brzezinka, about three kilometers from Auschwitz I. The initial plan was that Auschwitz II would consist of four sectors (Bauabschnitte I\u2013IV), each consisting of six subcamps (BIIa\u2013BIIf) with their own gates and fences. The first two sectors were completed (sector BI was initially a quarantine camp), but the construction of BIII began in 1943 and stopped in April 1944, and the plan for BIV was abandoned.\nSS-Sturmbannf\u00fchrer Karl Bischoff, an architect, was the chief of construction. Based on an initial budget of RM 8.9\u00a0million, his plans called for each barracks to hold 550 prisoners, but he later changed this to 744 per barracks, which meant the camp could hold 125,000, rather than 97,000. There were 174 barracks, each measuring , divided into 62 bays of . The bays were divided into \"roosts\", initially for three inmates and later for four. With personal space of to sleep and place whatever belongings they had, inmates were deprived, Robert-Jan van Pelt wrote, \"of the minimum space needed to exist\".\nThe prisoners were forced to live in the barracks as they were building them; in addition to working, they faced long roll calls at night. As a result, most prisoners in BIb (the men's camp) in the early months died of hypothermia, starvation or exhaustion within a few weeks. Some 10,000 Soviet prisoners of war arrived at Auschwitz I between 7 and 25 October 1941, but by 1 March 1942 only 945 were still registered; they were transferred to Auschwitz II, where most of them had died by May.\nCrematoria II\u2013V.\nThe first gas chamber at Auschwitz II was operational by March 1942. On or around 20 March, a transport of Polish Jews sent by the Gestapo from Silesia and Zag\u0142\u0119bie D\u0105browskie was taken straight from the O\u015bwi\u0119cim freight station to the Auschwitz II gas chamber, then buried in a nearby meadow. The gas chamber was located in what prisoners called the \"little red house\" (known as bunker 1 by the SS), a brick cottage that had been turned into a gassing facility; the windows had been bricked up and its four rooms converted into two insulated rooms, the doors of which said \"Zur Desinfektion\" (\"to disinfection\"). A second brick cottage, the \"little white house\" or bunker 2, was converted and operational by June 1942. When Himmler visited the camp on 17 and 18 July 1942, he was given a demonstration of a selection of Dutch Jews, a mass killing in a gas chamber in bunker 2, and a tour of the building site of Auschwitz III, the new IG Farben plant being constructed at Monowitz.\nUse of bunkers I and 2 stopped in spring 1943 when the new crematoria were built, although bunker 2 became operational again in May 1944 for the murder of the Hungarian Jews. Bunker I was demolished in 1943 and bunker 2 in November 1944. Piper writes that plans for crematoria II and III show that both had an oven room on the ground floor, and an underground dressing room and gas chamber . The dressing rooms had wooden benches along the walls and numbered pegs for clothing. Victims would be led from these rooms to a five-yard-long narrow corridor, which in turn led to a space from which the gas chamber door opened. The chambers were white inside, and nozzles were fixed to the ceiling to resemble showerheads. The daily capacity of the crematoria (how many bodies could be burned in a 24-hour period) was 340 corpses in crematorium I; 1,440 each in crematoria II and III; and 768 each in IV and V. By June 1943 all four crematoria were operational, but crematorium I was not used after July 1943. This made the total daily capacity 4,416, although by loading three to five corpses at a time, the \"Sonderkommando\" were able to burn some 8,000 bodies a day. This maximum capacity was rarely needed; the average between 1942 and 1944 was 1,000 bodies burned every day.\nAuschwitz III-Monowitz.\nAfter examining several sites for a new plant to manufacture Buna-N, a type of synthetic rubber essential to the war effort, the German chemical cartel IG Farben chose a site near the towns of Dwory and Monowice (Monowitz in German), about east of Auschwitz I. Tax exemptions were available to corporations prepared to develop industries in the frontier regions under the Eastern Fiscal Assistance Law, passed in December 1940. In addition to its proximity to the concentration camp, a source of cheap labor, the site had good railway connections and access to raw materials. In February 1941, Himmler ordered that the Jewish population of O\u015bwi\u0119cim be expelled to make way for skilled laborers; that all Poles able to work remain in the town and work on building the factory; and that Auschwitz prisoners be used in the construction work.\nAuschwitz inmates began working at the plant, known as Buna Werke and IG-Auschwitz, in April 1941, demolishing houses in Monowitz to make way for it. By May, because of a shortage of trucks, several hundred of them were rising at 3\u00a0am to walk there twice a day from Auschwitz I. Because a long line of exhausted inmates walking through the town of O\u015bwi\u0119cim might harm German-Polish relations, the inmates were told to shave daily, make sure they were clean, and sing as they walked. From late July they were taken to the factory by train on freight wagons. Given the difficulty of moving them, including during the winter, IG Farben decided to build a camp at the plant. The first inmates moved there on 30 October 1942. Known as \"KL Auschwitz III-Aussenlager\" (Auschwitz III subcamp), and later as the Monowitz concentration camp, it was the first concentration camp to be financed and built by private industry.\nMeasuring , the camp was larger than Auschwitz I. By the end of 1944, it housed 60 barracks measuring , each with a day room and a sleeping room containing 56 three-tiered wooden bunks. IG Farben paid the SS three or four Reichsmark for nine- to eleven-hour shifts from each worker. In 1943\u20131944, about 35,000 inmates worked at the plant; 23,000 (32 a day on average) died as a result of malnutrition, disease, and the workload. Within three to four months at the camp, Peter Hayes writes, the inmates were \"reduced to walking skeletons\". Deaths and transfers to the gas chambers at Auschwitz II reduced the population by nearly a fifth each month. Site managers constantly threatened inmates with the gas chambers, and the smell from the crematoria at Auschwitz I and II hung heavy over the camp.\nAlthough the factory had been expected to begin production in 1943, shortages of labor and raw materials meant start-up was postponed repeatedly. The Allies bombed the plant in 1944 on 20 August, 13 September, 18 December, and 26 December. On 19 January 1945, the SS ordered that the site be evacuated, sending 9,000 inmates, most of them Jews, on a death march to another Auschwitz subcamp at Gliwice. From Gliwice, prisoners were taken by rail in open freight wagons to the Buchenwald and Mauthausen concentration camps. The 800 inmates who had been left behind in the Monowitz hospital were liberated along with the rest of the camp on 27 January 1945 by the 1st Ukrainian Front of the Red Army.\nSubcamps.\nSeveral other German industrial enterprises, such as Krupp and Siemens-Schuckert, built factories with their own subcamps. There were around 28 camps near industrial plants, each camp holding hundreds or thousands of prisoners. Designated as \"Aussenlager\" (external camp), \"Nebenlager\" (extension camp), \"Arbeitslager\" (labor camp), or \"Aussenkommando\" (external work detail), camps were built at Blechhammer, Jawiszowice, Jaworzno, Lagisze, Mys\u0142owice, Trzebinia, and as far afield as the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia in Czechoslovakia. Industries with satellite camps included coal mines, foundries and other metal works, and chemical plants. Prisoners were also made to work in forestry and farming. For example, \"Wirtschaftshof Budy\", in the Polish village of Budy near Brzeszcze, was a farming subcamp where prisoners worked 12-hour days in the fields, tending animals, and making compost by mixing human ashes from the crematoria with sod and manure. Incidents of sabotage to decrease production took place in several subcamps, including Charlottengrube, Gleiwitz II, and Rajsko. Living conditions in some of the camps were so poor that they were regarded as punishment subcamps.\nLife in the camps.\nSS garrison.\nBorn in Baden-Baden in 1900, Rudolf H\u00f6ss was named the first commandant of Auschwitz when Heinrich Himmler ordered on 27 April 1940 that the camp be established. Living with his wife and children in a two-story stucco house near the commandant's and administration building, he served as commandant until 11 November 1943, with Josef Kramer as his deputy. Succeeded as commandant by Arthur Liebehenschel, H\u00f6ss joined the SS Business and Administration Head Office in Oranienburg as director of Amt DI, a post that made him deputy of the camps inspectorate.\nRichard Baer became commandant of Auschwitz I on 11 May 1944 and Fritz Hartjenstein of Auschwitz II from 22 November 1943, followed by Josef Kramer from 15 May 1944 until the camp's liquidation in January 1945. Heinrich Schwarz was commandant of Auschwitz III from the point at which it became an autonomous camp in November 1943 until its liquidation. H\u00f6ss returned to Auschwitz between 8 May and 29 July 1944 as the local SS garrison commander (\"Standort\u00e4ltester\") to oversee the arrival of Hungary's Jews, which made him the superior officer of all the commandants of the Auschwitz camps.\nAccording to Aleksander Lasik, about 6,335 people (6,161 of them men) worked for the SS at Auschwitz over the course of the camp's existence; 4.2 percent were officers, 26.1 percent non-commissioned officers, and 69.7 percent rank and file. In March 1941, there were 700 SS guards; in June 1942, 2000; and in August 1944, 3,342. At its peak in January 1945, 4,480 SS men and 71 SS women worked in Auschwitz; the higher number is probably attributable to the logistics of evacuating the camp. Female guards were known as SS supervisors (\"SS-Aufseherinnen\").\nMost of the staff were from Germany or Austria, but as the war progressed, increasing numbers of \"Volksdeutsche\" from other countries, including Czechoslovakia, Poland, Yugoslavia, and the Baltic states, joined the SS at Auschwitz. Not all were ethnically German. Guards were also recruited from Hungary, Romania, and Slovakia. Camp guards, around three quarters of the SS personnel, were members of the \"SS-Totenkopfverb\u00e4nde\" (death's head units). Other SS staff worked in the medical or political departments, or in the economic administration, which was responsible for clothing and other supplies, including the property of dead prisoners. The SS viewed Auschwitz as a comfortable posting; being there meant they had avoided the front and had access to the victims' property.\nFunctionaries and \"Sonderkommando\".\nCertain prisoners, at first non-Jewish Germans but later Jews and non-Jewish Poles, were assigned positions of authority as \"Funktionsh\u00e4ftlinge\" (functionaries), which gave them access to better housing and food. The \"Lagerprominenz\" (camp elite) included \"Blockschreiber\" (barracks clerk), \"Kapo\" (overseer), \"Stubendienst\" (barracks orderly), and \"Kommandierte\" (trusties). Wielding tremendous power over other prisoners, the functionaries developed a reputation as sadists. Very few were prosecuted after the war, because of the difficulty of determining which atrocities had been performed by order of the SS.\nAlthough the SS oversaw the killings at each gas chamber, the bulk of the work was done by prisoners known from 1942 as the \"Sonderkommando\" (special squad). These were mostly Jews but they included groups such as Soviet POWs. In 1940\u20131941 when there was one gas chamber, there were 20 such prisoners, in late 1943 there were 400, and by 1944 during the Holocaust in Hungary the number had risen to 874. The \"Sonderkommando\" removed goods and corpses from the incoming trains, guided victims to the dressing rooms and gas chambers, removed their bodies afterwards, and took their jewelry, hair, dental work, and any precious metals from their teeth, all of which was sent to Germany. Once the bodies were stripped of anything valuable, the \"Sonderkommando\" burned them in the crematoria.\nBecause they were witnesses to the mass murder, the Sonderkommando lived separately from the other prisoners, although this rule was not applied to the non-Jews among them. Their quality of life was further improved by their access to the property of new arrivals, which they traded within the camp, including with the SS. Nevertheless, their life expectancy was short; they were regularly killed and replaced. About 100 survived to the camp's liquidation. They were forced on a death march and by train to the camp at Mauthausen, where three days later they were asked to step forward during roll call. No one did, and because the SS did not have their records, several of them survived.\nTattoos and triangles.\nUniquely at Auschwitz, prisoners were tattooed with a serial number, on their left breast for Soviet prisoners of war and on the left arm for civilians. Categories of prisoner were distinguishable by triangular pieces of cloth (German: \"Winkel\") sewn onto on their jackets below their prisoner number. Political prisoners \"(Schutzh\u00e4ftlinge\" or Sch), mostly Poles, had a red triangle, while criminals (\"Berufsverbrecher\" or BV) were mostly German and wore green. Asocial prisoners (\"Asoziale\" or Aso), which included vagrants, prostitutes and the Roma, wore black. Purple was for Jehovah's Witnesses (\"Internationale Bibelforscher-Vereinigung\" or IBV)'s and pink for gay men, who were mostly German. An estimated 5,000\u201315,000 gay men prosecuted under German Penal Code Section 175 (proscribing sexual acts between men) were detained in concentration camps, of whom an unknown number were sent to Auschwitz. Jews wore a yellow badge, the shape of the Star of David, overlaid by a second triangle if they also belonged to a second category. The nationality of the inmate was indicated by a letter stitched onto the cloth. A racial hierarchy existed, with German prisoners at the top. Next were non-Jewish prisoners from other countries. Jewish prisoners were at the bottom.\nTransports.\nDeportees were brought to Auschwitz crammed in wretched conditions into goods or cattle wagons, arriving near a railway station or at one of several dedicated trackside ramps, including one next to Auschwitz I. The \"Altejudenrampe\" (old Jewish ramp), part of the O\u015bwi\u0119cim freight railway station, was used from 1942 to 1944 for Jewish transports. Located between Auschwitz I and Auschwitz II, arriving at this ramp meant a 2.5\u00a0km journey to Auschwitz II and the gas chambers. Most deportees were forced to walk, accompanied by SS men and a car with a Red Cross symbol that carried the Zyklon B, as well as an SS doctor in case officers were poisoned by mistake. Inmates arriving at night, or who were too weak to walk, were taken by truck. Work on a new railway line and ramp \"(right)\" between sectors BI and BII in Auschwitz II, was completed in May 1944 for the arrival of Hungarian Jews between May and early July 1944. The rails led directly to the area around the gas chambers.\nLife for the inmates.\nThe day began at 4:30\u00a0am for the men (an hour later in winter), and earlier for the women, when the block supervisor sounded a gong and started beating inmates with sticks to make them wash and use the latrines quickly. Sanitary arrangements were atrocious, with few latrines and a lack of clean water. Each washhouse had to service thousands of prisoners. In sectors BIa and BIb in Auschwitz II, two buildings containing latrines and washrooms were installed in 1943. These contained troughs for washing and 90 faucets; the toilet facilities were \"sewage channels\" covered by concrete with 58 holes for seating. There were three barracks with washing facilities or toilets to serve 16 residential barracks in BIIa, and six washrooms/latrines for 32 barracks in BIIb, BIIc, BIId, and BIIe. Primo Levi described a 1944 Auschwitz III washroom:\nPrisoners received half a liter of coffee substitute or a herbal tea in the morning, but no food. A second gong heralded roll call, when inmates lined up outside in rows of ten to be counted. No matter the weather, they had to wait for the SS to arrive for the count; how long they stood there depended on the officers' mood, and whether there had been escapes or other events attracting punishment. Guards might force the prisoners to squat for an hour with their hands above their heads, or hand out beatings or detention for infractions such as having a missing button or an improperly cleaned food bowl. The inmates were counted and re-counted.\nAfter roll call, to the sound of \"Arbeitskommandos formieren\" (\"form work details\"), prisoners walked to their place of work, five abreast, to begin a working day that was normally 11 hours long\u2014longer in summer and shorter in winter. A prison orchestra, such as the Women's Orchestra of Auschwitz, was forced to play cheerful music as the workers left the camp. \"Kapos\" were responsible for the prisoners' behavior while they worked, as was an SS escort. Much of the work took place outdoors at construction sites, gravel pits, and lumber yards. No rest periods were allowed. One prisoner was assigned to the latrines to measure the time the workers took to empty their bladders and bowels.\nLunch was three quarters of a liter of watery soup at midday, reportedly foul-tasting, with meat in the soup four times a week and vegetables (mostly potatoes and rutabaga) three times. The evening meal was 300 grams of bread, often moldy, part of which the inmates were expected to keep for breakfast the next day, with a tablespoon of cheese or marmalade, or 25 grams of margarine or sausage. Prisoners engaged in hard labor were given extra rations.\nA second roll call took place at seven in the evening, in the course of which prisoners might be hanged or flogged. If a prisoner was missing, the others had to remain standing until the absentee was found or the reason for the absence discovered, even if it took hours. On 6 July 1940, roll call lasted 19 hours because a Polish prisoner, Tadeusz Wiejowski, had escaped; following an escape in 1941, a group of prisoners was picked out from the escapee's workmates or barracks and sent to block 11 to be starved to death. After roll call, prisoners retired to their blocks for the night and received their bread rations. Then they had some free time to use the washrooms and receive their mail, unless they were Jews: Jews were not allowed to receive mail. Curfew (\"nighttime quiet\") was marked by a gong at nine o'clock. Inmates slept in long rows of brick or wooden bunks, or on the floor, lying in and on their clothes and shoes to prevent them from being stolen. The wooden bunks had blankets and paper mattresses filled with wood shavings; in the brick barracks, inmates lay on straw. According to Mikl\u00f3s Nyiszli:\nSunday was not a work day, but prisoners had to clean the barracks and take their weekly shower, and were allowed to write (in German) to their families, although the SS censored the mail. Inmates who did not speak German would trade bread for help. Observant Jews tried to keep track of the Hebrew calendar and Jewish holidays, including Shabbat, and the weekly Torah portion. No watches, calendars, or clocks were permitted in the camp. Only two Jewish calendars made in Auschwitz survived to the end of the war. Prisoners kept track of the days in other ways, such as obtaining information from newcomers.\nWomen's camp.\nAbout 30 percent of the registered inmates were female. The first mass transport of women, 999 non-Jewish German women from the Ravensbr\u00fcck concentration camp, arrived on 26 March 1942. Classified as criminal, asocial and political, they were brought to Auschwitz as founder functionaries of the women's camp. Rudolf H\u00f6ss wrote of them: \"It was easy to predict that these beasts would mistreat the women over whom they exercised power\u00a0... Spiritual suffering was completely alien to them.\" They were given serial numbers 1\u2013999. The women's guard from Ravensbr\u00fcck, Johanna Langefeld, became the first Auschwitz women's camp \"Lagerf\u00fchrerin\". A second mass transport of women, 999 Jews from Poprad, Slovakia, arrived on the same day. According to Danuta Czech, this was the first registered transport sent to Auschwitz by the Reich Security Head Office (RSHA) office IV B4, known as the Jewish Office, led by SS \"Obersturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Adolf Eichmann. (Office IV was the Gestapo.) A third transport of 798 Jewish women from Bratislava, Slovakia, followed on 28 March.\nWomen were at first held in blocks 1\u201310 of Auschwitz I, but from 6 August 1942, 13,000 inmates were transferred to a new women's camp (\"Frauenkonzentrationslager\" or FKL) in Auschwitz II. This consisted at first of 15 brick and 15 wooden barracks in sector (\"Bauabschnitt\") BIa; it was later extended into BIb, and by October 1943 it held 32,066 women. In 1943\u20131944, about 11,000 women were also housed in the Gypsy family camp, as were several thousand in the Theresienstadt family camp.\nConditions in the women's camp were so poor that when a group of male prisoners arrived to set up an infirmary in October 1942, their first task, according to researchers from the Auschwitz museum, was to distinguish the corpses from the women who were still alive. Gisella Perl, a Romanian-Jewish gynecologist and inmate of the women's camp, wrote in 1948:\nLangefeld was succeeded as \"Lagerf\u00fchrerin\" in October 1942 by SS \"Oberaufseherin\" Maria Mandl, who developed a reputation for cruelty. H\u00f6ss hired men to oversee the female supervisors, first SS \"Obersturmf\u00fchrer\" Paul M\u00fcller, then SS \"Hauptsturmf\u00fchrer\" Franz H\u00f6ssler. Mandl and H\u00f6ssler were executed after the war. Sterilization experiments were carried out in barracks 30 by a German gynecologist, Carl Clauberg, and another German doctor, Horst Schumann.\nMedical experiments, block 10.\nGerman doctors performed a variety of experiments on prisoners at Auschwitz. SS doctors tested the efficacy of X-rays as a sterilization device by administering large doses to female prisoners. Carl Clauberg injected chemicals into women's uteruses in an effort to glue them shut. Prisoners were infected with spotted fever for vaccination research and exposed to toxic substances to study the effects. In one experiment Bayer, then part of IG Farben, paid RM 150 each for 150 female inmates from Auschwitz (the camp had asked for RM 200 per woman), who were transferred to a Bayer facility to test an anesthetic. A Bayer employee wrote to Rudolf H\u00f6ss: \"The transport of 150 women arrived in good condition. However, we were unable to obtain conclusive results because they died during the experiments. We would kindly request that you send us another group of women to the same number and at the same price.\" The Bayer research was led at Auschwitz by Helmuth Vetter of Bayer/IG Farben, who was also an Auschwitz physician and SS captain, and by Auschwitz physicians Friedrich Entress and Eduard Wirths.\nThe most infamous doctor at Auschwitz was Josef Mengele, the \"Angel of Death\", who worked in Auschwitz II from 30 May 1943, at first in the gypsy family camp. Interested in performing research on identical twins, dwarfs, and those with hereditary disease, Mengele set up a kindergarten in barracks 29 and 31 for children he was experimenting on, and for all Romani children under six, where they were given better food rations. From May 1944, he would select twins and dwarfs from among the new arrivals during \"selection\", reportedly calling for twins with \"Zwillinge heraus!\" (\"twins step forward!\"). He and other doctors (the latter prisoners) would measure the twins' body parts, photograph them, and subject them to dental, sight and hearing tests, x-rays, blood tests, surgery, and blood transfusions between them. Then he would have them killed and dissected. Kurt Heissmeyer, another German doctor and SS officer, took 20 Polish Jewish children from Auschwitz to use in pseudoscientific experiments at the Neuengamme concentration camp near Hamburg, where he injected them with the tuberculosis bacilli to test a cure for tuberculosis. In April 1945, the children were killed by hanging to conceal the project.\nA Jewish skeleton collection was obtained from among a pool of 115 Jewish inmates, chosen for their perceived stereotypical racial characteristics. Rudolf Brandt and Wolfram Sievers, general manager of the \"Ahnenerbe\" (a Nazi research institute), delivered the skeletons to the collection of the Anatomy Institute at the Reichsuniversit\u00e4t Stra\u00dfburg in Alsace-Lorraine. The collection was sanctioned by Heinrich Himmler and under the direction of August Hirt. Ultimately 87 of the inmates were shipped to Natzweiler-Struthof and killed in August 1943. Brandt and Sievers were executed in 1948 after being convicted during the Doctors' trial, part of the Subsequent Nuremberg trials.\nPunishment, block 11.\nPrisoners could be beaten and killed by guards and kapos for the slightest infraction of the rules. Polish historian Irena Strzelecka writes that kapos were given nicknames that reflected their sadism: \"Bloody\", \"Iron\", \"The Strangler\", \"The Boxer\". Based on the 275 extant reports of punishment in the Auschwitz archives, Strzelecka lists common infractions: returning a second time for food at mealtimes, removing your own gold teeth to buy bread, breaking into the pigsty to steal the pigs' food, putting your hands in your pockets.\nFlogging during roll-call was common. A flogging table called \"the goat\" immobilized prisoners' feet in a box, while they stretched themselves across the table. Prisoners had to count out the lashes\u2014\"25 mit besten Dank habe ich erhalten\" (\"25 received with many thanks\")\u2014 and if they got the figure wrong, the flogging resumed from the beginning. Punishment by \"the post\" involved tying prisoners hands behind their backs with chains attached to hooks, then raising the chains so the prisoners were left dangling by the wrists. If their shoulders were too damaged afterwards to work, they might be sent to the gas chamber. Prisoners were subjected to the post for helping a prisoner who had been beaten, and for picking up a cigarette butt. To extract information from inmates, guards would force their heads onto the stove, and hold them there, burning their faces and eyes.\nKnown as block 13 until 1941, block 11 of Auschwitz I was the prison within the prison, reserved for inmates suspected of resistance activities. Cell 22 in block 11 was a windowless standing cell (\"Stehbunker\"). Split into four sections, each section measured less than and held four prisoners, who entered it through a hatch near the floor. There was a 5\u00a0cm\u00a0x\u00a05\u00a0cm vent for air, covered by a perforated sheet. Strzelecka writes that prisoners might have to spend several nights in cell 22; Wies\u0142aw Kielar spent four weeks in it for breaking a pipe. Several rooms in block 11 were deemed the \"Polizei-Ersatz-Gef\u00e4ngnis Myslowitz in Auschwitz\" (Auschwitz branch of the police station at Mys\u0142owice). There were also \"Sonderbehandlung\" cases (\"special treatment\") for Poles and others regarded as dangerous to the Third Reich.\nDeath wall.\nThe courtyard between blocks 10 and 11, known as the \"death wall\", served as an execution area, including for Poles in the General Government area who had been sentenced to death by a criminal court. The first executions, by shooting inmates in the back of the head, took place at the death wall on 11 November 1941, Poland's National Independence Day. The 151 accused were led to the wall one at a time, stripped naked and with their hands tied behind their backs. Danuta Czech noted that a \"clandestine Catholic mass\" was said the following Sunday on the second floor of Block 4 in Auschwitz I, in a narrow space between bunks.\nAn estimated 4,500 Polish political prisoners were executed at the death wall, including members of the camp resistance. An additional 10,000 Poles were brought to the camp to be executed without being registered. About 1,000 Soviet prisoners of war died by execution, although this is a rough estimate. A Polish government-in-exile report stated that 11,274 prisoners and 6,314 prisoners of war had been executed. Rudolf H\u00f6ss wrote that \"execution orders arrived in an unbroken stream\". According to SS officer Perry Broad, \"[s]ome of these walking skeletons had spent months in the stinking cells, where not even animals would be kept, and they could barely manage to stand straight. And yet, at that last moment, many of them shouted 'Long live Poland', or 'Long live freedom'.\" The dead included Colonel Jan Karcz and Major Edward G\u00f6tt-Gety\u0144ski, executed on 25 January 1943 with 51 others suspected of resistance activities. J\u00f3zef Noji, the Polish long-distance runner, was executed on 15 February that year. In October 1944, 200 \"Sonderkommando\" were executed for their part in the \"Sonderkommando\" revolt. \nFamily camps.\nGypsy family camp.\nA separate camp for the Roma, the \"Zigeunerfamilienlager\" (\"Gypsy family camp\"), was set up in the BIIe sector of Auschwitz II-Birkenau in February 1943. For unknown reasons, they were not subject to selection and families were allowed to stay together. The first transport of German Roma arrived on 26 February that year. There had been a small number of Romani inmates before that; two Czech Romani prisoners, Ignatz and Frank Denhel, tried to escape in December 1942, the latter successfully, and a Polish Romani woman, Stefania Ciuron, arrived on 12 February 1943 and escaped in April. Josef Mengele, the Holocaust's most infamous physician, worked in the gypsy family camp from 30 May 1943 when he began his work in Auschwitz.\nThe Auschwitz registry (\"Hauptb\u00fccher\") shows that 20,946 Roma were registered prisoners, and another 3,000 are thought to have entered unregistered. On 22 March 1943, one transport of 1,700 Polish Sinti and Roma was gassed on arrival because of illness, as was a second group of 1,035 on 25 May 1943. The SS tried to liquidate the camp on 16 May 1944, but the Roma fought them, armed with knives and iron pipes, and the SS retreated. Shortly after this, the SS removed nearly 2,908 from the family camp to work, and on 2 August 1944 gassed the other 2,897. Ten thousand remain unaccounted for.\nTheresienstadt family camp.\nThe SS deported around 18,000 Jews to Auschwitz from the Theresienstadt ghetto in Terezin, Czechoslovakia, beginning on 8 September 1943 with a transport of 2,293 male and 2,713 female prisoners. Placed in sector BIIb as a \"family camp\", they were allowed to keep their belongings, wear their own clothes, and write letters to family; they did not have their hair shaved and were not subjected to selection. Correspondence between Adolf Eichmann's office and the International Red Cross suggests that the Germans set up the camp to cast doubt on reports, in time for a planned Red Cross visit to Auschwitz, that mass murder was taking place there. The women and girls were placed in odd-numbered barracks and the men and boys in even-numbered. An infirmary was set up in barracks 30 and 32, and barracks 31 became a school and kindergarten. The somewhat better living conditions were nevertheless inadequate; 1,000 members of the family camp were dead within six months. Two other groups of 2,491 and 2,473 Jews arrived from Theresienstadt in the family camp on 16 and 20 December 1943.\nOn 8 March 1944, 3,791 of the prisoners (men, women and children) were sent to the gas chambers; the men were taken to crematorium III and the women later to crematorium II. Some of the group were reported to have sung Hatikvah and the Czech national anthem on the way. Before they died, they had been asked to write postcards to relatives, postdated to 25\u201327 March. Several twins were held back for medical experiments. The Czechoslovak government-in-exile initiated diplomatic manoeuvers to save the remaining Czech Jews after its representative in Bern received the Vrba-Wetzler report, written by two escaped prisoners, Rudolf Vrba and Alfred Wetzler, which warned that the remaining family-camp inmates would be gassed soon. The BBC also became aware of the report; its German service broadcast news of the family-camp murders during its women's programme on 16 June 1944, warning: \"All those responsible for such massacres from top downwards will be called to account.\" The Red Cross visited Theresienstadt in June 1944 and were persuaded by the SS that no one was being deported from there. The following month, about 2,000 women from the family camp were selected to be moved to other camps and 80 boys were moved to the men's camp; the remaining 7,000 were gassed between 10 and 12 July.\nSelection and extermination process.\nGas chambers.\nThe first gassings at Auschwitz took place in early September 1941, when around 850 inmates\u2014Soviet prisoners of war and sick Polish inmates\u2014were killed with Zyklon B in the basement of block 11 in Auschwitz I. The building proved unsuitable, so gassings were conducted instead in crematorium I, also in Auschwitz I, which operated until December 1942. There, more than 700 victims could be killed at once. Tens of thousands were killed in crematorium I. To keep the victims calm, they were told they were to undergo disinfection and de-lousing; they were ordered to undress outside, then were locked in the building and gassed. After its decommissioning as a gas chamber, the building was converted to a storage facility and later served as an SS air raid shelter. The gas chamber and crematorium were reconstructed after the war. Dwork and van Pelt write that a chimney was recreated; four openings in the roof were installed to show where the Zyklon B had entered; and two of the three furnaces were rebuilt with the original components.\nIn early 1942, mass exterminations were moved to two provisional gas chambers (the \"red house\" and \"white house\", known as bunkers 1 and 2) in Auschwitz II, while the larger crematoria (II, III, IV, and V) were under construction. Bunker 2 was temporarily reactivated from May to November 1944, when large numbers of Hungarian Jews were gassed. In summer 1944 the combined capacity of the crematoria and outdoor incineration pits was 20,000 bodies per day. A planned sixth facility\u2014crematorium VI\u2014was never built.\nFrom 1942 Jews were being transported to Auschwitz from all over German-occupied Europe by rail, arriving in daily convoys. The gas chambers worked to their fullest capacity from May to July 1944, during the Holocaust in Hungary. A rail spur leading to crematoria II and III in Auschwitz II was completed that May, and a new ramp was built between sectors BI and BII to deliver the victims closer to the gas chambers (images top right). On 29 April the first 1,800 Jews from Hungary arrived at the camp. From 14 May until early July 1944, 437,000 Hungarian Jews, half the pre-war population, were deported to Auschwitz, at a rate of 12,000 a day for a considerable part of that period. The crematoria had to be overhauled. Crematoria II and III were given new elevators leading from the stoves to the gas chambers, new grates were fitted, and several of the dressing rooms and gas chambers were painted. Cremation pits were dug behind crematorium V. The incoming volume was so great that the \"Sonderkommando\" resorted to burning corpses in open-air pits as well as in the crematoria.\nSelection.\nAccording to Polish historian Franciszek Piper, of the 1,095,000 Jews deported to Auschwitz, around 205,000 were registered in the camp and given serial numbers; 25,000 were sent to other camps; and 865,000 were killed soon after arrival. Adding non-Jewish victims gives a figure of 900,000 who were killed without being registered.\nDuring \"selection\" on arrival, those deemed able to work were sent to the right and admitted into the camp (registered), and the rest were sent to the left to be gassed. The group selected to die included almost all children, women with small children, the elderly, and others who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be fit for work. Practically any fault\u2014scars, bandages, boils and emaciation\u2014might provide reason enough to be deemed unfit. Children might be made to walk toward a stick held at a certain height; those who could walk under it were selected for the gas. Inmates unable to walk or who arrived at night were taken to the crematoria on trucks; otherwise the new arrivals were marched there. Their belongings were seized and sorted by inmates in the \"Kanada\" warehouses, an area of the camp in sector BIIg that housed 30 barracks used as storage facilities for plundered goods; it derived its name from the inmates' view of Canada as a land of plenty.\nInside the crematoria.\nThe crematoria consisted of a dressing room, gas chamber, and furnace room. In crematoria II and III, the dressing room and gas chamber were underground; in IV and V, they were on the ground floor. The dressing room had numbered hooks on the wall to hang clothes. In crematorium II, there was also a dissection room (\"Sezierraum\"). SS officers told the victims they had to take a shower and undergo delousing. The victims undressed in the dressing room and walked into the gas chamber; signs said \"Bade\" (bath) or \"Desinfektionsraum\" (disinfection room). A former prisoner testified that the language of the signs changed depending on who was being killed. Some inmates were given soap and a towel. A gas chamber could hold up to 2,000; one former prisoner said it was around 3,000.\nThe Zyklon B was delivered to the crematoria by a special SS bureau known as the Hygiene Institute. After the doors were shut, SS men dumped in the Zyklon B pellets through vents in the roof or holes in the side of the chamber. The victims were usually dead within 10 minutes; Rudolf H\u00f6ss testified that it took up to 20 minutes. Leib Langfus, a member of the \"Sonderkommando\", buried his diary (written in Yiddish) near crematorium III in Auschwitz II. It was found in 1952, signed \"A.Y.R.A\":\nUse of corpses.\n\"Sonderkommando\" wearing gas masks dragged the bodies from the chamber. They removed glasses and artificial limbs and shaved off the women's hair; women's hair was removed before they entered the gas chamber at Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka, but at Auschwitz it was done after death. By 6 February 1943, the Reich Economic Ministry had received 3,000\u00a0kg of women's hair from Auschwitz and Majdanek. The hair was first cleaned in a solution of sal ammoniac, dried on the brick floor of the crematoria, combed, and placed in paper bags. The hair was shipped to various companies, including one manufacturing plant in Bremen-Bluementhal, where workers found tiny coins with Greek letters on some of the braids, possibly from some of the 50,000 Greek Jews deported to Auschwitz in 1943. When they liberated the camp in January 1945, the Red Army found 7,000\u00a0kg of human hair in bags ready to ship.\nJust before cremation, jewelry was removed, along with dental work and teeth containing precious metals. Gold was removed from the teeth of dead prisoners from 23 September 1940 onwards by order of Heinrich Himmler. The work was carried out by members of the \"Sonderkommando\" who were dentists; anyone overlooking dental work might themselves be cremated alive. The gold was sent to the SS Health Service and used by dentists to treat the SS and their families; 50\u00a0kg had been collected by 8 October 1942. By early 1944, 10\u201312\u00a0kg of gold were being extracted monthly from victims' teeth.\nThe corpses were burned in the nearby incinerators, and the ashes were buried, thrown in the Vistula river, or used as fertilizer. Any bits of bone that had not burned properly were ground down in wooden mortars.\nDeath toll.\nAt least 1.3\u00a0million people were sent to Auschwitz between 1940 and 1945, and at least 1.1\u00a0million died. Overall 400,207 prisoners were registered in the camp: 268,657 male and 131,560 female. A study in the late 1980s by Polish historian Franciszek Piper, published by Yad Vashem in 1991, used timetables of train arrivals combined with deportation records to calculate that, of the 1.3\u00a0million sent to the camp, 1,082,000 had died there, a figure (rounded up to 1.1\u00a0million) that Piper regarded as a minimum. That figure came to be widely accepted.\nThe Germans tried to conceal how many they had killed. In July 1942, according to Rudolf H\u00f6ss's post-war memoir, H\u00f6ss received an order from Heinrich Himmler, via Adolf Eichmann's office and SS commander Paul Blobel, that \"[a]ll mass graves were to be opened and the corpses burned. In addition the ashes were to be disposed of in such a way that it would be impossible at some future time to calculate the number of corpses burned.\"\nEarlier estimates of the death toll were higher than Piper's. Following the camp's liberation, the Soviet government issued a statement, on 8 May 1945, that four million people had been killed on the site, a figure based on the capacity of the crematoria. H\u00f6ss told prosecutors at Nuremberg that at least 2,500,000 people had been gassed there, and that another 500,000 had died of starvation and disease. He testified that the figure of over two million had come from Eichmann. In his memoirs, written in custody, H\u00f6ss wrote that Eichmann had given the figure of 2.5\u00a0million to H\u00f6ss's superior officer Richard Gl\u00fccks, based on records that had been destroyed. H\u00f6ss regarded this figure as \"far too high. Even Auschwitz had limits to its destructive possibilities,\" he wrote.\nAround one in six Jews killed in the Holocaust died in Auschwitz. By nation, the greatest number of Auschwitz's Jewish victims originated from Hungary, accounting for 430,000 deaths, followed by Poland (300,000), France (69,000), Netherlands (60,000), Greece (55,000), Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia (46,000), Slovakia (27,000), Belgium (25,000), Germany and Austria (23,000), Yugoslavia (10,000), Italy (7,500), Norway (690), and others (34,000). Timothy Snyder writes that fewer than one percent of the million Soviet Jews murdered in the Holocaust were killed in Auschwitz. Of the at least 387 Jehovah's Witnesses who were imprisoned at Auschwitz, 132 died in the camp.\nResistance, escapes, liberation.\nCamp resistance, flow of information.\nInformation about Auschwitz became available to the Allies as a result of reports by Captain Witold Pilecki of the Polish Home Army who, as \"Thomasz Serfi\u0144ski\" (serial number 4859), allowed himself to be arrested in Warsaw and taken to Auschwitz. He was imprisoned there from 22 September 1940 until his escape on 27 April 1943. Michael Fleming writes that Pilecki was instructed to sustain morale, organize food, clothing and resistance, prepare to take over the camp if possible, and smuggle information out to the Polish military. Pilecki called his resistance movement Zwi\u0105zek Organizacji Wojskowej (ZOW, \"Union of Military Organization\").\nThe resistance sent out the first oral message about Auschwitz with Dr. Aleksander Wielkopolski, a Polish engineer who was released in October 1940. The following month the Polish underground in Warsaw prepared a report on the basis of that information, \"The camp in Auschwitz\", part of which was published in London in May 1941 in a booklet, \"The German Occupation of Poland\", by the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The report said of the Jews in the camp that \"scarcely any of them came out alive\". According to Fleming, the booklet was \"widely circulated amongst British officials\". The \"Polish Fortnightly Review\" based a story on it, writing that \"three crematorium furnaces were insufficient to cope with the bodies being cremated\", as did \"The Scotsman\" on 8 January 1942, the only British news organization to do so.\nOn 24 December 1941, the resistance groups representing the various prisoner factions met in block 45 and agreed to cooperate. Fleming writes that it has not been possible to track Pilecki's early intelligence from the camp. Pilecki compiled two reports after he escaped in April 1943; the second, Raport W, detailed his life in Auschwitz I and estimated that 1.5\u00a0million people, mostly Jews, had been killed. On 1 July 1942, the \"Polish Fortnightly Review\" published a report describing Birkenau, writing that \"prisoners call this supplementary camp 'Paradisal', presumably because there is only one road, leading to Paradise\". Reporting that inmates were being killed \"through excessive work, torture and medical means\", it noted the gassing of the Soviet prisoners of war and Polish inmates in Auschwitz I in September 1941, the first gassing in the camp. It said: \"It is estimated that the Oswiecim camp can accommodate fifteen thousand prisoners, but as they die on a mass scale there is always room for new arrivals.\"\nThe Polish government-in-exile in London first reported the gassing of prisoners in Auschwitz on 21 July 1942, and reported the gassing of Soviet POWs and Jews on 4 September 1942. In 1943, the \"Kampfgruppe Auschwitz\" (Combat Group Auschwitz) was organized within the camp with the aim of sending out information about what was happening. The \"Sonderkommando\" buried notes in the ground, hoping they would be found by the camp's liberators. The group also smuggled out photographs; the \"Sonderkommando\" photographs, of events around the gas chambers in Auschwitz II, were smuggled out of the camp in September 1944 in a toothpaste tube.\nAccording to Fleming, the British press responded, in 1943 and the first half of 1944, either by not publishing reports about Auschwitz or by burying them on the inside pages. The exception was the \"Polish Jewish Observer\", a \"City and East London Observer\" supplement edited by Joel Cang, a former Warsaw correspondent for the \"Manchester Guardian\". The British reticence stemmed from a Foreign Office concern that the public might pressure the government to respond or provide refuge for the Jews, and that British actions on behalf of the Jews might affect its relationships in the Middle East. There was similar reticence in the United States, and indeed within the Polish government-in-exile and the Polish resistance. According to Fleming, the scholarship suggests that the Polish resistance distributed information about the Holocaust in Auschwitz without challenging the Allies' reluctance to highlight it.\nEscapes, \"Auschwitz Protocols\".\nFrom the first escape on 6 July 1940 of Tadeusz Wiejowski, at least 802 prisoners (757 men and 45 women) tried to escape from the camp, according to Polish historian Henryk \u015awiebocki. He writes that most escapes were attempted from work sites outside the camp's perimeter fence. Of the 802 escapes, 144 were successful, 327 were caught, and the fate of 331 is unknown.\nFour Polish prisoners\u2014Eugeniusz Bendera (serial number 8502), Kazimierz Piechowski (no.\u00a0918), Stanis\u0142aw Gustaw Jaster (no.\u00a06438), and J\u00f3zef Lempart (no.\u00a03419)\u2014escaped successfully on 20 June 1942. After breaking into a warehouse, three of them dressed as SS officers and stole rifles and an SS staff car, which they drove out of the camp with the fourth handcuffed as a prisoner. They wrote later to Rudolf H\u00f6ss apologizing for the loss of the vehicle. On 21 July 1944, Polish inmate Jerzy Bielecki dressed in an SS uniform and, using a faked pass, managed to cross the camp's gate with his Jewish girlfriend, Cyla Cybulska, pretending that she was wanted for questioning. Both survived the war. For having saved her, Bielecki was recognized by Yad Vashem as Righteous Among the Nations.\nJerzy Tabeau (no.\u00a027273, registered as Jerzy Weso\u0142owski) and Roman Cieliczko (no.\u00a027089), both Polish prisoners, escaped on 19 November 1943; Tabeau made contact with the Polish underground and, between December 1943 and early 1944, wrote what became known as the \"Polish Major's report\" about the situation in the camp. On 27 April 1944, Rudolf Vrba (no.\u00a044070) and Alfr\u00e9d Wetzler (no.\u00a029162) escaped to Slovakia, carrying detailed information to the Slovak Jewish Council about the gas chambers. The distribution of the \"Vrba-Wetzler report\", and publication of parts of it in June 1944, helped to halt the deportation of Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz. On 27 May 1944, Arnost Rosin (no.\u00a029858) and Czes\u0142aw Mordowicz (no.\u00a084216) also escaped to Slovakia; the \"Rosin-Mordowicz report\" was added to the Vrba-Wetzler and Tabeau reports to become what is known as the \"Auschwitz Protocols\". The reports were first published in their entirety in November 1944 by the United States War Refugee Board, in a document entitled \"The Extermination Camps of Auschwitz (O\u015bwi\u0119cim) and Birkenau in Upper Silesia\".\nBombing proposal.\nIn January 1941 the Commander-in-Chief of the Polish Army and prime minister-in-exile, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski, arranged for a report to be forwarded to Air Marshal Richard Pierse, head of RAF Bomber Command. Written by Auschwitz prisoners in or around December 1940, the report described the camp's atrocious living conditions and asked the Polish government-in-exile to bomb it:\nPierse replied that it was not technically feasible to bomb the camp without harming the prisoners. In May 1944 Slovak rabbi Michael Dov Weissmandl suggested that the Allies bomb the rails leading to the camp. Historian David Wyman published an essay in \"Commentary\" in 1978 entitled \"Why Auschwitz Was Never Bombed\", arguing that the United States Army Air Forces could and should have attacked Auschwitz. In his book \"The Abandonment of the Jews: America and the Holocaust 1941\u20131945\" (1984), Wyman argued that, since the IG Farben plant at Auschwitz III had been bombed three times between August and December 1944 by the US Fifteenth Air Force in Italy, it would have been feasible for the other camps or railway lines to be bombed too. Bernard Wasserstein's \"Britain and the Jews of Europe\" (1979) and Martin Gilbert's \"Auschwitz and the Allies\" (1981) raised similar questions about British inaction. Since the 1990s, other historians have argued that Allied bombing accuracy was not sufficient for Wyman's proposed attack, and that counterfactual history is an inherently problematic endeavor.\n\"Sonderkommando\" revolt.\nThe \"Sonderkommando\" who worked in the crematoria were witnesses to the mass murder and were therefore regularly killed themselves. On 7 October 1944, following an announcement that 300 of them were to be sent to a nearby town to clear away rubble\u2014\"transfers\" were a common ruse for the murder of prisoners\u2014the group, mostly Jews from Greece and Hungary, staged an uprising. They attacked the SS with stones and hammers, killing three of them, and set crematorium IV on fire with rags soaked in oil that they had hidden. Hearing the commotion, the \"Sonderkommando\" at crematorium II believed that a camp uprising had begun and threw their \"Oberkapo\" into a furnace. After escaping through a fence using wirecutters, they managed to reach Rajsko, where they hid in the granary of an Auschwitz satellite camp, but the SS pursued and killed them by setting the granary on fire.\nBy the time the rebellion at crematorium IV had been suppressed, 212 members of the \"Sonderkommando\" were still alive and 451 had been killed. The dead included Zalmen Gradowski, who kept notes of his time in Auschwitz and buried them near crematorium III; after the war, another \"Sonderkommando\" member showed the prosecutors where to dig. The notes were published in several formats, including in 2017 as \"From the Heart of Hell\".\nEvacuation and death marches.\nThe last mass transports to arrive in Auschwitz were 60,000\u201370,000 Jews from the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Ghetto, some 2,000 from Theresienstadt, and 8,000 from Slovakia. The last selection took place on 30 October 1944. On 1 or 2 November 1944, Heinrich Himmler ordered the SS to halt the mass murder by gas; and on 25 November he ordered that Auschwitz's gas chambers and crematoria be destroyed. The \"Sonderkommando\" and other prisoners began the job of dismantling the buildings and cleaning up the site. On 18 January 1945, Engelbert Marketsch, a German criminal transferred from Mauthausen, became the last prisoner to be assigned a serial number in Auschwitz, number 202499.\nAccording to Polish historian Andrzej Strzelecki, the evacuation of the camp was one of its \"most tragic chapters\". Himmler ordered the evacuation of all camps in January 1945, telling camp commanders: \"The F\u00fchrer holds you personally responsible for\u00a0... making sure that not a single prisoner from the concentration camps falls alive into the hands of the enemy.\" The plundered goods from the \"Kanada\" barracks, together with building supplies, were transported to the German interior. Between 1 December 1944 and 15 January 1945, over one million items of clothing were packed to be shipped out of Auschwitz; 95,000 such parcels were sent to concentration camps in Germany.\nBeginning on 17 January, some 58,000 Auschwitz detainees (about two-thirds Jews)\u2014over 20,000 from Auschwitz I and II and over 30,000 from the subcamps\u2014were evacuated under guard, at first heading west on foot, then by open-topped freight trains, to concentration camps in Germany and Austria: Bergen-Belsen, Buchenwald, Dachau, Flossenburg, Gross-Rosen, Mauthausen, Dora-Mittelbau, Ravensbruck, and Sachsenhausen. Fewer than 9,000 remained in the camps, deemed too sick to move. During the marches, the SS shot or otherwise dispatched anyone unable to continue; \"execution details\" followed the marchers, killing prisoners who lagged behind. Peter Longerich estimated that a quarter of the detainees were thus killed. By December 1944 some 15,000 Jewish prisoners had made it from Auschwitz to Bergen-Belsen, where they were liberated by the British on 15 April 1945.\nOn 20 January, crematoria II and III were blown up, and on 23 January the \"Kanada\" warehouses were set on fire; they apparently burned for five days. Crematorium IV had been partly demolished after the \"Sonderkommando\" revolt in October, and the rest of it was destroyed later. On 26 January, one day ahead of the Red Army's arrival, crematorium V was blown up.\nLiberation.\nThe first in the camp complex to be liberated was Auschwitz III, the IG Farben camp at Monowitz; a soldier from the 100th Infantry Division of the Red Army entered the camp around 9\u00a0am on Saturday, 27 January 1945. The 60th Army of the 1st Ukrainian Front (also part of the Red Army) arrived in Auschwitz I and II around 3\u00a0pm. They found 7,000 prisoners alive in the three main camps, 500 in the other subcamps, and over 600 corpses. Items found included 837,000 women's garments, 370,000 men's suits, 44,000 pairs of shoes, and 7,000\u00a0kg of human hair, estimated by the Soviet war crimes commission to have come from 140,000 people. Some of the hair was examined by the Forensic Science Institute in Krak\u00f3w, where it was found to contain traces of prussic acid, the main ingredient of Zyklon B. Primo Levi described seeing the first four soldiers on horseback approach Auschwitz III, where he had been in the sick bay. They threw \"strangely embarrassed glances at the sprawling bodies, at the battered huts and at us few still alive\u00a0...\":\nGeorgii Elisavetskii, a Soviet soldier who entered one of the barracks, said in 1980 that he could hear other soldiers telling the inmates: \"You are free, comrades!\" But they did not respond, so he tried in Russian, Polish, German, Ukrainian. Then he used some Yiddish: \"They think that I am provoking them. They begin to hide. And only when I said to them: 'Do not be afraid, I am a colonel of Soviet Army and a Jew. We have come to liberate you'\u00a0... Finally, as if the barrier collapsed\u00a0... they rushed toward us shouting, fell on their knees, kissed the flaps of our overcoats, and threw their arms around our legs.\"\nThe Soviet military medical service and Polish Red Cross (PCK) set up field hospitals that looked after 4,500 prisoners suffering from the effects of starvation (mostly diarrhea) and tuberculosis. Local volunteers helped until the Red Cross team arrived from Krak\u00f3w in early February. In Auschwitz II, the layers of excrement on the barracks floors had to be scraped off with shovels. Water was obtained from snow and from fire-fighting wells. Before more help arrived, 2,200 patients there were looked after by a few doctors and 12 PCK nurses. All the patients were later moved to the brick buildings in Auschwitz I, where several blocks became a hospital, with medical personnel working 18-hour shifts.\nThe liberation of Auschwitz received little press attention at the time; the Red Army was focusing on its advance toward Germany and liberating the camp had not been one of its key aims. Boris Polevoi reported on the liberation in \"Pravda\" on 2 February 1945 but made no mention of Jews; inmates were described collectively as \"victims of Fascism\". It was when the Western Allies arrived in Buchenwald, Bergen-Belsen, and Dachau in April 1945 that the liberation of the camps received extensive coverage.\nAfter the war.\nTrials of war criminals.\nOnly 789 Auschwitz staff, up to 15 percent, ever stood trial; most of the cases were pursued in Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany. According to Aleksander Lasik, female SS officers were treated more harshly than male; of the 17 women sentenced, four received the death penalty and the others longer prison terms than the men. He writes that this may have been because there were only 200 women overseers, and therefore they were more visible and memorable to the inmates.\nCamp commandant Rudolf H\u00f6ss was arrested by the British on 11 March 1946 near Flensburg, northern Germany, where he had been working as a farmer under the pseudonym Franz Lang. He was imprisoned in Heide, then transferred to Minden for interrogation, part of the British occupation zone. From there he was taken to Nuremberg to testify for the defense in the trial of \"SS-Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Ernst Kaltenbrunner. H\u00f6ss was straightforward about his own role in the mass murder and said he had followed the orders of Heinrich Himmler. Extradited to Poland on 25 May 1946, he wrote his memoirs in custody, first published in Polish in 1951 then in German in 1958 as \"Kommandant in Auschwitz\". His trial before the Supreme National Tribunal in Warsaw opened on 11 March 1947; he was sentenced to death on 2 April and hanged in Auschwitz I on 16 April, near crematorium I.\nOn 25 November 1947, the Auschwitz trial began in Krak\u00f3w, when Poland's Supreme National Tribunal brought to court 40 former Auschwitz staff, including commandant Arthur Liebehenschel, women's camp leader Maria Mandel, and camp leader Hans Aumeier. The trials ended on 22 December 1947, with 23 death sentences, seven life sentences, and nine prison sentences ranging from three to 15 years. Hans M\u00fcnch, an SS doctor who had several former prisoners testify on his behalf, was the only person to be acquitted.\nOther former staff were hanged for war crimes in the Dachau Trials and the Belsen Trial, including camp leaders Josef Kramer, Franz H\u00f6ssler, and Vinzenz Sch\u00f6ttl; doctor Friedrich Entress; and guards Irma Grese and Elisabeth Volkenrath. Bruno Tesch and Karl Weinbacher, the owner and chief executive officer of the firm Tesch &amp; Stabenow, one of the suppliers of Zyklon B, were arrested by the British after the war and executed for knowingly supplying the chemical for use on humans. The 180-day Frankfurt Auschwitz trials, held in West Germany from 20 December 1963 to 20 August 1965, tried 22 defendants, including two dentists, a doctor, two camp adjudants and the camp's pharmacist. The 700-page indictment, presenting the testimony of 254 witnesses, was accompanied by a 300-page report about the camp, \"Nationalsozialistische Konzentrationslager\", written by historians from the \"Institut f\u00fcr Zeitgeschichte\" in Germany, including Martin Broszat and Helmut Krausnick. The report became the basis of their book, \"Anatomy of the SS State\" (1968), the first comprehensive study of the camp and the SS. The court convicted 19 of the defendants, giving six of them life sentences and the others between three and ten years.\nLegacy.\nIn the decades since its liberation, Auschwitz has become a primary symbol of the Holocaust. Historian Timothy D. Snyder attributes this to the camp's high death toll and \"unusual combination of an industrial camp complex and a killing facility\", which left behind far more witnesses than single-purpose killing facilities such as Che\u0142mno or Treblinka. In 2005 the United Nations General Assembly designated 27 January, the date of the camp's liberation, as International Holocaust Remembrance Day. Helmut Schmidt visited the site in November 1977, the first West German chancellor to do so, followed by his successor, Helmut Kohl, in November 1989. In a statement on the 50th anniversary of the liberation, Kohl said that \"[t]he darkest and most awful chapter in German history was written at Auschwitz.\" In January 2020, world leaders gathered at Yad Vashem in Jerusalem to commemorate the 75th anniversary. It was the city's largest-ever political gathering, with over 45 heads of state and world leaders, including royalty. At Auschwitz itself, Reuven Rivlin and Andrzej Duda, the presidents of Israel and Poland, laid wreaths.\nNotable memoirists of the camp include Primo Levi, Elie Wiesel, and Tadeusz Borowski. Levi's \"If This is a Man\", first published in Italy in 1947 as \"Se questo \u00e8 un uomo\", became a classic of Holocaust literature, an \"imperishable masterpiece\". Wiesel wrote about his imprisonment at Auschwitz in \"Night\" (1960) and other works, and became a prominent spokesman against ethnic violence; in 1986, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Camp survivor Simone Veil was elected President of the European Parliament, serving from 1979 to 1982. Two Auschwitz victims\u2014Maximilian Kolbe, a priest who volunteered to die by starvation in place of a stranger, and Edith Stein, a Jewish convert to Catholicism\u2014were named saints of the Catholic Church.\nIn 2017, a K\u00f6rber Foundation survey found that 40 percent of 14-year-olds in Germany did not know what Auschwitz was. The following year a survey organized by the Claims Conference, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and others found that 41 percent of 1,350 American adults surveyed, and 66 percent of millennials, did not know what Auschwitz was, while 22 percent said they had never heard of the Holocaust. A CNN-ComRes poll in 2018 found a similar situation in Europe.\nAuschwitz-Birkenau State Museum.\nOn 2 July 1947, the Polish government passed a law establishing a state memorial to remember \"the martyrdom of the Polish nation and other nations in Oswiecim\". The museum established its exhibits at Auschwitz I; after the war, the barracks in Auschwitz II-Birkenau had been mostly dismantled and moved to Warsaw to be used on building sites. Dwork and van Pelt write that, in addition, Auschwitz I played a more central role in the persecution of the Polish people, in opposition to the importance of Auschwitz II to the Jews, including Polish Jews. An exhibition opened in Auschwitz I in 1955, displaying prisoner mug shots; hair, suitcases, and shoes taken from murdered prisoners; canisters of Zyklon B pellets; and other objects related to the killings. UNESCO added the camp to its list of World Heritage Sites in 1979. All the museum's directors were, until 1990, former Auschwitz prisoners. Visitors to the site have increased from 492,500 in 2001, to over one million in 2009, to two million in 2016.\nThere have been protracted disputes over the perceived Christianization of the site. Pope John Paul II celebrated mass over the train tracks leading to Auschwitz II-Birkenau on 7 June 1979 and called the camp \"the Golgotha of our age\", referring to the crucifixion of Jesus. More controversy followed when Carmelite nuns founded a convent in 1984 in a former theater outside the camp's perimeter, near block 11 of Auschwitz I, after which a local priest and some survivors erected a large cross\u2014one that had been used during the pope's mass\u2014behind block 11 to commemorate 152 Polish inmates shot by the Germans in 1941. After a long dispute, Pope John Paul II intervened and the nuns moved the convent elsewhere in 1993. The cross remained, triggering the \"War of the Crosses\", as more crosses were erected to commemorate Christian victims, despite international objections. The Polish government and Catholic Church eventually agreed to remove all but the original.\nOn 4 September 2003, despite a protest from the museum, three Israeli Air Force F-15 Eagles performed a fly-over of Auschwitz II-Birkenau during a ceremony at the camp below. All three pilots were descendants of Holocaust survivors, including the man who led the flight, Major-General Amir Eshel. On 27 January 2015, some 300 Auschwitz survivors gathered with world leaders under a giant tent at the entrance to Auschwitz II to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the camp's liberation.\nMuseum curators consider visitors who pick up items from the ground to be thieves, and local police will charge them as such; the maximum penalty is a 10-year prison sentence. In 2017 two British youths from the Perse School were fined in Poland after picking up buttons and shards of decorative glass in 2015 from the \"Kanada\" area of Auschwitz II, where camp victims' personal effects were stored. The 16-ft \"Arbeit Macht Frei\" sign over the main camp's gate was stolen in December 2009 by a Swedish former neo-Nazi and two Polish men. The sign was later recovered.\nIn 2018 the Polish government passed an amendment to its Act on the Institute of National Remembrance, making it a criminal offence to make false suggestions of Polish complicity in the Holocaust, which would include referring to Auschwitz and other camps as \"Polish death camps\". Staff at the museum were accused by nationalist media in Poland of focusing too much on the fate of the Jews in Auschwitz at the expense of ethnic Poles. The brother of the museum's director, Piotr Cywi\u0144ski, wrote that Cywi\u0144ski had experienced \"50 days of incessant hatred\". After discussions with Israel's prime minister, amid international concern that the new law would stifle research, the Polish government adjusted the amendment so that anyone falsely accusing Poland of complicity would be guilty only of a civil offence."}
{"id": "2007", "revid": "136745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2007", "title": "Archery", "text": "Archery is the art, sport, practice, or skill of using a bow to shoot arrows. The word comes from the Latin \"arcus\" for bow. Historically, archery has been used for hunting and combat. In modern times, it is mainly a competitive sport and recreational activity. A person who participates in archery is typically called an archer or a \"bowman\", and a person who is fond of or an expert at archery is sometimes called a toxophilite or a marksman.\nHistory.\nThe oldest known evidence of arrows comes from South African sites such as Sibudu Cave, where the remains of bone and stone arrowheads have been found dating approximately 72,000-60,000 years ago.\nBased on indirect evidence, the bow also seems to have appeared or reappeared later in Eurasia, near the transition from the Upper Paleolithic to the Mesolithic. The earliest definite remains of bow and arrow from Europe are possible fragments from Germany found at Mannheim-Vogelstang dated 17,500-18,000 years ago, and at Stellmoor dated 11,000 years ago. Azilian points found in Grotte du Bichon, Switzerland, alongside the remains of both a bear and a hunter, with flint fragments found in the bear's third vertebra, suggest the use of arrows at 13,500 years ago. Other signs of its use in Europe come from the in the north of Hamburg, Germany and dates from the late Paleolithic, about 10,000\u20139000 BC. The arrows were made of pine and consisted of a main shaft and a fore shaft with a flint point. There are no definite earlier bows; previous pointed shafts are known, but may have been launched by spear-throwers rather than bows. The oldest bows known so far comes from the Holmeg\u00e5rd swamp in Denmark.\nAt the site of Nataruk in Turkana County, Kenya, obsidian bladelets found embedded in a skull and within the thoracic cavity of another skeleton, suggest the use of stone-tipped arrows as weapons about 10,000 years ago. \nBows eventually replaced the spear-thrower as the predominant means for launching shafted projectiles, on every continent except Australasia, though spear-throwers persisted alongside the bow in parts of the Americas, notably Mexico and among the Inuit.\nBows and arrows have been present in Egyptian and neighboring Nubian culture since its respective predynastic and Pre-Kerma origins. In the Levant, artifacts that could be arrow-shaft straighteners are known from the Natufian culture, (c. 10,800\u20138,300 BC) onwards. The Khiamian and PPN A shouldered Khiam-points may well be arrowheads.\nClassical civilizations, notably the Assyrians, Greeks, Armenians, Persians, Parthians, Romans, Indians, Koreans, Chinese, and Japanese fielded large numbers of archers in their armies. Akkadians were the first to use composite bows in war according to the victory stele of Naram-Sin of Akkad. Egyptians referred to Nubia as \"Ta-Seti,\" or \"The Land of the Bow,\" since the Nubians were known to be expert archers, and by the 16th Century BC Egyptians were using the composite bow in warfare. The Bronze Age Aegean Cultures were able to deploy a number of state-owned specialized bow makers for warfare and hunting purposes already from the 15th century BC. The Welsh longbow proved its worth for the first time in Continental warfare at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy. In the Americas archery was widespread at European contact.\nArchery was highly developed in Asia. The Sanskrit term for archery, dhanurveda, came to refer to martial arts in general. In East Asia, Goguryeo, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea was well known for its regiments of exceptionally skilled archers.\nMounted archery.\nTribesmen of Central Asia (after the domestication of the horse) and American Plains Indians (after gaining access to horses by Europeans) became extremely adept at archery on horseback. Lightly armoured, but highly mobile archers were excellently suited to warfare in the Central Asian steppes, and they formed a large part of armies that repeatedly conquered large areas of Eurasia. Shorter bows are more suited to use on horseback, and the composite bow enabled mounted archers to use powerful weapons. Empires throughout the Eurasian landmass often strongly associated their respective \"barbarian\" counterparts with the usage of the bow and arrow, to the point where powerful states like the Han Dynasty referred to their neighbours, the Xiong-nu, as \"Those Who Draw the Bow\". For example, Xiong-nu mounted bowmen made them more than a match for the Han military, and their threat was at least partially responsible for Chinese expansion into the Ordos region, to create a stronger, more powerful buffer zone against them. It is possible that \"barbarian\" peoples were responsible for introducing archery or certain types of bows to their \"civilized\" counterparts\u2014the Xiong-nu and the Han being one example. Similarly, short bows seem to have been introduced to Japan by northeast Asian groups.\nDecline of archery.\nThe development of firearms rendered bows obsolete in warfare, although efforts were sometimes made to preserve archery practice. In England and Wales, for example, the government tried to enforce practice with the longbow until the end of the 16th century. This was because it was recognized that the bow had been instrumental to military success during the Hundred Years' War. Despite the high social status, ongoing utility, and widespread pleasure of archery in Armenia, China, Egypt, England and Wales, the Americas, India, Japan, Korea, Turkey and elsewhere, almost every culture that gained access to even early firearms used them widely, to the neglect of archery. Early firearms were inferior in rate-of-fire, and were very sensitive to wet weather. However, they had longer effective range and were tactically superior in the common situation of soldiers shooting at each other from behind obstructions. They also required significantly less training to use properly, in particular penetrating steel armor without any need to develop special musculature. Armies equipped with guns could thus provide superior firepower, and highly trained archers became obsolete on the battlefield. However, the bow and arrow is still an effective weapon, and archers have seen action in the 21st century. Traditional archery remains in use for sport, and for hunting in many areas.\nLate eighteenth-century revival.\nEarly recreational archery societies included the Finsbury Archers and the Ancient Society of Kilwinning Archers. The latter's annual Papingo event was first recorded in 1483. (In this event, archers shoot vertically from the base of an abbey tower to dislodge a wood pigeon placed approximately above.) The Royal Company of Archers was formed in 1676 and is one of the oldest sporting bodies in the world. Archery remained a small and scattered pastime, however, until the late 18th century when it experienced a fashionable revival among the aristocracy. Sir Ashton Lever, an antiquarian and collector, formed the Toxophilite Society in London in 1781, with the patronage of George, the Prince of Wales.\nArchery societies were set up across the country, each with its own strict entry criteria and outlandish costumes. Recreational archery soon became extravagant social and ceremonial events for the nobility, complete with flags, music and 21 gun salutes for the competitors. The clubs were \"the drawing rooms of the great country houses placed outside\" and thus came to play an important role in the social networks of the local upper class. As well as its emphasis on display and status, the sport was notable for its popularity with females. Young women could not only compete in the contests but retain and show off their sexuality while doing so. Thus, archery came to act as a forum for introductions, flirtation and romance. It was often consciously styled in the manner of a Medieval tournament with titles and laurel wreaths being presented as a reward to the victor. General meetings were held from 1789, in which local lodges convened together to standardise the rules and ceremonies. Archery was also co-opted as a distinctively British tradition, dating back to the lore of Robin Hood and it served as a patriotic form of entertainment at a time of political tension in Europe. The societies were also elitist, and the new middle class bourgeoisie were excluded from the clubs due to their lack of social status.\nAfter the Napoleonic Wars, the sport became increasingly popular among all classes, and it was framed as a nostalgic reimagining of the preindustrial rural Britain. Particularly influential was Sir Walter Scott's 1819 novel, \"Ivanhoe\" that depicted the heroic character Lockseley winning an archery tournament.\nA modern sport.\nThe 1840s saw the second attempts at turning the recreation into a modern sport. The first Grand National Archery Society meeting was held in York in 1844 and over the next decade the extravagant and festive practices of the past were gradually whittled away and the rules were standardized as the 'York Round' - a series of shoots at , , and . Horace A. Ford helped to improve archery standards and pioneered new archery techniques. He won the Grand National 11 times in a row and published a highly influential guide to the sport in 1856.\nTowards the end of the 19th century, the sport experienced declining participation as alternative sports such as croquet and tennis became more popular among the middle class. By 1889, just 50 archery clubs were left in Britain, but it was still included as a sport at the 1900 Paris Olympics.\nThe National Archery Association of the United States was organized in 1879 and held annual meetings, the 1910 President was Frank E Canfield. Today it is known as USA Archery and is recognized by United States Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee. \nIn the United States, primitive archery was revived in the early 20th century. The last of the Yahi Indian tribe, a native known as Ishi, came out of hiding in California in 1911. His doctor, Saxton Pope, learned many of Ishi's traditional archery skills, and popularized them. \nFrom the 1920s, professional engineers took an interest in archery, previously the exclusive field of traditional craft experts. They led the commercial development of new forms of bow including the modern recurve and compound bow. These modern forms are now dominant in modern Western archery; traditional bows are in a minority. In the 1980s, the skills of traditional archery were revived by American enthusiasts, and combined with the new scientific understanding. Much of this expertise is available in the \"Traditional Bowyer's Bibles\" (see Further reading). Modern game archery owes much of its success to Fred Bear, an American bow hunter and bow manufacturer.\nMythology.\nDeities and heroes in several mythologies are described as archers, including the Greek Artemis and Apollo, the Roman Diana and Cupid, the Germanic Agilaz, continuing in legends like those of Wilhelm Tell, Palnetoke, or Robin Hood. Armenian Hayk and Babylonian Marduk, Indian Karna (also known as Radheya/son of Radha), Abhimanyu, Eklavya, Arjuna, Bhishma, Drona, Rama, and Shiva were known for their shooting skills. The famous archery competition of hitting the eye of a rotating fish while watching its reflection in the water bowl was one of the many archery skills depicted in the Mahabharata. \nPersian Arash was a famous archer. Earlier Greek representations of Heracles normally depict him as an archer. Archery, and the bow, play an important part in the epic poem the \"Odyssey,\" when Odysseus returns home in disguise and then bests the suitors in an archery competition after hinting at his identity by stringing and drawing his great bow that only he can draw, a similar motif is present in the Turkic heroic poem \"Alpamysh\".\nThe () were worshipped on the Greek island of Delos as attendants of Artemis, presiding over aspects of archery; (), represented distancing, (), trajectory, and (), aim.\nYi the archer and his apprentice Feng Meng appear in several early Chinese myths, and the historical character of Zhou Tong features in many fictional forms. Jumong, the first Taewang of the Goguryeo kingdom of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, is claimed by legend to have been a near-godlike archer. Archery features in the story of Oguz Khagan. Similarly, archery and the bow feature heavily into historical Korean identity.\nIn West African Yoruba belief, Osoosi is one of several deities of the hunt who are identified with bow and arrow iconography and other insignia associated with archery.\nEquipment.\nTypes of bows.\nWhile there is great variety in the construction details of bows (both historic and modern), all bows consist of a string attached to elastic limbs that store mechanical energy imparted by the user drawing the string. Bows may be broadly split into two categories: those drawn by pulling the string directly and those that use a mechanism to pull the string.\nDirectly drawn bows may be further divided based upon differences in the method of limb construction, notable examples being self bows, laminated bows and composite bows. Bows can also be classified by the bow shape of the limbs when unstrung; in contrast to traditional European straight bows, a recurve bow and some types of longbow have tips that curve away from the archer when the bow is unstrung. The cross-section of the limb also varies; the classic longbow is a tall bow with narrow limbs that are D-shaped in cross section, and the flatbow has flat wide limbs that are approximately rectangular in cross-section. Cable-backed bows use cords as the back of the bow; the draw weight of the bow can be adjusted by changing the tension of the cable. They were widespread among Inuit who lacked easy access to good bow wood. One variety of cable-backed bow is the Penobscot bow or Wabenaki bow, invented by Frank Loring (Chief Big Thunder) about 1900. It consists of a small bow attached by cables on the back of a larger main bow.\nIn different cultures, the arrows are released from either the left or right side of the bow, and this affects the hand grip and position of the bow. In Arab archery, Turkish archery and Ky\u016bd\u014d, the arrows are released from the right hand side of the bow, and this affects construction of the bow. In western archery, the arrow is usually released from the left hand side of the bow for a right-handed archer.\nCompound bows are designed to reduce the force required to hold the string at full draw, hence allowing the archer more time to aim with less muscular stress. Most compound designs use cams or elliptical wheels on the ends of the limbs to achieve this. A typical let-off is anywhere from 65% to 80%. For example, a bow with 80% let-off only requires to hold at full draw. Up to 99% let-off is possible. The compound bow was invented by Holless Wilbur Allen in the 1960s (a US patent was filed in 1966 and granted in 1969) and it has become the most widely used type of bow for all forms of archery in North America.\nMechanically drawn bows typically have a stock or other mounting, such as the crossbow. Crossbows typically have shorter draw lengths compared to compound bows. Because of this, heavier draw weights are required to achieve the same energy transfer to the arrow. These mechanically drawn bows also have devices to hold the tension when the bow is fully drawn. They are not limited by the strength of a single archer and larger varieties have been used as siege engines.\nTypes of arrows and fletchings.\nThe most common form of arrow consists of a shaft, with an arrowhead at the front end, and fletchings and a nock at the other end. Arrows across time and history have normally been carried in a container known as a quiver, which can take many different forms. Shafts of arrows are typically composed of solid wood, bamboo, fiberglass, aluminium alloy, carbon fiber, or composite materials. Wooden arrows are prone to warping. Fiberglass arrows are brittle, but can be produced to uniform specifications easily. Aluminium shafts were a very popular high-performance choice in the latter half of the 20th century, due to their straightness, lighter weight, and subsequently higher speed and flatter trajectories. Carbon fiber arrows became popular in the 1990s because they are very light, flying even faster and flatter than aluminium arrows. Today, the most popular arrows at tournaments and Olympic events are made of composite materials.\nThe arrowhead is the primary functional component of the arrow. Some arrows may simply use a sharpened tip of the solid shaft, but separate arrowheads are far more common, usually made from metal, stone, or other hard materials. The most commonly used forms are target points, field points, and broadheads, although there are also other types, such as bodkin, judo, and blunt heads.\nFletching is traditionally made from bird feathers, but solid plastic vanes and thin sheet-like spin vanes are used. They are attached near the nock (rear) end of the arrow with thin double sided tape, glue, or, traditionally, sinew. The most common configuration in all cultures is three fletches, though as many as six have been used. Two makes the arrow unstable in flight. When the arrow is \"three-fletched\", the fletches are equally spaced around the shaft, with one placed such that it is perpendicular to the bow when nocked on the string, though variations are seen with modern equipment, especially when using the modern spin vanes. This fletch is called the \"index fletch\" or \"cock feather\" (also known as \"the odd vane out\" or \"the nocking vane\"), and the others are sometimes called the \"hen feathers\". Commonly, the cock feather is of a different color. However, if archers are using fletching made of feather or similar material, they may use same color vanes, as different dyes can give varying stiffness to vanes, resulting in less precision. When an arrow is \"four-fletched\", two opposing fletches are often cock feathers, and occasionally the fletches are not evenly spaced.\nThe fletching may be either \"parabolic\" cut (short feathers in a smooth parabolic curve) or \"shield\" cut (generally shaped like half of a narrow shield), and is often attached at an angle, known as \"helical\" fletching, to introduce a stabilizing spin to the arrow while in flight. Whether helical or straight fletched, when natural fletching (bird feathers) is used it is critical that all feathers come from the same side of the bird. Oversized fletchings can be used to accentuate drag and thus limit the range of the arrow significantly; these arrows are called \"flu-flus\". Misplacement of fletchings can change the arrow's flight path dramatically.\nBowstring.\nDacron and other modern materials offer high strength for their weight and are used on most modern bows. Linen and other traditional materials are still used on traditional bows. Several modern methods of making a bowstring exist, such as the 'endless loop' and 'Flemish twist'. Almost any fiber can be made into a bowstring. The author of \"Arab Archery\" suggests the hide of a young, emaciated camel. Nj\u00e1l's saga describes the refusal of a wife, Hallger\u00f0ur, to cut her hair to make an emergency bowstring for her husband, Gunnar H\u00e1mundarson, who is then killed.\nProtective equipment.\nMost modern archers wear a bracer (also known as an arm-guard) to protect the inside of the bow arm from being hit by the string and prevent clothing from catching the bowstring. The bracer does not brace the arm; the word comes from the armoury term \"brassard\", meaning an armoured sleeve or badge. The Navajo people have developed highly ornamented bracers as non-functional items of adornment. Some archers (nearly all female archers) wear protection on their chests, called chestguards or plastrons. The myth of the Amazons was that they had one breast removed to solve this problem. Roger Ascham mentions one archer, presumably with an unusual shooting style, who wore a leather guard for his face.\nThe drawing digits are normally protected by a leather tab, glove, or thumb ring. A simple tab of leather is commonly used, as is a skeleton glove. Medieval Europeans probably used a complete leather glove.\nEurasiatic archers who used the thumb or Mongolian draw protected their thumbs, usually with leather according to the author of \"Arab Archery\", but also with special rings of various hard materials. Many surviving Turkish and Chinese examples are works of considerable art. Some are so highly ornamented that the users could not have used them to loose an arrow. Possibly these were items of personal adornment, and hence value, remaining extant whilst leather had virtually no intrinsic value and would also deteriorate with time. In traditional Japanese archery a special glove is used that has a ridge to assist in drawing the string.\nRelease aids.\nA release aid is a mechanical device designed to give a crisp and precise loose of arrows from a compound bow. In the most commonly used, the string is released by a finger-operated trigger mechanism, held in the archer's hand or attached to their wrist. In another type, known as a back-tension release, the string is automatically released when drawn to a pre-determined tension.\nStabilizers.\nStabilizers are mounted at various points on the bow. Common with competitive archery equipment are special brackets that allow multiple stabilizers to be mounted at various angles to fine tune the bow's balance.\nStabilizers aid in aiming by improving the balance of the bow. Sights, quivers, rests, and design of the riser (the central, non-bending part of the bow) make one side of the bow heavier. One purpose of stabilizers are to offset these forces. A reflex riser design will cause the top limb to lean towards the shooter. In this case a heavier front stabilizer is desired to offset this action. A deflex riser design has the opposite effect and a lighter front stabilizer may be used.\nStabilizers can reduce noise and vibration. These energies are absorbed by viscoelastic polymers, gels, powders, and other materials used to build stabilizers.\nStabilizers improve the forgiveness and accuracy by increasing the moment of inertia of the bow to resist movement during the shooting process. Lightweight carbon stabilizers with weighted ends are desirable because they improve the moment of interia while minimizing the weight added.\nShooting technique and form.\nThe standard convention on teaching archery is to hold the bow depending upon eye dominance. (One exception is in modern ky\u016bd\u014d where all archers are trained to hold the bow in the left hand.) Therefore, if one is right-eye dominant, they would hold the bow in the left hand and draw the string with the right hand. However, not everyone agrees with this line of thought. A smoother, and more fluid release of the string will produce the most consistently repeatable shots, and therefore may provide greater accuracy of the arrow flight. Some believe that the hand with the greatest dexterity should therefore be the hand that draws and releases the string. Either eye can be used for aiming, and the less dominant eye can be trained over time to become more effective for use. To assist with this, an eye patch can be temporarily worn over the dominant eye.\nThe hand that holds the bow is referred to as the \"bow hand\" and its arm the \"bow arm\". The opposite hand is called the \"drawing hand\" or \"string hand\". Terms such as \"bow shoulder\" or \"string elbow\" follow the same convention.\nIf shooting according to eye dominance, right-eye-dominant archers shooting conventionally hold the bow with their left hand. If shooting according to hand dexterity, the archer draws the string with the hand that possesses the greatest dexterity, regardless of eye dominance.\nModern form.\nTo shoot an arrow, an archer first assumes the correct stance. The body should be at or nearly perpendicular to the target and the shooting line, with the feet placed shoulder-width apart. As an archer progresses from beginner to a more advanced level other stances such as the \"open stance\" or the \"closed stance\" may be used, although many choose to stick with a \"neutral stance\". Each archer has a particular preference, but mostly this term indicates that the leg furthest from the shooting line is a half to a whole foot-length from the other foot, on the ground.\nTo load, the bow is pointed toward the ground, tipped slightly clockwise of vertical (for a right handed shooter) and the shaft of the arrow is placed on the arrow rest or shelf. The back of the arrow is attached to the bowstring with the nock (a small locking groove located at the proximal end of the arrow). This step is called \"nocking the arrow\". Typical arrows with three vanes should be oriented such that a single vane, the \"cock feather\", is pointing away from the bow, to improve the clearance of the arrow as it passes the arrow rest.\nA compound bow is fitted with a special type of arrow rest, known as a launcher, and the arrow is usually loaded with the cock feather/vane pointed either up, or down, depending upon the type of launcher being used.\nThe bowstring and arrow are held with three fingers, or with a mechanical arrow release. Most commonly, for finger shooters, the index finger is placed above the arrow and the next two fingers below, although several other techniques have their adherents around the world, involving three fingers below the arrow, or an arrow pinching technique. \"Instinctive\" shooting is a technique eschewing sights and is often preferred by traditional archers (shooters of longbows and recurves). In either the split finger or three finger under case, the string is usually placed in the first or second joint, or else on the pads of the fingers. When using a mechanical release aid, the release is hooked onto the D-loop.\nAnother type of string hold, used on traditional bows, is the type favoured by the Mongol warriors, known as the \"thumb release\", style. This involves using the thumb to draw the string, with the fingers curling around the thumb to add some support. To release the string, the fingers are opened out and the thumb relaxes to allow the string to slide off the thumb. When using this type of release, the arrow should rest on the same side of the bow as the drawing hand i.e. Left hand draw = arrow on left side of bow.\nThe archer then raises the bow and draws the string, with varying alignments for vertical versus slightly canted bow positions. This is often one fluid motion for shooters of recurves and longbows, which tend to vary from archer to archer. Compound shooters often experience a slight jerk during the drawback, at around the last , where the draw weight is at its maximum\u2014before relaxing into a comfortable stable full draw position. The archer draws the string hand towards the face, where it should rest lightly at a fixed \"anchor point\". This point is consistent from shot to shot, and is usually at the corner of the mouth, on the chin, to the cheek, or to the ear, depending on preferred shooting style. The archer holds the bow arm outwards, toward the target. The elbow of this arm should be rotated so that the inner elbow is perpendicular to the ground, though archers with hyper extendable elbows tend to angle the inner elbow toward the ground, as exemplified by the Korean archer Jang Yong-Ho. This keeps the forearm out of the way of the bowstring.\nIn modern form, the archer stands erect, forming a \"T\". The archer's lower trapezius muscles are used to pull the arrow to the anchor point. Some modern recurve bows are equipped with a mechanical device, called a clicker, which produces a clicking sound when the archer reaches the correct draw length. In contrast, traditional English Longbow shooters step \"into the bow\", exerting force with both the bow arm and the string hand arm simultaneously, especially when using bows having draw weights from to over . Heavily stacked traditional bows (recurves, long bows, and the like) are released immediately upon reaching full draw at maximum weight, whereas compound bows reach their maximum weight around the last , dropping holding weight significantly at full draw. Compound bows are often held at full draw for a short time to achieve maximum accuracy.\nThe arrow is typically released by relaxing the fingers of the drawing hand (see Bow draw), or triggering the mechanical release aid. Usually the release aims to keep the drawing arm rigid, the bow hand relaxed, and the arrow is moved back using the back muscles, as opposed to using just arm motions. An archer should also pay attention to the recoil or \"follow through\" of his or her body, as it may indicate problems with form (technique) that affect accuracy.\nAiming methods.\nThere are two main forms of aiming in archery: using a mechanical or fixed sight, or barebow.\nMechanical sights can be affixed to the bow to aid in aiming. They can be as simple as a pin, or may use optics with magnification. They usually also have a peep sight (rear sight) built into the string, which aids in a consistent anchor point. Modern compound bows automatically limit the draw length to give a consistent arrow velocity, while traditional bows allow great variation in draw length. Some bows use mechanical methods to make the draw length consistent. Barebow archers often use a sight picture, which includes the target, the bow, the hand, the arrow shaft and the arrow tip, as seen at the same time by the archer. With a fixed \"anchor point\" (where the string is brought to, or close to, the face), and a fully extended bow arm, successive shots taken with the sight picture in the same position fall on the same point. This lets the archer adjust aim with successive shots to achieve accuracy.\nModern archery equipment usually includes sights. Instinctive aiming is used by many archers who use traditional bows. The two most common forms of a non-mechanical release are split-finger and three-under. Split-finger aiming requires the archer to place the index finger above the nocked arrow, while the middle and ring fingers are both placed below. Three-under aiming places the index, middle, and ring fingers under the nocked arrow. This technique allows the archer to better look down the arrow since the back of the arrow is closer to the dominant eye, and is commonly called \"gun barreling\" (referring to common aiming techniques used with firearms).\nWhen using short bows or shooting from horseback, it is difficult to use the sight picture. The archer may look at the target, but without including the weapon in the field of accurate view. Aiming then involves hand-eye coordination\u2014which includes proprioception and motor-muscle memory, similar to that used when throwing a ball. With sufficient practice, such archers can normally achieve good practical accuracy for hunting or for war. Aiming without a sight picture may allow more rapid shooting, not however increasing accuracy.\nInstinctive shooting is a style of shooting that includes the barebow aiming method that relies heavily upon the subconscious mind, proprioception, and motor/muscle memory to make aiming adjustments; the term used to refer to a general category of archers who did not use a mechanical or fixed sight.\nPhysics.\nWhen a projectile is thrown by hand, the speed of the projectile is determined by the kinetic energy imparted by the thrower's muscles performing work. However, the energy must be imparted over a limited distance (determined by arm length) and therefore (because the projectile is accelerating) over a limited time, so the limiting factor is not work but rather power, which determined how much energy can be added in the limited time available. Power generated by muscles, however, is limited by force\u2013velocity relationship, and even at the optimal contraction speed for power production, total work by the muscle is less than half of what it would be if the muscle contracted over the same distance at slow speeds, resulting in less than 1/4 the projectile launch velocity possible without the limitations of the force\u2013velocity relationship.\nWhen a bow is used, the muscles are able to perform work much more slowly, resulting in greater force and greater work done. This work is stored in the bow as elastic potential energy, and when the bowstring is released, this stored energy is imparted to the arrow much more quickly than can be delivered by the muscles, resulting in much higher velocity and, hence, greater distance. This same process is employed by frogs, which use elastic tendons to increase jumping distance. In archery, some energy dissipates through elastic hysteresis, reducing the overall amount released when the bow is shot. Of the remaining energy, some is dampened both by the limbs of the bow and the bowstring. Depending on the arrow's elasticity, some of the energy is also absorbed by compressing the arrow, primarily because the release of the bowstring is rarely in line with the arrow shaft, causing it to flex out to one side. This is because the bowstring accelerates faster than the archer's fingers can open, and consequently some sideways motion is imparted to the string, and hence arrow nock, as the power and speed of the bow pulls the string off the opening fingers.\nEven with a release aid mechanism some of this effect is usually experienced, since the string always accelerates faster than the retaining part of the mechanism. This makes the arrow oscillate in flight\u2014its center flexing to one side and then the other repeatedly, gradually reducing as the arrow's flight proceeds. This is clearly visible in high-speed photography of arrows at discharge. A direct effect of these energy transfers can clearly be seen when dry firing. Dry firing refers to releasing the bowstring without a nocked arrow. Because there is no arrow to receive the stored potential energy, almost all the energy stays in the bow. Some have suggested that dry firing may cause physical damage to the bow, such as cracks and fractures\u2014and because most bows are not specifically made to handle the high amounts of energy dry firing produces, should never be done.\nModern arrows are made to a specified 'spine', or stiffness rating, to maintain matched flexing and hence accuracy of aim. This flexing can be a desirable feature, since, when the spine of the shaft is matched to the acceleration of the bow(string), the arrow bends or flexes around the bow and any arrow-rest, and consequently the arrow, and fletchings, have an un-impeded flight. This feature is known as the archer's paradox. It maintains accuracy, for if part of the arrow struck a glancing blow on discharge, some inconsistency would be present, and the excellent accuracy of modern equipment would not be achieved.\nThe accurate flight of an arrow depends on its fletchings. The arrow's manufacturer (a \"fletcher\") can arrange fletching to cause the arrow to rotate along its axis. This improves accuracy by evening pressure buildups that would otherwise cause the arrow to \"plane\" on the air in a random direction after shooting. Even with a carefully made arrow, the slightest imperfection or air movement causes some unbalanced turbulence in air flow. Consequently, rotation creates an equalization of such turbulence, which, overall, maintains the intended direction of flight i.e. accuracy. This rotation is not to be confused with the rapid gyroscopic rotation of a rifle bullet. Fletching that is not arranged to induce rotation still improves accuracy by causing a restoring drag any time the arrow tilts from its intended direction of travel.\nThe innovative aspect of the invention of the bow and arrow was the amount of power delivered to an extremely small area by the arrow. The huge ratio of length vs. cross sectional area, coupled with velocity, made the arrow more powerful than any other hand held weapon until firearms were invented. Arrows can spread or concentrate force, depending on the application. Practice arrows, for instance, have a blunt tip that spreads the force over a wider area to reduce the risk of injury or limit penetration. Arrows designed to pierce armor in the Middle Ages used a very narrow and sharp tip (\"bodkinhead\") to concentrate the force. Arrows used for hunting used a narrow tip (\"broadhead\") that widens further, to facilitate both penetration and a large wound.\nHunting.\nUsing archery to take game animals is known as \"bow hunting\". Bow hunting differs markedly from hunting with firearms, as distance between hunter and prey must be much shorter to ensure a humane kill. The skills and practices of bow hunting therefore emphasize very close approach to the prey, whether by still hunting, stalking, or waiting in a blind or tree stand. In many countries, including much of the United States, bow hunting for large and small game is legal. Bow hunters generally enjoy longer seasons than are allowed with other forms of hunting such as black powder, shotgun, or rifle. Usually, compound bows are used for large game hunting due to the relatively short time it takes to master them as opposed to the longbow or recurve bow. These compound bows may feature fiber optic sights, stabilizers, and other accessories designed to increase accuracy at longer distances. Using a bow and arrow to take fish is known as \"bow fishing\".\nModern competitive archery.\nCompetitive archery involves shooting arrows at a target for accuracy from a set distance or distances. This is the most popular form of competitive archery worldwide and is called target archery. A form particularly popular in Europe and America is field archery, shot at targets generally set at various distances in a wooded setting. Competitive archery in the United States is governed by USA Archery and National Field Archery Association (NFAA), which also certifies instructors.\nPara-Archery is an adaptation of archery for athletes with a disability governed by the World Archery Federation (WA), and is one of the sports in the Summer Paralympic Games. There are also several other lesser-known and historical forms of archery, as well as archery novelty games and flight archery, where the aim is to shoot the greatest distance.\nExternal links.\n[[Category:Archery| ]]\n[[Category:Competition]]\n[[Category:Hunting methods]]\n[[Category:Precision sports]]\n[[Category:Summer Olympic sports]]\n[[Category:Warfare of the Middle Ages]]\n[[Category:Organizations established in 1879]]"}
{"id": "2008", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2008", "title": "Al Qaeda", "text": ""}
{"id": "2009", "revid": "30211054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2009", "title": "Alvar Aalto", "text": "Hugo Alvar Henrik Aalto (; 3 February 1898 \u2013 11 May 1976) was a Finnish architect and designer. His work includes architecture, furniture, textiles and glassware, as well as sculptures and paintings. He never regarded himself as an artist, seeing painting and sculpture as \"branches of the tree whose trunk is architecture.\" Aalto's early career ran in parallel with the rapid economic growth and industrialization of Finland during the first half of the 20th century. Many of his clients were industrialists, among them the Ahlstr\u00f6m-Gullichsen family. The span of his career, from the 1920s to the 1970s, is reflected in the styles of his work, ranging from Nordic Classicism of the early work, to a rational International Style Modernism during the 1930s to a more organic modernist style from the 1940s onwards. Typical for his entire career is a concern for design as a Gesamtkunstwerk, a \"total work of art\", in which he \u2013 together with his first wife Aino Aalto \u2013 would design the building, and give special treatment to the interior surfaces, furniture, lamps and glassware. His furniture designs are considered Scandinavian Modern, in the sense of a concern for materials, especially wood, and simplification but also technical experimentation, which led him to receiving patents for various manufacturing processes, such as bent wood. As a designer he is celebrated as the inventor of bent plywood furniture. The Alvar Aalto Museum, designed by Aalto himself, is located in what is regarded as his home city Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4.\nBiography.\nLife.\nHugo Alvar Henrik Aalto was born in Kuortane, Finland. His father, Johan Henrik Aalto, was a Finnish-speaking land-surveyor and his mother, Selma Matilda \"Selly\" (n\u00e9e Hackstedt) was a Swedish-speaking postmistress. When Aalto was 5 years old, the family moved to Alaj\u00e4rvi, and from there to Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 in Central Finland.\nHe studied at the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 Lyceum school, where he completed his basic education in 1916, and took drawing lessons from local artist Jonas Heiska. In 1916, he then enrolled to study architecture at the Helsinki University of Technology. His studies were interrupted by the Finnish Civil War, in which he fought. He fought on the side of the \"White Army\" and fought at the Battle of L\u00e4nkipohja and the Battle of Tampere.\nHe built his first piece of architecture while a student; a house for his parents at Alaj\u00e4rvi. Later, he continued his education, graduating in 1921. In the summer of 1922 he began military service, finishing at Hamina reserve officer training school, and was promoted to reserve second lieutenant in June 1923.\nIn 1920, while a student, Aalto made his first trip abroad, travelling via Stockholm to Gothenburg, where he briefly found work with architect Arvid Bjerke. In 1922, he accomplished his first independent piece at the Industrial Exposition in Tampere. In 1923, he returned to Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, where he opened an architectural office under the name 'Alvar Aalto, Architect and Monumental Artist'. At that time he wrote articles for the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 newspaper \"Sis\u00e4-Suomi\" under the pseudonym Remus. During this time, he designed a number of small single-family houses in Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, and the office's workload steadily increased.\nOn 6 October 1924, Aalto married architect Aino Marsio. Their honeymoon in Italy was Aalto's first trip there, though Aino had previously made a study trip there. The latter trip together sealed an intellectual bond with the culture of the Mediterranean region that remained important to Aalto for life.\nOn their return they continued with several local projects, notably the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 Worker's Club, which incorporated a number of motifs which they had studied during their trip, most notably the decorations of the Festival hall modelled on the Rucellai Sepulchre in Florence by Leon Battista Alberti. After winning the architecture competition for the Southwest Finland Agricultural Cooperative building in 1927, the Aaltos moved their office to Turku. They had made contact with the city's most progressive architect, Erik Bryggman before moving. They began collaborating with him, most notably on the Turku Fair of 1928\u201329. Aalto's biographer, G\u00f6ran Schildt, claimed that Bryggman was the only architect with whom Aalto cooperated as an equal. With an increasing quantity of work in the Finnish capital, the Aaltos' office moved again in 1933 to Helsinki.\nThe Aaltos designed and built a joint house-office (1935\u201336) for themselves in Munkkiniemi, Helsinki, but later (1954\u201356) had a purpose-built office erected in the same neighbourhood \u2013 now the former is a \"home museum\" and the latter the premises of the Alvar Aalto Academy. In 1926, the young Aaltos designed and had built for themselves a summer cottage in Alaj\u00e4rvi, Villa Flora.\nDeath.\nAino Aalto died of cancer in 1949. Aino and Alvar Aalto had two children, a daughter, Johanna \"Hanni\", Mrs Alanen (born 1925), and a son, Hamilkar Aalto (born 1928). In 1952, Aalto married architect Elissa M\u00e4kiniemi (died 1994), who had been working as an assistant in his office.\nIn 1952, he designed and built a summer cottage, the so-called Experimental House, for himself and his new wife in Muuratsalo in Central Finland. Alvar Aalto died on 11 May 1976, in Helsinki, and is buried in the Hietaniemi cemetery in Helsinki. His wife and the office employees continued the works of the office which were still in progress. In 1978 the Museum of Finnish Architecture in Helsinki arranged a major exhibition of Aalto's works.\nArchitecture career.\nEarly career: classicism.\nAlthough he is sometimes regarded as among the first and most influential architects of Nordic modernism, closer examination reveals that Aalto (while a pioneer in Finland) closely followed and had personal contacts with other pioneers in Sweden, in particular Gunnar Asplund and Sven Markelius. What they, and many others of that generation in the Nordic countries shared, was a common classical education and an approach to classical architecture, that historians now call Nordic Classicism It was a style that had been a reaction to the previous dominant style of National Romanticism before moving, in the late 1920s, towards Modernism.\nUpon returning to Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 in 1923 to establish his own architect's office, Aalto designed several single-family homes designed in the style of Nordic Classicism. For example, the manor-like house for his mother's cousin Terho Manner in T\u00f6ysa (1923), a summer villa for the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 chief constable (also from 1923) and the Alatalo farmhouse in Tarvaala (1924). During this period he completed his first public buildings, the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 Workers' Club in 1925, the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 Defence Corps building in 1926 and the Sein\u00e4joki Civil Guard House building in 1924\u201329. He entered several architectural competitions for prestigious state public buildings, in Finland and abroad. This included two competitions for the Finnish Parliament building in 1923 and 1924, the extension to the University of Helsinki in 1931, and the building to house the League of Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1926\u201327. \nAalto's first church design to be completed, Muurame church, illustrates his transition from Nordic Classicism to Functionalism.\nThis was the period when Aalto was most prolific in his writings, with articles for professional journals and newspapers. Among his most well-known essays from this period are \"Urban culture\" (1924), \"Temple baths on Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 ridge\" (1925), \"Abb\u00e9 Coignard's sermon\" (1925), and \"From doorstep to living room\" (1926).\nEarly career: functionalism.\nThe shift in Aalto's design approach from classicism to modernism is epitomised by the Viipuri Library in Vyborg (1927\u201335), which went through a transformation from an originally classical competition entry proposal to the completed high-modernist building. His humanistic approach is in full evidence in the library: the interior displays natural materials, warm colours, and undulating lines. Due to problems about financing and a change of site, the Viipuri Library project lasted eight years. During that time he designed the Standard Apartment Building (1928\u201329) in Turku, Turun Sanomat Building (1929\u201330) and Paimio Sanatorium (1929\u201332). A number of factors heralded Aalto's shift towards modernism: on a personal level, Aalto's increased familiarization of international trends, especially after travelling throughout Europe, but in terms of completed projects it was the client of the Standard Apartment Building giving Aalto the opportunity to experiment with concrete prefabrication, the cutting-edge Corbusian form language of the Turun Sanomat Building, and these were then carried forward both in the Paimio Sanatorium and in the ongoing design for the library. Although the Turun Sanomat Building and Paimio Sanatorium are comparatively pure modernist works, they carried the seeds of his questioning of such an orthodox modernist approach and a move to a more daring, synthetic attitude. It has been pointed out that the planning principle for Paimio Sanatorium \u2013 the splayed wings \u2013 was indebted to the Zonnestraal Sanatorium (1925\u201331) by Jan Duiker, which Aalto visited while under construction. While these early Functionalist works by Aalto bear hallmarks of influences from Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius and other key modernist figures of central Europe, in all these buildings Aalto nevertheless started to show his individuality in a departure from such norms with the introduction of organic references.\nThrough Sven Markelius, Aalto became a member of the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM), attending the second congress in Frankfurt in 1929 and the fourth congress in Athens in 1933, where he established a close friendship with L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy, Sigfried Giedion and Philip Morton Shand. It was during this time that he followed closely the work of the main driving force behind the new modernism, Le Corbusier, and visited him in his Paris office several times in the following years.\nIt was not until the completion of the Paimio Sanatorium (1932) and Viipuri Library (1935) that Aalto first achieved world attention in architecture. His reputation grew in the US following the invitation to hold a retrospective exhibition of his works at the MOMA in New York in 1938, which was his visit to the US. The significance of the exhibition \u2013 which later went on a 12-city tour of the country \u2013 is in the fact that he was the second-ever architect \u2013 after Le Corbusier \u2013 to have a solo exhibition at the museum. His reputation grew in the US following the critical reception of his design for the Finnish Pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair, described by Frank Lloyd Wright as a \"work of genius\". It could be said that Aalto's international reputation was sealed with his inclusion in the second edition of Sigfried Giedion's influential book on Modernist architecture, \"Space, Time and Architecture: The growth of a new tradition\" (1949), in which Aalto received more attention than any other Modernist architect, including Le Corbusier. In his analysis of Aalto, Giedion gave primacy to qualities that depart from direct functionality, such as mood, atmosphere, intensity of life and even national characteristics, declaring that \"Finland is with Aalto wherever he goes\".\nMid career: experimentation.\nDuring the 1930s Alvar spent some time experimenting with laminated wood, sculpture and abstract relief, characterized by irregular curved forms. Utilizing this knowledge he was able to solve technical problems concerning the flexibility of wood and also of working out spatial issues in his designs. Aalto's early experiments with wood and his move away from a purist modernism would be tested in built form with the commission to design Villa Mairea (1939) in Noormarkku, the luxury home of young industrialist couple Harry and Maire Gullichsen. It was Maire Gullichsen who acted as the main client, and she worked closely not only with Alvar but also Aino Aalto on the design, inspiring them to be more daring in their work. The original design was to include a private art gallery: this was not built. The building forms a U-shape around a central inner 'garden', where the central feature is a kidney-shaped swimming pool. Adjacent to the pool is a sauna executed in a rustic style, alluding to both Finnish and Japanese precedents. The design of the house is a synthesis of numerous stylistic influences, from traditional Finnish vernacular to purist modernism, as well as influences from English and Japanese architecture. While the house is clearly intended for a wealthy family, Aalto nevertheless argued that it was also an experiment that would prove useful in the design of mass housing.\nHis increased fame led to offers and commissions outside Finland. In 1941 he accepted an invitation as a visiting professor to Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the US. Because of the Second World War, he returned to Finland to direct the Reconstruction Office. Post war, he returned to MIT, where he designed the student dormitory Baker House, completed in 1949. The dormitory lay along the Charles River and its undulating form provided maximum view and ventilation for each resident. This building was the first building of Aalto's redbrick period. Originally used in Baker House to signify the Ivy League university tradition, on his return to Finland Aalto used it in a number of key buildings, in particular, in several of the buildings in the new Helsinki University of Technology campus (starting in 1950), S\u00e4yn\u00e4tsalo Town Hall (1952), Helsinki Pensions Institute (1954), Helsinki House of Culture (1958), as well as in his own summer house, the Experimental House in Muuratsalo (1957).\nIn the 1950s Aalto immersed himself in sculpting: wood, bronze, marble or mixed media. Among notable works from this period is the memorial to the Battle of Suomussalmi (1960). Located on the battlefield, it consists of a leaning bronze pillar on a pedestal.\nMature career: monumentalism.\nThe early 1960s and 1970s (until his death in 1976) were marked by key works in Helsinki, in particular the huge town plan for the void in centre of Helsinki adjacent to T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6 Bay and the vast railway yards, and marked on the edges by significant buildings such as the National Museum and the main railway station, both by Eliel Saarinen. In his town plan Aalto proposed a line of separate marble-clad buildings fronting the bay which would house various cultural institutions, including a concert hall, opera, museum of architecture and headquarters for the Finnish Academy. The scheme also extended into the Kamppi district with a series of tall office blocks. Aalto first presented his scheme in 1961, but it went through various modifications during the early 1960s. Only two fragments of the overall plan were realized: the Finlandia Hall concert hall (1976) fronting T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6 Bay, and an office building in the Kamppi district for the Helsinki Electricity Company (1975). The Miesian formal language of geometric grids employed in the buildings was also used by Aalto for other sites in Helsinki, including the Enso-Gutzeit headquarters building (1962), the Academic Bookstore (1962) and the SYP Bank building (1969).\nFollowing Aalto's death in 1976 his office continued to operate under the direction of his widow Elissa, completing works already (to some extent) designed. These works include the Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 City Theatre and Essen opera house. Since the death of Elissa Aalto the office has continued to operate as the Alvar Aalto Academy, giving advice on the restoration of Aalto buildings and organising vast archive material.\nFurniture career.\nWhereas Aalto was famous for his architecture, his furniture designs were well thought of and are still popular today. He studied Josef Hoffmann and the Wiener Werkst\u00e4tte, and for a period of time, worked under Eliel Saarinen. He also gained inspiration from Gebr\u00fcder Thonet. During the late 1920s and 1930s he, working closely with Aino Aalto, also focusing much of his energy on furniture design, partly due to the decision to design much of the individual furniture pieces and lamps for the Paimio Sanatorium. Of particular significance was the experimentation in bent plywood chairs, most notably the so-called Paimio chair, which had been designed for the sitting tuberculosis patient, and the Model 60 stacking stool. The Aaltos, together with visual arts promoter Maire Gullichsen and art historian Nils-Gustav Hahl founded the Artek company in 1935, ostensibly to sell Aalto products but also other imported products. He became the first furniture designer to use the cantilever principle in chair design using wood.\nAwards.\nAalto's awards included the Prince Eugen Medal in 1954, the Royal Gold Medal for Architecture from the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1957 and the Gold Medal from the American Institute of Architects in 1963. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1957. He also was a member of the Academy of Finland, and was its president from 1963 to 1968. From 1925 to 1956 he was a member of the Congr\u00e8s International d'Architecture Moderne. In 1960 he received an honorary doctorate at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU).\nWorks.\nAalto's career spans the changes in style from (Nordic Classicism) to purist International Style Modernism to a more personal, synthetic and idiosyncratic Modernism. Aalto's wide field of design activity ranges from the large scale of city planning and architecture to interior design, furniture and glassware design and painting. It has been estimated that during his entire career Aalto designed over 500 individual buildings, approximately 300 of which were built, the vast majority of which are in Finland. He also has a few buildings in France, Germany, Italy and the USA.\nAalto's work with wood, was influenced by early Scandinavian architects. His experiments and departure from the norm brought attention to his ability to make wood do things not previously done. His techniques in the way he cut the beech tree, for example, and also his ability to use plywood as structural and aesthetic. Other examples include the rough-hewn vertical placement of logs at his pavilion at the Lapua expo, looking similar to a medieval barricade, at the orchestra platform at Turku and the Paris expo at the World Fair, he used varying sizes and shapes of planks. Also at Paris and at Villa Mairea he utilized birch boarding in a vertical arrangement. Also his famous undulating walls and ceilings made of red pine. In his roofing, he created massive spans (155-foot at the covered statium at Otaniemi) all without tie rods. His stairway at Villa Mairea, he evokes feelings of a natural forest by binding beech wood with withes into columns.\nAalto claimed that his paintings were not made as individual artworks but as part of his process of architectural design, and many of his small-scale \"sculptural\" experiments with wood led to later larger architectural details and forms. These experiments also led to a number of patents: for example, he invented a new form of laminated bent-plywood furniture in 1932 (which was patented in 1933). His experimental method had been influenced by his meetings with various members of the Bauhaus design school, especially L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy, whom he first met in 1930. Aalto's furniture was exhibited in London in 1935, to great critical acclaim, and to cope with the consumer demand Aalto, together with his wife Aino, Maire Gullichsen and Nils-Gustav Hahl founded the company Artek that same year. Aalto glassware (Aino as well as Alvar) is manufactured by Iittala.\nAalto's 'High Stool' and 'Stool E60' (manufactured by Artek) are currently used in Apple Stores across the world to serve as seating for customers. Finished in black lacquer, the stools are used to seat customers at the 'Genius Bar' and also in other areas of the store at times when seating is required for a product workshop or special event. Aalto was also influential in bringing modern art to the knowledge of the Finnish people, in particular the work of his friends, Alexander Milne Calder and Fernand L\u00e9ger.\nQuotations.\nAalto has an early place in any alphabetical list, and in May 2020 his entry in the combined index of \"Who Was Who\" was second out of 131,546 entries. First was Robert Aagaard, a furniture maker.\nCritique of Aalto's architecture.\nAs already mentioned, Aalto's international reputation was sealed with his inclusion in the second edition of Sigfried Giedion's influential book on Modernist architecture, \"Space, Time and Architecture: The growth of a new tradition\" (1949), in which Aalto received more attention than any other Modernist architect, including Le Corbusier. In his analysis of Aalto, Giedion gave primacy to qualities that depart from direct functionality, such as mood, atmosphere, intensity of life and even national characteristics, declaring that \"Finland is with Aalto wherever he goes\". However, a few more recent architecture critics and historians have questioned Aalto's position of influence in the canonic history. Italian Marxist architecture historians Manfredo Tafuri and Francesco Dal Co put forward the viewpoint that Aalto's \"historical significance has perhaps been rather exaggerated; with Aalto we are outside of the great themes that have made the course of contemporary architecture so dramatic. The qualities of his works have a meaning only as masterful distractions, not subject to reproduction outside the remote reality in which they have their roots.\" Their viewpoint was propounded by their own priority given to urbanism, seeing Aalto as an anti-urban, and thus consequently disparaging what they regarded as peripheral non-urban areas of the world: \"Essentially his architecture is not appropriate to urban typologies.\" Similarly concerned with the appropriateness of Aalto's form language, at the other end of the political spectrum, American postmodernist critic Charles Jencks made a claim for the need for buildings to signify meaning; however, he then lifted out Aalto's Pensions Institute building as an example of what he termed Aalto's 'soft paternalism': \"Conceived as a fragmented mass to break up the feeling of bureaucracy, it succeeds all too well in being humane and killing the pensioner with kindness. The forms are familiar red brick and ribbon-strip windows broken by copper and bronze elements \u2013 all carried through with a literal-mindedness that borders on the soporific.\" But also during Aalto's lifetime he faced critique from his fellow architects in Finland, most notably Kirmo Mikkola and Juhani Pallasmaa; by the last decade of his life Aalto's work was seen as idiosyncratic and individualistic, when the opposing tendencies of rationalism and constructivism \u2013 often championed under left-wing politics \u2013 argued for anonymous virtually non-aesthetic architecture. Mikkola wrote of Aalto's late works: \"Aalto has moved to his present baroque line...\"\nMemorials.\nAalto has been commemorated in a number of ways:\nFurther reading.\nG\u00f6ran Schildt has written and edited many books on Aalto, the most well-known being the three-volume biography, usually referred to as the definitive biography on Aalto."}
{"id": "2011", "revid": "1011410051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2011", "title": "Comparison of American and British English", "text": "The English language was first introduced to the Americas by British colonisation, beginning in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. The language also spread to numerous other parts of the world as a result of British trade and colonisation and the spread of the former British Empire, which, by 1921, included about 470\u2013570 million people, about a quarter of the world's population. Written forms of British and American English as found in newspapers and textbooks vary little in their essential features, with only occasional noticeable differences.\nOver the past 400 years, the forms of the language used in the Americas\u2014especially in the United States\u2014and that used in the United Kingdom have diverged in a few minor ways, leading to the versions now often referred to as American English and British English. Differences between the two include pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary (lexis), spelling, punctuation, idioms, and formatting of dates and numbers. However, the differences in written and most spoken grammar structure tend to be much less than in other aspects of the language in terms of mutual intelligibility. A few words have completely different meanings in the two versions or are even unknown or not used in one of the versions. One particular contribution towards formalising these differences came from Noah Webster, who wrote the first American dictionary (published 1828) with the intention of showing that people in the United States spoke a different dialect from those spoken in the UK, much like a regional accent.\nThis divergence between American English and British English has provided opportunities for humorous comment: e.g. in fiction George Bernard Shaw says that the United States and United Kingdom are \"two countries divided by a common language\"; and Oscar Wilde says that \"We have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of course, the language\" (\"The Canterville Ghost\", 1888). Henry Sweet incorrectly predicted in 1877 that within a century American English, Australian English and British English would be mutually unintelligible (\"A Handbook of Phonetics\"). Perhaps increased worldwide communication through radio, television, the Internet and globalisation has tended to reduce regional variation. This can lead to some variations becoming extinct (for instance \"the wireless\" being progressively superseded by \"the radio\") or the acceptance of wide variations as \"perfectly good English\" everywhere.\nAlthough spoken American and British English are generally mutually intelligible, there are occasional differences which might cause embarrassment\u2014for example, in American English a \"rubber\" is usually interpreted as a \"condom\" rather than an \"eraser\"; and a British \"fanny\" refers to the female pubic area, while the American \"fanny\" refers to an \"ass\" (US) or an \"arse\" (UK).\nVocabulary.\nThe familiarity of speakers with words and phrases from different regions varies, and the difficulty of discerning an unfamiliar definition also depends on the context and the term. As expressions spread with the globalisation of telecommunication, they are often but not always recognised as foreign to the speaker's dialect, and words from other dialects may carry connotations with regard to register, social status, origin, and intelligence.\nWords and phrases with different meanings.\nWords such as \"bill\" and \"biscuit\" are used regularly in both AmE and BrE but can mean different things in each form. The word \"bill\" has several meanings, most of which are shared between AmE and BrE. However, in AmE \"bill\" often refers to a piece of paper money (as in a \"dollar bill\") which in BrE is more commonly referred to as a note. In AmE it can also refer to the visor of a cap, though this is by no means common. In AmE a biscuit (from the French \"twice baked\" as in biscotto) is a soft bready product that is known in BrE as a scone or a specifically hard, sweet biscuit. Meanwhile, a BrE biscuit incorporates both dessert biscuits and AmE cookies (from the Dutch 'little cake').\nAs chronicled by Winston Churchill, the opposite meanings of the verb \"to table\" created a misunderstanding during a meeting of the Allied forces; in BrE to table an item on an agenda means to \"open it up\" for discussion whereas in AmE, it means to \"remove\" it from discussion, or at times, to suspend or delay discussion; e.g. \"Let's table that topic for later\".\nThe word \"football\" in BrE refers to association football, also known as soccer. In AmE, \"football\" means American football. The standard AmE term \"soccer\", a contraction of \"association (football)\", is actually of British origin, derived from the formalisation of different codes of football in the 19th century, and was a fairly unremarkable usage (possibly marked for class) in BrE until relatively recently; it has lately become perceived as an Americanism. In international (i.e. non-American) context, particularly in sports news outside English-speaking North America, American (or US branches of foreign) news agencies also use \"football\" to mean \"soccer\", especially in direct quotes.\nSimilarly, the word \"hockey\" in BrE refers to field hockey and in AmE, \"hockey\" means ice hockey.\nWords with completely different meanings are relatively few; most of the time there are either (1) words with one or more shared meanings and one or more meanings unique to one variety (for example, bathroom and toilet) or (2) words the meanings of which are actually common to both BrE and AmE but that show differences in frequency, connotation or denotation (for example, \"smart\", \"clever\", \"mad\").\nSome differences in usage and meaning can cause confusion or embarrassment. For example, the word \"fanny\" is a slang word for vulva in BrE but means buttocks in AmE\u2014the AmE phrase \"fanny pack\" is \"bum bag\" in BrE. In AmE the word \"pissed\" means being annoyed whereas in BrE it is a coarse word for being drunk (in both varieties, \"pissed off\" means irritated).\nSimilarly, in AmE the word \"pants\" is the common word for the BrE \"trousers\" and \"knickers\" refers to a variety of half-length trousers (though most AmE users would use the term \"shorts\" rather than knickers), while the majority of BrE speakers would understand \"pants\" to mean \"underpants\" and \"knickers\" to mean \"female underpants\".\nSometimes the confusion is more subtle. In AmE the word \"quite\" used as a qualifier is generally a reinforcement, though it is somewhat uncommon in actual colloquial American use today and carries an air of formality: for example, \"I'm quite hungry\" is a very polite way to say \"I'm very hungry\". In BrE \"quite\" (which is much more common in conversation) may have this meaning, as in \"quite right\" or \"quite mad\", but it more commonly means \"somewhat\", so that in BrE \"I'm quite hungry\" can mean \"I'm somewhat hungry\". This divergence of use can lead to misunderstanding.\nDifferent terms in different dialects.\nMost speakers of American English are aware of some uniquely British terms. It is generally very easy to guess what some words, such as BrE \"driving licence\", mean, the AmE equivalent being \"driver's license\". However, use of many other British words such as \"naff\" (slang but commonly used to mean \"not very good\") are unheard of in American English.\nSpeakers of BrE are likely to understand most common AmE terms, examples such as \"sidewalk (pavement or footpath)\", \"gas (gasoline/petrol)\", \"counterclockwise (anticlockwise)\" or \"elevator (lift)\", without any problem, thanks in part to considerable exposure to American popular culture and literature. Certain terms that are heard less frequently, especially those likely to be absent or rare in American popular culture, e.g., \"copacetic (very satisfactory)\", are unlikely to be understood by most BrE speakers.\nOther examples:\nHoliday greetings.\nIt is increasingly common for Americans to say \"Happy holidays\", referring to all, or at least multiple, winter (in the Northern hemisphere) or summer (in the Southern hemisphere) holidays (Christmas, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa, etc.) especially when one's religious observances are not known; the phrase is rarely heard in the UK. In the UK, the phrases \"holiday season\" and \"holiday period\" refer to the period in the summer (in the Northern hemisphere) or winter (in the Southern hemisphere) when most people take time off from work, and travel; AmE does not use \"holiday\" in this sense, instead using \"vacation\" for recreational excursions.\nIn AmE, the prevailing Christmas greeting is \"Merry Christmas\", which is the traditional English Christmas greeting, as found in the English Christmas carol \"We Wish You a Merry Christmas\", and which appears several times in Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\". In BrE, \"Happy Christmas\" is a common alternative to \"Merry Christmas\".\nIdiosyncratic differences.\nOmission of \"and\" and \"on\".\nGenerally in British English, numbers with a value over one hundred have the word \"and\" inserted before the last two digits. For example, the number 115, when written in words or spoken aloud, would be \"One hundred \"and\" fifteen\", in British English. In American English, numbers are typically said or written in words in the same way, however if the word \"and\" is omitted (\"One hundred fifteen\"), this is also considered acceptable (in BrE this would be considered ungrammatical).\nLikewise, in the US, the word \"on\" can be left out when referring to events occurring on any particular day of the week. The US possibility \"The Cowboys won the game Saturday\" would have the equivalent in the UK of \"Sheffield United won the match on Saturday.\"\nFigures of speech.\nBoth BrE and AmE use the expression \"I couldn't care less\", to mean that the speaker does not care at all. Some Americans use \"I could care less\" to mean the same thing. This variant is frequently derided as sloppy, as the literal meaning of the words is that the speaker \"does\" care to some extent.\nIn both areas, saying, \"I don't mind\" often means, \"I'm not annoyed\" (for example, by someone's smoking), while \"I don't care\" often means, \"The matter is trivial or boring\". However, in answering a question such as \"Tea or coffee?\", if either alternative is equally acceptable an American may answer, \"I don't care\", while a British person may answer, \"I don't mind\". Either can sound odd, confusing, or rude, to those accustomed to the other variant.\n\"To be \"all set\"\" in both BrE and AmE can mean \"to be prepared or ready\", though it appears to be more common in AmE. It can also have an additional meaning in AmE of \"to be finished or done\", for example, a customer at a restaurant telling a waiter \"I'm all set. I'll take the check.\"\nEquivalent idioms.\nA number of English idioms that have essentially the same meaning show lexical differences between the British and the American version; for instance:\n In the US, a \"carpet\" typically refers to a fitted carpet, rather than a rug.\nSocial and cultural differences.\nLexical items that reflect separate social and cultural development.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary school.\nThe US has a more uniform nationwide system of terms than does the UK, but the division by grades varies somewhat among the states and even among local school districts. For example, \"elementary school\" often includes kindergarten and may include sixth grade, with \"middle school\" including only two grades or extending to ninth grade. \nIn the UK, the US equivalent of a \"high school\" is often referred to as a \"secondary school\" regardless of whether it is state funded or private. US Secondary education also includes \"middle school\" or \"junior high school\", a two- or three-year transitional school between elementary school and high school. \"Middle school\" is sometimes used in the UK as a synonym for the younger \"junior school\", covering the second half of the primary curriculum, current years four to six in some areas. However, in Dorset (South England), it is used to describe the second school in the three-tier system, which is normally from year 5 to year 8 . In other regions, such as Evesham and the surrounding area in Worcestershire, the second tier goes from year 6 to year 8, and both starting secondary school in year nine. In Kirklees, West Yorkshire, in the villages of the Dearne Valley there is a three tier system: first schools year reception to year five, middle school (Scissett/Kirkburton Middle School) year 6 to year 8 and high school ()year 9 to year 13.\nA \"public school\" has opposite meanings in the two countries. In AmE this is a government-owned institution open to all students, supported by public funding. The BrE use of the term is in the context of \"private\" education: to be educated privately with a tutor. In England and Wales the term strictly refers to an ill-defined group of prestigious private independent schools funded by students' fees, although it is often more loosely used to refer to any independent school. Independent schools are also known as \"private schools\", and the latter is the term used in Scotland and Northern Ireland for all such fee-funded schools. Strictly, the term \"public school\" is not used in Scotland and Northern Ireland in the same sense as in England, but nevertheless Gordonstoun, the Scottish private school, is sometimes referred to as a \"public school\", as are some other Scottish private schools. Government-funded schools in Scotland and Northern Ireland are properly referred to as \"state schools\" but are sometimes confusingly referred to as \"public schools\" (with the same meaning as in the US), and in the US, where most public schools are administered by local governments, a \"state school\" typically refers to a college or university run by one of the U.S. states. \nSpeakers in both the United States and the United Kingdom use several additional terms for specific types of secondary school. A US \"prep school\" or \"preparatory school\" is an independent school funded by tuition fees; the same term is used in the UK for a private school for pupils under 13, designed to prepare them for fee-paying public schools. In the US, \"Catholic schools\" cover costs through tuition and have affiliations with a religious institution, most often a Catholic church or diocese. In England, where the state-funded education system grew from parish schools organised by the local established church, the Church of England (C of E, or CE), and many schools, especially primary schools (up to age 11) retain a church connection and are known as \"church schools\", \"CE schools\" or \"CE (aided) schools\". There are also \"faith schools\" associated with the Roman Catholic Church and other major faiths, with a mixture of funding arrangements. \nIn the US, a \"magnet school\" receives government funding and has special admission requirements: in some cases pupils gain admission through superior performance on admission tests, while other magnet schools admit students through a lottery. The UK has city academies, which are independent privately sponsored schools run with public funding and which can select up to 10% of pupils by aptitude. Moreover, in the UK 36 local education authorities retain selection by ability at 11. They maintain grammar schools (state funded secondary schools), which admit pupils according to performance in an examination (known as the 11+) and comprehensive schools that take pupils of all abilities. Grammar schools select the most academically able 10% to 23% of those who sit the exam. Students who fail the exam go to a secondary modern school, sometimes called a \"high school\", or increasingly an \"academy\". In areas where there are no grammar schools the comprehensives likewise may term themselves high schools or academies. Nationally only 6% of pupils attend grammar schools, mainly in four distinct counties. Some private schools are called \"grammar schools\", chiefly those that were grammar schools long before the advent of state education.\nUniversity.\nIn the UK a university student is said to \"study\", to \"read\" or, informally, simply to \"do\" a subject. In the recent past the expression 'to read a subject' was more common at the older universities such as Oxford and Cambridge. In the US a student \"studies\" or \"majors in\" a subject (although a student's \"major\", \"concentration\" or, less commonly, \"emphasis\" is also used in US colleges or universities to refer to the major subject of study). \"To major in\" something refers to the student's principal course of study; \"to study\" may refer to any class being taken. \nBrE: \nAmE: \nAt university level in BrE, each \"module\" is taught or facilitated by a \"lecturer\" or \"tutor\"; \"professor\" is the job-title of a senior academic (in AmE, at some universities, the equivalent of the BrE lecturer is instructor, especially when the teacher has a lesser degree or no university degree, though the usage may become confusing according to whether the subject being taught is considered technical or not; it is also different from adjunct instructor/professor). In AmE each \"class\" is generally taught by a \"professor\" (although some US tertiary educational institutions follow the BrE usage), while the position of \"lecturer\" is occasionally given to individuals hired on a temporary basis to teach one or more classes and who may or may not have a doctoral degree. \nThe word \"course\" in American use typically refers to the study of a restricted topic or individual subject (for example, \"a course in Early Medieval England\", \"a course in integral calculus\") over a limited period of time (such as a semester or term) and is equivalent to a \"module\" or sometimes \"unit\" at a British university. In the UK, a \"course of study\" or simply \"course\" is likely to refer to the entire programme of study, which may extend over several years and be made up of any number of \"modules,\" hence it is also practically synonymous to a degree programme. A few university-specific exceptions exist: for example, at Cambridge the word \"paper\" is used to refer to a \"module\", while the whole course of study is called \"tripos\". \nA \"dissertation\" in AmE refers to the final written product of a doctoral student to fulfil the requirement of that program. In BrE, the same word refers to the final written product of a student in an undergraduate or taught master's programme. A dissertation in the AmE sense would be a thesis in BrE, though \"dissertation\" is also used. \nAnother source of confusion is the different usage of the word \"college\". (See a full international discussion of the various meanings at college.) In the US, it refers to a post-high school institution that grants either associate's or bachelor's degrees, and in the UK, it refers to any post-secondary institution that is not a university (including \"sixth form college\" after the name in secondary education for years 12 and 13, the \"sixth form\") where intermediary courses such as A levels or NVQs can be taken and GCSE courses can be retaken. College may sometimes be used in the UK or in Commonwealth countries as part of the name of a secondary or high school (for example, Dubai College). In the case of Oxford, Cambridge, Aberdeen, London, Lancaster, Durham, Kent and York universities, all members are also members of a college which is part of the university, for example, one is a member of King's College, Cambridge and hence the university. \nIn both the US and UK \"college\" can refer to some division within a university that comprises related academic departments such as the \"college of business and economics\" though in the UK \"faculty\" is more often used. Institutions in the US that offer two to four years of post-high school education often have the word \"college\" as part of their name, while those offering more advanced degrees are called a \"university\". (There are exceptions: Boston College, Dartmouth College and the College of William &amp; Mary are examples of colleges that offer advanced degrees, while Vincennes University is an unusual example of a \"university\" that offers only associate degrees in the vast majority of its academic programs.) American students who pursue a \"bachelor's degree\" (four years of higher education) or an \"associate degree\" (two years of higher education) are \"college students\" regardless of whether they attend a college or a university and refer to their educational institutions informally as \"colleges.\" A student who pursues a master's degree or a doctorate degree in the arts and sciences is in AmE a \"graduate student\"; in BrE a \"postgraduate student\" although \"graduate student\" is also sometimes used. Students of advanced professional programs are known by their field (\"business student\", \"law student\", \"medical student\"). Some universities also have a residential college system, the details of which may vary but generally involve common living and dining spaces as well as college-organised activities. Nonetheless, when it comes to the level of education, AmE generally uses the word \"college\" (e.g., going to college) whereas BrE generally uses the word \"university\" (e.g., going to university) regardless of the institution's official designation/status in both countries. \nIn the context of higher education, the word \"school\" is used slightly differently in BrE and AmE. In BrE, except for the University of London, the word school is used to refer to an academic department in a university. In AmE, the word school is used to refer to a collection of related academic departments and is headed by a dean. When it refers to a division of a university, school is practically synonymous to a college. \n\"Professor\" has different meanings in BrE and AmE. In BrE it is the highest academic rank, followed by reader, senior lecturer and lecturer. In AmE \"professor\" refers to academic staff of all ranks, with (full) professor (largely equivalent to the UK meaning) followed by associate professor and assistant professor. \n\"Tuition\" has traditionally had separate meaning in each variation. In BrE it is the educational content transferred from teacher to student at a university. In AmE it is the money (the fees) paid to receive that education (BrE: tuition fees).\nGeneral terms.\nIn both the US and the UK, a student \"takes\" an exam, but in BrE a student can also be said to \"sit\" an exam. When preparing for an exam students \"revise\" (BrE)/\"review\" (AmE) what they have studied; the BrE idiom \"to revise for\" has the equivalent \"to review for\" in AmE. \nExaminations are supervised by \"invigilators\" in the UK and \"proctors\" (or \"(exam) supervisors\") in the US (a \"proctor\" in the UK is an official responsible for student discipline at the University of Oxford or Cambridge). In the UK a teacher first \"sets\" and then \"administers\" exam, while in the US, a teacher first \"writes\", \"makes\", \"prepares\", etc. and then \"gives\" an exam. With the same basic meaning of the latter idea but with a more formal or official connotation, a teacher in the US may also \"administer\" or \"proctor\" an exam. \nBrE: \nAmE: \nIn BrE, students are awarded \"marks\" as credit for requirements (e.g., tests, projects) while in AmE, students are awarded \"points\" or \"grades\" for the same. Similarly, in BrE, a candidate's work is being \"marked\", while in AmE it is said to be \"graded\" to determine what mark or grade is given. \nThere is additionally a difference between American and British usage in the word \"school\". In British usage \"school\" by itself refers only to primary (elementary) and secondary (high) schools and to \"sixth forms\" attached to secondary schools\u2014if one \"goes to school\", this type of institution is implied. By contrast an American student at a university may be \"in/at school\", \"coming/going to school\", etc. US and British law students and medical students both commonly speak in terms of going to \"law school\" and \"med[ical] school\", respectively. However, the word \"school\" is used in BrE in the context of higher education to describe a division grouping together several related subjects within a university, for example a \"School of European Languages\" containing \"departments\" for each language and also in the term \"art school\". It is also the name of some of the constituent colleges of the University of London, for example, School of Oriental and African Studies, London School of Economics. \nAmong high-school and college students in the United States, the words \"freshman\" (or the gender-neutral terms \"first year\" or sometimes \"freshie\"), \"sophomore\", \"junior\" and \"senior\" refer to the first, second, third, and fourth years respectively. It is important that the context of either high school or college first be established or else it must be stated directly (that is, \"She is a high-school freshman\". \"He is a college junior.\"). Many institutes in both countries also use the term \"first-year\" as a gender-neutral replacement for \"freshman\", although in the US this is recent usage, formerly referring only to those in the first year as a graduate student. One exception is the University of Virginia; since its founding in 1819 the terms \"first-year\", \"second-year\", \"third-year\", and \"fourth-year\" have been used to describe undergraduate university students. At the United States service academies, at least those operated by the federal government directly, a different terminology is used, namely \"fourth class\", \"third class\", \"second class\" and \"first class\" (the order of numbering being the reverse of the number of years in attendance). In the UK first-year university students are sometimes called \"freshers\" early in the academic year; however, there are no specific names for those in other years nor for school pupils. Graduate and professional students in the United States are known by their year of study, such as a \"second-year medical student\" or a \"fifth-year doctoral candidate.\" Law students are often referred to as \"1L\", \"2L\", or \"3L\" rather than \"nth-year law students\"; similarly, medical students are frequently referred to as \"M1\", \"M2\", \"M3\", or \"M4\". \nWhile anyone in the US who finishes studying at any educational institution by passing relevant examinations is said to \"graduate\" and to be a \"graduate\", in the UK only degree and above level students can \"graduate\". \"Student\" itself has a wider meaning in AmE, meaning any person of any age studying any subject at any level (including those not doing so at an educational institution, such as a \"piano student\" taking private lessons in a home), whereas in BrE it tends to be used for people studying at a post-secondary educational institution and the term \"pupil\" is more widely used for a young person at primary or secondary school, though the use of \"student\" for secondary school pupils in the UK is increasingly used, particularly for \"sixth form\" (years 12 and 13). \nThe names of individual institutions can be confusing. There are several high schools with the word \"university\" in their names in the United States that are not affiliated with any post-secondary institutions and cannot grant degrees, and there is one public high school, Central High School of Philadelphia, that does grant bachelor's degrees to the top ten per cent of graduating seniors. British secondary schools occasionally have the word \"college\" in their names. \nWhen it comes to the admissions process, applicants are usually asked to solicit \"letters of reference\" or reference forms from referees in BrE. In AmE, these are called \"letters of recommendation\" or recommendation forms. Consequently, the writers of these letters are known as \"referees\" and \"recommenders\", respectively by country. In AmE, the word \"referee\" is nearly always understood to refer to an umpire of a sporting match. \nIn the context of education, for AmE, the word \"staff\" mainly refers to school personnel who are neither administrators nor have teaching loads or academic responsibilities; personnel who have academic responsibilities are referred to as members of their institution's \"faculty.\" In BrE, the word \"staff\" refers to both academic and non-academic school personnel. As mentioned previously, the term \"faculty\" in BrE refers more to a collection of related academic departments.\nGovernment and politics.\nIn the UK, political candidates \"stand for election\", while in the US, they \"run for office\". There is virtually no crossover between BrE and AmE in the use of these terms. Also, the document which contains a party's positions/principles is referred to as a \"party platform\" in AmE, whereas it is in BrE commonly known as a \"party manifesto\". (In AmE, using the term \"manifesto\" may connote that the party is an extremist or radical organisation.) The term \"general election\" is used slightly differently in British and American English. In BrE, it refers exclusively to a nationwide parliamentary election and is differentiated from local elections (mayoral and council), EU Parliamentary elections and by-elections; whereas in AmE, it refers to a final election for any government position in the US, where the term is differentiated from the term \"primary\" (an election that determines a party's candidate for the position in question). Additionally, a \"by-election\" in BrE is called a \"special election\" in AmE.\nIn AmE, the term \"swing state\", \"swing county\", \"swing district\" is used to denote a jurisdiction/constituency where results are expected to be close but crucial to the overall outcome of the general election. In BrE, the term \"marginal constituency\" is more often used for the same and \"swing\" is more commonly used to refer to how much one party has gained (or lost) an advantage over another compared to the previous election. \nIn the UK, the term \"government\" only refers to what is commonly known in America as the \"executive branch\" or the particular \"administration\".\nA local government in the UK is generically referred to as the \"council,\" whereas in the United States a local government will be generically referred to as the \"City\" (or county, village, etc., depending on what kind of entity the government serves).\nBusiness and finance.\nIn financial statements, what is referred to in AmE as \"revenue\" or \"sales\" is known in BrE as \"turnover.\" In AmE, having \"high turnover\" in a business context would generally carry negative implications, though the precise meaning would differ by industry. \nA bankrupt firm \"goes into administration\" or liquidation in BrE; in AmE it \"goes bankrupt\", or \"files for Chapter 7\" (liquidation) or \"Chapter 11\" (reorganisation). An insolvent individual or partnership \"goes bankrupt\" in both BrE and AmE. \nIf a finance company takes possession of a mortgaged property from a debtor, it is called \"foreclosure\" in AmE and \"repossession\" in BrE. In some limited scenarios, \"repossession\" may be used in AmE, but it is much less commonly compared to \"foreclosure\". One common exception in AmE is for automobiles, which are always said to be \"repossessed\". Indeed, an agent who collects these cars for the bank is colloquially known in AmE as a \"repo man\".\nEmployment and recruitment.\nIn BrE, the term \"curriculum vitae\" (commonly abbreviated to \"CV\") is used to describe the document prepared by applicants containing their credentials required for a job. In AmE, the term \"resume\" is more commonly used, with \"CV\" primarily used in academic or research contexts, and is usually more comprehensive than a \"resume\".\nInsurance.\nAmE distinguishes between \"coverage\" as a noun and \"cover\" as a verb; an American seeks to buy enough insurance coverage in order to adequately cover a particular risk. BrE uses the word \"cover\" for both the noun and verb forms.\nTransport.\nAmE speakers refer to \"transportation\" and BrE speakers to \"transport\". (\"Transportation\" in the UK has traditionally meant the punishment of criminals by deporting them to an overseas penal colony.) In AmE, the word \"transport\" is usually used only as a verb, seldom as a noun or adjective except in reference to certain specialised objects, such as a \"tape transport\" or a \"military transport\" (e.g., a troop transport, a kind of vehicle, not an act of transporting).\nRoad transport.\nDifferences in terminology are especially obvious in the context of roads. The British term \"dual carriageway\", in American parlance, would be \"divided highway\" or perhaps, simply \"highway\". The \"central reservation\" on a \"motorway\" or \"dual carriageway\" in the UK would be the \"median\" or \"center divide\" on a \"freeway\", \"expressway\", \"highway\" or \"parkway\" in the US. The one-way lanes that make it possible to enter and leave such roads at an intermediate point without disrupting the flow of traffic are known as \"slip roads\" in the UK but in the US, they are typically known as \"ramps\" and both further distinguish between \"on-ramps\" or \"on-slips\" (for entering onto a highway/carriageway) and \"off-ramps\" or \"exit-slips\" (for leaving a highway/carriageway). When American engineers speak of \"slip roads\", they are referring to a street that runs alongside the main road (separated by a berm) to allow off-the-highway access to the premises that are there; however, the term \"frontage road\" is more commonly used, as this term is the equivalent of \"service road\" in the UK. However, it is not uncommon for an American to use \"service road\" as well instead of \"frontage road\".\nIn the UK, the term \"outside lane\" refers to the higher-speed \"overtaking lane\" (\"passing lane\" in the US) closest to the centre of the road, while \"inside lane\" refers to the lane closer to the edge of the road. In the US, \"outside lane\" is used only in the context of a turn, in which case it depends in which direction the road is turning (i.e., if the road bends right, the left lane is the \"outside lane\", but if the road bends left, it is the right lane). Both also refer to \"slow\" and \"fast\" lanes (even though all actual traffic speeds may be at or around the legal speed limit). \nIn the UK \"drink driving\" refers to driving after having consumed alcoholic beverages, while in the US, the term is \"drunk driving\". The legal term in the US is \"driving while intoxicated\" (DWI) or \"driving under the influence (of alcohol)\" (DUI). The equivalent legal phrase in the UK is \"drunk in charge of a motor vehicle\" (DIC) or more commonly \"driving with excess alcohol\". \nIn the UK, a hire car is the US equivalent of a rental car. The term \"hired car\" can be especially misleading for those in the US, where the term \"hire\" is generally only applied to the employment of people and the term \"rent\" is applied to the temporary custody of goods. To an American, \"hired car\" would imply that the car has been brought into the employment of an organisation as if it were a person, which would sound nonsensical. \nIn the UK, a saloon is a vehicle that is equivalent to the American sedan. This is particularly confusing to Americans, because in the US the term \"saloon\" is used in only one context: describing an old bar (UK pub) in the American West (a Western saloon). \"Coup\u00e9\" is used by both to refer to a two-door car, but is usually pronounced with two syllables in the UK (coo-pay) and one syllable in the US (coop). \nIn the UK, \"van\" may refer to a lorry (UK) of any size, whereas in the US, \"van\" is only understood to be a very small, boxy truck (US) (such as a \"moving van\") or a long passenger automobile with several rows of seats (such as a \"minivan\"). A large, long vehicle used for cargo transport would nearly always be called a \"truck\" in the US, though alternate terms such as \"eighteen-wheeler\" may be occasionally heard (regardless of the actual number of tires on the truck). \nIn the UK, a silencer is the equivalent to the US muffler. In the US, the word silencer has only one meaning: an attachment on the barrel of a gun designed to stop the distinctive crack of a gunshot. \nSpecific auto parts and transport terms have different names in the two dialects, for example:&lt;br&gt;\nRail transport.\nThere are also differences in terminology in the context of rail transport. The best known is \"railway\" in the UK and \"railroad\" in America, but there are several others. A \"railway station\" in the UK is a \"railroad station\" or \"train station\" in the US; trains have \"drivers\" (often called \"engine drivers\") in the UK, while in America trains are driven by \"engineers\"; trains have \"guards\" in the UK and \"conductors\" in the US; a place where two tracks meet is called a set of \"points\" in the UK and a \"switch\" in the US; and a place where a road crosses a railway line at ground level is called a \"level crossing\" in the UK and a \"grade crossing\" or \"railroad crossing\" in America. In the UK, the term \"sleeper\" is used for the devices that bear the weight of the rails and are known as \"ties\" or \"crossties\" in the United States. In a rail context, \"sleeper\" (more often, \"sleeper car\") would be understood in the US as a rail car with sleeping quarters for its passengers. The British term \"platform\" in the sense \"The train is at Platform 1\" would be known in the US by the term \"track\", and used in the phrase \"The train is on Track 1\". The British term \"brake van\" or \"guard's van\" is a \"caboose\" in the US. The American English phrase \"All aboard!\" when boarding a train is rarely used in the UK, and when the train reaches its final stop, in the UK the phrase used by rail personnel is \"All change!\" while in the US it is \"All out!\"\nTelevision.\nTraditionally, a \"show\" on British television would have referred to a light-entertainment program (BrE \"programme\") with one or more performers and a participative audience, whereas in American television, the term is used for any type of program. British English traditionally referred to other types of program by their type, such as drama, serial etc., but the term \"show\" has now taken on the generalised American meaning. In American television the episodes of a program first broadcast in a particular year constitute a \"season\", while the entire run of the program\u2014which may span several seasons\u2014is called a \"series\". In British television, on the other hand, the word \"series\" may apply to the episodes of a program in one particular year, for example, \"The 1998 series of \"Grange Hill\"\", as well as to the entire run. However, the entire run may occasionally be referred to as a \"show\".\nThe term \"telecast\", meaning television broadcast and uncommon even in the US, is not used in British English. A television program would be \"broadcast\", \"aired\" or \"shown\" in both the UK and US.\nTelecommunications.\nA long-distance call is a \"trunk call\" in British English, but is a \"toll call\" in American English, though neither term is well known among younger Americans. The distinction is a result of historical differences in the way local service was billed; the Bell System traditionally flat-rated local calls in all but a few markets, subsidising local service by charging higher rates, or tolls, for intercity calls, allowing local calls to appear to be free. British Telecom (and the British Post Office before it) charged for all calls, local and long distance, so labelling one class of call as \"toll\" would have been meaningless. \nSimilarly, a toll-free number in America is a freephone number in the UK. The term \"freefone\" is a BT trademark.\nRivers.\nIn Britain rivers are referred to using the format: River Thames. Americans generally use the Thames River format.\nStyle.\nUse of \"that\" and \"which\" in restrictive and non-restrictive relative clauses.\nGenerally, a non-restrictive relative clause (also called non-defining or supplementary) is one containing information that is supplementary, i.e. does not change the meaning of the rest of the sentence, while a restrictive relative clause (also called defining or integrated) contains information essential to the meaning of the sentence, effectively limiting the modified noun phrase to a subset that is defined by the relative clause.\nAn example of a restrictive clause is \"The dog that bit the man was brown.\"\nAn example of a non-restrictive clause is \"The dog, which bit the man, was brown.\"\nIn the former, \"that bit the man\" identifies which dog the statement is about.\nIn the latter, \"which bit the man\" provides supplementary information about a known dog.\nA non-restrictive relative clause is typically set off by commas, whereas a restrictive relative clause is not, but this is not a rule that is universally observed. In speech, this is also reflected in the intonation.\nWriters commonly use \"which\" to introduce a non-restrictive clause, and \"that\" to introduce a restrictive clause. \"That\" is rarely used to introduce a non-restrictive relative clause in prose. \"Which\" and \"that\" are both commonly used to introduce a restrictive clause; a study in 1977 reported that about 75 per cent of occurrences of \"which\" were in restrictive clauses.\nH. W. Fowler, in \"A Dictionary of Modern English Usage\" of 1926, followed others in suggesting that it would be preferable to use \"which\" as the non-restrictive (what he calls \"non-defining\") pronoun and \"that\" as the restrictive (what he calls defining) pronoun, but he also stated that this rule was observed neither by most writers nor by the best writers. \nHe implied that his suggested usage was more common in American English.\nFowler notes that his recommended usage presents problems, in particular that \"that\" must be the first word of the clause, which means, for instance, that \"which\" cannot be replaced by \"that\" when it immediately follows a preposition (e.g. \"the basic unit \"from which\" matter is constructed\") \u2013 though this would not prevent a stranded preposition (e.g. \"the basic unit \"that\" matter is constructed \"from\"\").\nStyle guides by American prescriptivists, such as Bryan Garner, typically insist, for stylistic reasons, that \"that\" be used for restrictive relative clauses and \"which\" be used for non-restrictive clauses, referring to the use of \"which\" in restrictive clauses as a \"mistake\". \nAccording to the 2015 edition of \"Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage\", \"In AmE \"which\" is 'not generally used in restrictive clauses, and that fact is then interpreted as the absolute rule that only \"that\" may introduce a restrictive clause', whereas in BrE 'either \"that\" or \"which\" may be used in restrictive clauses', but many British people 'believe that \"that\" is obligatory'\".\nWriting.\nSpelling.\nBefore the early 18th century English spelling was not standardised. Different standards became noticeable after the publishing of influential dictionaries. For the most part current BrE spellings follow those of Samuel Johnson's \"Dictionary of the English Language\" (1755), while AmE spellings follow those of Noah Webster's \"An American Dictionary of the English Language\" (1828). In the United Kingdom, the influences of those who preferred the French spellings of certain words proved decisive. In many cases AmE spelling deviated from mainstream British spelling; on the other hand it has also often retained older forms. Many of the now characteristic AmE spellings were popularised, although often not created, by Noah Webster. Webster chose already-existing alternative spellings \"on such grounds as simplicity, analogy or etymology\". Webster did attempt to introduce some reformed spellings, as did the Simplified Spelling Board in the early 20th century, but most were not adopted. Later spelling changes in the UK had little effect on present-day US spelling, and vice versa.\nPunctuation.\nFull stops and periods in abbreviations.\nThere have been some trends of transatlantic difference in use of periods in some abbreviations. These are discussed at \"Abbreviation \u00a7 Periods (full stops) and spaces\". Unit symbols such as kg and Hz are never punctuated.\nParentheses/brackets.\nIn British English, \"( )\" marks are often referred to as brackets, whereas \"[ ]\" are called square brackets and \"{ }\" are called curly brackets. In formal British English and in American English \"( )\" marks are parentheses (singular: parenthesis), \"[ ]\" are called brackets or square brackets, and \"{ }\" can be called either curly brackets or braces. Despite the different names, these marks are used in the same way in both dialects.\nQuoting.\nBritish and American English differ in the preferred quotation mark style, including the placement of commas and periods. In American English, \" and ' are called quote marks, whereas in British English, \" and ' are referred to as either inverted commas or speech marks. Additionally, in American English direct speech typically uses the double quote mark ( \" ), whereas in British English it is common to use the inverted comma ( ' ).\nCommas in headlines.\nAmerican newspapers commonly use a comma as a shorthand for \"and\" in headlines. For example, \"The Washington Post\" had the headline \"A TRUE CONSERVATIVE: For McCain, Bush Has Both Praise, Advice.\"\nNumerical expressions.\nThere are many differences in the writing and speaking of English numerals, most of which are matters of style, with the notable exception of different definitions for billion.\nThe two countries have different conventions for floor numbering. The UK uses a mixture of the metric system and Imperial units, where in the US, United States customary units are dominant in everyday life with a few fields using the metric system.\nMonetary amounts.\nMonetary amounts in the range of one to two major currency units are often spoken differently. In AmE one may say \"a dollar fifty\" or \"a pound eighty\", whereas in BrE these amounts would be expressed \"one dollar fifty\" and \"one pound eighty\". For amounts over a dollar an American will generally either drop denominations or give both dollars and cents, as in \"two-twenty\" or \"two dollars and twenty cents\" for $2.20. An American would not say \"two dollars twenty\". On the other hand, in BrE, \"two-twenty\" or \"two pounds twenty\" would be most common.\nIt is more common to hear a British-English speaker say \"one thousand two hundred dollars\" than \"a thousand and two hundred dollars\", although the latter construct is common in AmE. In British English, the \"and\" comes after the hundreds (\"one thousand, two hundred and thirty dollars\"). The term \"twelve hundred dollars\", popular in AmE, is frequently used in BrE but only for exact multiples of 100 up to 1,900. Speakers of BrE very rarely hear amounts over 1,900 expressed in hundreds, for example, \"twenty-three hundred\". In AmE it would not be unusual to refer to a high, uneven figure such as 2,307 as \"twenty-three hundred and seven\".\nIn BrE, particularly in television or radio advertisements, integers can be pronounced individually in the expression of amounts. For example, \"on sale for \u00a3399\" might be expressed \"on sale for three nine nine\", though the full \"three hundred and ninety-nine pounds\" is at least as common. An American advertiser would almost always say \"on sale for three ninety-nine\", with context distinguishing $399 from $3.99. In British English the latter pronunciation implies a value in pounds and pence, so \"three ninety-nine\" would be understood as \u00a33.99.\nIn spoken BrE the word \"pound\" is sometimes colloquially used for the plural as well. For example, \"three pound forty\" and \"twenty pound a week\" are both heard in British English. Some other currencies do not change in the plural; yen and rand being examples. This is in addition to normal adjectival use, as in \"a twenty-pound-a-week pay-rise\" (US \"raise\"). The euro most often takes a regular plural \"-s\" in practice despite the EU dictum that it should remain invariable in formal contexts; the invariable usage is more common in Ireland, where it is the official currency.\nIn BrE the use of \"p\" instead of \"pence\" is common in spoken usage. Each of the following has equal legitimacy: \"3 pounds 12 p\"; \"3 pounds and 12 p\"; \"3 pounds 12 pence\"; \"3 pounds and 12 pence\"; as well as just \"8 p\" or \"8 pence\". In everyday usage the amount is simply read as figures (\u00a33.50 = three pounds fifty) as in AmE.\nAmE uses words such as \"nickel\", \"dime\", and \"quarter\" for small coins. In BrE the usual usage is \"a 10-pence piece\" or \"a 10p piece\" or simply \"a 10p\", for any coin below \u00a31, \"pound coin\" and \"two-pound coin\". BrE did have specific words for a number of coins before decimalisation. Formal coin names such as \"half crown\" (2/6) and \"florin\" (2/-), as well as slang or familiar names such as \"bob\" (1/-) and \"tanner\" (6d) for pre-decimalization coins are still familiar to older BrE speakers but they are not used for modern coins. In older terms like \"two-bob bit\" (2/-) and \"thrupenny bit\" (3d), the word \"bit\" had common usage before decimalisation similar to that of \"piece\" today.\nIn order to make explicit the amount in words on a check (BrE \"cheque\"), Americans write \"three and \" (using this solidus construction or with a horizontal division line): they do not need to write the word \"dollars\" as it is usually already printed on the check. On a cheque UK residents would write \"three pounds and 24 pence\", \"three pounds \u2012 24\", or \"three pounds \u2012 24p\" since the currency unit is not preprinted. To make unauthorised amendment difficult, it is useful to have an expression terminator even when a whole number of dollars/pounds is in use: thus, Americans would write \"three and \" or \"three and \" on a three-dollar check (so that it cannot easily be changed to, for example, \"three million\"), and UK residents would write \"three pounds only\".\nDates.\nDates are usually written differently in the short (numerical) form. Christmas Day 2000, for example, is 25/12/00 or 25.12.00 in the UK and 12/25/00 in the US, although the formats 25/12/2000, 25.12.2000, and 12/25/2000 now have more currency than they had before Y2K. Occasionally other formats are encountered, such as the ISO 8601 2000-12-25, popular among programmers, scientists and others seeking to avoid ambiguity, and to make alphanumerical order coincide with chronological order. The difference in short-form date order can lead to misunderstanding, especially when using software or equipment that uses the foreign format. For example, 06/04/05 could mean either June 4, 2005 (if read as US format), 6 April 2005 (if seen as in UK format) or even 5 April 2006 if taken to be an older ISO 8601-style format where 2-digit years were allowed.\nWhen using the name of the month rather than the number to write a date in the UK, the recent standard style is for the day to precede the month, e. g., 21 April. Month preceding date is almost invariably the style in the US, and was common in the UK until the late twentieth century. British usage often changes the day from an integer to an ordinal, i.e., 21st instead of 21. In speech, \"of\" and \"the\" are used in the UK, as in \"the 21st of April\". In written language, the words \"the\" and \"of\" may be and are usually dropped, i.e., 21 April. The US would say this as \"April 21st\", and this form is still common in the UK. One of the few exceptions in American English is saying \"the Fourth of July\" as a shorthand for the United States Independence Day. In the US military the British forms are used, but the day is read cardinally, while among some speakers of New England and Southern American English varieties and who come from those regions but live elsewhere, those forms are common, even in formal contexts.\nPhrases such as the following are common in the UK but are generally unknown in the US: \"A week today\", \"a week tomorrow\", \"a week Tuesday\" and \"Tuesday week\"; these all refer to a day more than a week in the future. \"A fortnight Friday\" and \"Friday fortnight\" refer to a day two weeks after the coming Friday). \"A week on Tuesday\" and \"a fortnight on Friday\" could refer either to a day in the past (\"it's a week on Tuesday, you need to get another one\") or in the future (\"see you a week on Tuesday\"), depending on context. In the US the standard construction is \"a week from today\", \"a week from tomorrow\", etc. BrE speakers may also say \"Thursday last\" or \"Thursday gone\" where AmE would prefer \"last Thursday\". \"I'll see you (on) Thursday coming\" or \"let's meet this coming Thursday\" in BrE refer to a meeting later this week, while \"not until Thursday next\" would refer to next week. In BrE there is also common use of the term 'Thursday after next' or 'week after next' meaning 2 weeks in the future and 'Thursday before last' and 'week before last' meaning 2 weeks in the past, but not when referring to times more than 2 weeks been or gone or when using the terms tomorrow today or yesterday then in BrE you would say '5 weeks on Tuesday' or '2 weeks yesterday'.\nTime.\nThe 24-hour clock (\"18:00\", \"18.00\" or \"1800\") is considered normal in the UK and Europe in many applications including air, rail and bus timetables; it is largely unused in the US outside military, police, aviation and medical applications. As a result, many Americans refer to the 24-hour clock as \"military time\". Some British English style guides recommend the full stop (.) when telling time, compared to American English which uses colons (:) (i.e., 11:15 PM or 23:15 for AmE and 11.15 pm or 23.15 for BrE). Usually in the military (and sometimes in the police, aviation and medical) applications on both sides of the Atlantic \"0800\" and \"1800\" are read as (\"oh/zero\") \"eight hundred\" and \"eighteen hundred\" hours respectively.\nFifteen minutes after the hour is called \"quarter past\" in British usage and \"a quarter after\" or, less commonly, \"a quarter past\" in American usage. Fifteen minutes before the hour is usually called \"quarter to\" in British usage and \"a quarter of\", \"a quarter to\" or \"a quarter 'til\" in American usage; the form \"a quarter to\" is associated with parts of the Northern United States, while \"a quarter 'til\" is found chiefly in the Appalachian region. Thirty minutes after the hour is commonly called \"half past\" in both BrE and AmE; \"half after\" used to be more common in the US. In informal British speech, the preposition is sometimes omitted, so that 5:30 may be referred to as \"half five\"; this construction is entirely foreign to US speakers, who would possibly interpret \"half five\" as 4:30 (halfway to 5:00) rather than 5:30. The AmE formations \"top of the hour\" and \"bottom of the hour\" are not used in BrE. Forms such as \"eleven forty\" are common in both dialects. To be simple and direct in telling time, no terms relating to fifteen or thirty minutes before/after the hour are used; rather the time is told exactly as for example \"nine fifteen\", \"ten forty-five\".\nOther.\nIn sports statistics, certain percentages such as those for winning or win-loss records and saves in field or ice hockey and association football are almost always expressed as a decimal proportion to three places in AmE and are usually read aloud as if they are whole numbers, e.g. (0).500 or \"five hundred\", giving rise to the phrase \"games/matches over five hundred\", whereas in BrE they are also expressed but as true percentages instead, after multiplying the decimal by 100%, that is, 50% or \"fifty per cent\" and \"games/matches over 50% or 50 per cent\". However, \"games/matches over 50% or 50 percent\" is also found in AmE.\nDemographics.\nLinguist Braj Kachru, quoted by \"The Christian Science Monitor\" in 1996, stated that \"American English is spreading faster than British English\". The \"Monitor\" stated that English taught in Europe and the Commonwealth is more British-influenced, while English taught in Latin America is more American-influenced; however, most English use outside the classroom is more influenced by the United States: Americans greatly outnumber Britons; in addition, as of 1993, the United States originated 75 per cent of the world's TV programming. A BBC columnist assessed in 2015 that \"American English is the current dominant force globally, like it or not\"."}
{"id": "2014", "revid": "36932059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2014", "title": "Atomic semantics", "text": "Atomic semantics is a type of guarantee provided by a data register shared by several processors in a parallel machine or in a network of computers working together.\nAtomic semantics are very strong. An atomic register provides strong guarantees even when there is concurrency and failures.\nA read/write register R stores a value and is accessed by two basic operations: read and write(v). A read returns the value stored in R and write(v) changes the value stored in R to v.\nA register is called atomic if it satisfies the two following properties:\n1) Each invocation op of a read or write operation:\n\u2022Must appear as if it were executed at a single point \u03c4(op) in time.\n\u2022\u03c4 (op) works as follow:\n\u03c4b(op) \u2264 \u03c4 (op) \u2264 \u03c4e(op): where \u03c4b(op) and \u03c4e(op) indicate the time when the operation op begins and ends.\n\u2022If op1 \u2260 op2, then \u03c4 (op1)\u2260\u03c4 (op2)\n2) Each read operation returns the value written by the last write operation before the read, in the sequence where all operations are ordered by their \u03c4 values.\nAtomic/Linearizable register:\nTermination: when a node is correct, sooner or later each read and write operation will complete.\nSafety Property (Linearization points for read and write and failed operations):\nRead operation:It appears as if happened at all nodes at some times between the invocation and response time.\nWrite operation: Similar to read operation, it appears as if happened at all nodes at some times between the invocation and response time.\nFailed operation(The atomic term comes from this notion):It appears as if it is completed at every single node or it never happened at any node.\nExample : We know that an atomic register is one that is linearizable to a sequential safe register.\nThe following picture shows where we should put the linearization point for each operation:\nAn atomic register could be defined for a variable with a single writer but multi- readers (SWMR), single-writer/single-reader (SWSR), or multi-writer/multi-reader (MWMR). Here is an example of a multi-reader multi-writer atomic register which is accessed by three processes (P1, P2, P3). Note that R. read() \u2192 v means that the corresponding read operation returns v, which is the value of the register. Therefore, the following execution of the register R could satisfies the definition of the atomic registers:\nR.write(1), R.read()\u21921, R.write(3), R.write(2), R.read()\u21922, R.read()\u21922."}
{"id": "2015", "revid": "4176030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2015", "title": "Antarctic Circumpolar Current", "text": "The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is an ocean current that flows clockwise (as seen from the South Pole) from west to east around Antarctica. An alternative name for the ACC is the West Wind Drift. The ACC is the dominant circulation feature of the Southern Ocean and has a mean transport estimated at 100\u2013150 Sverdrups (Sv, million\u00a0m3/s), or possibly even higher, making it the largest ocean current. The current is circumpolar due to the lack of any landmass connecting with Antarctica and this keeps warm ocean waters away from Antarctica, enabling that continent to maintain its huge ice sheet.\nAssociated with the Circumpolar Current is the Antarctic Convergence, where the cold Antarctic waters meet the warmer waters of the subantarctic, creating a zone of upwelling nutrients. These nurture high levels of phytoplankton with associated copepods and krill, and resultant foodchains supporting fish, whales, seals, penguins, albatrosses, and a wealth of other species.\nThe ACC has been known to sailors for centuries; it greatly speeds up any travel from west to east, but makes sailing extremely difficult from east to west, although this is mostly due to the prevailing westerly winds. Jack London's story \"Make Westing\" and the circumstances preceding the mutiny on the \"Bounty\" poignantly illustrate the difficulty it caused for mariners seeking to round Cape Horn westbound on the clipper ship route from New York to California. The eastbound clipper route, which is the fastest sailing route around the world, follows the ACC around three continental capes \u2013 Cape Agulhas (Africa), South East Cape (Australia), and Cape Horn (South America).\nThe current creates the Ross and Weddell gyres.\nStructure.\nThe ACC connects the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans, and serves as a principal pathway of exchange among them. The current is strongly constrained by landform and bathymetric features. To trace it starting arbitrarily at South America, it flows through the Drake Passage between South America and the Antarctic Peninsula and then is split by the Scotia Arc to the east, with a shallow warm branch flowing to the north in the Falkland Current and a deeper branch passing through the Arc more to the east before also turning to the north. Passing through the Indian Ocean, the current first retroflects the Agulhas Current to form the Agulhas Return Current before it is split by the Kerguelen Plateau, and then moving northward again. Deflection is also seen as it passes over the mid-ocean ridge in the Southeast Pacific.\nFronts.\nThe current is accompanied by three fronts: the Subantarctic front (SAF), the Polar front (PF), and the Southern ACC front (SACC). Furthermore, the waters of the Southern Ocean are separated from the warmer and saltier subtropical waters by the subtropical front (STF).\nThe northern boundary of the ACC is defined by the northern edge of the SAF, this being the most northerly water to pass through Drake Passage and therefore be circumpolar. Much of the ACC transport is carried in this front, which is defined as the latitude at which a subsurface salinity minimum or a thick layer of unstratified Subantarctic mode water first appears, allowed by temperature dominating density stratification. Still further south lies the PF, which is marked by a transition to very cold, relatively fresh, Antarctic Surface Water at the surface. Here a temperature minimum is allowed by salinity dominating density stratification, due to the lower temperatures. Farther south still is the SACC, which is determined as the southernmost extent of Circumpolar Deep Water (temperature of about 2\u00a0\u00b0C at 400\u00a0m). This water mass flows along the shelfbreak of the western Antarctic Peninsula and thus marks the most southerly water flowing through Drake Passage and therefore circumpolar. The bulk of the transport is carried in the middle two fronts.\nThe total transport of the ACC at Drake Passage is estimated to be around 135\u00a0Sv, or about 135 times the transport of all the world's rivers combined. There is a relatively small addition of flow in the Indian Ocean, with the transport south of Tasmania reaching around 147\u00a0Sv, at which point the current is probably the largest on the planet.\nDynamics.\nThe circumpolar current is driven by the strong westerly winds in the latitudes of the Southern Ocean.\nIn latitudes where there are continents, winds blowing on light surface water can simply pile up light water against these continents. But in the Southern Ocean, the momentum imparted to the surface waters cannot be offset in this way. There are different theories on how the Circumpolar Current balances the momentum imparted by the winds. The increasing eastward momentum imparted by the winds causes water parcels to drift outward from the axis of the Earth's rotation (in other words, northward) as a result of the Coriolis force. This northward Ekman transport is balanced by a southward, pressure-driven flow below the depths of the major ridge systems. Some theories connect these flows directly, implying that there is significant upwelling of dense deep waters within the Southern Ocean, transformation of these waters into light surface waters, and a transformation of waters in the opposite direction to the north. Such theories link the magnitude of the Circumpolar Current with the global thermohaline circulation, particularly the properties of the North Atlantic.\nAlternatively, ocean eddies, the oceanic equivalent of atmospheric storms, or the large-scale meanders of the Circumpolar Current may directly transport momentum downward in the water column. This is because such flows can produce a net southward flow in the troughs and a net northward flow over the ridges without requiring any transformation of density. In practice both the thermohaline and the eddy/meander mechanisms are likely to be important.\nThe current flows at a rate of about over the Macquarie Ridge south of New Zealand. The ACC varies with time. Evidence of this is the Antarctic Circumpolar Wave, a periodic oscillation that affects the climate of much of the southern hemisphere. There is also the Antarctic oscillation, which involves changes in the location and strength of Antarctic winds. Trends in the Antarctic Oscillation have been hypothesized to account for an increase in the transport of the Circumpolar Current over the past two decades.\nFormation.\nPublished estimates of the onset of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current vary, but it is commonly considered to have started at the Eocene/Oligocene boundary. The isolation of Antarctica and formation of the ACC occurred with the openings of the Tasmanian Passage and the Drake Passage. The Tasmanian Seaway separates East Antarctica and Australia, and is reported to have opened to water circulation 33.5\u00a0Ma. The timing of the opening of the Drake Passage, between South America and the Antarctic Peninsula, is more disputed; tectonic and sediment evidence show that it could have been open as early as pre-34\u00a0Ma, estimates of the opening of the Drake passage are between 20 and 40\u00a0Ma. The isolation of Antarctica by the current is credited by many researchers with causing the glaciation of Antarctica and global cooling in the Eocene epoch. Oceanic models have shown that the opening of these two passages limited polar heat convergence and caused a cooling of sea surface temperatures by several degrees; other models have shown that CO2 levels also played a significant role in the glaciation of Antarctica.\nPhytoplankton.\nAntarctic sea ice cycles seasonally, in February\u2013March the amount of sea ice is lowest, and in August\u2013September the sea ice is at its greatest extent. Ice levels have been monitored by satellite since 1973. Upwelling of deep water under the sea ice brings substantial amounts of nutrients. As the ice melts, the melt water provides stability and the critical depth is well below the mixing depth, which allows for a positive net primary production. As the sea ice recedes epontic algae dominate the first phase of the bloom, and a strong bloom dominate by diatoms follows the ice melt south.\nAnother phytoplankton bloom occurs more to the north near the Antarctic convergence, here nutrients are present from thermohaline circulation. Phytoplankton blooms are dominated by diatoms and grazed by copepods in the open ocean, and by krill closer to the continent. Diatom production continues through the summer, and populations of krill are sustained, bringing large numbers of cetaceans, cephalopods, seals, birds, and fish to the area.\nPhytoplankton blooms are believed to be limited by irradiance in the austral (southern hemisphere) spring, and by biologically available iron in the summer. Much of the biology in the area occurs along the major fronts of the current, the Subtropical, Subantarctic, and the Antarctic Polar fronts, these are areas associated with well defined temperature changes. Size and distribution of phytoplankton are also related to fronts. Microphytoplankton (&gt;20\u00a0\u03bcm) are found at fronts and at sea ice boundaries, while nanophytoplankton (&lt;20\u00a0\u03bcm) are found between fronts.\nStudies of phytoplankton stocks in the southern sea have shown that the Antarctic Circumpolar Current is dominated by diatoms, while the Weddell Sea has abundant coccolithophorids and silicoflagellates. Surveys of the SW Indian Ocean have shown phytoplankton group variation based on their location relative to the Polar Front, with diatoms dominating South of the front, and dinoflagellates and flagellates in higher populations North of the front.\nSome research has been conducted on Antarctic phytoplankton as a carbon sink. Areas of open water left from ice melt are good areas for phytoplankton blooms. The phytoplankton takes carbon from the atmosphere during photosynthesis. As the blooms die and sink, the carbon can be stored in sediments for thousands of years. This natural carbon sink is estimated to remove 3.5 million tonnes from the ocean each year. 3.5\u00a0million tonnes of carbon taken from the ocean and atmosphere is equivalent to 12.8\u00a0million tonnes of carbon dioxide.\nStudies.\nAn expedition in May 2008 by 19 scientists studied the geology and biology of eight Macquarie Ridge sea mounts, as well as the Antarctic Circumpolar Current to investigate the effects of climate change of the Southern Ocean. The circumpolar current merges the waters of the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans and carries up to 150 times the volume of water flowing in all of the world's rivers. The study found that any damage on the cold-water corals nourished by the current will have a long-lasting effect. After studying the circumpolar current it is clear that it strongly influences regional and global climate as well as underwater biodiversity.\nThe current helps preserve wooden shipwrecks by preventing wood-boring \"ship worms\" from reaching targets such as Ernest Shackleton's ship, the \"Endurance\"."}
{"id": "2017", "revid": "1010776483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2017", "title": "Arbor Day", "text": "Arbor Day (or Arbour in some countries) is a secular day of observance in which individuals and groups are encouraged to plant trees. Today, many countries observe such a holiday. Though usually observed in the spring, the date varies, depending on climate and suitable planting season.\nOrigins and history.\nFirst Arbor Day.\nThe Spanish village of Mondo\u00f1edo held the first documented arbor plantation festival in the world organized by its mayor in 1594. The place remains as Alameda de los Remedios and it is still planted with lime and horse-chestnut trees. A humble granite marker and a bronze plate recall the event. Additionally, the small Spanish village of Villanueva de la Sierra held the first modern Arbor Day, an initiative launched in 1805 by the local priest with the enthusiastic support of the entire population.\nFirst American Arbor Day.\nThe first American Arbor Day was originated in Nebraska City, Nebraska by J. Sterling Morton. On April 10, 1872, an estimated one million trees were planted in Nebraska.\nBirdsey Northrop of Connecticut was responsible for globalizing the idea when he visited Japan in 1883 and delivered his Arbor Day and Village Improvement message. In that same year, the American Forestry Association made Northrop the Chairman of the committee to campaign for Arbor Day nationwide. He also brought his enthusiasm for Arbor Day to Australia, Canada, and Europe.\nMcCreight and Theodore Roosevelt.\nBeginning in 1906, Pennsylvania conservationist Major Israel McCreight of DuBois, Pennsylvania, argued that President Theodore Roosevelt\u2019s conservation speeches were limited to businessmen in the lumber industry and recommended a campaign of youth education and a national policy on conservation education. McCreight urged Roosevelt to make a public statement to school children about trees and the destruction of American forests. Conservationist Gifford Pinchot, Chief of the United States Forest Service, embraced McCreight\u2019s recommendations and asked the President to speak to the public school children of the United States about conservation. On April 15, 1907, Roosevelt issued an \"Arbor Day Proclamation to the School Children of the United States\" about the importance of trees and that forestry deserves to be taught in U.S. schools. Pinchot wrote McCreight, \"we shall all be indebted to you for having made the suggestion.\"\nAround the world.\nAustralia.\nArbor Day has been observed in Australia since 20 June 1889. National Schools Tree Day is held on the last Friday of July for schools and National Tree Day the last Sunday in July throughout Australia. Many states have Arbor Day, although Victoria has an Arbor Week, which was suggested by Premier Rupert (Dick) Hamer in the 1980s.\nBelgium.\nInternational Day of Treeplanting is celebrated in Flanders on or around 21 March as a theme-day/educational-day/observance, not as a public holiday. Tree planting is sometimes combined with awareness campaigns of the fight against cancer: \"Kom Op Tegen Kanker\".\nBrazil.\nThe Arbor Day (Dia da \u00c1rvore) is celebrated on September 21. It is not a national holiday. However, schools nationwide celebrate this day with environment-related activities, namely tree planting.\nBritish Virgin Islands.\nArbour Day is celebrated on November 22. It is sponsored by the National Parks Trust of the Virgin Islands. Activities include an annual national Arbour Day Poetry Competition and tree planting ceremonies throughout the territory.\nCambodia.\nCambodia celebrates Arbor Day on July 9 with a tree planting ceremony attended by the king.\nCanada.\nThe day was founded by Sir George W. Ross, later the Premier of Ontario, when he was Minister of Education in Ontario (1883-1899). According to the Ontario Teachers' Manuals \"History of Education\" (1915), Ross established both Arbour Day and Empire Day - \"the former to give the school children an interest in making and keeping the school grounds attractive, and the latter to inspire the children with a spirit of patriotism\" (p.\u00a0222). This predates the claimed founding of the day by Don Clark of Schomberg, Ontario for his wife Margret Clark in 1906. In Canada, National Forest Week is the last full week of September, and National Tree Day (Maple Leaf Day) falls on the Wednesday of that week. Ontario celebrates Arbour Week from the last Friday in April to the first Sunday in May. Prince Edward Island celebrates Arbour Day on the third Friday in May during Arbour Week. Arbour Day is the longest running civic greening project in Calgary and is celebrated on the first Thursday in May. On this day, each grade 1 student in Calgary's schools receives a tree seedling to be taken home to be planted on private property.\nCentral African Republic.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on July 22.\nChina.\nArbor Day () in China was founded by the forester Ling Daoyang in 1915. From 1916 to 1928, Arbor Day was celebrated on the Chinese Qingming Festival, which is on the first day of the fifth solar term of the traditional Chinese lunisolar calendar. In 1929, the date for Arbor Day was to commemorate Sun Yat-sen. In 1979, the fourth session of the Fifth National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China adopted the Resolution on the Unfolding of a Nationwide Voluntary Tree-planting Campaign. This resolution established the Arbor Day and stipulated that every able-bodied citizen between the ages of 11 and 60 should plant three to five trees per year or do the equivalent amount of work in seedling, cultivation, tree tending, or other services. Supporting documentation instructs all units to report population statistics to the local afforestation committees for workload allocation. Many couples choose to marry the day before the annual celebration, and they plant the tree to mark beginning of their life together and the new life of the tree.\nRepublic of Congo.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on November 6.\nCosta Rica.\n\"D\u00eda del \u00c1rbol\" is on June 15.\nCzech Republic.\n is celebrated on October 20.\nEgypt.\nArbor Day is on January 15.\nGermany.\nArbor Day (\"Tag des Baumes\") is on April 25. Its first celebration was in 1952.\nIndia.\nVan Mahotsav is an annual pan-Indian tree planting festival, occupying a week in the month of July. During this event millions of trees are planted. It was initiated in 1950 by K. M. Munshi, the then Union Minister for Agriculture and Food, to create an enthusiasm in the mind of the populace for the conservation of forests and planting of trees.\nThe name Van Mahotsava (the festival of trees) originated in July 1947 after a successful tree-planting drive was undertaken in Delhi, in which national leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru, Dr Rajendra Prasad and Abul Kalam Azad participated. Paryawaran Sachetak Samiti, a leading environmental organization conducts mass events and activities on this special day celebration each year. The week was simultaneously celebrated in a number of states in the country.\nIran.\nIn Iran, it is known as \"National Tree Planting Day\". By the Solar Hijri calendar, it is on the fifteenth day of the month Esfand, which usually corresponds with March 5. This day is the first day of the \"Natural Recyclable Resources Week\" (March 5 to 12).\nThis is the time when the saplings of the all kinds in terms of different climates of different parts of Iran are shared among the people. They are also taught how to plant trees.\nIsrael.\nThe Jewish holiday Tu Bishvat, the new year for trees, is on the 15th day of the month of Shvat, which usually falls in January or February. Originally based on the date used to calculate the age of fruit trees for tithing as mandated in Leviticus 19:23\u201325, the holiday now is most often observed by planting trees or raising money to plant trees, and by eating fruit, specifically grapes, figs, pomegranates, olives, and dates. Tu Bishvat is a semi-official holiday in Israel; schools are open but Hebrew-speaking schools often go on tree-planting excursions.\nJapan.\nJapan celebrates a similarly themed Greenery Day, held on May 4.\nKenya.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on April 21. Often people plant palm trees and coconut trees along the Indian Ocean that borders the east coast of Kenya.\nKorea.\nNorth Korea marks \"Tree Planting Day\" on March 2, when people across the country plant trees. This day is considered to combine traditional Asian cultural values with the country's dominant Communist ideology.\nIn South Korea, April 5, Singmogil or Sikmogil (\uc2dd\ubaa9\uc77c), the Arbor Day, was a public holiday until 2005. Even though Singmogil is no longer an official holiday, the day is still celebrated, with the South Korean public continuing to take part in tree-planting activities.\nLesotho.\nNational Tree Planting Day is usually on March 21 depending on the lunar cycle.\nLuxembourg.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on the second Saturday in November.\nMalawi.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on the 2nd Monday of December.\nMexico.\nThe \"D\u00eda del \u00c1rbol\" was established in Mexico in 1959 with President Adolfo L\u00f3pez Mateos issuing a decree that it should be observed on the 2nd Thursday of July.\nMongolia.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on the 2nd Saturday of May and October. The first National Tree Planting Day was celebrated May 8, 2010.\nNamibia.\nNamibia's first Arbor Day was celebrated on October 8, 2004. It takes place annually on the second Friday of October.\nNetherlands.\nSince conference and of the Food and Agriculture Organization's publication \"World Festival of Trees\", and a resolution of the United Nations in 1954: \"The Conference, recognising the need of arousing mass consciousness of the aesthetic, physical and economic value of trees, recommends a World Festival of Trees to be celebrated annually in each member country on a date suited to local conditions\"; it has been adopted by the Netherlands. In 1957, the National Committee Day of Planting Trees/Foundation of National Festival of Trees (\"Nationale Boomplantdag\"/\"Nationale Boomfeestdag\") was created.\nOn the third Wednesday in March each year (near the spring equinox), three quarters of Dutch schoolchildren aged 10/11 and Dutch celebrities plant trees. Stichting Nationale Boomfeestdag organizes all the activities in the Netherlands for this day. Some municipalities however plant the trees around 21 September because of the planting season.\nIn 2007, the 50th anniversary was celebrated with special golden jubilee activities.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand\u2019s first Arbor Day planting was on 3 July 1890 at Greytown, in the Wairarapa. The first official celebration was scheduled to take place in Wellington in August 2012, with the planting of pohutukawa and Norfolk pines along Thorndon Esplanade.\nProminent New Zealand botanist Dr Leonard Cockayne worked extensively on native plants throughout New Zealand and wrote many notable botanical texts. As early as the 1920s he held a vision for school students of New Zealand to be involved in planting native trees and plants in their school grounds. This vision bore fruit and schools in New Zealand have long planted native trees on Arbor Day.\nSince 1977, New Zealand has celebrated Arbor Day on June 5, which is also World Environment Day. Prior to then, Arbor Day was celebrated on August 4, which is rather late in the year for tree planting in New Zealand, hence the date change.\nMany of the Department of Conservation's Arbor Day activities focus on ecological restoration projects using native plants to restore habitats that have been damaged or destroyed by humans or invasive pests and weeds. There are great restoration projects underway around New Zealand and many organisations including community groups, landowners, conservation organisations, iwi, volunteers, schools, local businesses, nurseries and councils are involved in them. These projects are part of a vision to protect and restore the indigenous biodiversity.\nNiger.\nSince 1975, Niger has celebrated Arbor Day as part of its Independence Day: 3 August. On this day, aiding the fight against desertification, each Nigerien plants a tree. \nNorth Macedonia.\nHaving in mind the bad condition of the forest fund, and in particular the catastrophic wildfires which occurred in the summer of 2007, a citizens' initiative for afforestation was started in North Macedonia. The campaign by the name 'Tree Day-Plant Your Future' was first organized on 12 March 2008, when an official non-working day was declared and more than 150,000 Macedonians planted 2 million trees in one day (symbolically, one for each citizen). Six million more were planted in November the same year, and another 12,5 million trees in 2009. This has been established as a tradition and takes place every year.\nPakistan.\nNational tree plantation day of Pakistan (\u0642\u0648\u0645\u06cc \u0634\u062c\u0631 \u06a9\u0627\u0631\u06cc \u062f\u0646) is celebrated on 18 August.\nPhilippines.\nSince 1947, Arbor Day in the Philippines has been institutionalized to be observed throughout the nation by planting trees and ornamental plants and other forms of relevant activities. Its practice was instituted through Proclamation No. 30. It was subsequently revised by Proclamation No. 41, issued in the same year. In 1955, the commemoration was extended from a day to a week and moved to the last full week of July. Over two decades later, its commemoration was moved to the second week of June. In 2003, the commemorations were reduced from a week to a day and was moved to June 25 per Proclamation No. 396. The same proclamation directed \"the active participation of all government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, private sector, schools, civil society groups and the citizenry in tree planting activity\". It was subsequently revised by Proclamation 643 in the succeeding year.\nIn 2012, Republic Act 10176 was passed, which revived tree planting events \"as [a] yearly event for local government units\" and mandated the planting of at least one tree per year for able-bodied Filipino citizens aged 12 years old and above. Since 2012, many local arbor day celebrations have been commemorated, as in the cases of Natividad and Tayug in Pangasinan and Santa Rita in Pampanga.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, Arbor Day has been celebrated since 2002. Each October 10, many Polish people plant trees as well as participate in events organized by ecological foundations. Moreover, Polish Forest Inspectorates and schools give special lectures and lead ecological awareness campaigns.\nPortugal.\nArbor Day is celebrated on March 21. It is not a national holiday but instead schools nationwide celebrate this day with environment-related activities, namely tree planting.\nRussia.\nAll-Russian day of forest plantation was celebrated for the first time on 14 May 2011. Now it is held in April\u2013May (it depends on the weather in different regions).\nSamoa.\nArbor Day in Samoa is celebrated on the first Friday in November.\nSouth Africa.\nArbor Day was celebrated from 1945 until 2000 in South Africa. After that, the national government extended it to National Arbor Week, which lasts annually from 1\u20137 September. Two trees, one common and one rare, are highlighted to increase public awareness of indigenous trees, while various \"greening\" activities are undertaken by schools, businesses and other organizations. For example the social enterprise Greenpop, which focusses on sustainable urban greening, forest restoration and environmental awareness in Sub-Saharan Africa, leverages Arbor Day each year to call for tree planting action. During Arbor Month 2019, responding to recent studies that underscore the importance of tree restoration, they launched their new goal of planting 500,000 by 2025.\nSpain.\nIn 1896 Mariano Belm\u00e1s Estrada promoted the first \"Festival of Trees\" in Madrid.\nIn Spain there was an International Forest Day on 21 March, but a decree in 1915 also brought in an Arbor Day throughout Spain. Each municipality or collective decides the date for its Arbor Day, usually between February and May. In Villanueva de la Sierra (Extremadura), where the first Arbor Day in the world was held in 1805, it is celebrated, as on that occasion, on Tuesday Carnaval. It is a great day in the local festive calendar.\nAs an example of commitment to nature, the small town of Pescueza, with only 180 inhabitants, organizes every spring a large plantation of holm oaks, which is called the \"Festivalino\", promoted by city council, several foundations, and citizen participation.\nSri Lanka.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on November 15.\nTaiwan.\nArbor Day (\u690d\u6a39\u7bc0) has been a traditional holiday in the Republic of China since 1916. The Beiyang government's Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce first commemorated Arbor Day in 1915 at the suggestion of forester Ling Daoyang. In 1916, the government announced that all provinces of the Republic of China would celebrate the on the same day as the Qingming Festival, April 5, despite the differences in climate across China. From 1929, by decree of the Nationalist government, Arbor Day was , to commemorate the death of Sun Yat-sen, who had been a major advocate of afforestation in his life. Following the retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan in 1949, the celebration of Arbor Day on March 12 was retained.\nTanzania.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on April 1.\nUganda.\nNational Tree Planting Day is on March 24.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFirst mounted in 1975, National Tree Week is a celebration of the start of the winter tree planting season, usually at the end of November. Around a million trees are planted each year by schools, community organizations and local authorities.\nOn 6 February 2020, Myerscough College in Lancashire, England, supported by the Arbor Day Foundation, celebrated the UK's first Arbor Day.\nUnited States.\nArbor Day was founded in 1872 by J. Sterling Morton in Nebraska City, Nebraska. By the 1920s, each state in the United States had passed public laws that stipulated a certain day to be Arbor Day or \"Arbor and Bird Day\" observance.\nNational Arbor Day is celebrated every year on the last Friday in April; it is a civic holiday in Nebraska. Other states have selected their own dates for Arbor Day.\nThe customary observance is to plant a tree. On the first Arbor Day, April 10, 1872, an estimated one million trees were planted.\nVenezuela.\nVenezuela recognizes \"D\u00eda del Arbol\" (Day of the Tree) on the last Sunday of May."}
{"id": "2018", "revid": "1009110751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2018", "title": "A. J. Ayer", "text": "Sir Alfred Jules \"Freddie\" Ayer (; 29 October 1910\u00a0\u2013 27 June 1989), usually cited as A. J. Ayer, was an English philosopher known for his promotion of logical positivism, particularly in his books \"Language, Truth, and Logic\" (1936) and \"The Problem of Knowledge\" (1956).\nHe was educated at Eton College and the University of Oxford, after which he studied the philosophy of logical positivism at the University of Vienna. From 1933 to 1940 he lectured on philosophy at Christ Church, Oxford.\nDuring the Second World War Ayer was a Special Operations Executive and MI6 agent.\nHe was Grote Professor of the Philosophy of Mind and Logic at University College London from 1946 until 1959, after which he returned to Oxford to become Wykeham Professor of Logic at New College. He was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1951 to 1952 and knighted in 1970. He was known for his advocacy of humanism, and was the second President of the British Humanist Association (now known as Humanists UK).\nLife.\nAyer was born in St John's Wood, in north west London, to a wealthy family from continental Europe. His mother, Reine Citro\u00ebn, was from the Dutch-Jewish family who founded the Citro\u00ebn car company in France. His father, Jules Ayer, was a Swiss Calvinist financier who worked for the Rothschild family.\nAyer was educated at Ascham St Vincent's School, a former boarding preparatory school for boys in the seaside town of Eastbourne in Sussex, in which he started boarding at the comparatively early age of seven for reasons to do with the First World War, and Eton College, a boarding school in Eton (near Windsor) in Berkshire. It was at Eton that Ayer first became known for his characteristic bravado and precocity. Although primarily interested in furthering his intellectual pursuits, he was very keen on sports, particularly rugby, and reputedly played the Eton Wall Game very well. In the final examinations at Eton, Ayer came second in his year, and first in classics. In his final year, as a member of Eton's senior council, he unsuccessfully campaigned for the abolition of corporal punishment at the school. He won a classics scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford.\nAfter graduation from Oxford Ayer spent a year in Vienna, returned to England and published his first book, \"Language, Truth and Logic\" in 1936. The first exposition in English of logical positivism as newly developed by the Vienna Circle, this made Ayer at age 26 the 'enfant terrible' of British philosophy. In the Second World War he served as an officer in the Welsh Guards, chiefly in intelligence (Special Operations Executive (SOE) and MI6). Ayer was commissioned second lieutenant into the Welsh Guards from Officer Cadet Training Unit on 21 September 1940.\nAfter the war he briefly returned to the University of Oxford where he became a fellow and Dean of Wadham College. He thereafter taught philosophy at London University from 1946 until 1959, when he also started to appear on radio and television. He was an extrovert and social mixer who liked dancing and attending the clubs in London and New York. He was also obsessed with sport: he had played rugby for Eton, and was a noted cricketer and a keen supporter of Tottenham Hotspur football team, where he was for many years a season ticket holder. For an academic, Ayer was an unusually well-connected figure in his time, with close links to 'high society' and the establishment. Presiding over Oxford high-tables, he is often described as charming, but at times he could also be intimidating.\nAyer was married four times to three women. His first marriage was from 1932\u20131941 to (Grace Isabel) Ren\u00e9e (d. 1980), who subsequently married philosopher Stuart Hampshire, Ayer's friend and colleague. In 1960 he married Alberta Constance (Dee) Wells, with whom he had one son. Ayer's marriage to Wells was dissolved in 1983 and that same year he married Vanessa Salmon, former wife of politician Nigel Lawson. She died in 1985 and in 1989 he remarried Dee Wells, who survived him. Ayer also had a daughter with Hollywood columnist Sheilah Graham Westbrook.\nFrom 1959 to his retirement in 1978, Sir Alfred held the Wykeham Chair, Professor of Logic at Oxford. He was knighted in 1970. After his retirement, Ayer taught or lectured several times in the United States, including serving as a visiting professor at Bard College in the fall of 1987. At a party that same year held by fashion designer Fernando Sanchez, Ayer, then 77, confronted Mike Tyson who was forcing himself upon the (then) little-known model Naomi Campbell. When Ayer demanded that Tyson stop, the boxer reportedly asked, \"Do you know who the fuck I am? I'm the heavyweight champion of the world,\" to which Ayer replied, \"And I am the former Wykeham Professor of Logic. We are both pre-eminent in our field. I suggest that we talk about this like rational men\". Ayer and Tyson then began to talk, allowing Campbell to slip out. Ayer was also involved in politics being involved in anti-Vietnam War activism, supporting the Labour Party (and then later the Social Democratic Party), Chairman of the Campaign Against Racial Discrimination in Sport, and President of the Homosexual Law Reform Society.\nIn 1988, a year before his death, Ayer wrote an article entitled, \"What I saw when I was dead\", describing an unusual near-death experience. Of the experience, Ayer first said that it \"slightly weakened my conviction that my genuine death\u00a0... will be the end of me, though I continue to hope that it will be.\" However, a few days later he revised this, saying \"what I should have said is that my experiences have weakened, not my belief that there is no life after death, but my inflexible attitude towards that belief\".\nAyer died on 27 June 1989. From 1980 to 1989 Ayer lived at 51 York Street, Marylebone, where a memorial plaque was unveiled on 19 November 1995.\nPhilosophical ideas.\nIn \"Language, Truth and Logic\" (1936), Ayer presents the verification principle as the only valid basis for philosophy. Unless logical or empirical verification is possible, statements like \"God exists\" or \"charity is good\" are not true or untrue but meaningless, and may thus be excluded or ignored. Religious language in particular was unverifiable and as such literally nonsense. He also criticises C. A. Mace's opinion that metaphysics is a form of intellectual poetry. The stance that a belief in \"God\" denotes no verifiable hypothesis is sometimes referred to as igtheism (for example, by Paul Kurtz). In later years Ayer reiterated that he did not believe in God and began to refer to himself as an atheist. He followed in the footsteps of Bertrand Russell by debating with the Jesuit scholar Frederick Copleston on the topic of religion.\nAyer's version of emotivism divides \"the ordinary system of ethics\" into four classes:\nHe focuses on propositions of the first class\u2014moral judgments\u2014saying that those of the second class belong to science, those of the third are mere commands, and those of the fourth (which are considered in normative ethics as opposed to meta-ethics) are too concrete for ethical philosophy.\nAyer argues that moral judgments cannot be translated into non-ethical, empirical terms and thus cannot be verified; in this he agrees with ethical intuitionists. But he differs from intuitionists by discarding appeals to intuition of non-empirical moral truths as \"worthless\" since the intuition of one person often contradicts that of another. Instead, Ayer concludes that ethical concepts are \"mere pseudo-concepts\":\nBetween 1945 and 1947, together with Russell and George Orwell, he contributed a series of articles to \"Polemic\", a short-lived British \"Magazine of Philosophy, Psychology, and Aesthetics\" edited by the ex-Communist Humphrey Slater.\nAyer was closely associated with the British humanist movement. He was an Honorary Associate of the Rationalist Press Association from 1947 until his death. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1963. In 1965, he became the first president of the Agnostics' Adoption Society and in the same year succeeded Julian Huxley as president of the British Humanist Association, a post he held until 1970. In 1968 he edited \"The Humanist Outlook\", a collection of essays on the meaning of humanism. In addition he was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto.\nWorks.\nAyer is best known for popularising the verification principle, in particular through his presentation of it in \"Language, Truth, and Logic\" (1936). The principle was at the time at the heart of the debates of the so-called Vienna Circle which Ayer visited as a young guest. Others, including the leading light of the circle, Moritz Schlick, were already offering their own papers on the issue. Ayer's own formulation was that a sentence can be meaningful only if it has verifiable empirical import, otherwise it is either \"analytical\" if tautologous, or \"metaphysical\" (i.e. meaningless, or \"literally senseless\"). He started to work on the book at the age of 23 and it was published when he was 26. Ayer's philosophical ideas were deeply influenced by those of the Vienna Circle and David Hume. His clear, vibrant and polemical exposition of them makes \"Language, Truth and Logic\" essential reading on the tenets of logical empiricism\u2014the book is regarded as a classic of 20th century analytic philosophy, and is widely read in philosophy courses around the world. In it, Ayer also proposed that the distinction between a conscious man and an unconscious machine resolves itself into a distinction between 'different types of perceptible behaviour', an argument which anticipates the Turing test published in 1950 to test a machine's capability to demonstrate intelligence.\nAyer wrote two books on the philosopher Bertrand Russell, \"Russell and Moore: The Analytic Heritage\" (1971) and \"Russell\" (1972). He also wrote an introductory book on the philosophy of David Hume and a short biography of Voltaire.\nAyer was a strong critic of the German philosopher Martin Heidegger. As a logical positivist Ayer was in conflict with Heidegger's proposed vast, overarching theories regarding existence. These he felt were completely unverifiable through empirical demonstration and logical analysis. This sort of philosophy was an unfortunate strain in modern thought. He considered Heidegger to be the worst example of such philosophy, which Ayer believed to be entirely useless.\nIn 1972\u20131973 Ayer gave the Gifford Lectures at University of St Andrews, later published as \"The Central Questions of Philosophy\". In the preface to the book, he defends his selection to hold the lectureship on the basis that Lord Gifford wished to promote \"natural theology\", in the widest sense of that term', and that non-believers are allowed to give the lectures if they are \"able reverent men, true thinkers, sincere lovers of and earnest inquirers after truth\". He still believed in the viewpoint he shared with the logical positivists: that large parts of what was traditionally called \"philosophy\"\u2014including the whole of metaphysics, theology and aesthetics\u2014were not matters that could be judged as being true or false and that it was thus meaningless to discuss them.\nIn \"The Concept of a Person and Other Essays\" (1963), Ayer heavily criticized Wittgenstein's private language argument.\nAyer's sense-data theory in \"Foundations of Empirical Knowledge\" was famously criticised by fellow Oxonian J. L. Austin in \"Sense and Sensibilia\", a landmark 1950s work of common language philosophy. Ayer responded to this in the essay \"Has Austin Refuted the Sense-datum Theory?\", which can be found in his \"Metaphysics and Common Sense\" (1969).\nAwards.\nHe was awarded a Knighthood as Knight Bachelor in the London Gazette on 1 January 1970."}
{"id": "2019", "revid": "12329968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2019", "title": "Andr\u00e9 Weil", "text": "Andr\u00e9 Weil (; ; 6 May 1906 \u2013 6 August 1998) was a French mathematician, known for his foundational work in number theory and algebraic geometry. He was a founding member and the \"de facto\" early leader of the mathematical Bourbaki group. The philosopher Simone Weil was his sister. The writer Sylvie Weil is his daughter.\nLife.\nAndr\u00e9 Weil was born in Paris to agnostic Alsatian Jewish parents who fled the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine by the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War in 1870\u201371. The famous philosopher Simone Weil was Weil's only sibling. He studied in Paris, Rome and G\u00f6ttingen and received his doctorate in 1928. While in Germany, Weil befriended Carl Ludwig Siegel. Starting in 1930, he spent two academic years at Aligarh Muslim University. Aside from mathematics, Weil held lifelong interests in classical Greek and Latin literature, in Hinduism and Sanskrit literature: he taught himself Sanskrit in 1920. After teaching for one year at Aix-Marseille University, he taught for six years at University of Strasbourg. He married \u00c9veline de Possel (n\u00e9e \u00c9veline Gillet) in 1937.\nWeil was in Finland when World War II broke out; he had been traveling in Scandinavia since April 1939. His wife \u00c9veline returned to France without him. Weil was mistakenly arrested in Finland at the outbreak of the Winter War on suspicion of spying; however, accounts of his life having been in danger were shown to be exaggerated. Weil returned to France via Sweden and the United Kingdom, and was detained at Le Havre in January 1940. He was charged with failure to report for duty, and was imprisoned in Le Havre and then Rouen. It was in the military prison in Bonne-Nouvelle, a district of Rouen, from February to May, that Weil completed the work that made his reputation. He was tried on 3 May 1940. Sentenced to five years, he requested to be attached to a military unit instead, and was given the chance to join a regiment in Cherbourg. After the fall of France, he met up with his family in Marseille, where he arrived by sea. He then went to Clermont-Ferrand, where he managed to join his wife \u00c9veline, who had been living in German-occupied France.\nIn January 1941, Weil and his family sailed from Marseille to New York. He spent the remainder of the war in the United States, where he was supported by the Rockefeller Foundation and the Guggenheim Foundation. For two years, he taught undergraduate mathematics at Lehigh University, where he was unappreciated, overworked and poorly paid, although he did not have to worry about being drafted, unlike his American students. He quit the job at Lehigh and moved to Brazil, where he taught at the Universidade de S\u00e3o Paulo from 1945 to 1947, working with Oscar Zariski. Weil and his wife had two daughters, Sylvie (born in 1942) and Nicolette (born in 1946).\nHe then returned to the United States and taught at the University of Chicago from 1947 to 1958, before moving to the Institute for Advanced Study, where he would spend the remainder of his career. He was a Plenary Speaker at the ICM in 1950 in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1954 in Amsterdam, and in 1978 in Helsinki. In 1979, Weil shared the second Wolf Prize in Mathematics with Jean Leray.\nWork.\nWeil made substantial contributions in a number of areas, the most important being his discovery of profound connections between algebraic geometry and number theory. This began in his doctoral work leading to the Mordell\u2013Weil theorem (1928, and shortly applied in Siegel's theorem on integral points). Mordell's theorem had an \"ad hoc\" proof; Weil began the separation of the infinite descent argument into two types of structural approach, by means of height functions for sizing rational points, and by means of Galois cohomology, which would not be categorized as such for another two decades. Both aspects of Weil's work have steadily developed into substantial theories.\nAmong his major accomplishments were the 1940s proof of the Riemann hypothesis for zeta-functions of curves over finite fields, and his subsequent laying of proper foundations for algebraic geometry to support that result (from 1942 to 1946, most intensively). The so-called Weil conjectures were hugely influential from around 1950; these statements were later proved by Bernard Dwork, Alexander Grothendieck, Michael Artin, and finally by Pierre Deligne, who completed the most difficult step in 1973.\nWeil introduced the adele ring in the late 1930s, following Claude Chevalley's lead with the ideles, and gave a proof of the Riemann\u2013Roch theorem with them (a version appeared in his \"Basic Number Theory\" in 1967). His 'matrix divisor' (vector bundle \"avant la lettre\") Riemann\u2013Roch theorem from 1938 was a very early anticipation of later ideas such as moduli spaces of bundles. The Weil conjecture on Tamagawa numbers proved resistant for many years. Eventually the adelic approach became basic in automorphic representation theory. He picked up another credited \"Weil conjecture\", around 1967, which later under pressure from Serge Lang (resp. of Serre) became known as the Taniyama\u2013Shimura conjecture (resp. Taniyama\u2013Weil conjecture) based on a roughly formulated question of Taniyama at the 1955 Nikk\u014d conference. His attitude towards conjectures was that one should not dignify a guess as a conjecture lightly, and in the Taniyama case, the evidence was only there after extensive computational work carried out from the late 1960s.\nOther significant results were on Pontryagin duality and differential geometry. He introduced the concept of a uniform space in general topology, as a by-product of his collaboration with Nicolas Bourbaki (of which he was a Founding Father). His work on sheaf theory hardly appears in his published papers, but correspondence with Henri Cartan in the late 1940s, and reprinted in his collected papers, proved most influential. He also chose the symbol \u2205, derived from the letter \u00d8 in the Norwegian alphabet (which he alone among the Bourbaki group was familiar with), to represent the empty set.\nWeil also made a well-known contribution in Riemannian geometry in his very first paper in 1926, when he showed that the classical isoperimetric inequality holds on non-positively curved surfaces. This established the 2-dimensional case of what later became known as the Cartan\u2013Hadamard conjecture.\nHe discovered that the so-called Weil representation, previously introduced in quantum mechanics by Irving Segal and David Shale, gave a contemporary framework for understanding the classical theory of quadratic forms. This was also a beginning of a substantial development by others, connecting representation theory and theta functions.\nHe also wrote several books on the history of Number Theory. Weil was elected Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1966.\nAs expositor.\nWeil's ideas made an important contribution to the writings and seminars of Bourbaki, before and after World War II.\nBeliefs.\nIndian (Hindu) thought had great influence on Weil. He was an agnostic, and he respected religions.\nLegacy.\nAsteroid 289085 Andreweil, discovered by astronomers at the Saint-Sulpice Observatory in 2004, was named in his memory. The official was published by the Minor Planet Center on 14 February 2014 ().\nBooks.\nMathematical works:\nCollected papers:\nAutobiography:\nMemoir by his daughter:"}
{"id": "2020", "revid": "18054835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2020", "title": "Achaeans (Homer)", "text": "The Achaeans (; \"Akhaio\u00ed,\" \"the Achaeans\" or \"of Achaea\") constitute one of the collective names for the Greeks in Homer's \"Iliad\" (used 598 times) and \"Odyssey\". The other common names are Danaans (; \"Danaoi\"; used 138 times in the \"Iliad\") and Argives (; ; used 182 times in the \"Iliad\") while Panhellenes ( \"Panhellenes,\" \"All of the Greeks\") and Hellenes (; \"Hellenes\") both appear only once; all of the aforementioned terms were used synonymously to denote a common Greek civilizational identity. In the historical period, the Achaeans were the inhabitants of the region of Achaea, a region in the north-central part of the Peloponnese. The city-states of this region later formed a confederation known as the Achaean League, which was influential during the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC.\nHomeric versus later use.\nThe Homeric \"long-haired Achaeans\" would have been a part of the Mycenaean civilization that dominated Greece from circa 1600 BC until 1100 BC. Later, by the Archaic and Classical periods, the term \"Achaeans\" referred to inhabitants of the much smaller region of Achaea. Herodotus identified the Achaeans of the northern Peloponnese as descendants of the earlier, Homeric Achaeans. According to Pausanias, writing in the 2nd century CE, the term \"Achaean\" was originally given to those Greeks inhabiting the Argolis and Laconia.\nPausanias and Herodotus both recount the legend that the Achaeans were forced from their homelands by the Dorians, during the legendary Dorian invasion of the Peloponnese. They then moved into the region later called Achaea.\nA scholarly consensus has not yet been reached on the origin of the historic Achaeans relative to the Homeric Achaeans and is still hotly debated. Former emphasis on presumed race, such as John A. Scott's article about the blond locks of the Achaeans as compared to the dark locks of \"Mediterranean\" Poseidon, on the basis of hints in Homer, has been rejected by some. The contrasting belief that \"Achaeans\", as understood through Homer, is \"a name without a country\", an \"ethnos\" created in the Epic tradition, has modern supporters among those who conclude that \"Achaeans\" were redefined in the 5th century BC, as contemporary speakers of Aeolic Greek.\nKarl Beloch suggested there was no Dorian invasion, but rather that the Peloponnesian Dorians were the Achaeans. Eduard Meyer, disagreeing with Beloch, instead put forth the suggestion that the real-life Achaeans were mainland pre-Dorian Greeks. His conclusion is based on his research on the similarity between the languages of the Achaeans and pre-historic Arcadians. William Prentice disagreed with both, noting archeological evidence suggests the Achaeans instead migrated from \"southern Asia Minor to Greece, probably settling first in lower Thessaly\" probably prior to 2000 BC.\nHittite documents.\nEmil Forrer, a Swiss Hittitologist who worked on the Boghazk\u00f6y tablets in Berlin, said the Achaeans of pre-Homeric Greece were directly associated with the term \"Land of Ahhiyawa\" mentioned in the Hittite texts. His conclusions at the time were challenged by other Hittitologists (i.e. Johannes Friedrich in 1927 and Albrecht G\u00f6tze in 1930), as well as by Ferdinand Sommer, who published his \"Die Ahhijava-Urkunden\" (\"The Ahhiyawa Documents\") in 1932.\nSome Hittite texts mention a nation lying to the west called Ahhiyawa. In the earliest reference to this land, a letter outlining the treaty violations of the Hittite vassal Madduwatta, it is called \"Ahhiya\". Another important example is the \"Tawagalawa Letter\" written by an unnamed Hittite king (most probably Hattusili III) of the empire period (14th\u201313th century BC) to the king of \"Ahhiyawa\", treating him as an equal and implying Miletus (\"Millawanda\") was under his control. It also refers to an earlier \"\"Wilusa\" episode\" involving hostility on the part of \"Ahhiyawa\". Ahhiya(wa) has been identified with the Achaeans of the Trojan War and the city of Wilusa with the legendary city of Troy (note the similarity with early Greek \"Wilion\", later \"Ilion\", the name of the acropolis of Troy). The exact relationship of the term \"Ahhiyawa\" to the Achaeans beyond a similarity in pronunciation was hotly debated by scholars, even following the discovery that Mycenaean Linear B is an early form of Greek; the earlier debate was summed up in 1984 by Hans G. G\u00fcterbock of the Oriental Institute. More recent research based on new readings and interpretations of the Hittite texts, as well as of the material evidence for Mycenaean contacts with the Anatolian mainland, came to the conclusion that \"Ahhiyawa\" referred to the Mycenaean world, or at least to a part of it.\nEgyptian sources.\nIt has been proposed that \"Ekwesh\" of the Egyptian records may relate to \"Achaea\" (compared to Hittite \"Ahhiyawa\"), whereas \"Denyen\" and \"Tanaju\" may relate to Classical Greek \"Danaoi\". The earliest textual reference to the Mycenaean world is in the Annals of Thutmosis III (ca. 1479\u20131425 BC), which refers to messengers from the king of the Tanaju, circa 1437 BC, offering greeting gifts to the Egyptian king, in order to initiate diplomatic relations, when the latter campaigned in Syria. Tanaju is also listed in an inscription at the Mortuary Temple of Amenhotep III. The latter ruled Egypt in circa 1382\u20131344 BC. Moreover, a list of the cities and regions of the Tanaju is also mentioned in this inscription; among the cities listed are Mycenae, Nauplion, Kythera, Messenia and the Thebaid (region of Thebes).\nDuring the 5th year of Pharaoh Merneptah, a confederation of Libyan and northern peoples is supposed to have attacked the western delta. Included amongst the ethnic names of the repulsed invaders is the Ekwesh or Eqwesh, whom some have seen as Achaeans, although Egyptian texts specifically mention these Ekwesh to be circumcised (which does not seem to have been a general practice in the Aegean at the time). Homer mentions an Achaean attack upon the delta, and Menelaus speaks of the same in Book IV of the \"Odyssey\" to Telemachus when he recounts his own return home from the Trojan War. Later Greek myths also say Helen had spent the time of the Trojan War in Egypt, and not at Troy, and that after Troy the Greeks went there to recover her.\nGreek mythology.\nIn Greek mythology, the perceived cultural divisions among the Hellenes were represented as legendary lines of descent that identified kinship groups, with each line being derived from an eponymous ancestor. Each of the Greek \"ethne\" were said to be named in honor of their respective ancestors: Achaeus of the Achaeans, Danaus of the Danaans, Cadmus of the Cadmeans (the Thebans), Hellen of the Hellenes (not to be confused with Helen of Troy), Aeolus of the Aeolians, Ion of the Ionians, and Dorus of the Dorians.\nCadmus from Phoenicia, Danaus from Egypt, and Pelops from Anatolia each gained a foothold in mainland Greece and were assimilated and Hellenized. Hellen, Graikos, Magnes, and Macedon were sons of Deucalion and Pyrrha, the only people who survived the Great Flood; the \"ethne\" were said to have originally been named \"Graikoi\" after the elder son but later renamed \"Hellenes\" after Hellen who was proved to be the strongest. Sons of Hellen and the nymph Orseis were Dorus, Xuthos, and Aeolus. Sons of Xuthos and Kreousa, daughter of Erechthea, were Ion and Achaeus.\nAccording to Hyginus, 22 Achaeans killed 362 Trojans during their ten years at Troy.\nEtymology.\nAccording to Margalit Finkelberg, the name \u1f08\u03c7\u03b1\u03b9\u03bf\u03af/\u1f08\u03c7\u03b1\u03b9\u03dd\u03bf\u03af is derived from Hittite \"A\u1e2b\u1e2biyaw\u0101\". However, Robert S. P. Beekes doubted the validity of this derivation and suggested a Pre-Greek proto-form \"*Akaywa-\".\nThe etymology of \"Danaoi\" is uncertain; according to Beekes, \"the name is certainly Pre-Greek\"."}
{"id": "2021", "revid": "36761608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2021", "title": "Atle Selberg", "text": "Atle Selberg (14 June 1917 \u2013 6 August 2007) was a Norwegian mathematician known for his work in analytic number theory and the theory of automorphic forms, and in particular for bringing them into relation with spectral theory. He was awarded the Fields Medal in 1950 and an honorary Abel Prize in 2002.\nEarly years.\nSelberg was born in Langesund, Norway, the son of teacher Anna Kristina Selberg and mathematician Ole Michael Ludvigsen Selberg. Two of his three brothers, Sigmund and Henrik, were also mathematicians. His other brother, Arne, was a professor of engineering. \nWhile he was still at school he was influenced by the work of Srinivasa Ramanujan and he found an exact analytical formula for the partition function as suggested by the works of Ramanujan; however, this result was first published by Hans Rademacher. During the war he fought against the German invasion of Norway, and was imprisoned several times. \nHe studied at the University of Oslo and completed his Ph.D. in 1943.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Selberg worked in isolation due to the German occupation of Norway. After the war his accomplishments became known, including a proof that a positive proportion of the zeros of the Riemann zeta function lie on the line formula_1. \nAfter the war, he turned to sieve theory, a previously neglected topic which Selberg's work brought into prominence. In a 1947 paper he introduced the Selberg sieve, a method well adapted in particular to providing auxiliary upper bounds, and which contributed to Chen's theorem, among other important results.\nIn 1948 Selberg submitted two papers in \"Annals of Mathematics\" in which he proved by elementary means the theorems for primes in arithmetic progression and the density of primes. This challenged the widely held view of his time that certain theorems are only obtainable with the advanced methods of complex analysis. Both results were based on his work on the asymptotic formula\nwhere\nfor primes formula_4. He established this result by elementary means in March 1948, and by July of that year, Selberg and Paul Erd\u0151s each obtained elementary proofs of the prime number theorem, both using the asymptotic formula above as a starting point. Circumstances leading up to the proofs, as well as publication disagreements, led to a bitter dispute between the two mathematicians.\nFor his fundamental accomplishments during the 1940s, Selberg received the 1950 Fields Medal.\nInstitute for Advanced Study.\nSelberg moved to the United States and worked as an associate professor at Syracuse University and later settled at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey in the 1950s where he remained until his death. During the 1950s he worked on introducing spectral theory into number theory, culminating in his development of the Selberg trace formula, the most famous and influential of his results. In its simplest form, this establishes a duality between the lengths of closed geodesics on a compact Riemann surface and the eigenvalues of the Laplacian, which is analogous to the duality between the prime numbers and the zeros of the zeta function.\nHe was awarded the 1986 Wolf Prize in Mathematics. He was also awarded an honorary Abel Prize in 2002, its founding year, before the awarding of the regular prizes began.\nSelberg received many distinctions for his work in addition to the Fields Medal, the Wolf Prize and the Gunnerus Medal. He was elected to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nIn 1972 he was awarded an honorary degree, doctor philos. honoris causa, at the Norwegian Institute of Technology, later part of Norwegian University of Science and Technology.\nSelberg had two children, Ingrid Selberg and Lars Selberg. Ingrid Selberg is married to playwright Mustapha Matura.\nHe died at home in Princeton, New Jersey on 6 August 2007 of heart failure."}
{"id": "2023", "revid": "13767476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2023", "title": "Aeschylus", "text": "Aeschylus (, ; \"Aiskhylos\", ; c. 525/524 \u2013 c. 456/455 BC) was an ancient Greek author of Greek tragedy, and is often described as the father of tragedy. Academics' knowledge of the genre begins with his work, and understanding of earlier Greek tragedy is largely based on inferences made from reading his surviving plays. According to Aristotle, he expanded the number of characters in the theatre and allowed conflict among them. Before this, characters interacted only with the chorus.\nOnly seven of his estimated seventy to ninety plays have survived. There is a long-standing debate regarding the authorship of one of these plays, \"Prometheus Bound\". Some believe that his son Euphorion wrote it. Fragments from other of Aeschylus' plays have survived in quotations, and more continue to be discovered on Egyptian papyrus. These fragments often give further insights into Aeschylus' work. He was probably the first dramatist to present plays as a trilogy. His \"Oresteia\" is the only extant and ancient example. At least one of his plays was influenced by the Persians' second invasion of Greece (480\u2013479 BC). This work, \"The Persians\", is one of very few classical Greek tragedies concerned with contemporary events, and the only one extant. The significance of the war against Persia was so great to Aeschylus and the Greeks that Aeschylus' epitaph commemorates his participation in the Greek victory at Marathon while making no mention of his success as a playwright. Despite this, Aeschylus's work \u2013 particularly the \"Oresteia\" \"\u2013\" is generally acclaimed by modern critics and scholars.\nLife.\nAeschylus was born in c. 525 BC in Eleusis, a small town about 27\u00a0km northwest of Athens, in the fertile valleys of western Attica. Some scholars argue that his date of birth may be based on counting back forty years from his first victory in the Great Dionysia. His family was wealthy and well established. His father, Euphorion, was a member of the Eupatridae, the ancient nobility of Attica. But this might be a fiction invented by the ancients to account for the grandeur of Aeschylus' plays.\nAs a youth, Aeschylus worked at a vineyard until, according to the 2nd-century AD geographer Pausanias, the god Dionysus visited him in his sleep and commanded him to turn his attention to the nascent art of tragedy. As soon as he woke, he began to write a tragedy, and his first performance took place in 499\u00a0BC, when he was 26 years old. He won his first victory at the City Dionysia in 484\u00a0BC.\nIn 510 BC, when Aeschylus was 15 years old, Cleomenes I expelled the sons of Peisistratus from Athens, and Cleisthenes came to power. Cleisthenes' reforms included a system of registration that emphasized the importance of the deme over family tradition. In the last decade of the 6th century, Aeschylus and his family were living in the deme of Eleusis.\nThe Persian Wars played a large role in Aeschylus' life and career. In 490\u00a0BC, he and his brother Cynegeirus fought to defend Athens against the invading army of Darius I of Persia at the Battle of Marathon. The Athenians emerged triumphant, and the victory was celebrated across the city-states of Greece. Cynegeirus was killed while trying to prevent a Persian ship retreating from the shore, for which his countrymen extolled him as a hero.\nIn 480 BC, Aeschylus was called into military service again, together with his younger brother Ameinias, against Xerxes\u00a0I's invading forces at the Battle of Salamis. Aeschylus also fought at the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC. Ion of Chios was a witness for Aeschylus' war record and his contribution in Salamis. Salamis holds a prominent place in \"The Persians\", his oldest surviving play, which was performed in 472 BC and won first prize at the Dionysia.\nAeschylus was one of many Greeks who were initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries, an ancient cult of Demeter based in his home town of Eleusis. Initiates gained secret knowledge through these rites, likely concerning the afterlife. Firm details of specific rites are sparse, as members were sworn under the penalty of death not to reveal anything about the Mysteries to non-initiates. Nevertheless, according to Aristotle, Aeschylus was accused of asebeia for revealing some of the cult's secrets on stage.\nOther sources claim that an angry mob tried to kill Aeschylus on the spot but he fled the scene. Heracleides of Pontus asserts that the audience tried to stone Aeschylus. Aeschylus took refuge at the altar in the orchestra of the Theater of Dionysus. He pleaded ignorance at his trial. He was acquitted, with the jury sympathetic to the military service of him and his brothers during the Persian Wars. According to the 2nd-century AD author Aelian, Aeschylus' younger brother Ameinias helped to acquit Aeschylus by showing the jury the stump of the hand he had lost at Salamis, where he was voted bravest warrior. The truth is that the award for bravery at Salamis went not to Aeschylus' brother but to Ameinias of Pallene.\nAeschylus travelled to Sicily once or twice in the 470s\u00a0BC, having been invited by Hiero\u00a0I of Syracuse, a major Greek city on the eastern side of the island. He produced \"The Women of Aetna\" during one of these trips (in honor of the city founded by Hieron), and restaged his \"Persians\". By 473\u00a0BC, after the death of Phrynichus, one of his chief rivals, Aeschylus was the yearly favorite in the Dionysia, winning first prize in nearly every competition. In 472\u00a0BC, Aeschylus staged the production that included the \"Persians\", with Pericles serving as \"choregos\".\nPersonal life.\nAeschylus married and had two sons, Euphorion and Euaeon, both of whom became tragic poets. Euphorion won first prize in 431 BC in competition against both Sophocles and Euripides. A nephew of Aeschylus, Philocles (his sister's son), was also a tragic poet, and won first prize in the competition against Sophocles' \"Oedipus Rex\". Aeschylus had at least two brothers, Cynegeirus and Ameinias.\nDeath.\nIn 458 BC, he returned to Sicily for the last time, visiting the city of Gela, where he died in 456 or 455\u00a0BC. Valerius Maximus wrote that he was killed outside the city by a tortoise dropped by an eagle (possibly a lammergeier or Cinereous vulture, which do open tortoises for eating by dropping them on hard objects) which had mistaken his head for a rock suitable for shattering the shell. Pliny, in his \"Naturalis Histori\u00e6\", adds that Aeschylus had been staying outdoors to avoid a prophecy that he would be killed by a falling object. But this story may be legendary and due to a misunderstanding of the iconography on Aeschylus's tomb. Aeschylus' work was so respected by the Athenians that after his death his tragedies were the only ones allowed to be restaged in subsequent competitions. His sons Euphorion and Eu\u00e6on and his nephew Philocles also became playwrights.\nThe inscription on Aeschylus' gravestone makes no mention of his theatrical renown, commemorating only his military achievements:\nAccording to Castoriadis, the inscription on his grave signifies the primary importance of \"belonging to the City\" (polis), of the solidarity that existed within the collective body of citizen-soldiers.\nWorks.\nThe seeds of Greek drama were sowed in religious festivals for the gods, chiefly Dionysus, the god of wine. During Aeschylus' lifetime, dramatic competitions became part of the City Dionysia, held in spring. The festival opened with a procession which was followed by a competition of boys singing dithyrambs, and all culminated in a pair of dramatic competitions. The first competition Aeschylus would have participated in involved three playwrights each presenting three tragedies and one satyr play. Such format is called a continuous tragic tetralogy. It allowed Aeschylus to explore the human and theological and cosmic dimensions of a mythic sequence, developing it in successive phases. A second competition involving five comedic playwrights followed, and the winners of both competitions were chosen by a panel of judges.\nAeschylus entered many of these competitions, and various ancient sources attribute between seventy and ninety plays to him. Only seven tragedies attributed to him have survived intact: \"The Persians\", \"Seven Against Thebes\", \"The Suppliants\", the trilogy known as \"The Oresteia\" (the three tragedies \"Agamemnon\", \"The Libation Bearers\" and \"The Eumenides\"), and \"Prometheus Bound\" (whose authorship is disputed). With the exception of this last play\u00a0\u2013 the success of which is uncertain\u00a0\u2013 all of Aeschylus's extant tragedies are known to have won first prize at the City Dionysia.\nThe Alexandrian \"Life of Aeschylus\" claims that he won the first prize at the City Dionysia thirteen times. This compares favorably with Sophocles' reported eighteen victories (with a substantially larger catalogue, an estimated 120 plays), and dwarfs the five victories of Euripides, who is thought to have written roughly 90 plays.\nTrilogies.\nOne hallmark of Aeschylean dramaturgy appears to have been his tendency to write connected trilogies in which each play serves as a chapter in a continuous dramatic narrative. \"The Oresteia\" is the only extant example of this type of connected trilogy, but there is evidence that Aeschylus often wrote such trilogies. The satyr plays that followed his tragic trilogies also drew from myth.\nThe satyr play Proteus, which followed the \"Oresteia\", treated the story of Menelaus' detour in Egypt on his way home from the Trojan War. It is assumed, based on the evidence provided by a catalogue of Aeschylean play titles, scholia, and play fragments recorded by later authors, that three other of his extant plays were components of connected trilogies: \"Seven Against Thebes\" was the final play in an Oedipus trilogy, and \"The Suppliants\" and \"Prometheus Bound\" were each the first play in a Danaid trilogy and Prometheus trilogy, respectively. Scholars have also suggested several completely lost trilogies, based on known play titles. A number of these treated myths about the Trojan War. One, collectively called the \"Achilleis\", comprised \"Myrmidons\", \"Nereids\" and \"Phrygians\" (alternately, \"The Ransoming of Hector\").\nAnother trilogy apparently recounted the entrance of the Trojan ally Memnon into the war, and his death at the hands of Achilles (\"Memnon\" and \"The Weighing of Souls\" being two components of the trilogy). \"The Award of the Arms\", \"The Phrygian Women\", and \"The Salaminian Women\" suggest a trilogy about the madness and subsequent suicide of the Greek hero Ajax. Aeschylus seems to have written about Odysseus' return to Ithaca after the war (including his killing of his wife Penelope's suitors and its consequences) in a trilogy consisting of \"The Soul-raisers\", \"Penelope\", and \"The Bone-gatherers\". Other suggested trilogies touched on the myth of Jason and the Argonauts (\"Arg\u00f4\", \"Lemnian Women\", \"Hypsipyl\u00ea\"), the life of Perseus (\"The Net-draggers\", \"Polydekt\u00eas\", \"Phorkides\"), the birth and exploits of Dionysus (\"Semele\", \"Bacchae\", \"Pentheus\"), and the aftermath of the war portrayed in \"Seven Against Thebes\" (\"Eleusinians\", \"Argives\" (or \"Argive Women\"), \"Sons of the Seven\").\nSurviving plays.\n\"The Persians\" (472 BC).\n\"The Persians\" (\"Persai\") is the earliest of Aeschylus' extant plays. It was performed in 472 BC. It was based on Aeschylus' own experiences, specifically the Battle of Salamis. It is unique among surviving Greek tragedies in that it describes a recent historical event. \"The Persians\" focuses on the popular Greek theme of hubris and blames Persia's loss on the pride of its king.\nIt opens with the arrival of a messenger in Susa, the Persian capital, bearing news of the catastrophic Persian defeat at Salamis, to Atossa, the mother of the Persian King Xerxes. Atossa then travels to the tomb of Darius, her husband, where his ghost appears, to explain the cause of the defeat. It is, he says, the result of Xerxes' hubris in building a bridge across the Hellespont, an action which angered the gods. Xerxes appears at the end of the play, not realizing the cause of his defeat, and the play closes to lamentations by Xerxes and the chorus.\n\"Seven Against Thebes\" (467 BC).\n\"Seven against Thebes\" (\"Hepta epi Thebas\") was performed in 467 BC. It has the contrasting theme of the interference of the gods in human affairs. Another theme, with which Aeschylus' would continually involve himself, makes its first known appearance in this play, namely that the polis was a key development of human civilization.\nThe play tells the story of Eteocles and Polynices, the sons of the shamed king of Thebes, Oedipus. Eteocles and Polynices agree to share and alternate the throne of the city. After the first year, Eteocles refuses to step down. Polynices undertakes war therefore. The pair kill each other in single combat, and the original ending of the play consisted of lamentations for the dead brothers. But a new ending was added to the play some fifty years later: Antigone and Ismene mourn their dead brothers, a messenger enters announcing an edict prohibiting the burial of Polynices, and Antigone declares her intention to defy this edict. The play was the third in a connected Oedipus trilogy. The first two plays were \"Laius\" and \"Oedipus\". The concluding satyr play was \"The Sphinx\".\n\"The Suppliants\" (463 BC).\nAeschylus continued his emphasis on the polis with \"The Suppliants\" (\"Hiketides\") in 463 BC. The play gives tribute to the democratic undercurrents which were running through Athens and preceding the establishment of a democratic government in 461. The Danaids (50 daughters of Danaus, founder of Argos) flee a forced marriage to their cousins in Egypt. They turn to King Pelasgus of Argos for protection, but Pelasgus refuses until the people of Argos weigh in on the decision (a distinctly democratic move on the part of the king). The people decide that the Danaids deserve protection and are allowed within the walls of Argos despite Egyptian protests.\nA Danaid trilogy had long been assumed because of \"The Suppliants\"' cliffhanger ending. This was confirmed by the 1952 publication of Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 2256 fr. 3. The constituent plays are generally agreed to be \"The Suppliants\" and \"The Egyptians\" and \"The Danaids\". A plausible reconstruction of the trilogy's last two-thirds runs thus: In \"The Egyptians\", the Argive-Egyptian war threatened in the first play has transpired. King Pelasgus was killed during the war, and Danaus rules Argos. Danaus negotiates a settlement with Aegyptus, a condition of which requires his 50 daughters to marry the 50 sons of Aegyptus. Danaus secretly informs his daughters of an oracle which predicts that one of his sons-in-law would kill him. He orders the Danaids to murder their husbands therefore on their wedding night. His daughters agree. \"The Danaids\" would open the day after the wedding.\nIt is revealed that 49 of the 50 Danaids killed their husbands. Hypermnestra did not kill her husband, Lynceus, and helped him escape. Danaus is angered by his daughter's disobedience and orders her imprisonment and possibly execution. In the trilogy's climax and d\u00e9nouement, Lynceus reveals himself to Danaus and kills him, thus fulfilling the oracle. He and Hypermnestra will establish a ruling dynasty in Argos. The other 49 Danaids are absolved of their murders, and married off to unspecified Argive men. The satyr play following this trilogy was titled \"Amymone\", after one of the Danaids.\n\"The Oresteia\" (458 BC).\nBesides a few missing lines, the \"Oresteia\" of 458 BC is the only complete trilogy of Greek plays by any playwright still extant (of \"Proteus\", the satyr play which followed, only fragments are known). \"Agamemnon\" and \"The Libation Bearers\" (\"Choephoroi\") and \"The Eumenides\" together tell the violent story of the family of Agamemnon, king of Argos.\n\"Agamemnon\".\nAeschylus begins in Greece, describing the return of King Agamemnon from his victory in the Trojan War, from the perspective of the towns people (the Chorus) and his wife, Clytemnestra. Dark foreshadowings build to the death of the king at the hands of his wife, who was angry that their daughter Iphigenia was killed so that the gods would restore the winds and allow the Greek fleet to sail to Troy. Clytemnestra was also unhappy that Agamemnon kept the Trojan prophetess Cassandra as his concubine. Cassandra foretells the murder of Agamemnon and of herself to the assembled townsfolk, who are horrified. She then enters the palace knowing that she cannot avoid her fate. The ending of the play includes a prediction of the return of Orestes, son of Agamemnon, who will seek to avenge his father.\n\"The Libation Bearers\".\n\"The Libation Bearers\" opens with Orestes' arrival at Agamemnon's tomb, from exile in Phocis. Electra meets Orestes there. They plan revenge against Clytemnestra and her lover, Aegisthus. Clytemnestra's account of a nightmare in which she gives birth to a snake is recounted by the chorus. This leads her to order her daughter, Electra, to pour libations on Agamemnon's tomb (with the assistance of libation bearers) in hope of making amends. Orestes enters the palace pretending to bear news of his own death. Clytemnestra calls in Aegisthus to learn the news. Orestes kills them both. Orestes is then beset by the Furies, who avenge the murders of kin in Greek mythology.\n\"The Eumenides\".\nThe third play addresses the question of Orestes' guilt. The Furies drive Orestes from Argos and into the wilderness. He makes his way to the temple of Apollo and begs Apollo to drive the Furies away. Apollo had encouraged Orestes to kill Clytemnestra, so he bears some of the guilt for the murder. The Furies are a more ancient race of the gods, and Apollo sends Orestes to the temple of Athena with Hermes as a guide.\nThe Furies track him down, and Athena steps in and declares that a trial is necessary. Apollo argues Orestes' case, and after the judges (including Athena) deliver a tie vote, Athena announces that Orestes is acquitted. She renames the Furies \"The Eumenides\" (The Good-spirited, or Kindly Ones), and extols the importance of reason in the development of laws. As in \"The Suppliants\", the ideals of a democratic Athens are praised.\n\"Prometheus Bound\" (date disputed).\n\"Prometheus Bound\" is attributed to Aeschylus by ancient authorities. Since the late 19th century, however, scholars have increasingly doubted this ascription, largely on stylistic grounds. Its production date is also in dispute, with theories ranging from the 480s BC to as late as the 410s.\nThe play consists mostly of static dialogue. The Titan Prometheus is bound to a rock throughout, which is his punishment from the Olympian Zeus for providing fire to humans. The god Hephaestus and the Titan Oceanus and the chorus of Oceanids all express sympathy for Prometheus' plight. Prometheus is met by Io, a fellow victim of Zeus' cruelty. He prophesies her future travels, revealing that one of her descendants will free Prometheus. The play closes with Zeus sending Prometheus into the abyss because Prometheus will not tell him of a potential marriage which could prove Zeus' downfall.\n\"Prometheus Bound\" seems to have been the first play in a trilogy, the \"Prometheia\". In the second play, \"Prometheus Unbound\", Heracles frees Prometheus from his chains and kills the eagle that had been sent daily to eat Prometheus' perpetually regenerating liver (then believed the source of feeling). We learn that Zeus has released the other Titans which he imprisoned at the conclusion of the Titanomachy, perhaps foreshadowing his eventual reconciliation with Prometheus.\nIn the trilogy's conclusion, \"Prometheus the Fire-Bringer\", it seems that the Titan finally warns Zeus not to sleep with the sea nymph Thetis, for she is fated to beget a son greater than the father. Not wishing to be overthrown, Zeus marries Thetis off to the mortal Peleus. The product of that union is Achilles, Greek hero of the Trojan War. After reconciling with Prometheus, Zeus probably inaugurates a festival in his honor at Athens.\nLost plays.\nOf Aeschylus' other plays, only titles and assorted fragments are known. There are enough fragments (along with comments made by later authors and scholiasts) to produce rough synopses for some plays.\n\"Myrmidons\".\nThis play was based on books 9 and 16 of the \"Iliad\". Achilles sits in silent indignation over his humiliation at Agamemnon's hands for most of the play. Envoys from the Greek army attempt to reconcile Achilles to Agamemnon, but he yields only to his cousin, and lover Patroclus, who then battles the Trojans in Achilles' armour. The bravery and death of Patroclus are reported in a messenger's speech, which is followed by mourning.\n\"Nereids\".\nThis play was based on books 18 and 19 and 22 of the \"Iliad\". It follows the Daughters of Nereus, the sea god, who lament Patroclus' death. A messenger tells how Achilles (perhaps reconciled to Agamemnon and the Greeks) slew Hector.\n\"Phrygians\", or \"Hector's Ransom\".\nAfter a brief discussion with Hermes, Achilles sits in silent mourning over Patroclus. Hermes then brings in King Priam of Troy, who wins over Achilles and ransoms his son's body in a spectacular coup de th\u00e9\u00e2tre. A scale is brought on stage and Hector's body is placed in one scale and gold in the other. The dynamic dancing of the chorus of Trojans when they enter with Priam is reported by Aristophanes.\n\"Niobe\".\nThe children of Niobe, the heroine, have been slain by Apollo and Artemis because Niobe had gloated that she had more children than their mother, Leto. Niobe sits in silent mourning on stage during most of the play. In the \"Republic\", Plato quotes the line \"God plants a fault in mortals when he wills to destroy a house utterly.\"\nThese are the remaining 71 plays ascribed to Aeschylus which are known to us:\nInfluence.\nInfluence on Greek drama and culture.\nThe theatre was just beginning to evolve when Aeschylus started writing for it. Earlier playwrights such as Thespis had already expanded the cast to include an actor who was able to interact with the chorus. Aeschylus added a second actor, allowing for greater dramatic variety, while the chorus played a less important role. He is sometimes credited with introducing \"skenographia\", or scene-decoration, though Aristotle gives this distinction to Sophocles. Aeschylus is also said to have made the costumes more elaborate and dramatic, and made his actors wear platform boots (\"cothurni\") to make them more visible to the audience. According to a later account of Aeschylus' life, the chorus of Furies in the first performance of the \"Eumenides\" were so frightening when they entered that children fainted and patriarchs urinated and pregnant women went into labour.\nAeschylus wrote his plays in verse. No violence is performed onstage. The plays have a remoteness from daily life in Athens, relating stories about the gods, or being set, like \"The Persians\", far away. Aeschylus' work has a strong moral and religious emphasis. The \"Oresteia\" trilogy concentrated on humans' position in the cosmos relative to the gods and divine law and divine punishment.\nAeschylus' popularity is evident in the praise that the comic playwright Aristophanes gives him in \"The Frogs\", produced some 50 years after Aeschylus' death. Aeschylus appears as a character in the play and claims, at line 1022, that his \"Seven against Thebes\" \"made everyone watching it to love being warlike\". He claims, at lines 1026\u20137, that with \"The Persians\" he \"taught the Athenians to desire always to defeat their enemies.\" Aeschylus goes on to say, at lines 1039ff., that his plays inspired the Athenians to be brave and virtuous.\nInfluence outside Greek culture.\nAeschylus' works were influential beyond his own time. Hugh Lloyd-Jones draws attention to Richard Wagner's reverence of Aeschylus. Michael Ewans argues in his \"Wagner and Aeschylus. The Ring and the Oresteia\" (London: Faber. 1982) that the influence was so great as to merit a direct character by character comparison between Wagner's \"Ring\" and Aeschylus's \"Oresteia\". But a critic of that book, while not denying that Wagner read and respected Aeschylus, has described the arguments as unreasonable and forced.\nJ.T. Sheppard argues in the second half of his \"Aeschylus and Sophocles: Their Work and Influence\" that Aeschylus and Sophocles have played a major part in the formation of dramatic literature from the Renaissance to the present, specifically in French and Elizabethan drama. He also claims that their influence went beyond just drama and applies to literature in general, citing Milton and the Romantics.\nEugene O'Neill's \"Mourning Becomes Electra\" (1931), a trilogy of three plays set in America after the Civil War, is modeled after the \"Oresteia\". Before writing his acclaimed trilogy, O'Neill had been developing a play about Aeschylus, and he noted that Aeschylus \"so changed the system of the tragic stage that he has more claim than anyone else to be regarded as the founder (Father) of Tragedy.\"\nDuring his presidential campaign in 1968, Senator Robert F. Kennedy quoted the Edith Hamilton translation of Aeschylus on the night of the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.. Kennedy was notified of King's murder before a campaign stop in Indianapolis, Indiana, and was warned not to attend the event due to fears of rioting from the mostly African-American crowd. Kennedy insisted on attending and delivered an impromptu speech that delivered news of King's death. Acknowledging the audience's emotions, Kennedy referred to his own grief at the murder of Martin Luther King and, quoting a passage from the play \"Agamemnon\" (in translation), said: \"My favorite poet was Aeschylus. And he once wrote: 'Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart, until in our own despair, against our will, comes wisdom through the awful grace of God.' What we need in the United States is not division; what we need in the United States is not hatred; what we need in the United States is not violence and lawlessness; but is love and wisdom, and compassion toward one another, and a feeling of justice toward those who still suffer within our country, whether they be white or whether they be black\u00a0... Let us dedicate ourselves to what the Greeks wrote so many years ago: to tame the savageness of man and make gentle the life of this world.\" The quotation from Aeschylus was later inscribed on a memorial at the gravesite of Robert Kennedy following his own assassination.\nEditions.\nThe first translation of the seven plays into English was by Robert Potter in 1779, using blank verse for the iambic trimeters and rhymed verse for the choruses, a convention adopted by most translators for the next century."}
{"id": "2024", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2024", "title": "Amber Road", "text": "The Amber Road was an ancient trade route for the transfer of amber from coastal areas of the North Sea and the Baltic Sea to the Mediterranean Sea. Prehistoric trade routes between Northern and Southern Europe were defined by the amber trade.\nAs an important commodity, sometimes dubbed \"the gold of the north\", amber was transported from the North Sea and Baltic Sea coasts overland by way of the Vistula and Dnieper rivers to Italy, Greece, the Black Sea, Syria and Egypt over a period of thousands of years.\nAntiquity.\nFrom at least the 16th century BC, amber was moved from Northern Europe to the Mediterranean area. The breast ornament of the Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamen (c. 1333\u20131324 BC) contains large Baltic amber beads. Heinrich Schliemann found Baltic amber beads at Mycenae, as shown by spectroscopic investigation. The quantity of amber in the Royal Tomb of Qatna, Syria, is unparalleled for known second millennium BC sites in the Levant and the Ancient Near East. Amber was sent from the North Sea to the temple of Apollo at Delphi as an offering. From the Black Sea, trade could continue to Asia along the Silk Road, another ancient trade route.\nIn Roman times, a main route ran south from the Baltic coast (modern Lithuania), the entire north\u2013south length of modern-day Poland (likely through the Iron Age settlement of Biskupin), through the land of the Boii (modern Czech Republic and Slovakia) to the head of the Adriatic Sea (Aquileia by the modern Gulf of Venice). Along with amber, other commodities such as animal fur and skin, honey and wax was exported to the Rome in exchange for Roman glass, brass, gold, and non-ferrous metals such as tin and copper to the early Baltic region. As this road was a lucrative trade route connecting the Baltic Sea to the Mediterranean Sea, Roman military fortifications were constructed along the route to protect merchants and traders from Germanic raids.\nThe Old Prussian towns of Kaup and Truso on the Baltic were the starting points of the route to the south. In Scandinavia the amber road probably gave rise to the thriving Nordic Bronze Age culture, bringing influences from the Mediterranean Sea to the northernmost countries of Europe.\nKaliningrad Oblast is occasionally referred to in Russian as , which means \"the amber region\" (see Kaliningrad Regional Amber Museum).\nKnown Amber Roads by country.\nPoland.\nThe shortest (and possibly oldest) road avoids alpine areas and led from the Baltic coastline (nowadays Lithuania and Poland), through Biskupin, Milicz, Wroc\u0142aw, the K\u0142odzko Valley (less often through the Moravian Gate), crossed the Danube near Carnuntum in the Noricum Province, headed southwest past Poetovio, Celeia, Emona, Nauportus, and reached Patavium and Aquileia at the Adriatic coast. One of the oldest directions of the last stage of the Amber Road to the south of the Danube, noted in the myth about the Argonauts, used the Sava and Kupa rivers, ending with a short continental road from Nauportus to \"Tarsatica\" (Trsat, Rijeka) on the coast of the Adriatic.\nGermany.\nSeveral roads connected the North Sea and Baltic Sea, especially the city of Hamburg to the Brenner Pass, proceeding southwards to Brindisi (nowadays Italy) and Ambracia (nowadays Greece).\nSwitzerland.\nThe Swiss region indicates a number of alpine roads, concentrating around the capital city Bern and probably originating from the borders of the Rh\u00f4ne River and the Rhine.\nThe Netherlands.\nA small section, including Baarn, Barneveld, Amersfoort and Amerongen, connected the North Sea with the Lower Rhine.\nBelgium.\nA small section led southwards from Antwerp and Bruges to the towns Braine-l\u2019Alleud and Braine-le-Comte, both originally named \"Brennia-Brenna\". The route continued by following the Meuse River towards Bern in Switzerland.\nSouthern France and Spain.\nRoutes connected amber finding locations at Ambares (near Bordeaux), leading to B\u00e9arn and the Pyrenees. Routes connecting the amber finding locations in northern Spain and in the Pyrenees were a trading route to the Mediterranean Sea.\nModern use of \"Amber Road\".\nThere is a tourist route stretching along the Baltic coast from Kaliningrad to Latvia called \"Amber Road\".\n\"Amber Road\" sites are:\nIn Poland a north\u2013south motorway A1 is officially named Amber Highway."}
{"id": "2025", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2025", "title": "Crandall University", "text": "Crandall University is a small Christian liberal arts university located in Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada. Crandall is operated by the Canadian Baptists of Atlantic Canada.\nHistory.\nThe school was founded in 1949 under the name United Baptist Bible Training School (UBBTS), and served as both a secondary school and a Bible school. Over two decades, the focus of the school gradually shifted toward post-secondary programs. In 1968, UBBTS became a Bible and junior Christian liberal arts college, and in 1970 the name was changed to Atlantic Baptist College (ABC). A sustained campaign to expand the school's faculty and improve the level of education resulted in ABC being able to grant full Bachelor of Arts degrees in 1983. Its campus at this time was located along the Salisbury Road, west of Moncton's central business district.\nThe institution moved to a new campus built on the Gorge Road, north of the central business district, in 1996. The name was changed to Atlantic Baptist University (ABU), a reflection of expanded student enrollment and academic accreditation. In 2003, the ABU sports teams adopted the name \"The Blue Tide\". The institution was the first, and thus far only, English-language university in Moncton. The \"Atlantic Baptist University Act\" was passed by the Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick in 2008.\nOn August 21, 2009 it was announced that the institution had changed its name to Crandall University in honour of Rev. Joseph Crandall, a pioneering Baptist minister in the maritime region. In conjunction with the University name change, Crandall Athletics took on a new identity as \"The Crandall Chargers.\"\nControversy.\nIn 2012, Crandall University came under public scrutiny for receiving municipal funds for having a scripturally based hiring policy consistent with its denomination's tradition, that is, forbidding the hiring of non-celibate LGBTQ people. (This has been characterized by the press as an anti-gay hiring policy.) That same year, the Crandall Student Association publicly broke with the university's administration over the policy, with the student president at the time telling the CBC, \"The Christian faith does say do not judge others. And the Christian faith is all about love. So I feel that this policy \u2013 to me \u2013 doesn\u2019t seem like it\u2019s following those specific guidelines.\" In 2013, a year after the controversy erupted, the University opted to not apply for $150,000 in public funding that it had received annually. The university president also issued an apology, stating: \"We wish to apologize for anything that Crandall University might possibly have communicated in the past that may have seemed unloving or disrespectful in any way toward any individual or groups.\"\nAffiliations.\nCrandall is an affiliate member of the Association of the Registrars of the Universities and Colleges of Canada (ARUCC); a full member of the ARUCC regional association, the Atlantic Association of Registrars and Admissions Officers (AARAO); an active member of Christian Higher Education Canada (CHEC); and an active member of the New Brunswick Association of Private Colleges and Universities. However, Crandall faculty are not members of the Canadian Association of University Teachers (CAUT). In their report, the CAUT found that \"while the university has a statement on academic freedom, it is significantly inconsistent with that of the CAUT and the majority of universities across the western world, and assurances that free enquiry is still possible within its constraints are unconvincing.\" They therefore recommended that Crandall University \"be placed on the list of institutions 'found to have imposed a requirement of a commitment to a particular ideology or statement of faith as a condition of employment.'\"\nLibrary and archives.\nCrandall University houses the Baptist Heritage Center whose 300 artifacts preserve the material history of Atlantic Baptists, the Convention of Atlantic Baptist Churches, and its predecessor organizations. The collection and archives includes objects used in worship services, furniture, musical instruments, church building architecture pictures and printed material."}
{"id": "2027", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2027", "title": "Andrew Wiles", "text": "Sir Andrew John Wiles (born 11 April 1953) is an English mathematician and a Royal Society Research Professor at the University of Oxford, specializing in number theory. He is best known for proving Fermat's Last Theorem, for which he was awarded the 2016 Abel Prize and the 2017 Copley Medal by the Royal Society. He was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 2000, and in 2018 was appointed as the first Regius Professor of Mathematics at Oxford. Wiles is also a 1997 MacArthur Fellow.\nEducation and early life.\nWiles was born on 11 April 1953 in Cambridge, England, the son of Maurice Frank Wiles (1923\u20132005), later the Regius Professor of Divinity at the University of Oxford, and Patricia Wiles (n\u00e9e Mowll). His father worked as the chaplain at Ridley Hall, Cambridge, for the years 1952\u20131955. Wiles attended King's College School, Cambridge, and The Leys School, Cambridge.\nWiles states that he came across Fermat's Last Theorem on his way home from school when he was 10 years old. He stopped at his local library where he found a book about the theorem. Fascinated by the existence of a theorem that was so easy to state that he, a ten-year-old, could understand it, but that no one had proven, he decided to be the first person to prove it. However, he soon realised that his knowledge was too limited, so he abandoned his childhood dream until it was brought back to his attention at the age of 33 by Ken Ribet's 1986 proof of the epsilon conjecture, which Gerhard Frey had previously linked to Fermat's famous equation.\nCareer and research.\nWiles earned his bachelor's degree in mathematics in 1974 at Merton College, Oxford, and a PhD in 1980 as a graduate student of Clare College, Cambridge. After a stay at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1981, Wiles became a Professor of Mathematics at Princeton University. In 1985\u201386, Wiles was a Guggenheim Fellow at the Institut des Hautes \u00c9tudes Scientifiques near Paris and at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure. From 1988 to 1990, Wiles was a Royal Society Research Professor at the University of Oxford, and then he returned to Princeton. From 1994 to 2009, Wiles was a Eugene Higgins Professor at Princeton. He rejoined Oxford in 2011 as Royal Society Research Professor. In May 2018 he was appointed Regius Professor of Mathematics at Oxford, the first in the university's history.\nWiles's graduate research was guided by John Coates beginning in the summer of 1975. Together these colleagues worked on the arithmetic of elliptic curves with complex multiplication by the methods of Iwasawa theory. He further worked with Barry Mazur on the main conjecture of Iwasawa theory over the rational numbers, and soon afterward, he generalized this result to totally real fields.\nProof of Fermat's Last Theorem.\nStarting in mid-1986, based on successive progress of the previous few years of Gerhard Frey, Jean-Pierre Serre and Ken Ribet, it became clear that Fermat's Last Theorem could be proven as a corollary of a limited form of the modularity theorem (unproven at the time and then known as the \"Taniyama\u2013Shimura\u2013Weil conjecture\"). The modularity theorem involved elliptic curves, which was also Wiles's own specialist area.\nThe conjecture was seen by contemporary mathematicians as important, but extraordinarily difficult or perhaps impossible to prove. For example, Wiles's ex-supervisor John Coates states that it seemed \"impossible to actually prove\", and Ken Ribet considered himself \"one of the vast majority of people who believed [it] was completely inaccessible\", adding that \"Andrew Wiles was probably one of the few people on earth who had the audacity to dream that you can actually go and prove [it].\"\nDespite this, Wiles, with his from-childhood fascination with Fermat's Last Theorem, decided to undertake the challenge of proving the conjecture, at least to the extent needed for Frey's curve. He dedicated all of his research time to this problem for over six years in near-total secrecy, covering up his efforts by releasing prior work in small segments as separate papers and confiding only in his wife.\nIn June 1993, he presented his proof to the public for the first time at a conference in Cambridge.\nIn August 1993, it was discovered that the proof contained a flaw in one area. Wiles tried and failed for over a year to repair his proof. According to Wiles, the crucial idea for circumventing, rather than closing, this area came to him on 19 September 1994, when he was on the verge of giving up. Together with his former student Richard Taylor, he published a second paper which circumvented the problem and thus completed the proof. Both papers were published in May 1995 in a dedicated issue of the \"Annals of Mathematics.\"\nAwards and honours.\nWiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem has stood up to the scrutiny of the world's other mathematical experts. Wiles was interviewed for an episode of the BBC documentary series \"Horizon\" that focused on Fermat's Last Theorem. This was renamed \"The Proof\" and was made an episode of the PBS science television series \"Nova\". His work and life are also described in great detail in Simon Singh's popular book \"Fermat's Last Theorem\".\nWiles has been awarded a number of major prizes in mathematics and science:\nWiles's 1987 certificate of election to the Royal Society reads:"}
{"id": "2028", "revid": "11453759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2028", "title": "Ambient", "text": "Ambient or Ambiance or Ambience may refer to:"}
{"id": "2029", "revid": "3048957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2029", "title": "Anne Bront\u00eb", "text": "Anne Bront\u00eb (, ; 17 January 1820 \u2013 28 May 1849) was an English novelist and poet, and the youngest member of the Bront\u00eb literary family.\nAnne Bront\u00eb was the daughter of Patrick Bront\u00eb, a poor Irish clergyman in the Church of England. Anne lived most of her life with her family at the parish of Haworth on the Yorkshire moors. Otherwise she attended a boarding school in Mirfield between 1836 and 1837, and between 1839 and 1845 lived elsewhere working as a governess. In 1846 she published a book of poems with her sisters and later two novels, initially under the pen name Acton Bell. Her first novel, \"Agnes Grey\", was published in 1847 with \"Wuthering Heights\". Her second novel, \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\", was published in 1848. \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" is thought to be one of the first sustained feminist novels.\nAnne died at 29, probably of pulmonary tuberculosis. After Anne's death her sister Charlotte edited \"Agnes Grey\" to fix issues with its first edition, but prevented republication of \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\". This is one reason why Anne is not as well known as her sisters. Nonetheless both of Anne's novels are considered classics of English literature.\nFamily background.\nAnne's father was Patrick Bront\u00eb (1777\u20131861). Patrick Bront\u00eb was born in a two-room cottage in Emdale, Loughbrickland, County Down, Ireland. He was the oldest of ten children born to Hugh Brunty and Eleanor McCrory, poor Irish peasant farmers. The family surname, \"mac Aedh \u00d3 Proinntigh\", was Anglicised as Prunty or Brunty. Struggling against poverty, Patrick learned to read and write, and from 1798 taught others. In 1802, at 25, he won a place to study theology at St. John's College, Cambridge. Here he changed his name, Brunty, to the more distinguished sounding Bront\u00eb. In 1807 he was ordained in the priesthood in the Church of England. He served as a curate in Essex and then in Wellington, Shropshire. In 1810 he published his first poem, \"Winter Evening Thoughts\", in a local newspaper. In 1811 he published a collection of moral verse, \"Cottage Poems\". Also in 1811 he became vicar of St. Peter's Church in Hartshead, Yorkshire. In 1812 he was appointed an examiner in Classics at Woodhouse Grove School, near Bradford. This was a Wesleyan academy where, at 35, he met his future wife, the headmaster's niece, Maria Branwell.\nMaria Branwell (1783\u20131821), Anne's mother, was the daughter of Anne Carne, the daughter of a silversmith, and Thomas Branwell, a successful and property-owning grocer and tea merchant in Penzance. Maria was the eleventh of twelve children and enjoyed the benefits of a prosperous family in a small town. After the death of her parents, Maria went to help her aunt with housekeeping functions at the school. Maria was intelligent and well read, and her strong Methodist faith attracted Patrick Bront\u00eb, whose own leanings were similar.\nWithin three months, on 29 December 1812, though from considerably different backgrounds, Patrick Bront\u00eb and Maria Branwell were married. Their first child, Maria (1814\u20131825), was born after they moved to Hartshead. In 1815 Patrick was appointed curate of the chapel in Market Street Thornton, near Bradford. A second daughter, Elizabeth (1815\u20131825), was born shortly after. Four more children followed: Charlotte (1816\u20131855), Patrick Branwell (1817\u20131848), Emily (1818\u20131848), and Anne (1820\u20131849).\nEarly life.\nAnne was the youngest of the Bront\u00eb children. She was born on 17 January 1820 on the outskirts of Bradford. Her father, Patrick, was curate there. Anne was baptised there on 25 March 1820. Later Patrick was appointed to the perpetual curacy in Haworth, a small town away. In April 1820 the family moved into the five-roomed Haworth Parsonage.\nWhen Anne was barely a year old her mother, Maria, became ill, probably with uterine cancer. Maria Branwell died on 15 September 1821. Patrick tried to remarry, without success. Maria's sister, Elizabeth Branwell (1776\u20131842), had moved to the parsonage initially for Maria, but spent the rest of her life there raising Maria's children. She did it from a sense of duty. She was stern and expected respect, not love. There was little affection between her and the older children. According to tradition Anne was her favourite.\nIn Elizabeth Gaskell's biography of Charlotte, Patrick remembered Anne as precocious. Patrick said that when Anne was four years old he had asked her what a child most wanted and that she had said: \"age and experience\".\nIn summer 1824 Patrick sent daughters Maria, Elizabeth, Charlotte, and Emily to Crofton Hall in Crofton, West Yorkshire, and subsequently to the Clergy Daughter's School at Cowan Bridge in Lancashire. Maria and Elizabeth Bront\u00eb died of consumption on 6 May and 15 June 1825 respectively, and Charlotte and Emily were brought home. The unexpected deaths distressed the family so much that Patrick could not face sending them away again. They were educated at home for the next five years, largely by Elizabeth Branwell and Patrick. The children made little attempt to mix with others outside the parsonage and relied on each other for company. The bleak moors surrounding Haworth became their playground. Anne shared a room with her aunt, Elizabeth. They were close, and she may have influenced Anne's personality and religious beliefs.\nEducation.\nAnne's studies at home included music and drawing. The Keighley church organist gave piano lessons to Anne and Emily and Branwell, and John Bradley of Keighley gave them art lessons. Each drew with some skill. Their aunt tried to teach the girls how to run a household, but they inclined more to literature. They read much from their father's well-stocked library. Their reading included the Bible, Homer, Virgil, Shakespeare, Milton, Byron, Scott, articles from Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine and Fraser's Magazine and The Edinburgh Review, and miscellaneous books of history and geography and biography.\nTheir reading fed their imaginations, and their creativity soared after their father gave Branwell a set of toy soldiers in June 1826. They gave names to the soldiers, or the \"Twelves\", and developed their characters. This led to the creation of an imaginary world: the African kingdom of \"Angria\", which was illustrated with maps and watercolour renderings. The children devised plots about the inhabitants of Angria and its capital city, \"Glass Town\", later called Verreopolis or Verdopolis.\nTheir fantastical worlds and kingdoms gradually acquired characteristics from their historical world, drawing from its sovereigns, armies, heroes, outlaws, fugitives, inns, schools, and publishers. The characters and lands created by the children were given newspapers and magazines and chronicles written in tiny books with writing so small that it was difficult to read without a magnifying glass. These creations and writings were an apprenticeship for their later literary talents.\nJuvenilia.\nAround 1831, when Anne was eleven, she and Emily broke away from Charlotte and Branwell to create and develop their own fantasy world, \"Gondal\". Anne and Emily were particularly close, especially after Charlotte left for Roe Head School in January 1831. Charlotte's friend Ellen Nussey visited Haworth in 1833 and reported that Emily and Anne were \"like twins\" and \"inseparable companions\". She described Anne so:\nAnne took lessons from Charlotte after Charlotte had returned from Roe Head. Charlotte returned to Roe Head as a teacher on 29 July 1835, accompanied by Emily as a pupil. Emily's tuition was largely financed by Charlotte's teaching. Emily was unable to adapt to life at school and was physically ill from homesickness within a few months. She was withdrawn from school by October and replaced by Anne.\nAnne was 15 and it was her first time away from home. She made few friends at Roe Head. She was quiet and hardworking and determined to stay to acquire the education which she would need to support herself. She stayed for two years and returned home only during Christmas and summer holidays. She won a good-conduct medal in December 1836. Charlotte's letters almost never mention Anne while Anne was at Roe Head, which might imply that they were not close, but Charlotte was at least concerned about Anne's health. By December 1837 Anne had become seriously ill with gastritis and embroiled in religious crisis. A Moravian minister was called to see her several times during her illness, suggesting her distress was caused, in part, by conflict with the local Anglican clergy. Charlotte wrote to their father and he brought Anne home.\nEmployment at Blake Hall.\nA year after leaving the school, and aged 19, Anne was seeking a teaching position. She was the daughter of a poor clergyman and needed to earn money. Her father had no private income and the parsonage would revert to the church on his death. Teaching or working as a governess were among few options for a poor and educated woman. In April 1839 Anne started work as a governess for the Ingham family at Blake Hall, near Mirfield.\nThe children in her charge were spoiled and disobedient. Anne had great difficulty controlling them and little success in educating them. She was not allowed to punish them, and when she complained about their behaviour she received no support and was criticised for being incapable. The Inghams were dissatisfied with their children's progress and dismissed Anne. She returned home in 1839 at Christmas. At home also were Charlotte and Emily, who had left their positions, and Branwell. Anne's time at Blake Hall was so traumatic that she reproduced it in almost perfect detail in her novel \"Agnes Grey\".\nWilliam Weightman.\nAnne returned to Haworth and met William Weightman (1814\u20131842), her father's new curate who had started work in the parish in August 1839. Weightman was 25 and had obtained a two-year licentiate in theology from the University of Durham. He was welcome at the parsonage. Anne's acquaintance with him parallels her writing a number of poems, which may suggest she fell in love with him although there is disagreement over this possibility. Little evidence exists beyond a teasing anecdote of Charlotte's to Ellen Nussey in January 1842.\nIn \"Agnes Grey\" Agnes' interest in the curate refreshes her interest in poetry. Outside fiction William Weightman aroused much curiosity. It seems that he was good-looking and engaging, and that his easy humour and kindness towards the sisters made an impression. It is such a character that she portrays in Edward Weston, and that her heroine Agnes Grey finds deeply appealing.\nWeightman died of cholera in the same year. Anne expressed her grief for his death in her poem \"I will not mourn thee, lovely one\", in which she called him \"our darling\".\nGoverness.\nFrom 1840 to 1845 Anne worked at Thorp Green Hall, a comfortable country house near York. Here she was governess to the children of the Reverend Edmund Robinson and his wife, Lydia. The house appeared as Horton Lodge in \"Agnes Grey\". Anne had four pupils: Lydia (15), Elizabeth (13), Mary (12), and Edmund (8). She initially had problems similar to those at Blake Hall. Anne missed her home and family. In a diary paper in 1841 she wrote that she did not like her situation and wished to leave it. Her quiet and gentle disposition did not help. But Anne was determined and made a success of her position, becoming well-liked by her employers. Her charges, the Robinson girls, became lifelong friends.\nAnne spent only five or six weeks a year with her family, during holidays at Christmas and in June. The rest of her time was spent with the Robinsons. She accompanied the Robinsons on annual holidays to Scarborough. Between 1840 and 1844 Anne spent around five weeks each summer at the coastal town and loved it. A number of locations in Scarborough were used for her novels.\nAnne and her sisters considered setting up a school while she was still working for the Robinsons. Various locations were considered, including the parsonage, but the project never materialised. Anne came home on the death of her aunt in early November 1842 while her sisters were in Brussels. Elizabeth Branwell left a \u00a3350 legacy (equivalent to \u00a3 in ) for each of her nieces.\nIt was at the Long Plantation at Thorp Green in 1842 that Anne wrote her three-verse poem \"Lines Composed in a Wood on a Windy Day\", which was published in 1846 under the name Acton Bell.\nIn January 1843 Anne returned to Thorp Green and secured a position for Branwell. He was to tutor Edmund, who was growing too old to be in Anne's care. Branwell did not live in the house as Anne did. Anne's vaunted calm appears to have been the result of hard-fought battles, balancing deeply felt emotions with careful thought, a sense of responsibility and resolute determination. All three Bront\u00eb sisters worked as governesses or teachers, and all experienced problems controlling their charges, gaining support from their employers, and coping with homesickness, but Anne was the only one who persevered and made a success of her work.\nBack at the parsonage.\nAnne and Branwell taught at Thorp Green for the next three years. Branwell entered into a secret relationship with his employer's wife, Lydia Robinson. When Anne and Branwell returned home for the holidays in June 1846 Anne resigned. Anne gave no reason, but the reason may have been the relationship between her brother and Mrs Robinson. Branwell was dismissed when his employer found out about the relationship. Anne continued to exchange letters with Elizabeth and Mary Robinson. They came to visit Anne in December 1848.\nAnne took Emily to visit some of the places which Anne had become fond of. A plan to visit Scarborough fell through, but they went to York and saw York Minster.\nA book of poems.\nThe Bront\u00ebs were at home with their father during the summer of 1845. None had any immediate prospect of employment. Charlotte found Emily's poems, which had been shared only with Anne. Charlotte said that they should be published. Anne showed her own poems to Charlotte, and Charlotte \"thought that these verses too had a sweet sincere pathos of their own\". The sisters eventually reached an agreement. They told nobody what they were doing. With the money from Elizabeth Branwell they paid for publication of a collection of poems, 21 from Anne and 21 from Emily and 19 from Charlotte.\nThe book was published under pen names which retained their initials but concealed their sex. Anne's pseudonym was Acton Bell. \"Poems by Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell\" was available for sale in May 1846. The cost of publication was about three-quarters of Anne's salary at Thorp Green. On 7 May 1846 the first three copies were delivered to Haworth Parsonage. The book achieved three somewhat favourable reviews, but was a commercial failure, with only two copies sold in the first year. Anne nonetheless found a market for her later poetry. The \"Leeds Intelligencer\" and \"Fraser's Magazine\" published her poem \"The Narrow Way\" under her pseudonym in December 1848. Four months earlier, Fraser's Magazine had published her poem \"The Three Guides\".\nNovels.\n\"Agnes Grey\".\nBy July 1846 a package containing the manuscripts of each sister's first novel was making the rounds of London publishers. Charlotte had written \"The Professor\", Emily had written \"Wuthering Heights\", and Anne had written \"Agnes Grey\". \nAfter some rejections \"Wuthering Heights\" and \"Agnes Grey\" were accepted by the publisher Thomas Cautley Newby. \"The Professor\" was rejected. It was not long before Charlotte had completed her second novel, \"Jane Eyre\". \"Jane Eyre\" was accepted immediately by Smith, Elder &amp; Co.. It was the first published of the sisters' novels, and an immediate and resounding success. Meanwhile Anne and Emily's novels \"lingered in the press\". Anne and Emily were obliged to pay fifty pounds to help meet their publishing costs. Their publisher was galvanised by the success of \"Jane Eyre\" and published \"Wuthering Heights\" and \"Agnes Grey\" together in December 1847. They sold well, but \"Agnes Grey\" was outshone by Emily's more dramatic \"Wuthering Heights\".\n\"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\".\n Anne's second novel, \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\", was published in the last week of June 1848. \nIt is easy to underestimate the extent to which the novel challenged the social and legal structures. In 1913 May Sinclair said that the slamming of Helen Huntingdon's bedroom door against her husband reverberated throughout Victorian England. \nIn the book Helen has left her husband to protect their son from his influence. She supports herself and her son in hiding by painting. She has violated social conventions and English law. Until the Married Women's Property Act 1870 was passed, a married woman had no legal existence independent from her husband and could not own property nor sue for divorce nor control the custody of her children. Helen's husband had a right to reclaim her and charge her with kidnapping. By subsisting on her own income she was stealing her husband's property since this income was legally his.\nAnne stated her intentions in the second edition, published in August 1848. She presented a forceful rebuttal to critics (among them Charlotte) who considered her portrayal of Huntingdon overly graphic and disturbing. Anne \"wished to tell the truth\". She explained further that\nAnne also castigated reviewers who speculated on the sex of authors and the perceived appropriateness of their writing. She was\nLondon visit.\nIn July 1848 Anne and Charlotte went to Charlotte's publisher George Smith in London to dispel the rumour that the \"Bell brothers\" were one person. Emily refused to go. Anne and Charlotte spent several days with Smith. Many years after Anne's death, he wrote in the Cornhill Magazine his impressions of her:\nThe increasing popularity of the Bells' works led to renewed interest in \"Poems by Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell\", originally published by Aylott and Jones. The remaining print run was bought by Smith and Elder, and reissued under new covers in November 1848. It still sold poorly.\nFamily tragedies.\nBranwell's persistent drunkenness disguised the decline of his health and he died on 24 September 1848. His sudden death shocked the family. He was 31. The cause was recorded as chronic bronchitismarasmus, but was probably tuberculosis.\nThe family suffered from coughs and colds during the winter of 1848, and Emily became very ill. She worsened over two months and rejected medical aid until the morning of 19 December. She was very weak and said that \"if you will send for a doctor, I will see him now\". But Emily died at about two o'clock that afternoon, aged 30.\nEmily's death deeply affected Anne. Her grief undermined her physical health. Over Christmas Anne had influenza. Her symptoms intensified and in early January her father sent for a Leeds physician. The doctor diagnosed advanced consumption with little hope of recovery. Anne met the news with characteristic determination and self-control. However, in her letter to Ellen Nussey she expressed her frustrated ambitions:\nUnlike Emily, Anne took all the recommended medicines and followed the advice she was given. That same month she wrote her last poem, \"A dreadful darkness closes in\", in which she deals with being terminally ill. Her health fluctuated for months, but she grew thinner and weaker.\nDeath.\nAnne seemed somewhat better in February. She decided to visit Scarborough to see if the change of location and the fresh sea air might benefit her. Charlotte was initially against the journey, fearing that it would be too stressful, but changed her mind after the doctor's approval and Anne's assurance that it was her last hope. \nOn 24 May 1849 Anne set off for Scarborough with Charlotte and Ellen Nussey. They spent a day and night in York en route. Here they escorted Anne in a wheelchair and did some shopping and visited York Minster. It was clear that Anne had little strength left.\nOn Sunday 27 May Anne asked Charlotte whether it would be easier to return home and die instead of remaining in Scarborough. A doctor was consulted the next day and said that death was close. Anne received the news quietly. She expressed her love and concern for Ellen and Charlotte, and whispered for Charlotte to \"take courage\". Anne died at about two o'clock in the afternoon on Monday 28 May 1849, aged 29.\nCharlotte decided to \"lay the flower where it had fallen\". So Anne was buried in Scarborough. The funeral was held on 30 May. Patrick Bront\u00eb could not have made the journey if he had wished to. The former schoolmistress at Roe Head, Miss Wooler, was in Scarborough, and she was the only other mourner at Anne's funeral. Anne was buried in St Mary's churchyard, beneath the castle walls and overlooking the bay. Charlotte commissioned a stone to be placed over her grave with the inscription, When Charlotte visited the grave three years later she discovered multiple errors on the headstone and had it refaced. But this was not free of error. For Anne was 29 when she died, not 28 as written.\nIn 2011 the Bront\u00eb Society installed a new plaque at Anne Bront\u00eb's grave. The original gravestone had become illegible at places and could not be restored. It was left undisturbed while the new plaque was laid horizontally, interpreting the fading words of the original and correcting its error. In April 2013 the Bront\u00eb Society held a dedication and blessing service at the gravesite to mark the installation of the new plaque.\nReputation.\nAfter Anne's death Charlotte addressed issues with the first edition of \"Agnes Grey\" for its republication, but she prevented republication of \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\". In 1850 Charlotte wrote that Subsequent critics paid less attention to Anne's work and some dismissed her as \"a Bront\u00eb without genius\".\nBut since the mid-20th century her life and works have been given better attention. Biographies by Winifred G\u00e9rin (1959) and Elizabeth Langland (1989) and Edward Chitham (1991), as well as Juliet Barker's group biography, \"The Bront\u00ebs\" (1994; revised edition 2000), and work by critics such as Inga-Stina Ewbank, Marianne Thorm\u00e4hlen, Laura C Berry, Jan B Gordon, Mary Summers, and Juliet McMaster has led to acceptance of Anne Bront\u00eb as a major literary figure. Sally McDonald of the Bront\u00eb Society said in 2013 that in some ways Anne \"is now viewed as the most radical of the sisters, writing about tough subjects such as women's need to maintain independence and how alcoholism can tear a family apart.\" In 2016 Lucy Mangan championed Anne Bront\u00eb in the BBC's \"Being the Bront\u00ebs\", declaring that \"her time has come\"."}
{"id": "2030", "revid": "16947235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2030", "title": "Augustine of Hippo", "text": "Augustine of Hippo (; ; 13 November 354 \u2013 28 August 430), also known as Saint Augustine, was a theologian, philosopher, and the bishop of Hippo Regius in Numidia, Roman North Africa. His writings influenced the development of Western philosophy and Western Christianity, and he is viewed as one of the most important Church Fathers of the Latin Church in the Patristic Period. His many important works include \"The City of God\", \"On Christian Doctrine\", and \"Confessions\".\nAccording to his contemporary, Jerome, Augustine \"established anew the ancient Faith\". In his youth he was drawn to the major Persian religion, Manichaeism, and later to Neoplatonism. After his conversion to Christianity and baptism in 386, Augustine developed his own approach to philosophy and theology, accommodating a variety of methods and perspectives. Believing the grace of Christ was indispensable to human freedom, he helped formulate the doctrine of original sin and made significant contributions to the development of just war theory. When the Western Roman Empire began to disintegrate, Augustine imagined the Church as a spiritual City of God, distinct from the material Earthly City. His thoughts profoundly influenced the medieval worldview. The segment of the Church that adhered to the concept of the Trinity as defined by the Council of Nicaea and the Council of Constantinople closely identified with Augustine's \"On the Trinity\".\nAugustine is recognized as a saint in the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, and the Anglican Communion. He is also a preeminent Catholic Doctor of the Church and the patron of the Augustinians. His memorial is celebrated on 28 August, the day of his death. Augustine is the patron saint of brewers, printers, theologians, and a number of cities and dioceses. Many Protestants, especially Calvinists and Lutherans, consider him one of the theological fathers of the Protestant Reformation due to his teachings on salvation and divine grace. Protestant Reformers generally, and Martin Luther in particular, held Augustine in preeminence among early Church Fathers. Luther was, from 1505 to 1521, a member of the Order of the Augustinian Eremites.\nIn the East, his teachings are more disputed and were notably attacked by John Romanides. But other theologians and figures of the Eastern Orthodox Church have shown significant approbation of his writings, chiefly Georges Florovsky. The most controversial doctrine associated with him, the filioque, was rejected by the Orthodox Church. Other disputed teachings include his views on original sin, the doctrine of grace, and predestination. Nevertheless, though considered to be mistaken on some points, he is still considered a saint and has influenced some Eastern Church Fathers, most notably Gregory Palamas. In the Orthodox Church his feast day is celebrated on 15 June. The historian Diarmaid MacCulloch has written: \"Augustine's impact on Western Christian thought can hardly be overstated; only his beloved example, Paul of Tarsus, has been more influential, and Westerners have generally seen Paul through Augustine's eyes.\"\nLife.\nBackground.\nAugustine of Hippo (, , or ; ; 13 November 354 \u2013 28 August 430), also known as \"Saint Augustine\" or \"Saint Austin\", is known by various cognomens throughout the many denominations of the Christian world, including \"Blessed Augustine\" and the \"Doctor of Grace\" ().\nHippo Regius, where Augustine was the bishop, was in modern-day Annaba, Algeria.\nChildhood and education.\nAugustine was born in 354 in the municipium of Thagaste (now Souk Ahras, Algeria) in the Roman province of Numidia. His mother, Monica or Monnica, was a devout Christian; his father Patricius was a pagan who converted to Christianity on his deathbed. He had a brother named Navigius and a sister whose name is lost but is conventionally remembered as Perpetua.\nScholars generally agree Augustine and his family were Berbers, an ethnic group indigenous to North Africa, but were heavily Romanized, speaking only Latin at home as a matter of pride and dignity. In his writings, Augustine leaves some information as to the consciousness of his African heritage. For example, he refers to Apuleius as \"the most notorious of us Africans,\" to Ponticianus as \"a country man of ours, insofar as being African,\" and to Faustus of Mileve as \"an African Gentleman\".\nAugustine's family name, Aurelius, suggests his father's ancestors were freedmen of the \"gens Aurelia\" given full Roman citizenship by the Edict of Caracalla in 212. Augustine's family had been Roman, from a legal standpoint, for at least a century when he was born. It is assumed his mother, Monica, was of Berber origin, on the basis of her name, but as his family were \"honestiores\", an upper class of citizens known as honorable men, Augustine's first language was likely Latin.\nAt the age of 11, Augustine was sent to school at Madaurus (now M'Daourouch), a small Numidian city about south of Thagaste. There he became familiar with Latin literature, as well as pagan beliefs and practices. His first insight into the nature of sin occurred when he and a number of friends stole fruit they did not want from a neighborhood garden. He tells this story in his autobiography, \"The Confessions\". He remembers he stole the fruit, not because he was hungry, but because \"it was not permitted.\" His very nature, he says, was flawed. 'It was foul, and I loved it. I loved my own error\u2014not that for which I erred, but the error itself.\" From this incident he concluded the human person is naturally inclined to sin, and in need of the grace of Christ.\nAt the age of 17, through the generosity of his fellow citizen Romanianus, Augustine went to Carthage to continue his education in rhetoric, though it was above the financial means of his family. In spite of the good warnings of his mother, as a youth Augustine lived a hedonistic lifestyle for a time, associating with young men who boasted of their sexual exploits. The need to gain their acceptance forced inexperienced boys like Augustine to seek or make up stories about sexual experiences.\nIt was while he was a student in Carthage that he read Cicero's dialogue \"Hortensius\" (now lost), which he described as leaving a lasting impression, enkindling in his heart the love of wisdom and a great thirst for truth. It started his interest in philosophy. Although raised Catholic, Augustine became a Manichaean, much to his mother's chagrin.\nAt about the age of 17, Augustine began a relationship with a young woman in Carthage. Though his mother wanted him to marry a person of his class, the woman remained his lover for over fifteen years and gave birth to his son Adeodatus (372\u2013388), which means \"Gift from God\", who was viewed as extremely intelligent by his contemporaries. In 385, Augustine ended his relationship with his lover in order to prepare to marry a ten-year-old heiress. (He had to wait for two years because the legal age of marriage for women was twelve.) By the time he was able to marry her, however, he had decided to become a Catholic priest and the marriage did not happen.\nAugustine was from the beginning a brilliant student, with an eager intellectual curiosity, but he never mastered Greek \u2013 he tells us his first Greek teacher was a brutal man who constantly beat his students, and Augustine rebelled and refused to study. By the time he realized he needed to know Greek, it was too late; and although he acquired a smattering of the language, he was never eloquent with it. However, his mastery of Latin was another matter. He became an expert both in the eloquent use of the language and in the use of clever arguments to make his points.\nMove to Carthage, Rome, and Milan.\nAugustine taught grammar at Thagaste during 373 and 374. The following year he moved to Carthage to conduct a school of rhetoric and remained there for the next nine years. Disturbed by unruly students in Carthage, he moved to establish a school in Rome, where he believed the best and brightest rhetoricians practiced, in 383. However, Augustine was disappointed with the apathetic reception. It was the custom for students to pay their fees to the professor on the last day of the term, and many students attended faithfully all term, and then did not pay.\nManichaean friends introduced him to the prefect of the City of Rome, Symmachus, who had been asked by the imperial court at Milan to provide a rhetoric professor. Augustine won the job and headed north to take his position in Milan in late 384. Thirty years old, he had won the most visible academic position in the Latin world at a time when such posts gave ready access to political careers.\nAlthough Augustine spent ten years as a Manichaean, he was never an initiate or \"elect\", but an \"auditor\", the lowest level in this religion's hierarchy. While still at Carthage a disappointing meeting with the Manichaean Bishop, Faustus of Mileve, a key exponent of Manichaean theology, started Augustine's scepticism of Manichaeanism. In Rome, he reportedly turned away from Manichaeanism, embracing the scepticism of the New Academy movement. Because of his education, Augustine had great rhetorical prowess and was very knowledgeable of the philosophies behind many faiths. At Milan, his mother's religiosity, Augustine's own studies in Neoplatonism, and his friend Simplicianus all urged him towards Catholicism. Not coincidentally, this was shortly after the Roman emperor Theodosius I had issued a decree of death for all Manichaean monks in 382 and shortly before he declared Christianity to be the only legitimate religion for the Roman Empire in 391. Initially Augustine was not strongly influenced by Christianity and its ideologies, but after coming in contact with Ambrose of Milan, Augustine reevaluated himself and was forever changed.\nAugustine arrived in Milan and visited Ambrose, having heard of his reputation as an orator. Like Augustine, Ambrose was a master of rhetoric, but older and more experienced. Soon, their relationship grew, as Augustine wrote, \"And I began to love him, of course, not at the first as a teacher of the truth, for I had entirely despaired of finding that in thy Church\u2014but as a friendly man.\" Eventually, Augustine says he was spiritually led into Catholicism. Augustine was very much influenced by Ambrose, even more than by his own mother and others he admired. In his \"Confessions\", Augustine states, \"That man of God received me as a father would, and welcomed my coming as a good bishop should.\" Ambrose adopted Augustine as a spiritual son after the death of Augustine's father.\nAugustine's mother had followed him to Milan and arranged a respectable marriage for him. Although Augustine acquiesced, he had to dismiss his concubine and grieved for having forsaken his lover. He wrote, \"My mistress being torn from my side as an impediment to my marriage, my heart, which clave to her, was racked, and wounded, and bleeding.\" Augustine confessed he had not been a lover of wedlock so much as a slave of lust, so he procured another concubine since he had to wait two years until his fianc\u00e9e came of age. However, his emotional wound was not healed. It was during this period that he uttered his famously insincere prayer, \"Grant me chastity and continence, but not yet.\"\nThere is evidence Augustine may have considered this former relationship to be equivalent to marriage. In his \"Confessions\", he admitted the experience eventually produced a decreased sensitivity to pain. Augustine eventually broke off his engagement to his eleven-year-old fianc\u00e9e, but never renewed his relationship with either of his concubines. Alypius of Thagaste steered Augustine away from marriage, saying they could not live a life together in the love of wisdom if he married. Augustine looked back years later on the life at Cassiciacum, a villa outside of Milan where he gathered with his followers, and described it as \"Christianae vitae otium\" \u2013 the leisure of Christian life.\nConversion to Christianity and priesthood.\nIn late August of 386, at the age of 31, having heard of Ponticianus's and his friends' first reading of the life of Anthony of the Desert, Augustine converted to Christianity. As Augustine later told it, his conversion was prompted by hearing a child's voice say \"take up and read\" (). Resorting to the Sortes Sanctorum, he opened a book of St. Paul's writings (codex apostoli, 8.12.29) at random and read Romans 13: 13\u201314: \"Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.\"\nHe later wrote an account of his conversion in his \"Confessions\" (), which has since become a classic of Christian theology and a key text in the history of autobiography. This work is an outpouring of thanksgiving and penitence. Although it is written as an account of his life, the \"Confessions\" also talks about the nature of time, causality, free will, and other important philosophical topics. The following is taken from that work:\nAmbrose baptized Augustine and his son Adeodatus, in Milan on Easter Vigil, 24\u201325 April 387. A year later, in 388, Augustine completed his apology \"On the Holiness of the Catholic Church\". That year, also, Adeodatus and Augustine returned home to Africa. Augustine's mother Monica died at Ostia, Italy, as they prepared to embark for Africa. Upon their arrival, they began a life of aristocratic leisure at Augustine's family's property. Soon after, Adeodatus, too, died. Augustine then sold his patrimony and gave the money to the poor. He only kept the family house, which he converted into a monastic foundation for himself and a group of friends.\nIn 391 Augustine was ordained a priest in Hippo Regius (now Annaba), in Algeria. He became a famous preacher (more than 350 preserved sermons are believed to be authentic), and was noted for combating the Manichaean religion, to which he had formerly adhered.\nIn 395, he was made coadjutor Bishop of Hippo and became full Bishop shortly thereafter, hence the name \"Augustine of Hippo\"; and he gave his property to the church of Thagaste. He remained in that position until his death in 430. He wrote his autobiographical \"Confessions\" in 397\u2013398. His work \"The City of God\" was written to console his fellow Christians shortly after the Visigoths had sacked Rome in 410. Augustine worked tirelessly to convince the people of Hippo to convert to Christianity. Though he had left his monastery, he continued to lead a monastic life in the episcopal residence.\nMuch of Augustine's later life was recorded by his friend Possidius, bishop of Calama (present-day Guelma, Algeria), in his \"Sancti Augustini Vita\". Possidius admired Augustine as a man of powerful intellect and a stirring orator who took every opportunity to defend Christianity against its detractors. Possidius also described Augustine's personal traits in detail, drawing a portrait of a man who ate sparingly, worked tirelessly, despised gossip, shunned the temptations of the flesh, and exercised prudence in the financial stewardship of his see.\nDeath and sainthood.\nShortly before Augustine's death, the Vandals, a Germanic tribe that had converted to Arianism, invaded Roman Africa. The Vandals besieged Hippo in the spring of 430, when Augustine entered his final illness. According to Possidius, one of the few miracles attributed to Augustine, the healing of an ill man, took place during the siege. According to Possidius, Augustine spent his final days in prayer and repentance, requesting the penitential Psalms of David be hung on his walls so he could read them. He directed the library of the church in Hippo and all the books therein should be carefully preserved. He died on 28 August 430. Shortly after his death, the Vandals lifted the siege of Hippo, but they returned soon after and burned the city. They destroyed all but Augustine's cathedral and library, which they left untouched.\nAugustine was canonized by popular acclaim, and later recognized as a Doctor of the Church in 1298 by Pope Boniface VIII. His feast day is 28 August, the day on which he died. He is considered the patron saint of brewers, printers, theologians, and a number of cities and dioceses. He is invoked against sore eyes.\nRelics.\nAccording to Bede's \"True Martyrology\", Augustine's body was later translated or moved to Cagliari, Sardinia, by the Catholic bishops expelled from North Africa by Huneric. Around 720, his remains were transported again by Peter, bishop of Pavia and uncle of the Lombard king Liutprand, to the church of San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro in Pavia, in order to save them from frequent coastal raids by Saracens. In January 1327, Pope John XXII issued the papal bull \"Veneranda Santorum Patrum\", in which he appointed the Augustinians guardians of the tomb of Augustine (called \"Arca\"), which was remade in 1362 and elaborately carved with bas-reliefs of scenes from Augustine's life.\nIn October 1695, some workmen in the Church of San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro in Pavia discovered a marble box containing human bones (including part of a skull). A dispute arose between the Augustinian hermits (Order of Saint Augustine) and the regular canons (Canons Regular of Saint Augustine) as to whether these were the bones of Augustine. The hermits did not believe so; the canons affirmed they were. Eventually Pope Benedict XIII (1724\u20131730) directed the Bishop of Pavia, Monsignor Pertusati, to make a determination. The bishop declared that, in his opinion, the bones were those of Saint Augustine.\nThe Augustinians were expelled from Pavia in 1700, taking refuge in Milan with the relics of Augustine, and the disassembled \"Arca\", which were removed to the cathedral there. San Pietro fell into disrepair, but was finally rebuilt in the 1870s, under the urging of Agostino Gaetano Riboldi, and reconsecrated in 1896 when the relics of Augustine and the shrine were once again reinstalled.\nIn 1842, a portion of Augustine's right arm (cubitus) was secured from Pavia and returned to Annaba. It now rests in the Saint Augustin Basilica within a glass tube inserted into the arm of a life-size marble statue of the saint.\nViews and thought.\nAugustine's large contribution of writings covered diverse fields including theology, philosophy and sociology. Along with John Chrysostom, Augustine was among the most prolific scholars of the early church by quantity.\nTheology.\nChristian anthropology.\nAugustine was one of the first Christian ancient Latin authors with a very clear vision of theological anthropology. He saw the human being as a perfect unity of soul and body. In his late treatise \"\" (420) he exhorted respect for the body on the grounds it belonged to the very nature of the human person. Augustine's favourite figure to describe \"body-soul\" unity is marriage: \"caro tua, coniunx tua \u2013 your body is your wife\".\nInitially, the two elements were in perfect harmony. After the fall of humanity they are now experiencing dramatic combat between one another. They are two categorically different things. The body is a three-dimensional object composed of the four elements, whereas the soul has no spatial dimensions. Soul is a kind of substance, participating in reason, fit for ruling the body.\nAugustine was not preoccupied, as Plato and Descartes were, in detailed efforts to explain the metaphysics of the soul-body union. It sufficed for him to admit they are metaphysically distinct: to be a human is to be a composite of soul and body, with the soul superior to the body. The latter statement is grounded in his hierarchical classification of things into those that merely exist, those that exist and live, and those that exist, live, and have intelligence or reason.\nLike other Church Fathers such as Athenagoras, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria and Basil of Caesarea, Augustine \"vigorously condemned the practice of induced abortion\", and although he disapproved of an abortion during any stage of pregnancy, he made a distinction between early and later abortions. He acknowledged the distinction between \"formed\" and \"unformed\" fetuses mentioned in the Septuagint translation of , which incorrectly translates the word \"harm\" (from the original Hebrew text) as \"form\" in the Koine Greek of the Septuagint. His view was based on the Aristotelian distinction \"between the fetus before and after its supposed 'vivification'\". Therefore, he did not classify as murder the abortion of an \"unformed\" fetus since he thought it could not be known with certainty the fetus had received a soul.\nAugustine held that \"the timing of the infusion of the soul was a mystery known to God alone\". However, he considered procreation as one of the goods of marriage; abortion figured as a means, along with drugs that cause sterility, of frustrating this good. It lay along a continuum that included infanticide as an instance of 'lustful cruelty' or 'cruel lust.' Augustine called the use of means to avoid the birth of a child an 'evil work:\u2019 a reference to either abortion or contraception or both.\"\nCreation.\nIn \"City of God\", Augustine rejected both the contemporary ideas of ages (such as those of certain Greeks and Egyptians) that differed from the Church's sacred writings. In \"The Literal Interpretation of Genesis\" Augustine argued God had created everything in the universe simultaneously and not over a period of six days. He argued the six-day structure of creation presented in the Book of Genesis represents a logical framework, rather than the passage of time in a physical way \u2013 it would bear a spiritual, rather than physical, meaning, which is no less literal. One reason for this interpretation is the passage in Sirach\u00a018:1, \"creavit omnia simul\" (\"He created all things at once\"), which Augustine took as proof the days of Genesis\u00a01 had to be taken non-literalistically. As an additional support for describing the six days of creation as a heuristic device, Augustine thought the actual event of creation would be incomprehensible by humans and therefore needed to be translated.\nAugustine also does not envision original sin as causing structural changes in the universe, and even suggests the bodies of Adam and Eve were already created mortal before the Fall.\nEcclesiology.\nAugustine developed his doctrine of the Church principally in reaction to the Donatist sect. He taught there is one Church, but within this Church there are two realities, namely, the visible aspect (the institutional hierarchy, the Catholic sacraments, and the laity) and the invisible (the souls of those in the Church, who are either dead, sinful members or elect predestined for Heaven). The former is the institutional body established by Christ on earth which proclaims salvation and administers the sacraments, while the latter is the invisible body of the elect, made up of genuine believers from all ages, and who are known only to God. The Church, which is visible and societal, will be made up of \"wheat\" and \"tares\", that is, good and wicked people (as per Mat. 13:30), until the end of time. This concept countered the Donatist claim that only those in a state of grace were the \"true\" or \"pure\" church on earth, and that priests and bishops who were not in a state of grace had no authority or ability to confect the sacraments.\nAugustine's ecclesiology was more fully developed in \"City of God\". There he conceives of the church as a heavenly city or kingdom, ruled by love, which will ultimately triumph over all earthly empires which are self-indulgent and ruled by pride. Augustine followed Cyprian in teaching that bishops and priests of the Church are the successors of the Apostles, and their authority in the Church is God-given.\nEschatology.\nAugustine originally believed in premillennialism, namely that Christ would establish a literal 1,000-year kingdom prior to the general resurrection, but later rejected the belief, viewing it as carnal. He was the first theologian to expound a systematic doctrine of amillennialism, although some theologians and Christian historians believe his position was closer to that of modern postmillennialists. The Catholic Church during the Medieval period built its system of eschatology on Augustinian amillennialism, where Christ rules the earth spiritually through his triumphant church.\nDuring the Reformation theologians such as John Calvin accepted amillennialism. Augustine taught that the eternal fate of the soul is determined at death, and that purgatorial fires of the intermediate state purify only those who died in communion with the Church. His teaching provided fuel for later theology.\nMariology.\nAlthough Augustine did not develop an independent Mariology, his statements on Mary surpass in number and depth those of other early writers. Even before the Council of Ephesus, he defended the Ever-Virgin Mary as the Mother of God, believing her to be \"full of grace\" (following earlier Latin writers such as Jerome) on account of her sexual integrity and innocence. Likewise, he affirmed that the Virgin Mary \"conceived as virgin, gave birth as virgin and stayed virgin forever\".\nNatural knowledge and biblical interpretation.\nAugustine took the view that, if a literal interpretation contradicts science and humans' God-given reason, the Biblical text should be interpreted metaphorically. While each passage of Scripture has a literal sense, this \"literal sense\" does not always mean the Scriptures are mere history; at times they are rather an extended metaphor.\nOriginal sin.\nAugustine taught that the sin of Adam and Eve was either an act of foolishness (\"insipientia\") followed by pride and disobedience to God or that pride came first. The first couple disobeyed God, who had told them not to eat of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil (Gen 2:17). The tree was a symbol of the order of creation. Self-centeredness made Adam and Eve eat of it, thus failing to acknowledge and respect the world as it was created by God, with its hierarchy of beings and values.\nThey would not have fallen into pride and lack of wisdom if Satan hadn't sown into their senses \"the root of evil\" (\"radix Mali\"). Their nature was wounded by concupiscence or libido, which affected human intelligence and will, as well as affections and desires, including sexual desire. In terms of metaphysics, concupiscence is not a being but bad quality, the privation of good or a wound.\nAugustine's understanding of the consequences of original sin and the necessity of redeeming grace was developed in the struggle against Pelagius and his Pelagian disciples, Caelestius and Julian of Eclanum, who had been inspired by Rufinus of Syria, a disciple of Theodore of Mopsuestia. They refused to agree original sin wounded human will and mind, insisting human nature was given the power to act, to speak, and to think when God created it. Human nature cannot lose its moral capacity for doing good, but a person is free to act or not act in a righteous way. Pelagius gave an example of eyes: they have capacity for seeing, but a person can make either good or bad use of it.\nLike Jovinian, Pelagians insisted human affections and desires were not touched by the fall either. Immorality, \"e.g.\" fornication, is exclusively a matter of will, \"i.e.\" a person does not use natural desires in a proper way. In opposition, Augustine pointed out the apparent disobedience of the flesh to the spirit, and explained it as one of the results of original sin, punishment of Adam and Eve's disobedience to God.\nAugustine had served as a \"Hearer\" for the Manichaeans for about nine years, who taught that the original sin was carnal knowledge. But his struggle to understand the cause of evil in the world started before that, at the age of nineteen. By \"malum\" (evil) he understood most of all concupiscence, which he interpreted as a vice dominating people and causing in men and women moral disorder. Agostino Trap\u00e8 insists Augustine's personal experience cannot be credited for his doctrine about concupiscence. He considers Augustine's marital experience to be quite normal, and even exemplary, aside from the absence of Christian wedding rites. As J. Brachtendorf showed, Augustine used Ciceronian Stoic concept of passions, to interpret Paul's doctrine of universal sin and redemption.\nThe view that not only human soul but also senses were influenced by the fall of Adam and Eve was prevalent in Augustine's time among the Fathers of the Church. It is clear the reason for Augustine's distancing from the affairs of the flesh was different from that of Plotinus, a Neoplatonist who taught that only through disdain for fleshly desire could one reach the ultimate state of mankind. Augustine taught the redemption, i.e. transformation and purification, of the body in the resurrection.\nSome authors perceive Augustine's doctrine as directed against human sexuality and attribute his insistence on continence and devotion to God as coming from Augustine's need to reject his own highly sensual nature as described in the \"Confessions\". Augustine taught that human sexuality has been wounded, together with the whole of human nature, and requires redemption of Christ. That healing is a process realized in conjugal acts. The virtue of continence is achieved thanks to the grace of the sacrament of Christian marriage, which becomes therefore a \"remedium concupiscentiae\" \u2013 remedy of concupiscence. The redemption of human sexuality will be, however, fully accomplished only in the resurrection of the body.\nThe sin of Adam is inherited by all human beings. Already in his pre-Pelagian writings, Augustine taught that Original Sin is transmitted to his descendants by concupiscence, which he regarded as the passion of both, soul and body, making humanity a \"massa damnata\" (mass of perdition, condemned crowd) and much enfeebling, though not destroying, the freedom of the will. Although earlier Christian authors taught the elements of physical death, moral weakness, and a sin propensity within original sin, Augustine was the first to add the concept of inherited guilt (\"reatus\") from Adam whereby an infant was eternally damned at birth.\nAlthough Augustine's anti-Pelagian defense of original sin was confirmed at numerous councils, \"i.e.\" Carthage (418), Ephesus (431), Orange (529), Trent (1546) and by popes, \"i.e.\" Pope Innocent I (401\u2013417) and Pope Zosimus (417\u2013418), his inherited guilt eternally damning infants was omitted by these councils and popes. Anselm of Canterbury established in his \"Cur Deus Homo\" the definition that was followed by the great 13th-century Schoolmen, namely that Original Sin is the \"privation of the righteousness which every man ought to possess\", thus separating it from \"concupiscence\", with which some of Augustine's disciples had defined it as later did Luther and Calvin. In 1567, Pope Pius V condemned the identification of Original Sin with concupiscence.\nPredestination.\nAugustine taught that God orders all things while preserving human freedom. Prior to 396, he believed predestination was based on God's foreknowledge of whether individuals would believe in Christ, that God's grace was \"a reward for human assent\". Later, in response to Pelagius, Augustine said that the sin of pride consists in assuming \"we are the ones who choose God or that God chooses us (in his foreknowledge) because of something worthy in us\", and argued that God's grace causes individual act of faith.\nScholars are divided over whether Augustine's teaching implies double predestination, or the belief God chooses some people for damnation as well as some for salvation. Catholic scholars tend to deny he held such a view while some Protestants and secular scholars have held that Augustine did believe in double predestination. About 412, Augustine became the first Christian to understand predestination as a divine unilateral pre-determination of individuals' eternal destinies independently of human choice, although his prior Manichaean sect did teach this concept. Some Protestant theologians, such as Justo L. Gonz\u00e1lez and Bengt H\u00e4gglund, interpret Augustine's teaching that grace is irresistible, results in conversion, and leads to perseverance.\nIn \"On Rebuke and Grace\" (\"De correptione et gratia\"), Augustine wrote: \"And what is written, that He wills all men to be saved, while yet all men are not saved, may be understood in many ways, some of which I have mentioned in other writings of mine; but here I will say one thing: He wills all men to be saved, is so said that all the predestinated may be understood by it, because every kind of men is among them.\"\nSpeaking of the twins Jacob and Esau, Augustine wrote in his book \"On the Gift of Perseverance\", \"[I]t ought to be a most certain fact that the former is of the predestinated, the latter is not.\"\nSacramental theology.\nAlso in reaction against the Donatists, Augustine developed a distinction between the \"regularity\" and \"validity\" of the sacraments. Regular sacraments are performed by clergy of the Catholic Church, while sacraments performed by schismatics are considered irregular. Nevertheless, the validity of the sacraments do not depend upon the holiness of the priests who perform them (\"ex opere operato\"); therefore, irregular sacraments are still accepted as valid provided they are done in the name of Christ and in the manner prescribed by the Church. On this point Augustine departs from the earlier teaching of Cyprian, who taught that converts from schismatic movements must be re-baptised. Augustine taught that sacraments administered outside the Catholic Church, though true sacraments, avail nothing. However, he also stated that baptism, while it does not confer any grace when done outside the Church, does confer grace as soon as one is received into the Catholic Church.\nAugustine upheld the early Christian understanding of the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, saying that Christ's statement, \"This is my body\" referred to the bread he carried in his hands, and that Christians must have faith the bread and wine are in fact the body and blood of Christ, despite what they see with their eyes. For instance he stated that \"He [Jesus] walked here in the same flesh, and gave us the same flesh to be eaten unto salvation. But no one eats that flesh unless first he adores it; and thus it is discovered how such a footstool of the Lord's feet is adored; and not only do we not sin by adoring, we do sin by not adoring.\"\nIn some of his writings, Augustine expressed a symbolic view of the Eucharist. For example, in his work \"On Christian Doctrine\", Augustine referred to the Eurcharist as a \"figure\" and a \"sign.\"\nAgainst the Pelagians, Augustine strongly stressed the importance of infant baptism. About the question whether baptism is an absolute necessity for salvation, however, Augustine appears to have refined his beliefs during his lifetime, causing some confusion among later theologians about his position. He said in one of his sermons that only the baptized are saved. This belief was shared by many early Christians. However, a passage from his \"City of God\", concerning the Apocalypse, may indicate Augustine did believe in an exception for children born to Christian parents.\nPhilosophy.\nAstrology.\nAugustine's contemporaries often believed astrology to be an exact and genuine science. Its practitioners were regarded as true men of learning and called \"mathemathici\". Astrology played a prominent part in Manichaean doctrine, and Augustine himself was attracted by their books in his youth, being particularly fascinated by those who claimed to foretell the future. Later, as a bishop, he warned that one should avoid astrologers who combine science and horoscopes. (Augustine's term \"mathematici\", meaning \"astrologers\", is sometimes mistranslated as \"mathematicians\".) According to Augustine, they were not genuine students of Hipparchus or Eratosthenes but \"common swindlers\".\nEpistemology.\nEpistemological concerns shaped Augustine's intellectual development. His early dialogues [\"Contra academicos\" (386) and \"De Magistro\" (389)], both written shortly after his conversion to Christianity, reflect his engagement with sceptical arguments and show the development of his doctrine of divine illumination. The doctrine of illumination claims God plays an active and regular part in human perception (as opposed to God designing the human mind to be reliable consistently, as in, for example, Descartes' idea of clear and distinct perceptions) and understanding by illuminating the mind so human beings can recognize intelligible realities God presents. According to Augustine, illumination is obtainable to all rational minds and is different from other forms of sense perception. It is meant to be an explanation of the conditions required for the mind to have a connection with intelligible entities.\nAugustine also posed the problem of other minds throughout different works, most famously perhaps in \"On the Trinity\" (VIII.6.9), and developed what has come to be a standard solution: the argument from analogy to other minds. In contrast to Plato and other earlier philosophers, Augustine recognized the centrality of testimony to human knowledge and argued that what others tell us can provide knowledge even if we don't have independent reasons to believe their testimonial reports.\nJust war.\nAugustine asserted Christians should be pacifists as a personal, philosophical stance. However, peacefulness in the face of a grave wrong that could only be stopped by violence would be a sin. Defence of one's self or others could be a necessity, especially when authorized by a legitimate authority. While not breaking down the conditions necessary for war to be just, Augustine coined the phrase in his work \"The City of God\". In essence, the pursuit of peace must include the option of fighting for its long-term preservation. Such a war could not be pre-emptive, but defensive, to restore peace. Thomas Aquinas, centuries later, used the authority of Augustine's arguments in an attempt to define the conditions under which a war could be just.\nFree will.\nIncluded in Augustine's earlier theodicy is the claim God created humans and angels as rational beings possessing free will. Free will was not intended for sin, meaning it is not equally predisposed to both good and evil. A will defiled by sin is not considered as \"free\" as it once was because it is bound by material things, which could be lost or be difficult to part with, resulting in unhappiness. Sin impairs free will, while grace restores it. Only a will that was once free can be subjected to sin's corruption. After 412, Augustine changed his theology, teaching that humanity had no free will to believe in Christ but only a free will to sin: \"I in fact strove on behalf of the free choice of the human 'will,\u2019 but God's grace conquered\" (\"Retract\". 2.1).\nThe early Christians opposed the deterministic views (e.g., fate) of Stoics, Gnostics, and Manichaeans prevalent in the first four centuries. Christians championed the concept of a relational God who interacts with humans rather than a Stoic or Gnostic God who unilaterally foreordained every event (yet Stoics still claimed to teach free will). Patristics scholar Ken Wilson argues that every early Christian author with extant writings who wrote on the topic prior to Augustine of Hippo (412) advanced human free choice rather than a deterministic God. According to Wilson, Augustine taught traditional free choice until 412, when he reverted to his earlier Manichaean and Stoic deterministic training when battling the Pelagians. Only a few Christians accepted Augustine's view of free will until the Protestant Reformation when both Luther and Calvin embraced Augustine's deterministic teachings wholeheartedly.\nThe Catholic Church considers Augustine's teaching to be consistent with free will. He often said that anyone can be saved if they wish. While God knows who will and won't be saved, with no possibility for the latter to be saved in their lives, this knowledge represents God's perfect knowledge of how humans will freely choose their destinies.\nSociology, morals and ethics.\nSlavery.\nAugustine led many clergy under his authority at Hippo to free their slaves \"as an act of piety\". He boldly wrote a letter urging the emperor to set up a new law against slave traders and was very much concerned about the sale of children. Christian emperors of his time for 25 years had permitted sale of children, not because they approved of the practice, but as a way of preventing infanticide when parents were unable to care for a child. Augustine noted that the tenant farmers in particular were driven to hire out or to sell their children as a means of survival.\nIn his book, \"The City of God\", he presents the development of slavery as a product of sin and as contrary to God's divine plan. He wrote that God \"did not intend that this rational creature, who was made in his image, should have dominion over anything but the irrational creation \u2013 not man over man, but man over the beasts\". Thus he wrote that righteous men in primitive times were made shepherds of cattle, not kings over men. \"The condition of slavery is the result of sin\", he declared. In \"The City of God\", Augustine wrote he felt the existence of slavery was a punishment for the existence of sin, even if an individual enslaved person committed no sin meriting punishment. He wrote: \"Slavery is, however, penal, and is appointed by that law which enjoins the preservation of the natural order and forbids its disturbance.\" Augustine believed slavery did more harm to the slave owner than the enslaved person himself: \"the lowly position does as much good to the servant as the proud position does harm to the master.\" Augustine proposes as a solution to sin a type of cognitive reimagining of one's situation, where slaves \"may themselves make their slavery in some sort free, by serving not in crafty fear, but in faithful love,\" until the end of the world eradicated slavery for good: \"until all unrighteousness pass away, and all principality and every human power be brought to nothing, and God be all in all.\"\nJews.\nAgainst certain Christian movements, some of which rejected the use of Hebrew Scripture, Augustine countered that God had chosen the Jews as a special people, and he considered the scattering of Jewish people by the Roman Empire to be a fulfillment of prophecy. He rejected homicidal attitudes, quoting part of the same prophecy, namely \"Slay them not, lest they should at last forget Thy law\" (Psalm 59:11). Augustine, who believed Jewish people would be converted to Christianity at \"the end of time\", argued God had allowed them to survive their dispersion as a warning to Christians; as such, he argued, they should be permitted to dwell in Christian lands. The sentiment sometimes attributed to Augustine that Christians should let the Jews \"survive but not thrive\" (it is repeated by author James Carroll in his book \"Constantine's Sword\", for example) is apocryphal and is not found in any of his writings.\nSexuality.\nFor Augustine, the evil of sexual immorality was not in the sexual act itself, but in the emotions that typically accompany it. In \"On Christian Doctrine\" Augustine contrasts love, which is enjoyment on account of God, and lust, which is not on account of God. Augustine claims that, following the Fall, sexual lust (\"concupiscentia\") has become necessary for copulation (as required to stimulate male erection), sexual lust is an evil result of the Fall, and therefore, evil must inevitably accompany sexual intercourse (\"On marriage and concupiscence\" 1.19, see footnote). Therefore, following the Fall, even marital sex carried out merely to procreate inevitably perpetuates evil (\"On marriage and concupiscence\" 1.27; \"A Treatise against Two Letters of the Pelagians\" 2.27). For Augustine, proper love exercises a denial of selfish pleasure and the subjugation of corporeal desire to God. The only way to avoid evil caused by sexual intercourse is to take the \"better\" way (\"Confessions\" 8.2) and abstain from marriage (\"On marriage and concupiscence\" 1.31). Sex within marriage is not, however, for Augustine a sin, although necessarily producing the evil of sexual lust. Based on the same logic, Augustine also declared the pious virgins raped during the sack of Rome to be innocent because they did not intend to sin nor enjoy the act.\nBefore the Fall, Augustine believed sex was a passionless affair, \"just like many a laborious work accomplished by the compliant operation of our other limbs, without any lascivious heat\", that the seed \"might be sown without any shameful lust, the genital members simply obeying the inclination of the will\". After the Fall, by contrast, the penis cannot be controlled by mere will, subject instead to both unwanted impotence and involuntary erections: \"Sometimes the urge arises unwanted; sometimes, on the other hand, it forsakes the eager lover, and desire grows cold in the body while burning in the mind... It arouses the mind, but it does not follow through what it has begun and arouse the body also\" (\"City of God\" 14.16).\nAugustine censured those who try to prevent the creation of offspring when engaging in sexual relations, saying that though they may be nominally married they are not really, but are using that designation as a cloak for turpitude. When they allow their unwanted children to die of exposure, they unmask their sin. Sometimes they use drugs to produce sterility, or other means to try to destroy the fetus before they are born. Their marriage is not wedlock but debauchery.\nAugustine believed Adam and Eve had both already chosen in their hearts to disobey God's command not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge before Eve took the fruit, ate it, and gave it to Adam. Accordingly, Augustine did not believe Adam was any less guilty of sin. Augustine praises women and their role in society and in the Church. In his \"Tractates on the Gospel of John\", Augustine, commenting on the Samaritan woman from , uses the woman as a figure of the Church in agreement with the New Testament teaching that the Church is the bride of Christ. \"Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her.\"\nPedagogy.\nAugustine is considered an influential figure in the history of education. A work early in Augustine's writings is \"De Magistro\" (On the Teacher), which contains insights about education. His ideas changed as he found better directions or better ways of expressing his ideas. In the last years of his life Augustine wrote his \"Retractationes\" (\"Retractations\"), reviewing his writings and improving specific texts. Henry Chadwick believes an accurate translation of \"retractationes\" may be \"reconsiderations\". Reconsiderations can be seen as an overarching theme of the way Augustine learned. Augustine's understanding of the search for understanding, meaning, and truth as a restless journey leaves room for doubt, development, and change.\nAugustine was a strong advocate of critical thinking skills. Because written works were limited during this time, spoken communication of knowledge was very important. His emphasis on the importance of community as a means of learning distinguishes his pedagogy from some others. Augustine believed dialectic is the best means for learning and that this method should serve as a model for learning encounters between teachers and students. Augustine's dialogue writings model the need for lively interactive dialogue among learners.\nHe recommended adapting educational practices to fit the students' educational backgrounds:\nIf a student has been well educated in a wide variety of subjects, the teacher must be careful not to repeat what they have already learned, but to challenge the student with material they do not yet know thoroughly. With the student who has had no education, the teacher must be patient, willing to repeat things until the student understands, and sympathetic. Perhaps the most difficult student, however, is the one with an inferior education who believes he understands something when he does not. Augustine stressed the importance of showing this type of student the difference between \"having words and having understanding\" and of helping the student to remain humble with his acquisition of knowledge.\nUnder the influence of Bede, Alcuin, and Rabanus Maurus, \"De catechizandis rudibus\" came to exercise an important role in the education of clergy at the monastic schools, especially from the eighth century onwards.\nAugustine believed students should be given an opportunity to apply learned theories to practical experience. Yet another of Augustine's major contributions to education is his study on the styles of teaching. He claimed there are two basic styles a teacher uses when speaking to the students. The \"mixed style\" includes complex and sometimes showy language to help students see the beautiful artistry of the subject they are studying. The \"grand style\" is not quite as elegant as the mixed style, but is exciting and heartfelt, with the purpose of igniting the same passion in the students' hearts. Augustine balanced his teaching philosophy with the traditional Bible-based practice of strict discipline.\nAugustine knew Latin and Ancient Greek. He had a long correspondence with St Jerome the textual differences existing between the Hebrew Bible and the Greek Septuagint, concluding that the original Greek manuscripts resulted closely similar to the other Hebrew ones, and also that even the differences in the two original versions of the Holy Scripture could enlight its spiritual meaning so as to have been unitarily inspired by God.\nCoercion.\nAugustine of Hippo had to deal with issues of violence and coercion throughout his entire career due largely to the Donatist-Catholic conflict. He is one of very few authors in Antiquity who ever truly theoretically examined the ideas of religious freedom and coercion. However, it is his teaching on coercion that has most \"embarrassed his modern defenders and vexed his modern detractors,\" making him appear \"to generations of religious liberals as \"le prince et patriarche de persecuteurs.\"\" Russell says Augustine's theory of coercion \"was not crafted from dogma, but in response to a unique historical situation\" and is therefore context dependent, while others see it as inconsistent with his other teachings.\nThe context.\nDuring the Great Persecution, \"When Roman soldiers came calling, some of the [Catholic] officials handed over the sacred books, vessels, and other church goods rather than risk legal penalties\" over a few objects. Maureen Tilley says this was a problem by 305, that became a schism by 311, because many of the North African Christians had a long established tradition of a \"physicalist approach to religion.\" The sacred scriptures were not simply books to them, but were the Word of God in physical form, therefore they saw handing over the Bible, and handing over a person to be martyred, as \"two sides of the same coin.\" Those who cooperated with the authorities became known as \"traditores.\" The term originally meant \"one who hands over a physical object\", but it came to mean \"traitor.\"\nAccording to Tilley, after the persecution ended, those who had apostatized wanted to return to their positions in the church. The North African Christians, (the rigorists who became known as Donatists), refused to accept them. Catholics were more tolerant and wanted to wipe the slate clean. For the next 75 years, both parties existed, often directly alongside each other, with a double line of bishops for the same cities. Competition for the loyalty of the people included multiple new churches and violence. No one is exactly sure when the Circumcellions and the Donatists allied, but for decades, they fomented protests and street violence, accosted travelers and attacked random Catholics without warning, often doing serious and unprovoked bodily harm such as beating people with clubs, cutting off their hands and feet, and gouging out eyes.\nAugustine became coadjutor Bishop of Hippo in 395, and since he believed that conversion must be voluntary, his appeals to the Donatists were verbal. For several years, he used popular propaganda, debate, personal appeal, General Councils, appeals to the emperor and political pressure to bring the Donatists back into union with the Catholics, but all attempts failed. The harsh realities Augustine faced can be found in his Letter 28 written to bishop Novatus around 416. Donatists had attacked, cut out the tongue and cut off the hands of a Bishop Rogatus who had recently converted to Catholicism. An unnamed count of Africa had sent his agent with Rogatus, and he too had been attacked; the count was \"inclined to pursue the matter.\" Russell says Augustine demonstrates a \"hands on\" involvement with the details of his bishopric, but at one point in the letter, he confesses he does not know what to do. \"All the issues that plague him are there: stubborn Donatists, Circumcellion violence, the vacillating role of secular officials, the imperative to persuade, and his own trepidations.\" The empire responded to the civil unrest with law and its enforcement, and thereafter, Augustine changed his mind on using verbal arguments alone. Instead, he came to support the state's use of coercion. Augustine did not believe the empire's enforcement would \"make the Donatists more virtuous\" but he did believe it would make them \"less vicious.\"\nThe theology.\nThe primary 'proof text' of what Augustine thought concerning coercion is from Letter 93, written in 408, as a reply to the bishop Vincentius, of Cartenna (Mauretania, North Africa). This letter shows that both practical and biblical reasons led Augustine to defend the legitimacy of coercion. He confesses that he changed his mind because of \"the ineffectiveness of dialogue and the proven efficacy of laws.\" He had been worried about false conversions if force was used, but \"now,\" he says, \"it seems imperial persecution is working.\" Many Donatists had converted. \"Fear had made them reflect, and made them docile.\" Augustine continued to assert that coercion could not directly convert someone, but concluded it could make a person ready to be reasoned with.\nAccording to Mar Marcos, Augustine made use of several biblical examples to legitimize coercion, but the primary analogy in Letter 93 and in Letter 185, is the parable of the Great Feast in Luke 14.15-24 and its statement \"compel them to come in.\" Russell says, Augustine uses the Latin term \"cogo\", instead of the \"compello\" of the Vulgate, since to Augustine, \"cogo\" meant to \"gather together\" or \"collect\" and was not simply \"compel by physical force.\"\nIn 1970, Robert Markus argued that, for Augustine, a degree of external pressure being brought for the purpose of reform was compatible with the exercise of free will. Russell asserts that \"Confessions 13\" is crucial to understanding Augustine's thought on coercion; using Peter Brown's explanation of Augustine's view of salvation, he explains that Augustine's past, his own sufferings and \"conversion through God's pressures,\" along with his biblical hermeneutics, is what led him to see the value in suffering for discerning truth. According to Russell, Augustine saw coercion as one among many conversion strategies for forming \"a pathway to the inner person.\"\nIn Augustine's view, there is such a thing as just and unjust persecution. Augustine explains that when the purpose of persecution is to lovingly correct and instruct, then it becomes discipline and is just. He said the church would discipline its people out of a loving desire to heal them, and that, \"once compelled to come in, heretics would gradually give their voluntary assent to the truth of Christian orthodoxy.\" Frederick H. Russell describes this as \"a pastoral strategy in which the church did the persecuting with the dutiful assistance of Roman authorities,\" adding that it is \"a precariously balanced blend of external discipline and inward nurturance.\"\nAugustine placed limits on the use of coercion, recommending fines, imprisonment, banishment, and moderate floggings, preferring beatings with rods which was a common practice in the ecclesial courts. He opposed severity, maiming, and the execution of heretics. While these limits were mostly ignored by Roman authorities, Michael Lamb says that in doing this, \"Augustine appropriates republican principles from his Roman predecessors...\" and maintains his commitment to liberty, legitimate authority, and the rule of law as a constraint on arbitrary power. He continues to advocate holding authority accountable to prevent domination, but affirms the state's right to act.\nH. A. Deane, on the other hand, says there is a fundamental inconsistency between Augustine's political thought and \"his final position of approval of the use of political and legal weapons to punish religious dissidence\" and others have seconded this view. Brown asserts that Augustine's thinking on coercion is more of an attitude than a doctrine, since it is \"not in a state of rest,\" but is instead marked by \"a painful and protracted attempt to embrace and resolve tensions.\"\nAccording to Russell it is possible to see how Augustine himself had evolved from his earlier \"Confessions\" to this teaching on coercion and the latter's strong patriarchal nature: \"Intellectually, the burden has shifted imperceptibly from discovering the truth to disseminating the truth.\" The bishops had become the church's elite with their own rationale for acting as \"stewards of the truth.\" Russell points out that Augustine's views are limited to time and place and his own community, but later, others took what he said and applied it outside those parameters in ways Augustine never imagined or intended.\nWorks.\nAugustine was one of the most prolific Latin authors in terms of surviving works, and the list of his works consists of more than one hundred separate titles. They include apologetic works against the heresies of the Arians, Donatists, Manichaeans and Pelagians; texts on Christian doctrine, notably \"De Doctrina Christiana\" (\"On Christian Doctrine\"); exegetical works such as commentaries on Genesis, the Psalms and Paul's Letter to the Romans; many sermons and letters; and the \"Retractationes\", a review of his earlier works which he wrote near the end of his life.\nApart from those, Augustine is probably best known for his \"Confessions\", which is a personal account of his earlier life, and for \"De civitate Dei\" (\"The City of God\", consisting of 22 books), which he wrote to restore the confidence of his fellow Christians, which was badly shaken by the sack of Rome by the Visigoths in 410. His \"On the Trinity\", in which he developed what has become known as the 'psychological analogy' of the Trinity, is also considered to be among his masterpieces, and arguably of more doctrinal importance than the \"Confessions\" or the \"City of God\". He also wrote \"On Free Choice of the Will\" (\"De libero arbitrio\"), addressing why God gives humans free will that can be used for evil.\nInfluence.\nIn both his philosophical and theological reasoning, Augustine was greatly influenced by Stoicism, Platonism and Neoplatonism, particularly by the work of Plotinus, author of the \"Enneads\", probably through the mediation of Porphyry and Victorinus (as Pierre Hadot has argued). Some Neoplatonic concepts are still visible in Augustine's early writings. His early and influential writing on the human will, a central topic in ethics, would become a focus for later philosophers such as Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche. He was also influenced by the works of Virgil (known for his teaching on language), and Cicero (known for his teaching on argument).\nIn philosophy.\nPhilosopher Bertrand Russell was impressed by Augustine's meditation on the nature of time in the \"Confessions\", comparing it favourably to Kant's version of the view that time is subjective. Catholic theologians generally subscribe to Augustine's belief that God exists outside of time in the \"eternal present\"; that time only exists within the created universe because only in space is time discernible through motion and change. His meditations on the nature of time are closely linked to his consideration of the human ability of memory. Frances Yates in her 1966 study \"The Art of Memory\" argues that a brief passage of the \"Confessions\", 10.8.12, in which Augustine writes of walking up a flight of stairs and entering the vast fields of memory clearly indicates that the ancient Romans were aware of how to use explicit spatial and architectural metaphors as a mnemonic technique for organizing large amounts of information.\nAugustine's philosophical method, especially demonstrated in his \"Confessions\", had continuing influence on Continental philosophy throughout the 20th century. His descriptive approach to intentionality, memory, and language as these phenomena are experienced within consciousness and time anticipated and inspired the insights of modern phenomenology and hermeneutics. Edmund Husserl writes: \"The analysis of time-consciousness is an age-old crux of descriptive psychology and theory of knowledge. The first thinker to be deeply sensitive to the immense difficulties to be found here was Augustine, who laboured almost to despair over this problem.\"\nMartin Heidegger refers to Augustine's descriptive philosophy at several junctures in his influential work \"Being and Time\". Hannah Arendt began her philosophical writing with a dissertation on Augustine's concept of love, \"Der Liebesbegriff bei Augustin\" (1929): \"The young Arendt attempted to show that the philosophical basis for \"vita socialis\" in Augustine can be understood as residing in neighbourly love, grounded in his understanding of the common origin of humanity.\"\nJean Bethke Elshtain in \"Augustine and the Limits of Politics\" tried to associate Augustine with Arendt in their concept of evil: \"Augustine did not see evil as glamorously demonic but rather as absence of good, something which paradoxically is really nothing. Arendt ... envisioned even the extreme evil which produced the Holocaust as merely banal [in \"Eichmann in Jerusalem\"].\"\nAugustine's philosophical legacy continues to influence contemporary critical theory through the contributions and inheritors of these 20th-century figures. Seen from a historical perspective, there are three main perspectives on the political thought of Augustine: first, political Augustinianism; second, Augustinian political theology; and third, Augustinian political theory.\nIn theology.\nThomas Aquinas was influenced heavily by Augustine. On the topic of original sin, Aquinas proposed a more optimistic view of man than that of Augustine in that his conception leaves to the reason, will, and passions of fallen man their natural powers even after the Fall, without \"supernatural gifts\". While in his pre-Pelagian writings Augustine taught that Adam's guilt as transmitted to his descendants much enfeebles, though does not destroy, the freedom of their will, Protestant reformers Martin Luther and John Calvin affirmed that Original Sin completely destroyed liberty (see total depravity).\nAccording to Leo Ruickbie, Augustine's arguments against magic, differentiating it from miracle, were crucial in the early Church's fight against paganism and became a central thesis in the later denunciation of witches and witchcraft. According to Professor Deepak Lal, Augustine's vision of the heavenly city has influenced the secular projects and traditions of the Enlightenment, Marxism, Freudianism and eco-fundamentalism. Post-Marxist philosophers Antonio Negri and Michael Hardt rely heavily on Augustine's thought, particularly \"The City of God\", in their book of political philosophy \"Empire\".\nAugustine has influenced many modern-day theologians and authors such as John Piper. Hannah Arendt, an influential 20th-century political theorist, wrote her doctoral dissertation in philosophy on Augustine, and continued to rely on his thought throughout her career. Ludwig Wittgenstein extensively quotes Augustine in \"Philosophical Investigations\" for his approach to language, both admiringly, and as a sparring partner to develop his own ideas, including an extensive opening passage from the \"Confessions\". Contemporary linguists have argued that Augustine has significantly influenced the thought of Ferdinand de Saussure, who did not 'invent' the modern discipline of semiotics, but rather built upon Aristotelian and Neoplatonic knowledge from the Middle Ages, via an Augustinian connection: \"as for the constitution of Saussurian semiotic theory, the importance of the Augustinian thought contribution (correlated to the Stoic one) has also been recognized. Saussure did not do anything but reform an ancient theory in Europe, according to the modern conceptual exigencies.\"\nIn his autobiographical book \"Milestones\", Pope Benedict XVI claims Augustine as one of the deepest influences in his thought.\nOratorio, music.\nMarc-Antoine Charpeentier, Motet \"Pour St Augustin mourant\", H.419, for 2 voices and contino (1687), and \"Pour St Augustin\", H.307, for 2 voices and continuo (1670s).\nMuch of Augustine's conversion is dramatized in the oratorio \"La conversione di Sant'Agostino\" (1750) composed by Johann Adolph Hasse. The libretto for this oratorio, written by Duchess Maria Antonia of Bavaria, draws upon the influence of Metastasio (the finished libretto having been edited by him) and is based on an earlier five-act play \"Idea perfectae conversionis dive Augustinus\" written by the Jesuit priest Franz Neumayr. In the libretto Augustine's mother Monica is presented as a prominent character that is worried that Augustine might not convert to Christianity. As Dr. Andrea Palent says: Throughout the oratorio Augustine shows his willingness to turn to God, but the burden of the act of conversion weighs heavily on him. This is displayed by Hasse through extended recitative passages.\nIn popular art.\nAugustine has been the subject of songs by Bob Dylan and The Chairman Dances.\nIn his poem \"Confessional\", Frank Bidart compares the relationship between Augustine and his mother, Saint Monica, to the relationship between the poem's speaker and his mother.\nIn the 2010 TV miniseries \"\", Augustine is played by Matteo Urzia (aged 15), Alessandro Preziosi (aged 25) and Franco Nero (aged 76)."}
{"id": "2032", "revid": "3742946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2032", "title": "Acting", "text": "Acting is an activity in which a story is told by means of its enactment by an actor or actress who adopts a character\u2014in theatre, television, film, radio, or any other medium that makes use of the mimetic mode.\nActing involves a broad range of skills, including a well-developed imagination, emotional facility, physical expressivity, vocal projection, clarity of speech, and the ability to interpret drama. Acting also demands an ability to employ dialects, accents, improvisation, observation and emulation, mime, and stage combat. Many actors train at length in specialist programs or colleges to develop these skills. The vast majority of professional actors have undergone extensive training. Actors and actresses will often have many instructors and teachers for a full range of training involving singing, scene-work, audition techniques, and acting for camera.\nMost early sources in the West that examine the art of acting (, \"hypokrisis\") discuss it as part of rhetoric.\nHistory.\nOne of the first known actors was an ancient Greek called Thespis of Icaria. Writing two centuries after the event, Aristotle in his \"Poetics\" () suggests that Thespis stepped out of the dithyrambic chorus and addressed it as a separate character. Before Thespis, the chorus narrated (for example, \"Dionysus did this, Dionysus said that\"). When Thespis stepped out from the chorus, he spoke as if he was the character (for example, \"I am Dionysus, I did this\"). To distinguish between these different modes of storytelling\u2014enactment and narration\u2014Aristotle uses the terms \"mimesis\" (via enactment) and \"diegesis\" (via narration). From Thespis' name derives the word \"thespian\".\nTraining.\nConservatories and drama schools typically offer two- to four-year training on all aspects of acting. Universities mostly offer three- to four-year programs, in which a student is often able to choose to focus on acting, whilst continuing to learn about other aspects of theatre. Schools vary in their approach, but in North America the most popular method taught derives from the 'system' of Konstantin Stanislavski, which was developed and popularised in America as method acting by Lee Strasberg, Stella Adler, Sanford Meisner, and others.\nOther approaches may include a more physically based orientation, such as that promoted by theatre practitioners as diverse as Anne Bogart, Jacques Lecoq, Jerzy Grotowski, or Vsevolod Meyerhold. Classes may also include psychotechnique, mask work, physical theatre, improvisation, and acting for camera.\nRegardless of a school's approach, students should expect intensive training in textual interpretation, voice, and movement. Applications to drama programmes and conservatories usually involve extensive auditions. Anybody over the age of 18 can usually apply. Training may also start at a very young age. Acting classes and professional schools targeted at under-18s are widespread. These classes introduce young actors to different aspects of acting and theatre, including scene study.\nIncreased training and exposure to public speaking allows humans to maintain calmer and more relaxed physiologically. By measuring a public speaker's heart rate maybe one of the easiest ways to judge shifts in stress as the heart rate increases with anxiety . As actors increase performances, heart rate and other evidence of stress can decrease. This is very important in training for actors, as adaptive strategies gained from increased exposure to public speaking can regulate implicit and explicit anxiety. By attending an institution with a specialization in acting, increased opportunity to act will lead to more relaxed physiology and decrease in stress and its effects on the body. These effects can vary from hormonal to cognitive health that can impact quality of life and performance\nImprovisation.\nSome classical forms of acting involve a substantial element of improvised performance. Most notable is its use by the troupes of the \"commedia dell'arte\", a form of masked comedy that originated in Italy.\nImprovisation as an approach to acting formed an important part of the Russian theatre practitioner Konstantin Stanislavski's 'system' of actor training, which he developed from the 1910s onwards. Late in 1910, the playwright Maxim Gorky invited Stanislavski to join him in Capri, where they discussed training and Stanislavski's emerging \"grammar\" of acting. Inspired by a popular theatre performance in Naples that utilised the techniques of the \"commedia dell'arte\", Gorky suggested that they form a company, modelled on the medieval strolling players, in which a playwright and group of young actors would devise new plays together by means of improvisation. Stanislavski would develop this use of improvisation in his work with his First Studio of the Moscow Art Theatre. Stanislavski's use was extended further in the approaches to acting developed by his students, Michael Chekhov and Maria Knebel.\nIn the United Kingdom, the use of improvisation was pioneered by Joan Littlewood from the 1930s onwards and, later, by Keith Johnstone and Clive Barker. In the United States, it was promoted by Viola Spolin, after working with Neva Boyd at a Hull House in Chicago, Illinois (Spolin was Boyd's student from 1924 to 1927). Like the British practitioners, Spolin felt that playing games was a useful means of training actors and helped to improve an actor's performance. With improvisation, she argued, people may find expressive freedom, since they do not know how an improvised situation will turn out. Improvisation demands an open mind in order to maintain spontaneity, rather than pre-planning a response. A character is created by the actor, often without reference to a dramatic text, and a drama is developed out of the spontaneous interactions with other actors. This approach to creating new drama has been developed most substantially by the British filmmaker Mike Leigh, in films such as \"Secrets &amp; Lies\" (1996), \"Vera Drake\" (2004), \"Another Year\" (2010), and \"Mr. Turner\" (2014).\nImprovisation is also used to cover up if an actor or actress makes a mistake.\nPhysiological effects.\nSpeaking or acting in front of an audience is a stressful situation, which causes an increased heart rate.\nIn a 2017 study on American university students, actors of various experience levels all showed similarly elevated heart rates throughout their performances; this agrees with previous studies on professional and amateur actors' heart rates. While all actors experienced stress, causing elevated heart rate, the more experienced actors displayed less heart rate variability than the less experienced actors in the same play. The more experienced actors experienced less stress while performing, and therefore had a smaller degree of variability than the less experienced, more stressed actors. The more experienced an actor is, the more stable their heart rate will be while performing, but will still experience elevated heart rates.\nSemiotics.\nThe semiotics of acting involves a study of the ways in which aspects of a performance come to operate for its audience as signs. This process largely involves the production of meaning, whereby elements of an actor's performance acquire significance, both within the broader context of the dramatic action and in the relations each establishes with the real world.\nFollowing the ideas proposed by the Surrealist theorist Antonin Artaud, however, it may also be possible to understand communication with an audience that occurs 'beneath' significance and meaning (which the semiotician F\u00e9lix Guattari described as a process involving the transmission of \"a-signifying signs\"). In his \"The Theatre and its Double\" (1938), Artaud compared this interaction to the way in which a snake charmer communicates with a snake, a process which he identified as \"mimesis\"\u2014the same term that Aristotle in his \"Poetics\" (c. 335 BCE) used to describe the mode in which drama communicates its story, by virtue of its embodiment by the actor enacting it, as distinct from \"diegesis\", or the way in which a narrator may describe it. These \"vibrations\" passing from the actor to the audience may not necessarily precipitate into significant elements as such (that is, consciously perceived \"meanings\"), but rather may operate by means of the circulation of \"affects\".\nThe approach to acting adopted by other theatre practitioners involve varying degrees of concern with the semiotics of acting. Konstantin Stanislavski, for example, addresses the ways in which an actor, building on what he calls the \"experiencing\" of a role, should also shape and adjust a performance in order to support the overall significance of the drama\u2014a process that he calls establishing the \"perspective of the role\". The semiotics of acting plays a far more central role in Bertolt Brecht's epic theatre, in which an actor is concerned to bring out clearly the sociohistorical significance of behaviour and action by means of specific performance choices\u2014a process that he describes as establishing the \"not/but\" element in a performed physical \"\"gestus\" within context of the play's overal \"Fabel\"\". Eugenio Barba argues that actors ought not to concern themselves with the significance of their performance behaviour; this aspect is the responsibility, he claims, of the director, who weaves the signifying elements of an actor's performance into the director's dramaturgical \"montage\".\nThe theatre semiotician Patrice Pavis, alluding to the contrast between Stanislavski's 'system' and Brecht's demonstrating performer\u2014and, beyond that, to Denis Diderot's foundational essay on the art of acting, \"Paradox of the Actor\" (c. 1770\u201478)\u2014argues that:\nActing was long seen in terms of the actor's sincerity or hypocrisy\u2014should he believe in what he is saying and be moved by it, or should he distance himself and convey his role in a detached manner? The answer varies according to how one sees the effect to be produced in the audience and the social function of theatre.\nElements of a semiotics of acting include the actor's gestures, facial expressions, intonation and other vocal qualities, rhythm, and the ways in which these aspects of an individual performance relate to the drama and the theatrical event (or film, television programme, or radio broadcast, each of which involves different semiotic systems) considered as a whole. A semiotics of acting recognises that all forms of acting involve conventions and codes by means of which performance behaviour acquires significance\u2014including those approaches, such as Stanislvaski's or the closely related method acting developed in the United States, that offer themselves as \"a natural kind of acting that can do without conventions and be received as self-evident and universal.\" Pavis goes on to argue that:\nAny acting is based on a codified system (even if the audience does not see it as such) of behaviour and actions that are considered to be believable and realistic or artificial and theatrical. To advocate the natural, the spontaneous, and the instinctive is only to attempt to produce natural effects, governed by an ideological code that determines, at a particular historical time, and for a given audience, what is natural and believable and what is declamatory and theatrical.\nThe conventions that govern acting in general are related to structured forms of play, which involve, in each specific experience, \"rules of the game.\" This aspect was first explored by Johan Huizinga (in \"Homo Ludens\", 1938) and Roger Caillois (in \"Man, Play and Games\", 1958). Caillois, for example, distinguishes four aspects of play relevant to acting: \"mimesis\" (simulation), \"agon\" (conflict or competition), \"alea\" (chance), and \"illinx\" (vertigo, or \"vertiginous psychological situations\" involving the spectator's identification or catharsis). This connection with play as an activity was first proposed by Aristotle in his \"Poetics\", in which he defines the desire to imitate in play as an essential part of being human and our first means of learning as children:\nFor it is an instinct of human beings, from childhood, to engage in mimesis (indeed, this distinguishes them from other animals: man is the most mimetic of all, and it is through mimesis that he develops his earliest understanding); and equally natural that everyone enjoys mimetic objects. (IV, 1448b)\nThis connection with play also informed the words used in English (as was the analogous case in many other European languages) for drama: the word \"play\" or \"game\" (translating the Anglo-Saxon \"pl\u00e8ga\" or Latin \"ludus\") was the standard term used until William Shakespeare's time for a dramatic entertainment\u2014just as its creator was a \"play-maker\" rather than a \"dramatist\", the person acting was known as a \"player\", and, when in the Elizabethan era specific buildings for acting were built, they was known as \"play-houses\" rather than \"theatres.\"\nResumes and auditions.\nActors and actresses need to make a resume when applying for roles. The acting resume is very different from a normal resume; it is generally shorter, with lists instead of paragraphs, and it should have a head shot on the back. Usually, a resume also contains a short 30 second to 1 minute reel about the person, so that the casting director can see your previous performances, if any.\nAuditioning is the act of performing either a monologue or sides (lines for one character) as sent by the casting director. Auditioning entails showing the actor's skills to present themselves as a different person; it may be as brief as two minutes. For theater auditions it can be longer than two minutes, or they may perform more than one monologue, as each casting director can have different requirements for actors. Actors should go to auditions dressed for the part, to make it easier for the casting director to visualize them as the character. For television or film they will have to undergo more than one audition. Oftentimes actors are called into another audition at the last minute, and are sent the sides either that morning or the night before. Auditioning can be a stressful part of acting, especially if one has not been trained to audition.\nRehearsal.\nRehearsal is a process in which actors prepare and practice a performance, exploring the vicissitudes of conflict between characters, testing specific actions in the scene, and finding means to convey a particular sense. Some actors continue to rehearse a scene throughout the run of a show in order to keep the scene fresh in their minds and exciting for the audience.\nAudience.\nA critical audience with evaluative spectators is known to induce stress on actors during performance, (see Bode &amp; Brutten). Being in front of an audience sharing a story will makes the actors intensely vulnerable. Shockingly, an actor will typically rate the quality of their performance higher than their spectators. Heart rates are generally always higher during a performance with an audience when compared to rehearsal, however what's interesting is that this audience also seems to induce a higher quality of performance. Simply put, while public performances cause extremely high stress levels in actors (more so amateur ones), the stress actually improves the performance, supporting the idea of \"positive stress in challenging situations\"\nHeart rate.\nDepending on what an actor is doing, his or her heart rate will vary. This is the body's way of responding to stress. Prior to a show one will see an increase in heart rate due to anxiety. While performing an actor has an increased sense of exposure which will increase performance anxiety and the associated physiological arousal, such as heart rate. Heart rates increases more during shows compared to rehearsals because of the increased pressure, which is due to the fact that a performance has a potentially greater impact on an actors career. After the show a decrease in the heart rate due to the conclusion of the stress inducing activity can be seen. Often the heart rate will return to normal after the show or performance is done; however, during the applause after the performance there is a rapid spike in heart rate. This can be seen not only in actors but also with public speaking and musicians.\nStress.\nThere is a correlation between heart-rate and stress when actors' are performing in front of an audience. Actors claim that having an audience has no change in their stress level, but as soon as they come on stage their heart-rate rises quickly. A 2017 study done in an American University looking at actors' stress by measuring heart-rate showed individual heart-rates rose right before the performance began for those actors opening. There are many factors that can add to an actors' stress. For example, length of monologues, experience level, and actions done on stage including moving the set. Throughout the performance heart-rate rises the most before an actor is speaking. The stress and thus heart-rate of the actor then drops significantly at the end of a monologue, big action scene, or performance."}
{"id": "2037", "revid": "18760506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2037", "title": "Delian League", "text": "The Delian League, founded in 478 BC, was an association of Greek city-states, with the number of members numbering between 150 and 330 under the leadership of Athens, whose purpose was to continue fighting the Persian Empire after the Greek victory in the Battle of Plataea at the end of the Second Persian invasion of Greece.\nThe League's modern name derives from its official meeting place, the island of Delos, where congresses were held in the temple and where the treasury stood until, in a symbolic gesture, Pericles moved it to Athens in 454 BC.\nShortly after its inception, Athens began to use the League's funds for its own purposes, which led to conflicts between Athens and the less powerful members of the League. By 431 BC, the threat the League presented to Spartan hegemony combined with Athens's heavy-handed control of the Delian League prompted the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War; the League was dissolved upon the war's conclusion in 404 BC under the direction of Lysander, the Spartan commander.\nBackground.\nThe Greco-Persian Wars had their roots in the conquest of the Greek cities of Asia Minor, and particularly Ionia, by the Achaemenid Persian Empire of Cyrus the Great shortly after 550 BC. The Persians found the Ionians difficult to rule, eventually settling for sponsoring a tyrant in each Ionian city. While Greek states had in the past often been ruled by tyrants, this form of government was on the decline. By 500 BC, Ionia appears to have been ripe for rebellion against these Persian clients. The simmering tension finally broke into open revolt due to the actions of the tyrant of Miletus, Aristagoras. Attempting to save himself after a disastrous Persian-sponsored expedition in 499 BC, Aristagoras chose to declare Miletus a democracy. This triggered similar revolutions across Ionia, extending to Doris and Aeolis, beginning the Ionian Revolt.\nThe Greek states of Athens and Eretria allowed themselves to be drawn into this conflict by Aristagoras, and during their only campaigning season (498 BC) they contributed to the capture and burning of the Persian regional capital of Sardis. After this, the Ionian revolt carried on (without further outside aid) for a further five years, until it was finally completely crushed by the Persians. However, in a decision of great historic significance, the Persian king Darius the Great decided that, despite having subdued the revolt, there remained the unfinished business of exacting punishment on Athens and Eretria for supporting the revolt. The Ionian revolt had severely threatened the stability of Darius's empire, and the states of mainland Greece would continue to threaten that stability unless dealt with. Darius thus began to contemplate the complete conquest of Greece, beginning with the destruction of Athens and Eretria.\nIn the next two decades, there would be two Persian invasions of Greece, occasioning, thanks to Greek historians, some of the most famous battles in history. During the first invasion, Thrace, Macedon and the Aegean Islands were added to the Persian Empire, and Eretria was duly destroyed. However, the invasion ended in 490 BC with the decisive Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon. After this invasion, Darius died, and responsibility for the war passed to his son Xerxes I.\nXerxes then personally led a second Persian invasion of Greece in 480 BC, taking an enormous (although oft-exaggerated) army and navy to Greece. Those Greeks who chose to resist (the 'Allies') were defeated in the twin simultaneous battles of Thermopylae on land and Artemisium at sea. All of Greece except the Peloponnesus thus having fallen into Persian hands, the Persians then seeking to destroy the Allied navy once and for all, suffered a decisive defeat at the Battle of Salamis. The following year, 479 BC, the Allies assembled the largest Greek army yet seen and defeated the Persian invasion force at the Battle of Plataea, ending the invasion and the threat to Greece.\nThe Allied fleet defeated the remnants of the Persian fleet in the Battle of Mycale near the island of Samos\u2014on the same day as Plataea, according to tradition. This action marks the end of the Persian invasion, and the beginning of the next phase in the Greco-Persian wars, the Greek counterattack. After Mycale, the Greek cities of Asia Minor again revolted, with the Persians now powerless to stop them. The Allied fleet then sailed to the Thracian Chersonese, still held by the Persians, and besieged and captured the town of Sestos. The following year, 478 BC, the Allies sent a force to capture the city of Byzantion (modern day Istanbul). The siege was successful, but the behaviour of the Spartan general Pausanias alienated many of the Allies, and resulted in Pausanias's recall.\nFormation.\nAfter Byzantion, Sparta was eager to end its involvement in the war. The Spartans greatly feared the rise of the Athenians as a challenge to their power. Additionally, the Spartans were of the view that, with the liberation of mainland Greece, and the Greek cities of Asia Minor, the war's purpose had already been achieved. There was also perhaps a feeling that establishing long-term security for the Asian Greeks would prove impossible. In the aftermath of Mycale, the Spartan king Leotychidas had proposed transplanting all the Greeks from Asia Minor to Europe as the only method of permanently freeing them from Persian dominion.\nXanthippus, the Athenian commander at Mycale, had furiously rejected this; the Ionian cities had been Athenian colonies, and the Athenians, if no one else, would protect the Ionians. This marked the point at which the leadership of the Greek alliance effectively passed to the Athenians. With the Spartan withdrawal after Byzantion, the leadership of the Athenians became explicit.\nThe loose alliance of city states which had fought against Xerxes's invasion had been dominated by Sparta and the Peloponnesian league. With the withdrawal of these states, a congress was called on the holy island of Delos to institute a new alliance to continue the fight against the Persians; hence the modern designation \"Delian League\". According to Thucydides, the official aim of the League was to \"avenge the wrongs they suffered by ravaging the territory of the king.\"\nIn reality, this goal was divided into three main efforts\u2014to prepare for future invasion, to seek revenge against Persia, and to organize a means of dividing spoils of war. The members were given a choice of either offering armed forces or paying a tax to the joint treasury; most states chose the tax. League members swore to have the same friends and enemies, and dropped ingots of iron into the sea to symbolize the permanence of their alliance. The Athenian politician Aristides would spend the rest of his life occupied in the affairs of the alliance, dying (according to Plutarch) a few years later in Pontus, whilst determining what the tax of new members was to be.\nComposition and expansion.\nIn the first ten years of the league's existence, Cimon/Kimon forced Karystos in Euboea to join the league, conquered the island of Skyros and sent Athenian colonists there.\nOver time, especially with the suppression of rebellions, Athens exercised hegemony over the rest of the league. Thucydides describes how Athens's control over the League grew:\n Of all the causes of defection, that connected with arrears of tribute and vessels, and with failure of service, was the chief; for the Athenians were very severe and exacting, and made themselves offensive by applying the screw of necessity to men who were not used to and in fact not disposed for any continuous labor. In some other respects the Athenians were not the old popular rulers they had been at first; and if they had more than their fair share of service, it was correspondingly easy for them to reduce any that tried to leave the confederacy. The Athenians also arranged for the other members of the league to pay its share of the expense in money instead of in ships and men, and for this the subject city-states had themselves to blame, their wish to get out of giving service making most leave their homes. Thus while Athens was increasing her navy with the funds they contributed, a revolt always found itself without enough resources or experienced leaders for war.\nRebellion.\nNaxos.\nThe first member of the league to attempt to secede was the island of Naxos in c. 471 BC. After being defeated, Naxos is believed (based on similar, later revolts) to have been forced to tear down its walls along with losing its fleet and vote in the League.\nThasos.\nIn 465 BC, Athens founded the colony of Amphipolis on the Strymon river. Thasos, a member of the League, saw her interests in the mines of Mt. Pangaion threatened and defected from the League to Persia. She called to Sparta for assistance but was denied, as Sparta was facing the largest helot revolution in its history.\nAfter more than two years of siege, Thasos surrendered to the Athenian leader Aristides and was forced back into the league. As a result, the fortification walls of Thasos were torn down, and they had to pay yearly tribute and fines. Additionally, their land, naval ships, and the mines of Thasos were confiscated by Athens. The siege of Thasos marks the transformation of the Delian league from an alliance into, in the words of Thucydides, a hegemony.\nPolicies of the League.\nIn 461 BC, Cimon was ostracized and was succeeded in his influence by democrats such as Ephialtes and Pericles. This signaled a complete change in Athenian foreign policy, neglecting the alliance with the Spartans and instead allying with her enemies, Argos and Thessaly. Megara deserted the Spartan-led Peloponnesian League and allied herself with Athens, allowing construction of a double line of walls across the Isthmus of Corinth and protecting Athens from attack from that quarter. Roughly a decade earlier, due to encouragement from influential speaker Themistocles, the Athenians had also constructed the Long Walls connecting their city to the Piraeus, its port, making it effectively invulnerable to attack by land.\nIn 454 BC, the Athenian general Pericles moved the Delian League's treasury from Delos to Athens, allegedly to keep it safe from Persia. However, Plutarch indicates that many of Pericles's rivals viewed the transfer to Athens as usurping monetary resources to fund elaborate building projects. Athens also switched from accepting ships, men and weapons as dues from league members, to only accepting money.\nThe new treasury established in Athens was used for many purposes, not all relating to the defence of members of the league. It was from tribute paid to the league that Pericles set to building the Parthenon on the Acropolis, replacing an older temple, as well as many other non-defense related expenditures. The Delian League was turning from an alliance into an empire.\nWars against Persia.\nWar with the Persians continued. In 460 BC, Egypt revolted under local leaders the Hellenes called Inaros and Amyrtaeus, who requested aid from Athens. Pericles led 250 ships, intended to attack Cyprus, to their aid because it would further damage Persia. After four years, however, the Egyptian rebellion was defeated by the Achaemenid general Megabyzus, who captured the greater part of the Athenian forces. In fact, according to Isocrates, the Athenians and their allies lost some 20,000 men in the expedition, while modern estimates place the figure at 50,000 men and 250 ships including reinforcements. The remainder escaped to Cyrene and thence returned home.\nThis was the Athenians' main (public) reason for moving the treasury of the League from Delos to Athens, further consolidating their control over the League. The Persians followed up their victory by sending a fleet to re-establish their control over Cyprus, and 200 ships were sent out to counter them under Cimon, who returned from ostracism in 451 BC. He died during the blockade of Citium, though the fleet won a double victory by land and sea over the Persians off Salamis, Cyprus.\nThis battle was the last major one fought against the Persians. Many writers report that a peace treaty, known as the Peace of Callias, was formalized in 450 BC, but some writers believe that the treaty was a myth created later to inflate the stature of Athens. However, an understanding was definitely reached, enabling the Athenians to focus their attention on events in Greece proper.\nWars in Greece.\nSoon, war with the Peloponnesians broke out. In 458 BC, the Athenians blockaded the island of Aegina, and simultaneously defended Megara from the Corinthians by sending out an army composed of those too young or old for regular military service. The following year, Sparta sent an army into Boeotia, reviving the power of Thebes in order to help hold the Athenians in check. Their return was blocked, and they resolved to march on Athens, where the Long Walls were not yet completed, winning a victory at the Battle of Tanagra. All this accomplished, however, was to allow them to return home via the Megarid. Two months later, the Athenians under Myronides invaded Boeotia, and winning the Battle of Oenophyta gained control of the whole country except Thebes.\nReverses followed peace with Persia in 449 BC. The Battle of Coronea, in 447 BC, led to the abandonment of Boeotia. Euboea and Megara revolted, and while the former was restored to its status as a tributary ally, the latter was a permanent loss. The Delian and Peloponnesian Leagues signed a peace treaty, which was set to endure for thirty years. It only lasted until 431 BC, when the Peloponnesian War broke out.\nThose who revolted unsuccessfully during the war saw the example made of the Mytilenians, the principal people on Lesbos. After an unsuccessful revolt, the Athenians ordered the death of the entire male population. After some thought, they rescinded this order, and only put to death the leading 1000 ringleaders of the revolt, and redistributed the land of the entire island to Athenian shareholders, who were sent out to reside on Lesbos.\nThis type of treatment was not reserved solely for those who revolted. Thucydides documents the example of Melos, a small island, neutral in the war, though founded by Spartans. The Melians were offered a choice to join the Athenians, or be conquered. Choosing to resist, their town was besieged and conquered; the males were put to death and the women sold into slavery (see Melian dialogue).\nThe Athenian Empire (454\u2013404 BC).\nBy 454 BC, the Delian League could be fairly characterised as an Athenian Empire; a key event of 454 BC was the moving of the treasury of the Delian League from Delos to Athens. This is often seen as a key marker of the transition from alliance to empire, but while it is significant, it is important to view the period as a whole when considering the development of Athenian imperialism, and not to focus on a single event as being the main contributor to it. At the start of the Peloponnesian War, only Chios and Lesbos were left to contribute ships, and these states were by now far too weak to secede without support. Lesbos tried to revolt first, and failed completely. Chios, the most powerful of the original members of the Delian League save Athens, was the last to revolt, and in the aftermath of the Syracusan Expedition enjoyed success for several years, inspiring all of Ionia to revolt. Athens was nonetheless eventually able to suppress these revolts.\nTo further strengthen Athens's grip on its empire, Pericles in 450 BC began a policy of establishing \"kleruchiai\"\u2014quasi-colonies that remained tied to Athens and which served as garrisons to maintain control of the League's vast territory. Furthermore, Pericles employed a number of offices to maintain Athens' empire: \"proxenoi\", who fostered good relations between Athens and League members; \"episkopoi\" and \"archontes\", who oversaw the collection of tribute; and \"hellenotamiai\", who received the tribute on Athens' behalf.\nAthens's empire was not very stable and after 27 years of war, the Spartans, aided by the Persians and Athenian internal strife, were able to defeat it. However, it did not remain defeated for long. The Second Athenian League, a maritime self-defense league, was founded in 377 BC and was led by Athens. The Athenians would never recover the full extent of their power, and their enemies were now far stronger and more varied."}
{"id": "2038", "revid": "855512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2038", "title": "August Horch", "text": "August Horch (12 October 1868 \u2013 3 February 1951) was a German engineer and automobile pioneer, the founder of the manufacturing giant which would eventually become Audi.\nBeginnings.\nHorch was born in Winningen, Rhenish Prussia. His initial trade was as a blacksmith, and then was educated at Hochschule Mittweida (Mittweida Technical College). After receiving a degree in engineering, he worked in shipbuilding. Horch worked for Karl Benz from 1896, before founding \"A. Horch &amp; Co.\" in November 1899, in Ehrenfeld, Cologne, Germany.\nManufacturing.\nThe first Horch automobile was built in 1901. The company moved to Reichenbach in 1902 and Zwickau in 1904. Horch left the company in 1909 after a dispute, and set up in competition in Zwickau. His new firm was initially called \"Horch Automobil-Werke GmbH\", but following a legal dispute over the \"Horch\" name, he decided to make another automobile company. (The court decided that \"Horch\" was a registered trademark on behalf of August Horch's former partners and August Horch was not entitled to use it any more). Consequently, Horch named his new company \"Audi Automobilwerke GmbH\" in 1910, \"Audi\" being the Latinization of Horch.\nPost Audi.\nHorch left Audi in 1920 and went to Berlin and took various jobs. He published his autobiography, \"I Built Cars (Ich Baute Autos)\" in 1937. He also served on the board of Auto Union, the successor to Audi Automobilwerke GmbH he founded. He was an honorary citizen of Zwickau and had a street named for his Audi cars in both Zwickau and his birthplace Winningen. He was made an honorary professor at Braunschweig University of Technology."}
{"id": "2039", "revid": "32206216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2039", "title": "Avionics", "text": "Avionics are the electronic systems used on aircraft, artificial satellites, and spacecraft. Avionic systems include communications, navigation, the display and management of multiple systems, and the hundreds of systems that are fitted to aircraft to perform individual functions. These can be as simple as a searchlight for a police helicopter or as complicated as the tactical system for an airborne early warning platform. The term \"avionics\" is a portmanteau of the words \"aviation\" and \"electronics\".\nHistory.\nThe term \"avionics\" was coined in 1949 by Philip J. Klass, senior editor at \"Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology\" magazine as a portmanteau of \"aviation electronics\".\nRadio communication was first used in aircraft just prior to World War I. The first airborne radios were in zeppelins, but the military sparked development of light radio sets that could be carried by heavier-than-air craft, so that aerial reconnaissance biplanes could report their observations immediately in case they were shot down. The first experimental radio transmission from an airplane was conducted by the US Navy August 1910. The first aircraft radios transmitted by radiotelegraphy, so they required two-seat aircraft with a second crewman to tap on a telegraph key to spell out messages by Morse code. During World War I, AM voice two way radio sets were made possible in 1917 by the development of the triode vacuum tube, which were simple enough that the pilot in a single seat aircraft could use it while flying.\nRadar, the central technology used today in aircraft navigation and air traffic control, was developed by several nations, mainly in secret, as an air defense system in the 1930s during the runup to World War\u00a0II. Many modern avionics have their origins in World War\u00a0II wartime developments. For example, autopilot systems that are commonplace today began as specialized systems to help bomber planes fly steadily enough to hit precision targets from high altitudes. Britain's 1940 decision to share its radar technology with its US ally, particularly the magnetron vacuum tube, in the famous Tizard Mission, significantly shortened the war. Modern avionics is a substantial portion of military aircraft spending. Aircraft like the F\u201115E and the now retired F\u201114 have roughly 20 percent of their budget spent on avionics. Most modern helicopters now have budget splits of 60/40 in favour of avionics.\nThe civilian market has also seen a growth in cost of avionics. Flight control systems (fly-by-wire) and new navigation needs brought on by tighter airspaces, have pushed up development costs. The major change has been the recent boom in consumer flying. As more people begin to use planes as their primary method of transportation, more elaborate methods of controlling aircraft safely in these high restrictive airspaces have been invented.\nModern avionics.\nAvionics plays a heavy role in modernization initiatives like the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Next Generation Air Transportation System project in the United States and the Single European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) initiative in Europe. The Joint Planning and Development Office put forth a roadmap for avionics in six areas:\nMarket.\nThe Aircraft Electronics Association reports $1.73 billion avionics sales for the first three quarters of 2017 in business and general aviation, a 4.1% yearly improvement: 73.5% came from North America, forward-fit represented 42.3% while 57.7% were retrofits as the U.S. deadline of January 1, 2020 for mandatory ADS-B out approach.\nAircraft avionics.\nThe cockpit of an aircraft is a typical location for avionic equipment, including control, monitoring, communication, navigation, weather, and anti-collision systems. The majority of aircraft power their avionics using 14- or 28\u2011volt DC electrical systems; however, larger, more sophisticated aircraft (such as airliners or military combat aircraft) have AC systems operating at 400\u00a0Hz, 115 volts AC. There are several major vendors of flight avionics, including Panasonic Avionics Corporation, Honeywell (which now owns Bendix/King), Universal Avionics Systems Corporation, Rockwell Collins (now Collins Aerospace), Thales Group, GE Aviation Systems, Garmin, Raytheon, Parker Hannifin, UTC Aerospace Systems (now Collins Aerospace), Selex ES (now Leonardo S.p.A.), Shadin Avionics and Avidyne Corporation.\nInternational standards for avionics equipment are prepared by the Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC) and published by ARINC.\nCommunications.\nCommunications connect the flight deck to the ground and the flight deck to the passengers. On\u2011board communications are provided by public-address systems and aircraft intercoms.\nThe VHF aviation communication system works on the airband of 118.000\u00a0MHz to 136.975\u00a0MHz. Each channel is spaced from the adjacent ones by 8.33\u00a0kHz in Europe, 25\u00a0kHz elsewhere. VHF is also used for line of sight communication such as aircraft-to-aircraft and aircraft-to-ATC. Amplitude modulation (AM) is used, and the conversation is performed in simplex mode. Aircraft communication can also take place using HF (especially for trans-oceanic flights) or satellite communication.\nNavigation.\nAir navigation is the determination of position and direction on or above the surface of the Earth. Avionics can use satellite navigation systems (such as GPS and WAAS), INS( inertial navigation system), ground-based radio navigation systems (such as VOR or LORAN), or any combination thereof. Some navigation systems such as GPS calculate the position automatically and display it to the flight crew on moving map displays. Older ground-based Navigation systems such as VOR or LORAN requires a pilot or navigator to plot the intersection of signals on a paper map to determine an aircraft's location; modern systems calculate the position automatically and display it to the flight crew on moving map displays.\nMonitoring.\nThe first hints of glass cockpits emerged in the 1970s when flight-worthy cathode ray tube (CRT) screens began to replace electromechanical displays, gauges and instruments. A \"glass\" cockpit refers to the use of computer monitors instead of gauges and other analog displays. Aircraft were getting progressively more displays, dials and information dashboards that eventually competed for space and pilot attention. In the 1970s, the average aircraft had more than 100 cockpit instruments and controls.\nGlass cockpits started to come into being with the Gulfstream G\u2011IV private jet in 1985. One of the key challenges in glass cockpits is to balance how much control is automated and how much the pilot should do manually. Generally they try to automate flight operations while keeping the pilot constantly informed.\nAircraft flight-control system.\nAircraft have means of automatically controlling flight. Autopilot was first invented by Lawrence Sperry during World War\u00a0I to fly bomber planes steady enough to hit accurate targets from 25,000 feet. When it was first adopted by the U.S.\u00a0military, a Honeywell engineer sat in the back seat with bolt cutters to disconnect the autopilot in case of emergency. Nowadays most commercial planes are equipped with aircraft flight control systems in order to reduce pilot error and workload at landing or takeoff.\nThe first simple commercial auto-pilots were used to control heading and altitude and had limited authority on things like thrust and flight control surfaces. In helicopters, auto-stabilization was used in a similar way. The first systems were electromechanical. The advent of fly by wire and electro-actuated flight surfaces (rather than the traditional hydraulic) has increased safety. As with displays and instruments, critical devices that were electro-mechanical had a finite life. With safety critical systems, the software is very strictly tested.\nFuel Systems.\nFuel Quantity Indication System (FQIS) monitors the amount of fuel aboard. Using various sensors, such as capacitance tubes, temperature sensors, densitometers &amp; level sensors, the FQIS computer calculates the mass of fuel remaining on board.\nFuel Control and Monitoring System (FCMS) reports fuel remaining on board in a similar manner, but, by controlling pumps &amp; valves, also manages fuel transfers around various tanks.\nCollision-avoidance systems.\nTo supplement air traffic control, most large transport aircraft and many smaller ones use a traffic alert and collision avoidance system (TCAS), which can detect the location of nearby aircraft, and provide instructions for avoiding a midair collision. Smaller aircraft may use simpler traffic alerting systems such as TPAS, which are passive (they do not actively interrogate the transponders of other aircraft) and do not provide advisories for conflict resolution.\nTo help avoid controlled flight into terrain (CFIT), aircraft use systems such as ground-proximity warning systems (GPWS), which use radar altimeters as a key element. One of the major weaknesses of GPWS is the lack of \"look-ahead\" information, because it only provides altitude above terrain \"look-down\". In order to overcome this weakness, modern aircraft use a terrain awareness warning system (TAWS).\nFlight recorders.\nCommercial aircraft cockpit data recorders, commonly known as \"black boxes\", store flight information and audio from the cockpit. They are often recovered from an aircraft after a crash to determine control settings and other parameters during the incident.\nWeather systems.\nWeather systems such as weather radar (typically Arinc\u00a0708 on commercial aircraft) and lightning detectors are important for aircraft flying at night or in instrument meteorological conditions, where it is not possible for pilots to see the weather ahead. Heavy precipitation (as sensed by radar) or severe turbulence (as sensed by lightning activity) are both indications of strong convective activity and severe turbulence, and weather systems allow pilots to deviate around these areas.\nLightning detectors like the Stormscope or Strikefinder have become inexpensive enough that they are practical for light aircraft. In addition to radar and lightning detection, observations and extended radar pictures (such as NEXRAD) are now available through satellite data connections, allowing pilots to see weather conditions far beyond the range of their own in-flight systems. Modern displays allow weather information to be integrated with moving maps, terrain, and traffic onto a single screen, greatly simplifying navigation.\nModern weather systems also include wind shear and turbulence detection and terrain and traffic warning systems. In\u2011plane weather avionics are especially popular in Africa, India, and other countries where air-travel is a growing market, but ground support is not as well developed.\nAircraft management systems.\nThere has been a progression towards centralized control of the multiple complex systems fitted to aircraft, including engine monitoring and management. Health and usage monitoring systems (HUMS) are integrated with aircraft management computers to give maintainers early warnings of parts that will need replacement.\nThe integrated modular avionics concept proposes an integrated architecture with application software portable across an assembly of common hardware modules. It has been used in fourth generation jet fighters and the latest generation of airliners.\nMission or tactical avionics.\nMilitary aircraft have been designed either to deliver a weapon or to be the eyes and ears of other weapon systems. The vast array of sensors available to the military is used for whatever tactical means required. As with aircraft management, the bigger sensor platforms (like the E\u20113D, JSTARS, ASTOR, Nimrod MRA4, Merlin HM Mk 1) have mission-management computers.\nPolice and EMS aircraft also carry sophisticated tactical sensors.\nMilitary communications.\nWhile aircraft communications provide the backbone for safe flight, the tactical systems are designed to withstand the rigors of the battle field. UHF, VHF Tactical (30\u201388\u00a0MHz) and SatCom systems combined with ECCM methods, and cryptography secure the communications. Data links such as Link 11, 16, 22 and BOWMAN, JTRS and even TETRA provide the means of transmitting data (such as images, targeting information etc.).\nRadar.\nAirborne radar was one of the first tactical sensors. The benefit of altitude providing range has meant a significant focus on airborne radar technologies. Radars include airborne early warning (AEW), anti-submarine warfare (ASW), and even weather radar (Arinc 708) and ground tracking/proximity radar.\nThe military uses radar in fast jets to help pilots fly at low levels. While the civil market has had weather radar for a while, there are strict rules about using it to navigate the aircraft.\nSonar.\nDipping sonar fitted to a range of military helicopters allows the helicopter to protect shipping assets from submarines or surface threats. Maritime support aircraft can drop active and passive sonar devices (sonobuoys) and these are also used to determine the location of enemy submarines.\nElectro-Optics.\nElectro-optic systems include devices such as the head-up display (HUD), forward looking infrared (FLIR), infra-red search and track and other passive infrared devices (Passive infrared sensor). These are all used to provide imagery and information to the flight crew. This imagery is used for everything from search and rescue to navigational aids and target acquisition.\nESM/DAS.\nElectronic support measures and defensive aids systems are used extensively to gather information about threats or possible threats. They can be used to launch devices (in some cases automatically) to counter direct threats against the aircraft. They are also used to determine the state of a threat and identify it.\nAircraft networks.\nThe avionics systems in military, commercial and advanced models of civilian aircraft are interconnected using an avionics databus. Common avionics databus protocols, with their primary application, include:"}
{"id": "2041", "revid": "30657704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2041", "title": "Ares", "text": "Ares (; , \"\u00c1r\u0113s\" ) is the Greek god of courage and war. He is one of the Twelve Olympians, and the son of Zeus and Hera. In Greek literature, he often represents the physical or violent and untamed aspect of war and is the personification of sheer brutality and bloodlust, in contrast to his sister, the armored Athena, whose functions as a goddess of intelligence include military strategy and generalship.\nThe Greeks were toward Ares: although he embodied the physical valor necessary for success in war, he was a dangerous force, \"overwhelming, insatiable in battle, destructive, and man-slaughtering.\" His sons Phobos (Fear) and Deimos (Terror) and his lover, or sister, Enyo (Discord) accompanied him on his war chariot. In the \"Iliad,\" his father Zeus tells him that he is the god most hateful to him. An association with Ares endows places and objects with a savage, dangerous, or militarized quality. His value as a war god is placed in doubt: during the Trojan War, Ares was on the losing side, while Athena, often depicted in Greek art as holding Nike (Victory) in her hand, favoured the triumphant Greeks.\nAres plays a relatively limited role in Greek mythology as represented in literary narratives, though his numerous love affairs and abundant offspring are often alluded to. When Ares does appear in myths, he typically faces humiliation. He is well known as the lover of Aphrodite, the goddess of love, who was married to Hephaestus, god of craftsmanship. The most famous story related to Ares and Aphrodite shows them exposed to ridicule through the wronged husband's device.\nThe counterpart of Ares among the Roman gods is Mars, who as a father of the Roman people was given a more important and dignified place in ancient Roman religion as a guardian deity. During the Hellenization of Latin literature, the myths of Ares were reinterpreted by Roman writers under the name of Mars. Greek writers under Roman rule also recorded cult practices and beliefs pertaining to Mars under the name of Ares. Thus in the classical tradition of later Western art and literature, the mythology of the two figures later became virtually indistinguishable.\nNames.\nThe etymology of the name \"Ares\" is traditionally connected with the Greek word (\"ar\u0113\"), the Ionic form of the Doric (\"ara\"), \"bane, ruin, curse, imprecation\". Walter Burkert notes that \"Ares is apparently an ancient abstract noun meaning throng of battle, war.\" R. S. P. Beekes has suggested a Pre-Greek origin of the name.\nThe earliest attested form of the name is the Mycenaean Greek , \"a-re\", written in the Linear B syllabic script.\nThe adjectival epithet, \"Areios,\" was frequently appended to the names of other gods when they took on a warrior aspect or became involved in warfare: \"Zeus Areios\", \"Athena Areia\", even \"Aphrodite Areia\". In the \"Iliad\", the word \"ares\" is used as a common noun synonymous with \"battle.\"\nInscriptions as early as Mycenaean times, and continuing into the Classical period, attest to Enyalios as another name for the god of war.\nCharacter, origins, and worship.\nAres was one of the Twelve Olympians in the archaic tradition represented by the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey.\" Zeus expresses a recurring Greek revulsion toward the god when Ares returns wounded and complaining from the battlefield at Troy:\nThis ambivalence is expressed also in the Greeks' association of Ares with the Thracians, whom they regarded as a barbarous and warlike people. Thrace was Ares's birthplace, his true home, and his refuge after the affair with Aphrodite was exposed to the general mockery of the other gods.\nA late-6th-century BC funerary inscription from Attica emphasizes the consequences of coming under Ares's sway:\nAres in Sparta.\nIn Sparta, Ares was viewed as a model soldier: his resilience, physical strength, and military intelligence were unrivaled. An ancient statue, representing the god in chains, suggests that the martial spirit and victory were to be kept in the city of Sparta. That the Spartans admired him is indicative of the cultural divisions that existed between themselves and other Greeks, especially the Athenians (see Peloponnesian War).\nAres in the Arabian Peninsula.\nAres was also worshipped by the inhabitants of Tylos. It is not known if he was worshipped in the form of an Arabian god (or which one) or if he was worshipped in his Greek form.\nThe Suda write that at Petra the Theus Ares () was worshiped and he was honored. There was a black stone statue on a golden plinth, four feet tall and two feet wide. They offered sacrifice and pour forth the blood of the sacrificial animals, and the whole house was rich in gold, and contained many votive offerings.\nAres among the Scythians.\nAccording to Herodotus' \"Histories\", the Scythians worshipped a god he equated with the Greek Ares; unlike most other Scythian gods, he does not offer the indigenous name for this deity. While ranking beneath Tabiti, Api and Papaios in the divine hierarchy, this god was apparently worshipped differently from other Scythian gods, with statues and complex altars devoted to him. This type of worship is noted to be present among the Alans.\nNoting how Greek mythological Amazons are devotees of Ares and most likely based on Scythian warriors, some researchers have considered the possibility that a Scythian warrior women cult of this deity existed. Others have also posited that the \"Sword of Mars\" alludes to the Huns having adopted this deity.\nAres in Ethiopia.\nMa\u1e25rem, the principal god of the kings of Aksum prior to the 4th century AD, was always equated with Ares. In their Greek inscriptions, the kings invoke Ares. In bilingual inscriptions, where the Ethiopic has Ma\u1e25rem the Greek will have Ares. The anonymous king who put up the Monumentum Adulitanum in the late 2nd or early 3rd century refers to \"my greatest god, Ares, who also begat me, through whom I brought under my sway\" various peoples. The monumental throne celebrating the king's conquests was itself dedicated to Ares. In the early 4th century, the last pagan king of Aksum, Ezana, referred to \"the one who brought me forth, the invincible Ares\".\nAttributes.\nAres\u2019 attributes were a helmet, shield, and sword or spear. The birds of Ares (\"Ornithes Areioi\") were a flock of feather-dart-dropping birds that guarded the Amazons' shrine of the god on a coastal island in the Black Sea.\nCult and ritual.\nAlthough Ares received occasional sacrifice from armies going to war, the god had a formal temple and cult at only a few sites. At Sparta, however, each company of youths sacrificed a puppy to Enyalios before engaging in ritual fighting at the Phoebaeum. The chthonic night-time sacrifice of a dog to Enyalios became assimilated to the cult of Ares.\nJust east of Sparta stood an archaic statue of Ares in chains, to show that the spirit of war and victory was to be kept in the city.\nAt Olympia there was an altar of Ares.\nThe Temple of Ares in the agora of Athens, which Pausanias saw in the second century AD, had been moved and rededicated there during the time of Augustus. Essentially, it was a Roman temple to the Augustan Mars Ultor. From archaic times, the Areopagus, the \"mount of Ares\" at some distance from the Acropolis, was a site of trials. Paul the Apostle later preached about Christianity there. Its connection with Ares, perhaps based on a false etymology, is etiological myth. A second temple to Ares has been located at the archaeological site of Metropolis in what is now Western Turkey.\nAttendants.\nAres's sons Deimos (\"Terror\" or \"Dread\") and Phobos (\"Fear\") are his companions in war. According to Hesiod, they were also his children, born to him by Aphrodite. Eris, the goddess of discord, or Enyo, the goddess of war, bloodshed, and violence, was considered the sister and companion of the violent Ares. In at least one tradition, Enyalius, rather than another name for Ares, was his son by Enyo.\nAres may also be accompanied by Kydoimos, the daemon of the din of battle; the Makhai (\"Battles\"); the \"Hysminai\" (\"Acts of manslaughter\"); Polemos, a minor spirit of war, or only an epithet of Ares, since it has no specific dominion; and Polemos's daughter, Alala, the goddess or personification of the Greek war-cry, whose name Ares uses as his own war-cry. Ares's sister Hebe (\"Youth\") also draws baths for him.\nAccording to Pausanias, local inhabitants of Therapne, Sparta, recognized Thero, \"feral, savage,\" as a nurse of Ares.\nConsorts and children.\nThe union of Ares and Aphrodite created the gods Eros, Anteros, Phobos, Deimos, and Harmonia. Other versions include Alcippe as one of his daughters.\nUpon one occasion, Ares incurred the anger of Poseidon by slaying his son, Halirrhothius, because he had raped Alcippe, a daughter of the war-god. For this deed, Poseidon summoned Ares to appear before the tribunal of the Olympic gods, which was held upon a hill in Athens. Ares was acquitted. This event is supposed to have given rise to the name Areopagus (or Hill of Ares), which afterward became famous as the site of a court of justice.\nAccounts tell of Cycnus (\u039a\u03cd\u03ba\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) of Macedonia, a son of Ares who was so murderous that he tried to build a temple with the skulls and the bones of travellers. Heracles slaughtered this abominable monstrosity, engendering the wrath of Ares, whom the hero wounded in conflict.\nMythology.\nFounding of Thebes.\nOne of the roles of Ares was expressed in mainland Greece as the founding myth of Thebes: Ares was the progenitor of the water-dragon slain by Cadmus, for the dragon's teeth were sown into the ground as if a crop and sprang up as the fully armored autochthonic Spartoi. Cadmus placed himself in the god's service for eight years atoning for the crime of killing Ares\u2019 dragon. To propitiate Ares, Cadmus took as a bride Harmonia, a daughter of Ares's union with Aphrodite. In this way, Cadmus harmonized all strife and founded the city of Thebes.\nAres and Aphrodite.\nIn the tale sung by the bard in the hall of Alcinous, the Sun-god Helios once spied Ares and Aphrodite having sex secretly in the hall of Hephaestus, her husband. He reported the incident to Hephaestus. Contriving to catch the illicit couple in the act, Hephaestus fashioned a finely-knitted and nearly invisible net with which to snare them. At the appropriate time, this net was sprung, and trapped Ares and Aphrodite locked in very private embrace.\nBut Hephaestus was not satisfied with his revenge, so he invited the Olympian gods and goddesses to view the unfortunate pair. For the sake of modesty, the goddesses demurred, but the male gods went to witness the sight. Some commented on the beauty of Aphrodite, others remarked that they would eagerly trade places with Ares, but all who were present mocked the two. Once the couple was released, the embarrassed Ares returned to his homeland, Thrace, and Aphrodite went to Paphos.\nIn a much later interpolated detail, Ares put the young soldier Alectryon by his door to warn them of Helios's arrival as Helios would tell Hephaestus of Aphrodite's infidelity if the two were discovered, but Alectryon fell asleep on guard duty. Helios discovered the two and alerted Hephaestus. The furious Ares turned the sleepy Alectryon into a rooster which now always announces the arrival of the sun in the morning.\nAres and the giants.\nIn one archaic myth, related only in the \"Iliad\" by the goddess Dione to her daughter Aphrodite, two chthonic giants, the Aloadae, named Otus and Ephialtes, threw Ares into chains and put him in a bronze urn, where he remained for thirteen months, a lunar year. \"And that would have been the end of Ares and his appetite for war, if the beautiful Eriboea, the young giants' stepmother, had not told Hermes what they had done,\" she related. \"In this one suspects a festival of licence which is unleashed in the thirteenth month.\"\nAres was held screaming and howling in the urn until Hermes rescued him, and Artemis tricked the Aloadae into slaying each other. In Nonnus's \"Dionysiaca\" Ares also killed Ekhidnades, the giant son of Echidna, and a great enemy of the gods. Scholars have not concluded whether the nameless Ekhidnades (\"of Echidna's lineage\") was entirely Nonnus's invention or not. \n\"Iliad\".\nIn the \"Iliad\", Homer represented Ares as having no fixed allegiances, rewarding courage on both sides: he promised Athena and Hera that he would fight on the side of the Achaeans (\"Iliad\" V.830\u2013834, XXI.410\u2013414), but Aphrodite persuaded Ares to side with the Trojans. During the war, Diomedes fought with Hector and saw Ares fighting on the Trojans' side. Diomedes called for his soldiers to fall back slowly (V.590\u2013605).\nAthene or Athena, Ares's sister, saw his interference and asked Zeus, his father, for permission to drive Ares away from the battlefield, which Zeus granted (V.711\u2013769). Hera and Athena encouraged Diomedes to attack Ares (V.780\u2013834). Diomedes thrust with his spear at Ares, with Athena driving it home, and Ares's cries made Achaeans and Trojans alike tremble (V.855\u2013864). Ares fled to Mount Olympus, forcing the Trojans to fall back.\nWhen Hera mentioned to Zeus that Ares's son, Ascalaphus, was killed, Ares overheard and wanted to join the fight on the side of the Achaeans, disregarding Zeus's order that no Olympic god should enter the battle, but Athena stopped him (XV.110\u2013128). Later, when Zeus allowed the gods to fight in the war again (XX.20\u201329), Ares was the first to act, attacking Athena to avenge himself for his previous injury. Athena overpowered him by striking Ares with a boulder (XXI.391\u2013408).\nCultural depictions.\nIn Renaissance and Neoclassical works of art, Ares's symbols are a spear and helmet, his animal is a dog, and his bird is the vulture. In literary works of these eras, Ares is replaced by the Roman Mars, a romantic emblem of manly valor rather than the cruel and blood-thirsty god of Greek mythology."}
{"id": "2042", "revid": "1010537051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2042", "title": "Alexander Grothendieck", "text": "Alexander Grothendieck (; ; ; 28 March 1928\u00a0\u2013 13 November 2014) was a mathematician who became the leading figure in the creation of modern algebraic geometry. His research extended the scope of the field and added elements of commutative algebra, homological algebra, sheaf theory and category theory to its foundations, while his so-called \"relative\" perspective led to revolutionary advances in many areas of pure mathematics. He is considered by many to be the greatest mathematician of the 20th century.\nBorn in Germany, Grothendieck was raised and lived primarily in France, and he and his family were persecuted by the Nazi regime. For much of his working life, however, he was, in effect, stateless. As he consistently spelled his first name \"Alexander\" rather than \"Alexandre\" and his surname, taken from his mother, was the Dutch-like Low German \"Grothendieck\", he was sometimes mistakenly believed to be of Dutch origin.\nGrothendieck began his productive and public career as a mathematician in 1949. In 1958, he was appointed a research professor at the Institut des hautes \u00e9tudes scientifiques (IH\u00c9S) and remained there until 1970, when, driven by personal and political convictions, he left following a dispute over military funding. He received his Fields Medal in 1966 for advances in algebraic geometry, homological algebra, and K-theory. He later became professor at the University of Montpellier and, while still producing relevant mathematical work, he withdrew from the mathematical community and devoted himself to political and religious pursuits (first Buddhism and later a more Christian vision). In 1991, he moved to the French village of Lasserre in the Pyrenees, where he lived in seclusion, still working tirelessly on mathematics until his death in 2014.\nLife.\nFamily and childhood.\nGrothendieck was born in Berlin to anarchist parents. His father, Alexander \"Sascha\" Schapiro (also known as Alexander Tanaroff), had Hasidic Jewish roots and had been imprisoned in Russia before moving to Germany in 1922, while his mother, Johanna \"Hanka\" Grothendieck, came from a Protestant family in Hamburg and worked as a journalist. Both had broken away from their early backgrounds in their teens. At the time of his birth, Grothendieck's mother was married to the journalist Johannes Raddatz and his birth name was initially recorded as \"Alexander Raddatz.\" The marriage was dissolved in 1929 and Schapiro/Tanaroff acknowledged his paternity, but never married Hanka.\nGrothendieck lived with his parents in Berlin until the end of 1933, when his father moved to Paris to evade Nazism, followed soon thereafter by his mother. They left Grothendieck in the care of Wilhelm Heydorn, a Lutheran pastor and teacher in Hamburg. During this time, his parents took part in the Spanish Civil War, according to Winfried Scharlau, as non-combatant auxiliaries, though others state that Sascha fought in the anarchist militia.\nWorld War II.\nIn May 1939, Grothendieck was put on a train in Hamburg for France. Shortly afterwards his father was interned in Le Vernet. He and his mother were then interned in various camps from 1940 to 1942 as \"undesirable dangerous foreigners\". The first was the Rieucros Camp, where his mother contracted the tuberculosis which eventually caused her death and where Alexander managed to attend the local school, at Mende. Once Alexander managed to escape from the camp, intending to assassinate Hitler. Later, his mother Hanka was transferred to the Gurs internment camp for the remainder of World War II. Alexander was permitted to live, separated from his mother, in the village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, sheltered and hidden in local boarding houses or pensions, though he occasionally had to seek refuge in the woods during Nazis raids, surviving at times without food or water for several days. His father was arrested under the Vichy anti-Jewish legislation, and sent to the Drancy, and then handed over by the French Vichy government to the Germans to be sent to be murdered at the Auschwitz concentration camp in 1942. In Chambon, Grothendieck attended the Coll\u00e8ge C\u00e9venol (now known as the Le Coll\u00e8ge-Lyc\u00e9e C\u00e9venol International), a unique secondary school founded in 1938 by local Protestant pacifists and anti-war activists. Many of the refugee children hidden in Chambon attended C\u00e9venol, and it was at this school that Grothendieck apparently first became fascinated with mathematics.\nStudies and contact with research mathematics.\nAfter the war, the young Grothendieck studied mathematics in France, initially at the University of Montpellier where he did not initially perform well, failing such classes as astronomy. Working on his own, he rediscovered the Lebesgue measure. After three years of increasingly independent studies there, he went to continue his studies in Paris in 1948.\nInitially, Grothendieck attended Henri Cartan's Seminar at \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, but he lacked the necessary background to follow the high-powered seminar. On the advice of Cartan and Andr\u00e9 Weil, he moved to the University of Nancy where two leading experts were working on Grothendieck's area of interest, Topological Vector Spaces: Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Laurent Schwartz. The latter had recently won a Fields Medal. He showed his new student his latest paper; it ended with a list of 14 open questions, relevant for locally convex spaces. Grothendieck introduced new methods, which allowed him to solve all these problems within a few months. \nIn Nancy, he wrote his dissertation under those two professors on functional analysis, from 1950 to 1953. At this time he was a leading expert in the theory of topological vector spaces. From 1953 to 1955 he moved to the University of S\u00e3o Paulo in Brazil, where he immigrated by means of a Nansen passport, given that he refused to take French Nationality. By 1957, he set this subject aside in order to work in algebraic geometry and homological algebra. The same year he was invited to visit Harvard by Oscar Zariski, but the offer fell through when he refused to sign a pledge promising not to work to overthrow the United States government, a position that, he was warned, might have landed him in prison. The prospect did not worry him, as long as he could have access to books.\nComparing Grothendieck during his Nancy years to the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure trained students at that time: Pierre Samuel, Roger Godement, Ren\u00e9 Thom, Jacques Dixmier, Jean Cerf, Yvonne Bruhat, Jean-Pierre Serre, Bernard Malgrange, Leila Schneps says:\nHis first works on topological vector spaces in 1953 have been successfully applied to physics and computer science, culminating in a relation between Grothendieck inequality and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox in quantum physics.\nIH\u00c9S years.\nIn 1958, Grothendieck was installed at the Institut des hautes \u00e9tudes scientifiques (IH\u00c9S), a new privately funded research institute that, in effect, had been created for Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Grothendieck. Grothendieck attracted attention by an intense and highly productive activity of seminars there (\"de facto\" working groups drafting into foundational work some of the ablest French and other mathematicians of the younger generation). Grothendieck himself practically ceased publication of papers through the conventional, learned journal route. He was, however, able to play a dominant role in mathematics for around a decade, gathering a strong school.\nDuring this time, he had officially as students Michel Demazure (who worked on SGA3, on group schemes), Luc Illusie (cotangent complex), Michel Raynaud, Jean-Louis Verdier (cofounder of the derived category theory) and Pierre Deligne. Collaborators on the SGA projects also included Michael Artin (\u00e9tale cohomology) and Nick Katz (monodromy theory and Lefschetz pencils). Jean Giraud worked out torsor theory extensions of nonabelian cohomology. Many others like David Mumford, Robin Hartshorne, Barry Mazur and C.P. Ramanujam were also involved.\n\"Golden Age\".\nAlexander Grothendieck's work during the \"Golden Age\" period at the IH\u00c9S established several unifying themes in algebraic geometry, number theory, topology, category theory and complex analysis. His first (pre-IH\u00c9S) discovery in algebraic geometry was the Grothendieck\u2013Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, a generalisation of the Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem proved algebraically; in this context he also introduced K-theory. Then, following the programme he outlined in his talk at the 1958 International Congress of Mathematicians, he introduced the theory of schemes, developing it in detail in his \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"EGA\") and providing the new more flexible and general foundations for algebraic geometry that has been adopted in the field since that time. He went on to introduce the \u00e9tale cohomology theory of schemes, providing the key tools for proving the Weil conjectures, as well as crystalline cohomology and algebraic de Rham cohomology to complement it. Closely linked to these cohomology theories, he originated topos theory as a generalisation of topology (relevant also in categorical logic). He also provided an algebraic definition of fundamental groups of schemes and more generally the main structures of a categorical Galois theory. As a framework for his coherent duality theory he also introduced derived categories, which were further developed by Verdier.\nThe results of work on these and other topics were published in the \"EGA\" and in less polished form in the notes of the \"S\u00e9minaire de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"SGA\") that he directed at the IH\u00c9S.\nPolitical activism.\nGrothendieck's political views were radical and pacifist, and he strongly opposed both United States intervention in Vietnam and Soviet military expansionism. He gave lectures on category theory in the forests surrounding Hanoi while the city was being bombed, to protest against the Vietnam War. He retired from scientific life around 1970, having found out that IH\u00c9S was partly funded by the military. He returned to academia a few years later as a professor at the University of Montpellier.\nWhile the issue of military funding was perhaps the most obvious explanation for Grothendieck's departure from the IH\u00c9S, those who knew him say that the causes of the rupture ran deeper. Pierre Cartier, a \"visiteur de longue dur\u00e9e\" (\"long-term guest\") at the IH\u00c9S, wrote a piece about Grothendieck for a special volume published on the occasion of the IH\u00c9S's fortieth anniversary. The \"Grothendieck Festschrift\", published in 1990, was a three-volume collection of research papers to mark his sixtieth birthday in 1988.\nIn it, Cartier notes that as the son of an antimilitary anarchist and one who grew up among the disenfranchised, Grothendieck always had a deep compassion for the poor and the downtrodden. As Cartier puts it, Grothendieck came to find Bures-sur-Yvette \"une cage dor\u00e9e\" (\"a gilded cage\"). While Grothendieck was at the IH\u00c9S, opposition to the Vietnam War was heating up, and Cartier suggests that this also reinforced Grothendieck's distaste at having become a mandarin of the scientific world. In addition, after several years at the IH\u00c9S, Grothendieck seemed to cast about for new intellectual interests. By the late 1960s, he had started to become interested in scientific areas outside mathematics. David Ruelle, a physicist who joined the IH\u00c9S faculty in 1964, said that Grothendieck came to talk to him a few times about physics. Biology interested Grothendieck much more than physics, and he organized some seminars on biological topics.\nIn 1970, Grothendieck, with two other mathematicians, Claude Chevalley and Pierre Samuel, created a political group called \"Survivre\"\u2014the name later changed to \"Survivre et vivre\". The group published a bulletin and was dedicated to antimilitary and ecological issues, and also developed strong criticism of the indiscriminate use of science and technology. Grothendieck devoted the next three years to this group and served as the main editor of its bulletin.\nAlthough Grothendieck continued with mathematical enquiries his standard mathematical career, for the most part, ended when he left the IH\u00c9S. After leaving the IH\u00c9S Grothendieck became a temporary professor at Coll\u00e8ge de France for two years. He then became a professor at the University of Montpellier, where he became increasingly estranged from the mathematical community. He formally retired in 1988, a few years after having accepted a research position at the CNRS.\nManuscripts written in the 1980s.\nWhile not publishing mathematical research in conventional ways during the 1980s, he produced several influential manuscripts with limited distribution, with both mathematical and biographical content.\nProduced during 1980 and 1981, \"La Longue Marche \u00e0 travers la th\u00e9orie de Galois\" (\"The Long March Through Galois Theory\") is a 1600-page handwritten manuscript containing many of the ideas that led to the \"Esquisse d'un programme\". It also includes a study of Teichm\u00fcller theory.\nIn 1983, stimulated by correspondence with Ronald Brown and Tim Porter at Bangor University, Grothendieck wrote a 600-page manuscript titled \"Pursuing Stacks\", starting with a letter addressed to Daniel Quillen. This letter and successive parts were distributed from Bangor (see External links below). Within these, in an informal, diary-like manner, Grothendieck explained and developed his ideas on the relationship between algebraic homotopy theory and algebraic geometry and prospects for a noncommutative theory of stacks. The manuscript, which is being edited for publication by G. Maltsiniotis, later led to another of his monumental works, \"Les D\u00e9rivateurs\". Written in 1991, this latter opus of about 2000 pages further developed the homotopical ideas begun in \"Pursuing Stacks\". Much of this work anticipated the subsequent development of the motivic homotopy theory of Fabien Morel and Vladimir Voevodsky in the mid-1990s.\nIn 1984, Grothendieck wrote the proposal \"Esquisse d'un Programme\" (\"Sketch of a Programme\") for a position at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). It describes new ideas for studying the moduli space of complex curves. Although Grothendieck himself never published his work in this area, the proposal inspired other mathematicians' work by becoming the source of dessin d'enfant theory and Anabelian geometry. It was later published in the two-volume \"Geometric Galois Actions\" (Cambridge University Press, 1997).\nDuring this period, Grothendieck also gave his consent to publishing some of his drafts for EGA on Bertini-type theorems (\"EGA\"\u00a0V, published in Ulam Quarterly in 1992-1993 and later made available on the Grothendieck Circle web site in 2004).\nIn the 1,000-page autobiographical manuscript \"R\u00e9coltes et semailles\" (1986) Grothendieck describes his approach to mathematics and his experiences in the mathematical community, a community that initially accepted him in an open and welcoming manner but which he progressively perceived to be governed by competition and status. He complains about what he saw as the \"burial\" of his work and betrayal by his former students and colleagues after he had left the community. \"R\u00e9coltes et semailles\" work is now available on the internet in the French original, and an English translation is underway. Parts of \"R\u00e9coltes et semailles\" have been translated into Spanish and into Russian and published in Moscow.\nIn 1988 Grothendieck declined the Crafoord Prize with an open letter to the media. He wrote that established mathematicians like himself had no need for additional financial support and criticized what he saw as the declining ethics of the scientific community, characterized by outright scientific theft that, according to him, had become commonplace and tolerated. The letter also expressed his belief that totally unforeseen events before the end of the century would lead to an unprecedented collapse of civilization. Grothendieck added however that his views are \"in no way meant as a criticism of the Royal Academy's aims in the administration of its funds\" and added \"I regret the inconvenience that my refusal to accept the Crafoord prize may have caused you and the Royal Academy.\"\n\"La Clef des Songes\", a 315-page manuscript written in 1987, is Grothendieck's account of how his consideration of the source of dreams led him to conclude that God exists. As part of the notes to this manuscript, Grothendieck described the life and work of 18 \"mutants\", people whom he admired as visionaries far ahead of their time and heralding a new age. The only mathematician on his list was Bernhard Riemann. Influenced by the Catholic mystic Marthe Robin who was claimed to survive on the Holy Eucharist alone, Grothendieck almost starved himself to death in 1988. His growing preoccupation with spiritual matters was also evident in a letter titled \"Lettre de la Bonne Nouvelle\" sent to 250 friends in January 1990. In it, he described his encounters with a deity and announced that a \"New Age\" would commence on 14 October 1996.\nOver 20,000 pages of Grothendieck's mathematical and other writings, held at the University of Montpellier, remain unpublished. They have been digitized for preservation and are freely available in open access through the Institut Montpelli\u00e9rain Alexander Grothendieck portal.\nRetirement into reclusion and death.\nIn 1991, Grothendieck moved to a new address which he did not provide to his previous contacts in the mathematical community. Very few people visited him afterward. Local villagers helped sustain him with a more varied diet after he tried to live on a staple of dandelion soup. At some point, Leila Schneps and Pierre Lochak located him, then carried on a brief correspondence. Thus they became among \"the last members of the mathematical establishment to come into contact with him\". After his death, it was revealed that he lived alone in a house in Lasserre, Ari\u00e8ge, a small village at the foot of the Pyrenees.\nIn January 2010, Grothendieck wrote the letter \"D\u00e9claration d'intention de non-publication\" to Luc Illusie, claiming that all materials published in his absence have been published without his permission. He asks that none of his work be reproduced in whole or in part and that copies of this work be removed from libraries. A website devoted to his work was called \"an abomination.\" This order may have been reversed later in 2010.\nOn 13 November 2014, aged 86, Grothendieck died in the hospital of Saint-Girons, Ari\u00e8ge.\nCitizenship.\nGrothendieck was born in Weimar Germany. In 1938, aged ten, he moved to France as a refugee. Records of his nationality were destroyed in the fall of Germany in 1945 and he did not apply for French citizenship after the war. He thus became a stateless person for at least the majority of his working life, traveling on a Nansen passport. Part of this reluctance to hold French nationality is attributed to not wishing to serve in the French military, particularly due to the Algerian War (1954\u201362). He eventually applied for French citizenship in the early 1980s, well past the age that exempted him from military service.\nFamily.\nGrothendieck was very close to his mother to whom he dedicated his dissertation. She died in 1957 from the tuberculosis that she contracted in camps for displaced persons. He had five children: a son with his landlady during his time in Nancy, three children, Johanna (1959), Alexander (1961) and Mathieu (1965) with his wife Mireille Dufour, and one child with Justine Skalba, with whom he lived in a commune in the early 1970s.\nMathematical work.\nGrothendieck's early mathematical work was in functional analysis. Between 1949 and 1953 he worked on his doctoral thesis in this subject at Nancy, supervised by Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Laurent Schwartz. His key contributions include topological tensor products of topological vector spaces, the theory of nuclear spaces as foundational for Schwartz distributions, and the application of Lp spaces in studying linear maps between topological vector spaces. In a few years, he had turned himself into a leading authority on this area of functional analysis\u2014to the extent that Dieudonn\u00e9 compares his impact in this field to that of Banach.\nIt is, however, in algebraic geometry and related fields where Grothendieck did his most important and influential work. From about 1955 he started to work on sheaf theory and homological algebra, producing the influential \"T\u00f4hoku paper\" (\"Sur quelques points d'alg\u00e8bre homologique\", published in the Tohoku Mathematical Journal in 1957) where he introduced abelian categories and applied their theory to show that sheaf cohomology can be defined as certain derived functors in this context.\nHomological methods and sheaf theory had already been introduced in algebraic geometry by Jean-Pierre Serre and others, after sheaves had been defined by Jean Leray. Grothendieck took them to a higher level of abstraction and turned them into a key organising principle of his theory. He shifted attention from the study of individual varieties to the \"relative point of view\" (pairs of varieties related by a morphism), allowing a broad generalization of many classical theorems. The first major application was the relative version of Serre's theorem showing that the cohomology of a coherent sheaf on a complete variety is finite-dimensional; Grothendieck's theorem shows that the higher direct images of coherent sheaves under a proper map are coherent; this reduces to Serre's theorem over a one-point space.\nIn 1956, he applied the same thinking to the Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, which had already recently been generalized to any dimension by Hirzebruch. The Grothendieck\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem was announced by Grothendieck at the initial Mathematische Arbeitstagung in Bonn, in 1957. It appeared in print in a paper written by Armand Borel with Serre. This result was his first work in algebraic geometry. He went on to plan and execute a programme for rebuilding the foundations of algebraic geometry, which were then in a state of flux and under discussion in Claude Chevalley's seminar; he outlined his programme in his talk at the 1958 International Congress of Mathematicians.\nHis foundational work on algebraic geometry is at a higher level of abstraction than all prior versions. He adapted the use of non-closed generic points, which led to the theory of schemes. He also pioneered the systematic use of nilpotents. As 'functions' these can take only the value 0, but they carry infinitesimal information, in purely algebraic settings. His \"theory of schemes\" has become established as the best universal foundation for this field, because of its expressiveness as well as technical depth. In that setting one can use birational geometry, techniques from number theory, Galois theory and commutative algebra, and close analogues of the methods of algebraic topology, all in an integrated way.\nHe is also noted for his mastery of abstract approaches to mathematics and his perfectionism in matters of formulation and presentation. Relatively little of his work after 1960 was published by the conventional route of the learned journal, circulating initially in duplicated volumes of seminar notes; his influence was to a considerable extent personal. His influence spilled over into many other branches of mathematics, for example the contemporary theory of D-modules. (It also provoked adverse reactions, with many mathematicians seeking out more concrete areas and problems.)\n\"EGA\", \"SGA\", \"FGA\".\nThe bulk of Grothendieck's published work is collected in the monumental, yet incomplete, \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"EGA\") and \"S\u00e9minaire de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"SGA\"). The collection \"Fondements de la G\u00e9ometrie Alg\u00e9brique\" (\"FGA\"), which gathers together talks given in the S\u00e9minaire Bourbaki, also contains important material.\nGrothendieck's work includes the invention of the \u00e9tale and l-adic cohomology theories, which explain an observation of Andr\u00e9 Weil's that there is a connection between the topological characteristics of a variety and its diophantine (number theoretic) properties. For example, the number of solutions of an equation over a finite field reflects the topological nature of its solutions over the complex numbers. Weil realized that to prove such a connection one needed a new cohomology theory, but neither he nor any other expert saw how to do this until such a theory was found by Grothendieck.\nThis program culminated in the proofs of the Weil conjectures, the last of which was settled by Grothendieck's student Pierre Deligne in the early 1970s after Grothendieck had largely withdrawn from mathematics.\nMajor mathematical contributions.\nIn Grothendieck's retrospective \"R\u00e9coltes et Semailles\", he identified twelve of his contributions which he believed qualified as \"great ideas\". In chronological order, they are:\nHere the term \"yoga\" denotes a kind of \"meta-theory\" that can be used heuristically; Michel Raynaud writes the other terms \"Ariadne's thread\" and \"philosophy\" as effective equivalents.\nGrothendieck wrote that, of these themes, the largest in scope was topoi, as they synthesized algebraic geometry, topology, and arithmetic. The theme that had been most extensively developed was schemes, which were the framework \"par excellence\" for eight of the other themes (all but 1, 5, and 12). Grothendieck wrote that the first and last themes, topological tensor products and regular configurations, were of more modest size than the others. Topological tensor products had played the role of a tool rather than a source of inspiration for further developments; but he expected that regular configurations could not be exhausted within the lifetime of a mathematician who devoted himself to it. He believed that the deepest themes were motives, anabelian geometry, and Galois\u2013Teichm\u00fcller theory.\nInfluence.\nGrothendieck is considered by many to be the greatest mathematician of the 20th century. In an obituary David Mumford and John Tate wrote:\nAlthough mathematics became more and more abstract and general throughout the 20th century, it was Alexander Grothendieck who was the greatest master of this trend. His unique skill was to eliminate all unnecessary hypotheses and burrow into an area so deeply that its inner patterns on the most abstract level revealed themselves\u2013and then, like a magician, show how the solution of old problems fell out in straightforward ways now that their real nature had been revealed.\nBy the 1970s, Grothendieck's work was seen as influential not only in algebraic geometry, and the allied fields of sheaf theory and homological algebra, but influenced logic, in the field of categorical logic.\nGeometry.\nGrothendieck approached algebraic geometry by clarifying the foundations of the field, and by developing mathematical tools intended to prove a number of notable conjectures. Algebraic geometry has traditionally meant the understanding of geometric objects, such as algebraic curves and surfaces, through the study of the algebraic equations for those objects. Properties of algebraic equations are in turn studied using the techniques of ring theory. In this approach, the properties of a geometric object are related to the properties of an associated ring. The space (e.g., real, complex, or projective) in which the object is defined is extrinsic to the object, while the ring is intrinsic.\nGrothendieck laid a new foundation for algebraic geometry by making intrinsic spaces (\"spectra\") and associated rings the primary objects of study. To that end he developed the theory of schemes, which can be informally thought of as topological spaces on which a commutative ring is associated to every open subset of the space. Schemes have become the basic objects of study for practitioners of modern algebraic geometry. Their use as a foundation allowed geometry to absorb technical advances from other fields.\nHis generalization of the classical Riemann-Roch theorem related topological properties of complex algebraic curves to their algebraic structure. The tools he developed to prove this theorem started the study of algebraic and topological K-theory, which study the topological properties of objects by associating them with rings. Topological K-theory was founded by Michael Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch, after direct contact with Grothendieck's ideas at the Bonn Arbeitstagung.\nCohomology theories.\nGrothendieck's construction of new cohomology theories, which use algebraic techniques to study topological objects, has influenced the development of algebraic number theory, algebraic topology, and representation theory. As part of this project, his creation of topos theory, a category-theoretic generalization of point-set topology, has influenced the fields of set theory and mathematical logic.\nThe Weil conjectures were formulated in the later 1940s as a set of mathematical problems in arithmetic geometry. They describe properties of analytic invariants, called local zeta functions, of the number of points on an algebraic curve or variety of higher dimension. Grothendieck's discovery of the \u2113-adic \u00e9tale cohomology, the first example of a Weil cohomology theory, opened the way for a proof of the Weil conjectures, ultimately completed in the 1970s by his student Pierre Deligne. Grothendieck's large-scale approach has been called a \"visionary program.\" The \u2113-adic cohomology then became a fundamental tool for number theorists, with applications to the Langlands program.\nGrothendieck's conjectural theory of motives was intended to be the \"\u2113-adic\" theory but without the choice of \"\u2113\", a prime number. It did not provide the intended route to the Weil conjectures, but has been behind modern developments in algebraic K-theory, motivic homotopy theory, and motivic integration. This theory, Daniel Quillen's work, and Grothendieck's theory of Chern classes, are considered the background to the theory of algebraic cobordism, another algebraic analogue of topological ideas.\nCategory theory.\nGrothendieck's emphasis on the role of universal properties across varied mathematical structures brought category theory into the mainstream as an organizing principle for mathematics in general. Among its uses, category theory creates a common language for describing similar structures and techniques seen in many different mathematical systems. His notion of abelian category is now the basic object of study in homological algebra. The emergence of a separate mathematical discipline of category theory has been attributed to Grothendieck's influence, though unintentional.\nIn popular culture.\nThe novel \"Colonel L\u00e1grimas\" (\"Colonel Tears\" in English, available by Restless Books) by Puerto Rican - Costa Rican writer Carlos Fonseca is a semibiographic novel about Grothendieck."}
{"id": "2043", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2043", "title": "Hostility towards America", "text": ""}
{"id": "2047", "revid": "40054868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2047", "title": "Alcoholics Anonymous", "text": "Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is an international mutual aid fellowship with the stated purpose of enabling its members to \"stay sober and help other alcoholics achieve sobriety.\" AA is nonprofessional, self-supporting, and apolitical. Its only membership requirement is a desire to stop drinking. The AA program of recovery is set forth in the Twelve Steps.\nAA was founded in 1935 in Akron, Ohio, when one alcoholic, Bill Wilson, talked to another alcoholic, Bob Smith, about the nature of alcoholism and a possible solution. With the help of other early members, the book \"Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How More Than One Hundred Men Have Recovered From Alcoholism\" was written in 1939. Its title became the name of the organization and is now usually referred to as \"The Big Book\". AA's initial Twelve Traditions were introduced in 1946 to help the fellowship be stable and unified while disengaged from \"outside issues\" and influences.\nThe Traditions recommend that members remain anonymous in public media, altruistically help other alcoholics, and that AA groups avoid official affiliations with other organizations. They also advise against dogma and coercive hierarchies. Subsequent fellowships such as Narcotics Anonymous have adapted the Twelve Steps and the Twelve Traditions to their respective primary purposes.\nAA membership has since spread internationally \"across diverse cultures holding different beliefs and values\", including geopolitical areas resistant to grassroots movements. Close to two million people worldwide are estimated to be members of AA, as of 2016.\nHistory.\nAA sprang from The Oxford Group, a non-denominational movement modeled after first-century Christianity. Some members founded the Group to help in maintaining sobriety. \"Grouper\" Ebby Thacher was Wilson's former drinking buddy who approached Wilson saying that he had \"got religion\", was sober, and that Wilson could do the same if he set aside objections to religion and instead formed a personal idea of God, \"another power\" or \"higher power\".\nFeeling a \"kinship of common suffering\" and, though drunk, Wilson attended his first Group gathering. Within days, Wilson admitted himself to the Charles B. Towns Hospital after drinking four beers on the way\u2014the last alcohol he ever drank. Under the care of William Duncan Silkworth (an early benefactor of AA), Wilson's detox included the deliriant belladonna. At the hospital, a despairing Wilson experienced a bright flash of light, which he felt to be God revealing himself. Following his hospital discharge, Wilson joined the Oxford Group and recruited other alcoholics to the Group. Wilson's early efforts to help others become sober were ineffective, prompting Silkworth to suggest that Wilson place less stress on religion and more on \"the science\" of treating alcoholism. Wilson's first success came during a business trip to Akron, Ohio, where he was introduced to Robert Smith, a surgeon and Oxford Group member who was unable to stay sober. After thirty days of working with Wilson, Smith drank his last drink on 10 June 1935, the date marked by AA for its anniversaries.\nThe first female member Florence Rankin joined AA in March 1937, and the first non-Protestant member, a Roman Catholic, joined in 1939. The first Black AA group was established in 1945 in Washington, D.C. by Jim S., an African-American physician from Virginia.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, many AA meetings moved to online meetings using platforms such as Zoom, Google Hangouts, and conference calls. Some members expressed concerns about anonymity and security and steps were taken, including having \"digital bouncers\" at some online meetings.\nThe Big Book, the Twelve Steps and the Twelve Traditions.\nTo share their method, Wilson and other members wrote the initially-titled book, \"Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How More Than One Hundred Men Have Recovered from Alcoholism\", from which AA drew its name. Informally known as \"The Big Book\" (with its first 164 pages virtually unchanged since the 1939 edition), it suggests a twelve-step program in which members admit that they are powerless over alcohol and need help from a \"higher power\". They seek guidance and strength through prayer and meditation from God or a Higher Power of their own understanding; take a moral inventory with care to include resentments; list and become ready to remove character defects; list and make amends to those harmed; continue to take a moral inventory, pray, meditate, and try to help other alcoholics recover. The second half of the book, \"Personal Stories\" (subject to additions, removal and retitling in subsequent editions), is made of AA members' redemptive autobiographical sketches.\nIn 1941, interviews on American radio and favorable articles in US magazines, including a piece by Jack Alexander in \"The Saturday Evening Post\", led to increased book sales and membership. By 1946, as the growing fellowship quarreled over structure, purpose, and authority, as well as finances and publicity, Wilson began to form and promote what became known as AA's \"Twelve Traditions,\" which are guidelines for an altruistic, unaffiliated, non-coercive, and non-hierarchical structure that limited AA's purpose to only helping alcoholics on a non-professional level while shunning publicity. Eventually, he gained formal adoption and inclusion of the Twelve Traditions in all future editions of the Big Book. At the 1955 conference in St. Louis, Missouri, Wilson relinquished stewardship of AA to the General Service Conference, as AA grew to millions of members internationally.\nOrganization and finances.\nAA says it is \"not organized in the formal or political sense\", and Bill Wilson, borrowing the phrase from anarchist theorist Peter Kropotkin, called it a \"benign anarchy\". In Ireland, Shane Butler said that AA \"looks like it couldn't survive as there's no leadership or top-level telling local cumanns what to do, but it has worked and proved itself extremely robust\". Butler explained that \"AA's 'inverted pyramid' style of governance has helped it to avoid many of the pitfalls that political and religious institutions have encountered since it was established here in 1946.\"\nIn 2018, AA counted 2,087,840 members and 120,300 AA groups worldwide. The Twelve Traditions informally guide how individual AA groups function, and the Twelve Concepts for World Service guide how the organization is structured globally.\nA member who accepts a service position or an organizing role is a \"trusted servant\" with terms rotating and limited, typically lasting three months to two years and determined by group vote and the nature of the position. Each group is a self-governing entity with AA World Services acting only in an advisory capacity. AA is served entirely by alcoholics, except for seven \"nonalcoholic friends of the fellowship\" of the 21-member AA Board of Trustees.\nAA groups are self-supporting, relying on voluntary donations from members to cover expenses. The AA General Service Office (GSO) limits contributions to US$3,000 a year. Above the group level, AA may hire outside professionals for services that require specialized expertise or full-time responsibilities.\nLike individual groups, the GSO is self-supporting. AA receives proceeds from books and literature that constitute more than 50% of the income for its General Service Office. In keeping with AA's Seventh Tradition, the Central Office is fully self-supporting through the sale of literature and related products, and through the voluntary donations of AA members and groups. It does not accept donations from people or organizations outside of AA.\nIn keeping with AA's Eighth Tradition, the Central Office employs special workers who are compensated financially for their services, but their services do not include traditional \"12th Step\" work of working with alcoholics in need. All 12th Step calls that come to the Central Office are handed to sober AA members who have volunteered to handle these calls. It also maintains service centers, which coordinate activities such as printing literature, responding to public inquiries, and organizing conferences. Other International General Service Offices (Australia, Costa Rica, Russia, etc.) are independent of AA World Services in New York.\nProgram.\nAA's program extends beyond abstaining from alcohol. Its goal is to effect enough change in the alcoholic's thinking \"to bring about recovery from alcoholism\" through \"an entire psychic change,\" or spiritual awakening. A spiritual awakening is meant to be achieved by taking the Twelve Steps, and sobriety is furthered by volunteering for AA and regular AA meeting attendance or contact with AA members. Members are encouraged to find an experienced fellow alcoholic, called a sponsor, to help them understand and follow the AA program. The sponsor should preferably have experience of all twelve of the steps, be the same sex as the sponsored person, and refrain from imposing personal views on the sponsored person. Following the helper therapy principle, sponsors in AA may benefit from their relationship with their charges, as \"helping behaviors\" correlate with increased abstinence and lower probabilities of binge drinking.\nAA's program is an inheritor of Counter-Enlightenment philosophy. AA shares the view that acceptance of one's inherent limitations is critical to finding one's proper place among other humans and God. Such ideas are described as \"Counter-Enlightenment\" because they are contrary to the Enlightenment's ideal that humans have the capacity to make their lives and societies a heaven on Earth using their own power and reason.\nAfter evaluating AA's literature and observing AA meetings for sixteen months, sociologists David R. Rudy and Arthur L. Greil found that for an AA member to remain sober a high level of commitment is necessary. This commitment is facilitated by a change in the member's worldview. To help members stay sober AA must, they argue, provide an all-encompassing worldview while creating and sustaining an atmosphere of transcendence in the organization. To be all-encompassing AA's ideology places an emphasis on tolerance rather than on a narrow religious worldview that could make the organization unpalatable to potential members and thereby limit its effectiveness. AA's emphasis on the spiritual nature of its program, however, is necessary to institutionalize a feeling of transcendence. A tension results from the risk that the necessity of transcendence, if taken too literally, would compromise AA's efforts to maintain a broad appeal. As this tension is an integral part of AA, Rudy and Greil argue that AA is best described as a \"quasi-religious organization\".\nMeetings.\nAA meetings are \"quasi-ritualized therapeutic sessions run by and for, alcoholics\". They are usually informal and often feature discussions with voluntary donations collected during meetings. (AA's 7th tradition encourages groups to be self-supporting, declining outside contributions). Local AA directories list weekly meetings. Those listed as \"closed\" are available to those with a self-professed \"desire to stop drinking,\" which cannot be challenged by another member on any grounds. \"Open\" meetings are available to anyone (nonalcoholics can attend as observers). At speaker meetings (also known as gratitude meetings), one or more members who typically come in from a neighboring town's meeting tell their stories. At Big Book meetings, the group in attendance will take turns reading a passage from the AA Big Book and then discuss how they relate to it after. At twelve step meetings, the group will typically break out into subgroups depending on where they are in their program and start working on the twelve steps outlined in the program. In addition to those three most common types of meetings, there are also other kinds of discussion meetings which tend to allocate the most time for general discussion.\nAA meetings do not exclude other alcoholics, though some meetings cater to specific demographics such as gender, profession, age, sexual orientation, or culture. Meetings in the United States are held in a variety of languages including Armenian, English, Farsi, Finnish, French, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Spanish. While AA has pamphlets that suggest meeting formats, groups have the autonomy to hold and conduct meetings as they wish \"except in matters affecting other groups or AA as a whole\". Different cultures affect ritual aspects of meetings, but around the world \"many particularities of the AA meeting format can be observed at almost any AA gathering\".\nConfidentiality.\nUS courts have not extended the status of privileged communication, such as that enjoyed by clergy and lawyers, to AA related communications between members.\nSpirituality.\nA study found an association between an increase in attendance at AA meetings with increased spirituality and a decrease in the frequency and intensity of alcohol use. The research also found that AA was effective at helping agnostics and atheists become sober. The authors concluded that though spirituality was an important mechanism of behavioral change for some alcoholics, it was not the only effective mechanism. Since the mid-1970s, a number of 'agnostic' or 'no-prayer' AA groups have begun across the U.S., Canada, and other parts of the world, which hold meetings that adhere to a tradition allowing alcoholics to freely express their doubts or disbelief that spirituality will help their recovery, and these meetings forgo use of opening or closing prayers. There are online resources listing AA meetings for atheists and agnostics.\nDisease concept of alcoholism.\nMore informally than not, AA's membership has helped popularize the disease concept of alcoholism which had appeared in the eighteenth century. Though AA usually avoids the term \"disease\", 1973 conference-approved literature said \"we had the disease of alcoholism.\" Regardless of official positions, since AA's inception, most members have believed alcoholism to be a disease.\nAA's Big Book calls alcoholism \"an illness which only a spiritual experience will conquer.\" Ernest Kurtz says this is \"The closest the book Alcoholics Anonymous comes to a definition of alcoholism.\" Somewhat divergently in his introduction to The Big Book, non-member and early benefactor William Silkworth said those unable to moderate their drinking suffer from an allergy. In presenting the doctor's postulate, AA said \"The doctor's theory that we have an allergy to alcohol interests us. As laymen, our opinion as to its soundness may, of course, mean little. But as ex-problem drinkers, we can say that his explanation makes good sense. It explains many things for which we cannot otherwise account.\" AA later acknowledged that \"alcoholism is not a true allergy, the experts now inform us.\" Wilson explained in 1960 why AA had refrained from using the term \"disease\":\nWe AAs have never called alcoholism a disease because, technically speaking, it is not a disease entity. For example, there is no such thing as heart disease. Instead there are many separate heart ailments or combinations of them. It is something like that with alcoholism. Therefore, we did not wish to get in wrong with the medical profession by pronouncing alcoholism a disease entity. Hence, we have always called it an illness or a malady\u2014a far safer term for us to use.\nSince then medical and scientific communities have generally concluded that alcoholism is an \"addictive disease\" (aka Alcohol Use Disorder, Severe, Moderate, or Mild). The ten criteria are: alcoholism is a Primary Illness not caused by other illnesses nor by personality or character defects; second, an addiction gene is part of its etiology; third, alcoholism has predictable symptoms; fourth, it is progressive, becoming more severe even after long periods of abstinence; fifth, it is chronic and incurable; sixth, alcoholic drinking or other drug use persists in spite of negative consequences and efforts to quit; seventh, brain chemistry and neural functions change so alcohol is perceived as necessary for survival; eighth, it produces physical dependence and life-threatening withdrawal; ninth, it is a terminal illness; tenth, alcoholism can be treated and can be kept in remission.\nCanadian and United States demographics.\nAA's New York General Service Office regularly surveys AA members in North America. Its 2014 survey of over 6,000 members in Canada and the United States concluded that, in North America, AA members who responded to the survey were 62% male and 38% female.\nAverage member sobriety is slightly under 10 years with 36% sober more than ten years, 13% sober from five to ten years, 24% sober from one to five years, and 27% sober less than one year. Before coming to AA, 63% of members received some type of treatment or counseling, such as medical, psychological, or spiritual. After coming to AA, 59% received outside treatment or counseling. Of those members, 84% said that outside help played an important part in their recovery.\nThe same survey showed that AA received 32% of its membership from other members, another 32% from treatment facilities, 30% were self-motivated to attend AA, 12% of its membership from court\u2013ordered attendance, and only 1% of AA members decided to join based on information obtained from the Internet. People taking the survey were allowed to select multiple answers for what motivated them to join AA.\nEffectiveness.\nStudies of AA's efficacy have produced inconsistent results. While some studies have suggested an association between AA attendance and increased abstinence or other positive outcomes, other studies have not.\nThe Surgeon General of the United States 2016 Report on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health states \"Well-supported scientific evidence demonstrates the effectiveness of twelve-step mutual aid groups focused on alcohol and twelve-step facilitation interventions.\"\nRelationship with institutions.\nHospitals.\nMany AA meetings take place in treatment facilities. Carrying the message of AA into hospitals was how the co-founders of AA first remained sober. They discovered great value in working with alcoholics who are still suffering, and that even if the alcoholic they were working with did not stay sober, they did. Bill Wilson wrote, \"Practical experience shows that nothing will so much insure immunity from drinking as intensive work with other alcoholics\". Bill Wilson visited Towns Hospital in New York City in an attempt to help the alcoholics who were patients there in 1934. At St. Thomas Hospital in Akron, Ohio, Smith worked with still more alcoholics. In 1939, a New York mental institution, Rockland State Hospital, was one of the first institutions to allow AA hospital groups. Service to corrections and treatment facilities used to be combined until the General Service Conference, in 1977, voted to dissolve its Institutions Committee and form two separate committees, one for treatment facilities, and one for correctional facilities.\nPrisons.\nIn the United States and Canada, AA meetings are held in hundreds of correctional facilities. The AA General Service Office has published a workbook with detailed recommendations for methods of approaching correctional-facility officials with the intent of developing an in-prison AA program. In addition, AA publishes a variety of pamphlets specifically for the incarcerated alcoholic. Additionally, the AA General Service Office provides a pamphlet with guidelines for members working with incarcerated alcoholics.\nUnited States court rulings.\nUnited States courts have ruled that inmates, parolees, and probationers cannot be ordered to attend AA. Though AA itself was not deemed a religion, it was ruled that it contained \"enough\" religious components (variously described in \"Griffin v. Coughlin\" below as, inter alia, \"religion\", \"religious activity\", \"religious exercise\") to make coerced attendance at AA meetings a violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the constitution. In 2007, the Ninth Circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals stated that a parolee who was ordered to attend AA had standing to sue his parole office.\nAmerican treatment industry.\nIn 1939, High Watch Recovery Center in Kent, Connecticut, was founded by Bill Wilson and Marty Mann. Sister Francis who owned the farm tried to gift the spiritual retreat for alcoholics to Alcoholics Anonymous, however citing the sixth tradition Bill W. turned down the gift but agreed to have a separate non-profit board run the facility composed of AA members. Bill Wilson and Marty Mann served on the High Watch board of directors for many years. High Watch was the first and therefore the oldest 12-step-based treatment center in the world still operating today.\nIn 1949, the Hazelden treatment center was founded and staffed by AA members, and since then many alcoholic rehabilitation clinics have incorporated AA's precepts into their treatment programs. 32% of AA's membership was introduced to it through a treatment facility.\nUnited Kingdom treatment industry.\nA cross-sectional survey of substance-misuse treatment providers in the West Midlands found fewer than 10% integrated twelve-step methods in their practice and only a third felt their consumers were suited for Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous membership. Less than half were likely to recommend self-help groups to their clients. Providers with nursing qualifications were more likely to make such referrals than those without them. A statistically significant correlation was found between providers' self-reported level of spirituality and their likelihood of recommending AA or NA.\nCriticism.\nThirteenth-stepping.\n\"Thirteenth-stepping\" is a pejorative term for AA members approaching new members for dates. A study in the \"Journal of Addiction Nursing\" sampled 55 women in AA and found that 35% of these women had experienced a \"pass\" and 29% had felt seduced at least once in AA settings. This has also happened with new male members who received guidance from older female AA members, in pursuit of sexual company. The authors suggest that both men and women need to be prepared for this behavior or find male-only or female-only groups. Women-only meetings are a very prevalent part of AA culture, and AA has become more welcoming for women. AA's pamphlet on sponsorship suggests that men be sponsored by men and women be sponsored by women.\nModeration or abstinence.\nStanton Peele argued that some AA groups apply the disease model to all problem drinkers, whether or not they are \"full-blown\" alcoholics. Along with Nancy Shute, Peele has advocated that besides AA, other options should be readily available to those problem drinkers who are able to manage their drinking with the right treatment. The Big Book says \"moderate drinkers\" and \"a certain type of hard drinker\" are able to stop or moderate their drinking. The Big Book suggests no program for these drinkers, but instead seeks to help drinkers without \"power of choice in drink.\"\nCultural identity.\nOne review of AA warned of detrimental iatrogenic effects of twelve-step philosophy and concluded that AA uses many methods that are also used by cults. A subsequent study concluded, however, that AA's program bore little resemblance to religious cults because the techniques used appeared beneficial. Another study found that the AA program's focus on admission of having a problem increases deviant stigma and strips members of their previous cultural identity, replacing it with the deviant identity. A survey of group members, however, found they had a bicultural identity and saw AA's program as a complement to their other national, ethnic, and religious cultures.\nLiterature.\nAlcoholics Anonymous publishes several books, reports, pamphlets, and other media, including a periodical known as the \"AA Grapevine\". Two books are used primarily: \"Alcoholics Anonymous\" (the \"Big Book\") and \"Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions\", the latter explaining AA's fundamental principles in depth. The full text of each of these two books is available on the AA website at no charge.\nAA in television.\nChuck Lorre's \"Mom\" (2013\u2013), follows dysfunctional daughter/mother duo Christy and Bonnie Plunkett, who are estranged for years while simultaneously struggling with addiction. They attempt to pull their lives and relationships together by trying to stay sober and visiting Alcoholics Anonymous. The show also explores themes of alcoholism, drug addiction and relapse.\nIn \"Hill Street Blues\", Captain Furillo (Daniel J. Travanti) is a regular member of AA and is shown several times in AA meetings.\nIn \"Grey's Anatomy,\" AA plays a large role in the storylines of multiple characters. In season 6, Dr. Richard Webber (James Pickens Jr.) begins struggling with alcoholism and it is revealed that he has a history of alcohol addiction. AA and maintaining sobriety become an important part of Dr. Webber's life through out the rest of the series. Alcoholism, but more so drug addiction, is also heavily featured in the spin-off series \"Private Practice.\" In season 4, it is revealed that both Dr. Charlotte King (KaDee Strickland) and Dr. Amelia Shepherd (Caterina Scorsone) have a history of problem drinking and narcotics addiction. This becomes main theme in season 5 when Amelia relapses and begins using again following her friend's suicide. The season follows her relapse and recovery. When Amelia joins Grey's in season 11, overcoming addiction remains an important part of her story line. Both series commonly discuss AA meetings, sponsors, and the \"serenity prayer\".\nIn Aaron Sorkin's political drama, \"The West Wing\", the character Leo McGarry is an admitted alcoholic and drug addict. He is reluctant to attend regular AA meetings, feeling the high-profile nature of his position as Chief of Staff of the White House would encourage a media frenzy. The vice president (Tim Matheson) invites him to a \"weekly poker game\", which turns out to be a secret AA meeting known only to those invited.\nIn CBS' \"Elementary\", Jonny Lee Miller plays an adaptation of Sherlock Holmes who is a recovering drug addict. Several episodes are centered around AA meetings and the process of recovery.\n\"This is Us\" is family drama where two of the main characters are members of AA. Generational patterns of addiction are covered. Some episodes feature characters reading AA literature and attending meetings.\n\"How to Get Away with Murder\" also features a main character with substance abuse issues, as a recurring theme. In later seasons, Annalise Keating is seen attending AA meetings."}
{"id": "2049", "revid": "10648115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2049", "title": "Alpha compositing", "text": "In computer graphics, alpha compositing or alpha blending is the process of combining one image with a background to create the appearance of partial or full transparency. It is often useful to render picture elements (pixels) in separate passes or layers and then combine the resulting 2D images into a single, final image called the composite. Compositing is used extensively in film when combining computer-rendered image elements with live footage. Alpha blending is also used in 2D computer graphics to put rasterized foreground elements over a background.\nIn order to combine the picture elements of the images correctly, it is necessary to keep an associated \"matte\" for each element in addition to its color. This matte layer contains the coverage information\u2014the shape of the geometry being drawn\u2014making it possible to distinguish between parts of the image where something was drawn and parts that are empty.\nAlthough the most basic operation of combining two images is to put one over the other, there are many operations, or blend modes, that are used.\nDescription.\nTo store matte information, the concept of an alpha channel was introduced by Alvy Ray Smith in the late 1970s and fully developed in a 1984 paper by Thomas Porter and Tom Duff. In a 2D image a color combination is stored for each picture element (pixel). Additional data for each pixel is stored in the alpha channel with a value ranging from 0 to 1. A value of 0 means that the pixel is fully transparent and does not provide any coverage information; i.e. there is no occlusion at the image pixel window because the geometry did not overlap this pixel. A value of 1 means that the pixel is fully opaque because the geometry completely overlaps the pixel window.\nWith the existence of an alpha channel, it is possible to express compositing image operations using a \"compositing algebra\". For example, given two images A and B, the most common compositing operation is to combine the images such that A appears in the foreground and B appears in the background. This can be expressed as A over B. In addition to over, Porter and Duff defined the compositing operators in, held out by (the phrase refers to holdout matting and is usually abbreviated out), atop, and xor (and the reverse operators rover, rin, rout, and ratop) from a consideration of choices in blending the colors of two pixels when their coverage is, conceptually, overlaid orthogonally:\nAs an example, the over operator can be accomplished by applying the following formula to each pixel:\nHere formula_3, formula_4 and formula_5 stand for the color components of the pixels in the result, image A and image B respectively, applied to each color channel (red/green/blue) individually, whereas formula_6, formula_7 and formula_8 are the alpha values of the respective pixels.\nThe over operator is, in effect, the normal painting operation (see Painter's algorithm). Bruce A. Wallace derived the over operator based on a physical reflectance/transmittance model, as opposed to Duff's geometrical approach. The in and out operators are the alpha compositing equivalent of clipping. The two use only the alpha channel of the second image and ignore the color components.\nStraight versus premultiplied.\nIf an alpha channel is used in an image, there are two common representations that are available: straight (unassociated) alpha and premultiplied (associated) alpha.\nWith straight alpha, the RGB components represent the color of the object or pixel, disregarding its opacity.\nWith premultiplied alpha, the RGB components represent the emission of the object or pixel, and the alpha represents the occlusion. The over operator then becomes:\nA more obvious advantage of this is that, in certain situations, it can save a subsequent multiplication (e.g. if the image is used many times during later compositing). However, the most significant advantages of using premultiplied alpha are for correctness and simplicity rather than performance: premultiplied alpha allows correct filtering and blending. In addition, premultiplied alpha allows regions of regular alpha blending and regions with additive blending mode to be encoded within the same image.\nAssuming that the pixel color is expressed using \"straight\" (non-premultiplied) RGBA tuples, a pixel value of (0, 0.7, 0, 0.5) implies a pixel that has 70% of the maximum green intensity and 50% opacity. If the color were fully green, its RGBA would be (0, 1, 0, 0.5).\nHowever, if this pixel uses premultiplied alpha, all of the RGB values (0, 0.7, 0) are multiplied, or scaled for occlusion, by the alpha value 0.5, which is appended to yield (0, 0.35, 0, 0.5). In this case, the 0.35 value for the G channel actually indicates 70% green emission intensity (with 50% occlusion). A pure green emission would be encoded as (0, 0.5, 0, 0.5). Knowing whether a file uses straight or premultiplied alpha is essential to correctly process or composite it, as a different calculation is required. It is also entirely acceptable to have an RGBA triplet express emission with no occlusion, such as (0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.0). Fires and flames, glows, flares, and other such phenomena can only be represented using associated / premultiplied alpha.\nThe only important difference is in the dynamic range of the colour representation in finite precision numerical calculations (which is in all applications): premultiplied alpha has a unique representation for transparent pixels, avoiding the need to choose a \"clear color\" or resultant artifacts such as edge fringes (see the next paragraphs). In an associated / premultiplied alpha image, the RGB represents the emission amount, while the alpha is occlusion. Premultiplied alpha has some practical advantages over normal alpha blending because interpolation and filtering give correct results.\nOrdinary interpolation without premultiplied alpha leads to RGB information leaking out of fully transparent (A=0) regions, even though this RGB information is ideally invisible. When interpolating or filtering images with abrupt borders between transparent and opaque regions, this can result in borders of colors that were not visible in the original image. Errors also occur in areas of semitransparency because the RGB components are not correctly weighted, giving incorrectly high weighting to the color of the more transparent (lower alpha) pixels.\nPremultiplication can reduce the available relative precision in the RGB values when using integer or fixed-point representation for the color components, which may cause a noticeable loss of quality if the color information is later brightened or if the alpha channel is removed. In practice, this is not usually noticeable because during typical composition operations, such as OVER, the influence of the low-precision colour information in low-alpha areas on the final output image (after composition) is correspondingly reduced. This loss of precision also makes premultiplied images easier to compress using certain compression schemes, as they do not record the color variations hidden inside transparent regions, and can allocate fewer bits to encode low-alpha areas. The same \u201climitations\u201d of lower quantisation bit depths such as 8 bit per channel are also present in imagery without alpha, and this argument is problematic as a result.\nGamma correction.\nThe RGB values of typical digital images do not directly correspond to the physical light intensities, but are rather compressed by a gamma correction function:\nThis transformation better utilized the limited number of bits in the encoded image by choosing formula_12 that better matches the non-linear human perception of luminance.\nAccordingly, computer programs that deal with such images must decode the RGB values into a linear space (by undoing the gamma-compression), blend the linear light intensities, and then re-apply the gamma compression on the result:\nWhen combined with premultiplied alpha, pre-multiplication is done in linear space, prior to gamma compression. This results in the following formula:\nNote that only the color components undergo gamma-correction; the alpha channel is always linear.\nOther transparency methods.\nAlthough used for similar purposes, transparent colors and image masks do not permit the smooth blending of the superimposed image pixels with those of the background (only whole image pixels or whole background pixels allowed).\nA similar effect can be achieved with a 1-bit alpha channel, as found in the 16-bit RGBA Highcolor mode of the Truevision TGA image file format and related TARGA and AT-Vista/NU-Vista display adapters' Highcolor graphic mode. This mode devotes 5 bits for every primary RGB color (15-bit RGB) plus a remaining bit as the \"alpha channel\".\nScreendoor transparency can be used to simulate partial occlusion where only 1-bit alpha is available.\nFor some applications, a single alpha channel is not sufficient: a stained-glass window, for instance, requires a separate transparency channel for each RGB channel to model the red, green and blue transparency separately. More alpha channels can be added for accurate spectral color filtration applications.\nAnalytical derivation of the over operator.\nA third approach is found by starting out with two very simple assumptions. For simplicity, we shall here use the shorthand notation formula_15 for representing the over operator.\nThe first assumption is that in the case where the background is opaque (i.e. formula_16), the over operator represents the convex combination of formula_17 and formula_18:\nThe second assumption is that the operator must respect the associative rule:\nNow, let us assume that formula_17 and formula_18 have variable transparencies, whereas formula_23 is opaque. We're interested in finding\nWe know from the associative rule that the following must be true:\nWe know that formula_23 is opaque and thus follows that formula_27 is opaque, so in the above equation, each formula_28 operator can be written as a convex combination:\nHence we see that this represents an equation of the form formula_30. By setting formula_31 and formula_32 we get\nwhich means that we have analytically derived a formula for the output alpha and the output color of formula_15.\nAn even more compact representation is given by noticing that formula_35:\nThe formula_28 operator fulfills all the requirements of a non-commutative monoid, where the identity element formula_38 is chosen such that formula_39 (i.e. the identity element can be any tuple formula_40 with formula_41)."}
{"id": "2050", "revid": "17245768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2050", "title": "Archaeologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "2051", "revid": "4293477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2051", "title": "Anarchist", "text": ""}
{"id": "2052", "revid": "160367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2052", "title": "Array data structure", "text": "In computer science, an array data structure, or simply an array, is a data structure consisting of a collection of \"elements\" (values or variables), each identified by at least one \"array index\" or \"key\". An array is stored such that the position of each element can be computed from its index tuple by a mathematical formula. The simplest type of data structure is a linear array, also called one-dimensional array.\nFor example, an array of 10 32-bit (4-byte) integer variables, with indices 0 through 9, may be stored as 10 words at memory addresses 2000, 2004, 2008, ..., 2036, (in hexadecimal: codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, ..., codice_4) so that the element with index \"i\" has the address 2000 + (\"i\" \u00d7 4).\nThe memory address of the first element of an array is called first address, foundation address, or base address.\nBecause the mathematical concept of a matrix can be represented as a two-dimensional grid, two-dimensional arrays are also sometimes called matrices. In some cases the term \"vector\" is used in computing to refer to an array, although tuples rather than vectors are the more mathematically correct equivalent. Tables are often implemented in the form of arrays, especially lookup tables; the word \"table\" is sometimes used as a synonym of \"array\".\nArrays are among the oldest and most important data structures, and are used by almost every program. They are also used to implement many other data structures, such as lists and strings. They effectively exploit the addressing logic of computers. In most modern computers and many external storage devices, the memory is a one-dimensional array of words, whose indices are their addresses. Processors, especially vector processors, are often optimized for array operations.\nArrays are useful mostly because the element indices can be computed at run time. Among other things, this feature allows a single iterative statement to process arbitrarily many elements of an array. For that reason, the elements of an array data structure are required to have the same size and should use the same data representation. The set of valid index tuples and the addresses of the elements (and hence the element addressing formula) are usually, but not always, fixed while the array is in use.\nThe term \"array\" is often used to mean array data type, a kind of data type provided by most high-level programming languages that consists of a collection of values or variables that can be selected by one or more indices computed at run-time. Array types are often implemented by array structures; however, in some languages they may be implemented by hash tables, linked lists, search trees, or other data structures.\nThe term is also used, especially in the description of algorithms, to mean associative array or \"abstract array\", a theoretical computer science model (an abstract data type or ADT) intended to capture the essential properties of arrays.\nHistory.\nThe first digital computers used machine-language programming to set up and access array structures for data tables, vector and matrix computations, and for many other purposes. John von Neumann wrote the first array-sorting program (merge sort) in 1945, during the building of the first stored-program computer.p.\u00a0159 Array indexing was originally done by self-modifying code, and later using index registers and indirect addressing. Some mainframes designed in the 1960s, such as the Burroughs B5000 and its successors, used memory segmentation to perform index-bounds checking in hardware.\nAssembly languages generally have no special support for arrays, other than what the machine itself provides. The earliest high-level programming languages, including FORTRAN (1957), Lisp (1958), COBOL (1960), and ALGOL 60 (1960), had support for multi-dimensional arrays, and so has C (1972). In C++ (1983), class templates exist for multi-dimensional arrays whose dimension is fixed at runtime as well as for runtime-flexible arrays.\nApplications.\nArrays are used to implement mathematical vectors and matrices, as well as other kinds of rectangular tables. Many databases, small and large, consist of (or include) one-dimensional arrays whose elements are records.\nArrays are used to implement other data structures, such as lists, heaps, hash tables, deques, queues, stacks, strings, and VLists. Array-based implementations of other data structures are frequently simple and space-efficient (implicit data structures), requiring little space overhead, but may have poor space complexity, particularly when modified, compared to tree-based data structures (compare a sorted array to a search tree).\nOne or more large arrays are sometimes used to emulate in-program dynamic memory allocation, particularly memory pool allocation. Historically, this has sometimes been the only way to allocate \"dynamic memory\" portably.\nArrays can be used to determine partial or complete control flow in programs, as a compact alternative to (otherwise repetitive) multiple codice_5 statements. They are known in this context as control tables and are used in conjunction with a purpose built interpreter whose control flow is altered according to values contained in the array. The array may contain subroutine pointers (or relative subroutine numbers that can be acted upon by SWITCH statements) that direct the path of the execution.\nElement identifier and addressing formulas.\nWhen data objects are stored in an array, individual objects are selected by an index that is usually a non-negative scalar integer. Indexes are also called subscripts. An index \"maps\" the array value to a stored object.\nThere are three ways in which the elements of an array can be indexed:\nUsing zero based indexing is the design choice of many influential programming languages, including C, Java and Lisp. This leads to simpler implementation where the subscript refers to an offset from the starting position of an array, so the first element has an offset of zero.\nArrays can have multiple dimensions, thus it is not uncommon to access an array using multiple indices. For example, a two-dimensional array codice_6 with three rows and four columns might provide access to the element at the 2nd row and 4th column by the expression codice_7 in the case of a zero-based indexing system. Thus two indices are used for a two-dimensional array, three for a three-dimensional array, and \"n\" for an \"n\"-dimensional array.\nThe number of indices needed to specify an element is called the dimension, dimensionality, or rank of the array.\nIn standard arrays, each index is restricted to a certain range of consecutive integers (or consecutive values of some enumerated type), and the address of an element is computed by a \"linear\" formula on the indices.\nOne-dimensional arrays.\nA one-dimensional array (or single dimension array) is a type of linear array. Accessing its elements involves a single subscript which can either represent a row or column index.\nAs an example consider the C declaration codice_8 which declares a one-dimensional array of ten integers. Here, the array can store ten elements of type codice_9 . This array has indices starting from zero through nine. For example, the expressions codice_10 and codice_11 are the first and last elements respectively.\nFor a vector with linear addressing, the element with index \"i\" is located at the address , where \"B\" is a fixed \"base address\" and \"c\" a fixed constant, sometimes called the \"address increment\" or \"stride\".\nIf the valid element indices begin at 0, the constant \"B\" is simply the address of the first element of the array. For this reason, the C programming language specifies that array indices always begin at 0; and many programmers will call that element \"zeroth\" rather than \"first\".\nHowever, one can choose the index of the first element by an appropriate choice of the base address \"B\". For example, if the array has five elements, indexed 1 through 5, and the base address \"B\" is replaced by , then the indices of those same elements will be 31 to 35. If the numbering does not start at 0, the constant \"B\" may not be the address of any element.\nMultidimensional arrays.\nFor a multidimensional array, the element with indices \"i\",\"j\" would have address \"B\" + \"c\" \u00b7 \"i\" + \"d\" \u00b7 \"j\", where the coefficients \"c\" and \"d\" are the \"row\" and \"column address increments\", respectively.\nMore generally, in a \"k\"-dimensional array, the address of an element with indices \"i\"1, \"i\"2, ..., \"i\"\"k\" is\nFor example: int a[2][3];\nThis means that array a has 2 rows and 3 columns, and the array is of integer type. Here we can store 6 elements they will be stored linearly but starting from first row linear then continuing with second row. The above array will be stored as a11, a12, a13, a21, a22, a23.\nThis formula requires only \"k\" multiplications and \"k\" additions, for any array that can fit in memory. Moreover, if any coefficient is a fixed power of 2, the multiplication can be replaced by bit shifting.\nThe coefficients \"c\"\"k\" must be chosen so that every valid index tuple maps to the address of a distinct element.\nIf the minimum legal value for every index is 0, then \"B\" is the address of the element whose indices are all zero. As in the one-dimensional case, the element indices may be changed by changing the base address \"B\". Thus, if a two-dimensional array has rows and columns indexed from 1 to 10 and 1 to 20, respectively, then replacing \"B\" by will cause them to be renumbered from 0 through 9 and 4 through 23, respectively. Taking advantage of this feature, some languages (like FORTRAN 77) specify that array indices begin at 1, as in mathematical tradition while other languages (like Fortran 90, Pascal and Algol) let the user choose the minimum value for each index.\nDope vectors.\nThe addressing formula is completely defined by the dimension \"d\", the base address \"B\", and the increments \"c\"1, \"c\"2, ..., \"c\"\"k\". It is often useful to pack these parameters into a record called the array's \"descriptor\" or \"stride vector\" or \"dope vector\". The size of each element, and the minimum and maximum values allowed for each index may also be included in the dope vector. The dope vector is a complete handle for the array, and is a convenient way to pass arrays as arguments to procedures. Many useful array slicing operations (such as selecting a sub-array, swapping indices, or reversing the direction of the indices) can be performed very efficiently by manipulating the dope vector.\nCompact layouts.\nOften the coefficients are chosen so that the elements occupy a contiguous area of memory. However, that is not necessary. Even if arrays are always created with contiguous elements, some array slicing operations may create non-contiguous sub-arrays from them.\nThere are two systematic compact layouts for a two-dimensional array. For example, consider the matrix\nIn the row-major order layout (adopted by C for statically declared arrays), the elements in each row are stored in consecutive positions and all of the elements of a row have a lower address than any of the elements of a consecutive row:\nIn column-major order (traditionally used by Fortran), the elements in each column are consecutive in memory and all of the elements of a column have a lower address than any of the elements of a consecutive column:\nFor arrays with three or more indices, \"row major order\" puts in consecutive positions any two elements whose index tuples differ only by one in the \"last\" index. \"Column major order\" is analogous with respect to the \"first\" index.\nIn systems which use processor cache or virtual memory, scanning an array is much faster if successive elements are stored in consecutive positions in memory, rather than sparsely scattered. Many algorithms that use multidimensional arrays will scan them in a predictable order. A programmer (or a sophisticated compiler) may use this information to choose between row- or column-major layout for each array. For example, when computing the product \"A\"\u00b7\"B\" of two matrices, it would be best to have \"A\" stored in row-major order, and \"B\" in column-major order.\nResizing.\nStatic arrays have a size that is fixed when they are created and consequently do not allow elements to be inserted or removed. However, by allocating a new array and copying the contents of the old array to it, it is possible to effectively implement a \"dynamic\" version of an array; see dynamic array. If this operation is done infrequently, insertions at the end of the array require only amortized constant time.\nSome array data structures do not reallocate storage, but do store a count of the number of elements of the array in use, called the count or size. This effectively makes the array a dynamic array with a fixed maximum size or capacity; Pascal strings are examples of this.\nNon-linear formulas.\nMore complicated (non-linear) formulas are occasionally used. For a compact two-dimensional triangular array, for instance, the addressing formula is a polynomial of degree 2.\nEfficiency.\nBoth \"store\" and \"select\" take (deterministic worst case) constant time. Arrays take linear (O(\"n\")) space in the number of elements \"n\" that they hold.\nIn an array with element size \"k\" and on a machine with a cache line size of B bytes, iterating through an array of \"n\" elements requires the minimum of ceiling(\"nk\"/B) cache misses, because its elements occupy contiguous memory locations. This is roughly a factor of B/\"k\" better than the number of cache misses needed to access \"n\" elements at random memory locations. As a consequence, sequential iteration over an array is noticeably faster in practice than iteration over many other data structures, a property called locality of reference (this does \"not\" mean however, that using a perfect hash or trivial hash within the same (local) array, will not be even faster - and achievable in constant time). Libraries provide low-level optimized facilities for copying ranges of memory (such as memcpy) which can be used to move contiguous blocks of array elements significantly faster than can be achieved through individual element access. The speedup of such optimized routines varies by array element size, architecture, and implementation.\nMemory-wise, arrays are compact data structures with no per-element overhead. There may be a per-array overhead (e.g., to store index bounds) but this is language-dependent. It can also happen that elements stored in an array require \"less\" memory than the same elements stored in individual variables, because several array elements can be stored in a single word; such arrays are often called \"packed\" arrays. An extreme (but commonly used) case is the bit array, where every bit represents a single element. A single octet can thus hold up to 256 different combinations of up to 8 different conditions, in the most compact form.\nArray accesses with statically predictable access patterns are a major source of data parallelism.\nComparison with other data structures.\nDynamic arrays or growable arrays are similar to arrays but add the ability to insert and delete elements; adding and deleting at the end is particularly efficient. However, they reserve linear (\u0398(\"n\")) additional storage, whereas arrays do not reserve additional storage.\nAssociative arrays provide a mechanism for array-like functionality without huge storage overheads when the index values are sparse. For example, an array that contains values only at indexes 1 and 2 billion may benefit from using such a structure. Specialized associative arrays with integer keys include Patricia tries, Judy arrays, and van Emde Boas trees.\nBalanced trees require O(log \"n\") time for indexed access, but also permit inserting or deleting elements in O(log \"n\") time, whereas growable arrays require linear (\u0398(\"n\")) time to insert or delete elements at an arbitrary position.\nLinked lists allow constant time removal and insertion in the middle but take linear time for indexed access. Their memory use is typically worse than arrays, but is still linear.\nAn Iliffe vector is an alternative to a multidimensional array structure. It uses a one-dimensional array of references to arrays of one dimension less. For two dimensions, in particular, this alternative structure would be a vector of pointers to vectors, one for each row(pointer on c or c++). Thus an element in row \"i\" and column \"j\" of an array \"A\" would be accessed by double indexing (\"A\"[\"i\"][\"j\"] in typical notation). This alternative structure allows jagged arrays, where each row may have a different size\u2014or, in general, where the valid range of each index depends on the values of all preceding indices. It also saves one multiplication (by the column address increment) replacing it by a bit shift (to index the\nDimension.\nThe dimension of an array is the number of indices needed to select an element. Thus, if the array is seen as a function on a set of possible index combinations, it is the dimension of the space of which its domain is a discrete subset. Thus a one-dimensional array is a list of data, a two-dimensional array is a rectangle of data, a three-dimensional array a block of data, etc.\nThis should not be confused with the dimension of the set of all matrices with a given domain, that is, the number of elements in the array. For example, an array with 5 rows and 4 columns is two-dimensional, but such matrices form a 20-dimensional space. Similarly, a three-dimensional vector can be represented by a one-dimensional array of size three."}
{"id": "2053", "revid": "19485939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2053", "title": "Advance Australia Fair", "text": "\"Advance Australia Fair\" is the national anthem of Australia. Created by the Scottish-born composer Peter Dodds McCormick, the song was first performed in 1878 and sung in Australia as a patriotic song. It replaced \"God Save the Queen\" as the official national anthem in 1984, following a plebiscite to choose the national song in 1977.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\n\"Advance Australia Fair\" was published in early December 1878 by Peter Dodds McCormick under the pen-name \"Amicus\" (which means \"friend\" in Latin). It was first sung by Andrew Fairfax, accompanied by a concert band conducted by McCormick, at a function of the Highland Society of New South Wales in Sydney on 30 November 1878 (Saint Andrew's Day). The song gained popularity and an amended version was sung by a choir of around 10,000 at the inauguration of the Commonwealth of Australia on 1 January 1901. In 1907 the Australian Government awarded McCormick \u00a3100 for his composition.\nIn a letter to R.B. Fuller dated 1 August 1913, McCormick described the circumstances that inspired him to write \"Advance Australia Fair\":\nThe earliest known sound recording of \"Advance Australia Fair\" appears in \"The Landing of the Australian Troops in Egypt\" (circa 1916), a short commercial recording dramatising the arrival of Australian troops in Egypt \"en route\" to Gallipoli.\nBefore its adoption as Australia's national anthem, \"Advance Australia Fair\" had considerable use elsewhere. For example, Australia's national broadcaster, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, used it to announce its news bulletins until 1952. It was also frequently played at the start or end of official functions. Towards the end of World War II it was one of three songs played in certain picture theatres, along with \"God Save the King\" and the US national anthem.\nInfluence.\nOther songs and marches have been influenced by \"Advance Australia Fair\", such as the Australian vice-regal salute.\nCompetitions, plebiscite and adoption.\nIn 1973 the Whitlam government decided that the country needed an anthem that could represent Australia with \"distinction\" and started a competition to find one that could replace the existing anthem, \"God Save the Queen\". This decision by Whitlam was driven by the desire to forge a new nationalism separate from the United Kingdom. In January of that year, Gough Whitlam dedicated an entire Australia Day speech to the search for a new anthem, referring to it as a \"symbolic expression of our national pride and dignity.\" The Australia Council for the Arts organised the contest, which was dubbed the \"Australian National Anthem Quest\". The contest was held in two stages, the first seeking lyrics and the second music, each having a A$5,000 prize for the winning entry. On the recommendation of the Council for the Arts, none of the new entries was felt worthy enough, so the contest ended with suggestions for \"Advance Australia Fair\", \"Waltzing Matilda\" and \"The Song of Australia\".\nIn 1974 the Whitlam government then performed a nationwide opinion survey to determine the song to be sung on occasions of national significance. Conducted through the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the survey polled 60,000 people nationally. \"Advance Australia Fair\" was chosen by 51.4% of respondents and, on 9 April of that year, Whitlam announced in parliament that it was the national anthem. It was to be used on all occasions excepting those of a specifically regal nature. A spokesman for Whitlam later stated that the Government regarded the tune primarily as the national anthem. During the 1975 election campaign following the dismissal of Whitlam by Sir John Kerr, David Combe proposed that the song be played at the start of the Labor Party's official campaign launch on 24 November 1975 at Festival Hall, Melbourne. Whitlam's speechwriter Graham Freudenberg rejected this idea because, among other reasons, the status of the anthem at that point was still tentative.\nOn 22 January 1976 the Fraser government reinstated \"God Save the Queen\" as the national anthem for use at royal, vice-regal, defence and loyal toast occasions. Fraser stated that \"Advance Australia Fair\", \"Song of Australia\" or \"Waltzing Matilda\" could be used for non-regal occasions. His government made plans to conduct a national poll to find a song for use on ceremonial occasions when it was desired to mark a separate Australian identity. This was conducted as a plebiscite to choose the National Song, held as an optional additional question in the 1977 referendum on various issues. On 23 May the government announced the results, \"Advance Australia Fair\" received 43.29% of the vote, defeating the three alternatives, \"Waltzing Matilda\" (28.28%), \"The Song of Australia\" (9.65%) and the existing national anthem, \"God Save the Queen\" (18.78%).\n\"Advance Australia Fair\", with modified lyrics and reduced to two verses (see development of lyrics), was adopted as the Australian national anthem by the Labor government of Bob Hawke, coming into effect on 19 April 1984. At the same time, \"God Save the Queen\" became known as the royal anthem, and continues to be played alongside the Australian national anthem at public engagements in Australia that are attended by the Queen or members of the Royal Family.\nEven though any copyright of Peter Dodds McCormick's original lyrics has expired, as he died in 1916, the Commonwealth of Australia claims copyright on the official lyrics and particular arrangements of music. Non-commercial use of the anthem is permitted without case-by-case permission, but the Commonwealth government requires permission for commercial use.\nThe orchestral arrangement of \"Advance Australia Fair\" that is now regularly played for Australian victories at international sporting medal ceremonies, and at the openings of major domestic sporting, cultural and community events, is by Tommy Tycho, an immigrant from Hungary. It was commissioned by ABC Records in 1984 and then televised by Channel 10 in 1986 in their Australia Day broadcast, featuring Julie Anthony as the soloist.\nLegislative basis.\nThe national anthem was changed on 1 January 2021 by proclamation of the Governor-General on the advice of the Federal Executive Council. The change prior to that was on 19 April 1984.\nLyrics.\nThe lyrics of \"Advance Australia Fair\", as modified by the National Australia Day Council, were officially adopted in April 1984. The lyrics were updated as of 1 January 2021 in an attempt to recognise Indigenous Australians, with the word \u201cone\u201d in the second line replacing the previous \u201cyoung\u201d. The lyrics are as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-right:2em;\"&gt;Australians all let us rejoice,\nFor we are one and free;\nWe've golden soil and wealth for toil;\nOur home is girt by sea;\nOur land abounds in nature's gifts\nOf beauty rich and rare;\nIn history's page, let every stage\nAdvance Australia Fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia Fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left;\"&gt;Beneath our radiant Southern Cross\nWe'll toil with hearts and hands;\nTo make this Commonwealth of ours\nRenowned of all the lands;\nFor those who've come across the seas\nWe've boundless plains to share;\nWith courage let us all combine\nTo Advance Australia Fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia Fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\nDevelopment of lyrics.\nSince the original lyrics were written in 1878, there have been several changes, in some cases with the intent of increasing the anthem's inclusiveness and gender neutrality. Some of these were minor while others have significantly changed the song. The original song was four verses long. For its adoption as the national anthem, the song was cut from four verses to two. The first verse was kept largely as the 1878 original, except for the change in the first line from \" let us rejoice\" to \" let us rejoice\". The second, third and fourth verses of the original were dropped, in favour of a modified version of the new third verse which was sung at Federation in 1901.\nThe lyrics published in the second edition (1879) were as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-right:2em;\"&gt;Australia's sons, let us rejoice,\nFor we are young and free;\nWe've golden soil and wealth for toil,\nOur home is girt by sea;\nOur land abounds in nature's gifts\nOf beauty rich and rare;\nIn history's page, let every stage\nAdvance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains let us sing,\nAdvance, Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-right:2em;\"&gt;When gallant Cook from Albion sail'd,\nTo trace wide oceans o'er,\nTrue British courage bore him on,\nTil he landed on our shore.\nThen here he raised Old England's flag,\nThe standard of the brave;\n\"With all her faults we love her still\"\n\"Britannia rules the wave.\"\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance, Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-right:2em;\"&gt;While other nations of the globe\nBehold us from afar,\nWe'll rise to high renown and shine\nLike our glorious southern star;\nFrom England soil and Fatherland,\nScotia and Erin fair,\nLet all combine with heart and hand\nTo advance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance, Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left;\"&gt;Should foreign foe e'er sight our coast,\nOr dare a foot to land,\nWe'll rouse to arms like sires of yore,\nTo guard our native strand;\nBritannia then shall surely know,\nThough oceans roll between,\nHer sons in fair Australia's land\nStill keep their courage green.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe 1901 Federation version of the third verse was originally sung as:\n&lt;poem&gt;Beneath our radiant Southern Cross,\nWe'll toil with hearts and hands;\nTo make our youthful Commonwealth,\nRenowned of all the lands;\nFor loyal sons beyond the seas\nWe've boundless plains to share;\nWith courage let us all combine\nTo advance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance Australia fair!&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe lyrics of \"Advance Australia Fair\", as modified by the National Australia Day Council and officially adopted on 19 April 1984, were as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-right:2em;\"&gt;Australians all let us rejoice,\nFor we are young and free;\nWe've golden soil and wealth for toil;\nOur home is girt by sea;\nOur land abounds in nature's gifts\nOf beauty rich and rare;\nIn history's page, let every stage\nAdvance Australia Fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia Fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left;\"&gt;Beneath our radiant Southern Cross\nWe'll toil with hearts and hands;\nTo make this Commonwealth of ours\nRenowned of all the lands;\nFor those who've come across the seas\nWe've boundless plains to share;\nWith courage let us all combine\nTo Advance Australia Fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia Fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThese lyrics were updated on 1 January 2021 to the current version, in which \"young\" in the second line is replaced with \"one\".\nCriticism.\nGeneral criticism.\nThe fourth line of the anthem, \"our home is girt by sea\", has been criticised for using the so-called archaic word \"girt\". Additionally, the lyrics and melody of the Australian national anthem have been criticised in some quarters as being dull and unendearing to the Australian people. National Party senator Sandy Macdonald said in 2001 that \"Advance Australia Fair\" is so boring that the nation risks singing itself to sleep, with boring music and words impossible to understand.\nPolitical sentiment is divided. Craig Emerson of the Australian Labor Party has critiqued the anthem, former MP Peter Slipper has said that Australia should consider another anthem, in 2011 former Victorian Premier Jeff Kennett suggested \"I Am Australian\", while former Australian Labor Party leader Kim Beazley defended it.\nRecognition of indigenous Australians.\nThe song has been criticised for failing to represent or acknowledge Australia's Indigenous peoples and the country's colonial history. The lyrics have been accused of celebrating British colonisation and perpetuating the concept of \"terra nullius\", with the second line of the anthem (\"for we are young and free\") criticised in particular for ignoring the long history of Indigenous Australians. It has also been suggested that the word \"fair\" celebrates the \"civilising\" mission of British colonists.\nSince about 2015, public debate about the anthem has increased. Boxer Anthony Mundine stated in 2013, 2017 and 2018 that he would not stand for the anthem, prompting organisers not to play it before his fights. In September 2018 a 9-year-old Brisbane girl was disciplined by her school after refusing to stand for the national anthem; her actions were applauded by some public commentators, and criticised by others. In 2019, several National Rugby League football players decided not to sing the anthem before the first match of the State of Origin series and before the Indigenous All-Stars series with New Zealand; NRL coach and celebrated former player Mal Meninga supported the protesting players and called for a referendum on the subject.\nSeveral alternative versions of \"Advance Australia Fair\" have been proposed to address the exclusion of Indigenous Australians. Judith Durham of The Seekers and Mutti Mutti musician Kutcha Edwards released their alternative lyrics in 2009, replacing \"for we are young and free\" with the opening lines \"Australians let us stand as one, upon this sacred land\". In 2015, Aboriginal Australian soprano Deborah Cheetham declined an invitation to sing the anthem at the 2015 AFL grand final after the AFL turned down her request to replace the words \"for we are young and free\" with \"in peace and harmony\". She has advocated for the lyrics be rewritten and endorsed Durham and Edwards' alternative version.\nIn 2017 the Recognition in Anthem Project was established and began work on a new version, with lyrics written by poet and former Victorian Supreme Court judge Peter Vickery following consultation with Indigenous communities and others. Vickery's proposed lyrics replaced \"we are young and free\" with \"we are one and free\" in the first verse, deleted the second verse, and added two new verses; the second verse acknowledging Indigenous history, immigration and calls for unity and respect, and the third verse adapting lines from the official second verse. It was debuted at the Desert Song Festival in Alice Springs by an Aboriginal choir. Former prime minister Bob Hawke endorsed Vickery's alternative lyrics in 2018. In 2017, the federal government under then prime minister Malcolm Turnbull granted permission for Vickery's lyrics to be sung at certain occasions as a \"patriotic song\", but said that before making any official change to the anthem, \"The Government would need to be convinced of a sufficient groundswell of support in the wider community\".\nIn November 2020, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian proposed changing one word in the opening couplet, from \"we are young and free\" to \"we are one and free\", to acknowledge Australia's Indigenous history. The proposal was supported by the federal Minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, and in December 2020 Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced that this change would be adopted from 1 January 2021, having received approval from Governor-General David Hurley.\nIn response to the change many First Nation people pointed out that the term First Nation itself implies a separate and sovereign nation, that they are not Australian and that they do not take part in the Australian anthem. They will cite the popular local saying, \"This is First Nation land, always has been and always will be.\"\nDharawal lyrics.\nLyrics for the anthem have been written twice in the Dharug language, an Australian Aboriginal language spoken around Sydney by the Dharawal people.\nThis version was first performed in July 2010, at a Rugby League State of Origin match in Sydney, though there was some opposition:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left:2em;\"&gt;nyini Australiagal bugjari garibara\nnyini budjari buriga\nbugjari bamul yararaga mari walaba\nbalmulga mari walanmirang\nbamul merong mari kaban walaba\nbadjajarang waratah\nyanamuru Australiagal yanumauru Australiagal\u00a0\u00a0\nyana budjari Australiagal\nnyini bayala gawuwi bayala gawuwi\nyana budjari Australiagal&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left;\"&gt;We Australian mob are going to have a good dance\nWe good young fellows\nGood earth and speared a lot of wallabies\na lot of water associated with this earth\nearth having a lot of animals and waratahs\ngo along the path Australians\nAustralian mob go together\nwe say and sing out\nAustralian mob go together.&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn December 2020, the following lyrics were sung in the Dharug language, followed by the anthem in English, before a Rugby Union international between Australia and Argentina:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left:2em;\"&gt;\nAustraliagal ya'nga yabun\nEora budgeri\nYarragal Bamal Yarrabuni\nNgurra garrigarrang\nNura mari guwing bayabuba\nDiara-murrahmah-coing\nGuwugu yago ngabay burrabagur\nYirribana Australiagal\nGarraburra ngayiri yabun\nYirribana Australiagal&lt;/poem&gt;\nOther unofficial variants.\nIn 2011, about fifty different Christian schools from different denominations came under criticism for singing a version of the song written by Sri Lankan immigrant Ruth Ponniah in 1988. The song replaced the second verse with lyrics that were explicitly Christian in nature, with the opening lines: \"With Christ our head and cornerstone, we'll build our nation's might\". Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth Peter Garrett and chief executive of the National Australia Day Council Warren Pearson admonished the schools for modifying the lyrics of the anthem, and the Australian Parents Council and the Federation of Parents and Citizens' Association of NSW called for a ban on the modified song. Stephen O'Doherty, chief executive of Christian Schools Australia, defended the use of the lyrics in response."}
{"id": "2058", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2058", "title": "Atheists", "text": "Atheist are people who deny the existence of a deity or any fashion of things coplanor toward reality."}
{"id": "2061", "revid": "40040962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2061", "title": "Automatic number announcement circuit", "text": "An automatic number announcement circuit (ANAC) is a component of a central office of a telephone company that provides a service to installation and service technicians to determine the telephone number of a line. The facility has a telephone number that may be called to listen to an automatic announcement that includes the caller's telephone number.\nThe ANAC number is useful primarily during the installation of landline telephones to quickly identify one of multiple lines.\nOperation.\nA technician calls the local telephone number of the automatic number announcement service. This call is connected to equipment at a local central office that uses a voice synthesizer or digital samples to announce the telephone number of the line calling in. The main purpose of this system is to allow telephone company technicians to identify the telephone line they are connected to.\nAutomatic number announcement systems are based on automatic number identification, and meant for phone company technicians, the ANAC system works with unlisted numbers, numbers with caller ID blocking, and numbers with no outgoing calls allowed. Installers of multi-line business services where outgoing calls from all lines display the company's main number on call display can use ANAC to identify a specific line in the system, even if CID displays every line as \"line one\".\nSome ANACs are very regional or local in scope, while others are state-/province- or area-code-wide: there appears to be no consistent national system for them. Most are provider-specific. Every telephone company, whether large or small, determines its own ANAC for each individual central office, which tends to perpetuate the current situation of a mess of overlapping and/or spotty areas of coverage. No official lists of ANAC numbers are published as telephone companies believe overuse of these numbers could make them more likely to be busy when needed by installers.\n958 local test exchanges.\nUnder the North American Numbering Plan, almost all North American area codes reserve telephone numbers beginning with \"958\" and \"959\" for internal local and long-distance testing (respectively), sometimes called plant testing. (One exception is Winnipeg, which reserves \"959\" only.) Numbers within this block are used for various test utilities such as a ringback number (to test the ringer when installing telephone sets), milliwatt tone (a number simply answers with a continuous test tone) and a loop around (which connects a call to another inbound call to the same or another test number). ANAC numbers can also appear in the \"958\" range, but there is no requirement that they reside there.\nIn some area codes, multiple additional prefixes had been reserved for test purposes, in addition to the standard 958 and 959. Many area codes reserved 999; 320 was also formerly reserved in Bell Canada territory. As widespread inefficiencies in numbering (such as the assignment of entire blocks of 10000 numbers to every competing carrier in every small village to support local number portability schemes) have created shortages of available numbers, these prefixes are often \"reclaimed\" and issued as standard exchanges, moving the handful of numbers in them to one standard test exchange (usually 958).\nSome carriers have been known to disable payphone calls to 958 or 959 test lines, such as Bell Canada's system-wide ANAC line at (area code) 958-2580. Conversely, a standard line on which voice service has been unsubscribed (such as an ADSL dry loop) may still accept calls to the 958 test exchange but not allow calls to standard numbers. This \"soft disconnect\" condition is intended to allow calls to 9-1-1 emergency services and to the telco business office to order telephone service, but to no other numbers.\nTollfree numbers.\nSome large telephone companies have toll-free numbers set up. In most cases, these numbers remain undisclosed to prevent abuse, but MCI maintains this widely published, toll-free ANAC: 1-800-437-7950. This is distinct from technical support and other lines which use ANI so that a computer can automatically display the customer's account on a \"screen pop\" for the next available customer service representative: the MCI number is intended specifically for ANAC use.\nFormerly, some companies changed their ANAC number every month for secrecy; this is still the case with a few numbers. In one example of this concern, most payphones in the United States are assigned a telephone number and can ring if the number is called. The phone can then be used to make and receive calls by anyone, making it a potential tool in anonymous criminal activity such as narcotics trafficking. Where a payphone does not have any number listed on the unit, the number can be discovered by calling an ANAC service.\nLate in the 20th century, after caller ID and pre-paid cell phone service became commonplace and with these services being more easily exploited for criminal purposes, especially in the case of burner phones, this type of abuse of payphones faded from concern. In Canada, this behaviour has always been more difficult. As a matter of course, incoming calls to payphones are disabled; furthermore, the Bell ANAC number is also disabled (although the telephone number is marked on the payphone itself as it is needed to report a non-working coin phone to 6-1-1 repair service).\nThere are some private national toll-free numbers that use ANI and then have a computer read back the number that is calling, but these are not intended for use in identifying the customer's own phone number. They are used in order for the agent in the call center to confirm the phone the customer is calling from, so that a computer can automatically display the customer's account on a \"screen pop\" for the next available customer service representative; they are distinct from purpose-made toll-free ANAC numbers. Regardless, if one were to call one of these numbers, listen for the number confirmation and hang up, they would in effect be using this system as if it were an ANAC.\nOne such toll-free service is one owned by MCI - 1-800-444-4444. This number (US only) is easy to remember and, when called, will read back the number after a very short message. A suspended (out of service) line or an incoming only line would not be able to reach any toll-free numbers.\nANAC numbers.\nThese numbers appear on various lists circulated on-line, many from the 1980s and 1990s. Most were published years ago by Phrack, , the alt.2600 Usenet newsgroup (as part of the FAQ) or phone phreaks and are now hopelessly outdated. The information is not reliable, as numbers change often. Many of the listed numbers no longer work.\nThe list is presented by area code, number and location. In some regions, there are several numbers, depending on the telephone company or the area code of the caller, as there can be several central offices serving some areas.\nUnited States.\nThe North American Numbering Plan reserves 958-XXXX and 1-NPA-959-XXXX for local and long-distance test numbers in almost all USA and Canadian area codes.\nFrequently, a prefix outside the 958 or 959 range (such as 200, 997, 998, 999) was also listed as a test exchange, only to be reclaimed and issued as a block of standard numbers at a later date. NANPA's utilised codes report will indicate 'UA' (unassignable) for valid test prefixes; if a formerly 'UA' code newly appears on the available list or becomes an active exchange, any former test numbers from its time as a reserved prefix are presumed invalid and deprecated. N11 prefixes such as 211, 311 and 511 are also disappearing as test numbers as these codes are reassigned to local services such as city, community or highway information.\nA few commonly-used 958 or 959 numbers for major incumbent landline carriers:\nNumbers otherwise vary arbitrarily by locality:\nUS toll-free.\n\"Please note that it is always preferable to call the local ANAC; only if the local ANAC number can not be called is it advisable to call a toll-free ANAC number. It is also preferable to call an open ANAC rather than the password-protected one given below.\"\n\"The below numbers are not true ANAC numbers; however, they do read back one's phone number. These numbers provide valuable services to the customers they serve; it is, therefore, inadvisable to misuse them.\"\nCanada.\nThe current use of exchange prefixes for each area code is listed by CNAC; if an exchange changes from \"plant test\" to reclaimed or active, any former test numbers with the associated prefix are invalidated. Commonly-used test numbers for major carriers include:\nAdditional plant test codes may be in use locally in some areas:\nOccasionally, a number in an existing, standard local exchange in the area is used. These will incur a toll (and might not work) outside their home area. Some may be announcing caller ID, which is not the same as ANI. As standard local calls, they are not accessible from ADSL \"dry loop\", inbound-only or unsubscribed lines:\nIn Bell Canada territory, +1-areacode-320 was formerly reserved for 320-xxxx test numbers; these were moved to the 958-xxxx range and 320-xxxx reclaimed for use as a standard exchange. The use of N11 prefixes (such as 3-1-1) for test numbers is also deprecated as 3-1-1 now often reaches city hall or municipal services while 2-1-1 is local community information.\nSome lists erroneously mention 1-555-1313 as ANAC (506 New Brunswick). The purpose of +1-areacode-555-1313, a pay-per-use \"name that number\" reverse lookup information service introduced in the mid-1990s, differs from ANAC. ANAC announces the caller's own number; the reverse lookup gives the directory name for a listed telephone number input by the user. 555-1313 is one of the rare uses of the 555 exchange for other than the standard 555-1212 directory information line.\nIreland.\nThis service announces the line number on all Eir lines, including lines where calls are carried by another provider using carrier preselect.\nThe same number also works for Smart Telecom lines provided by local-loop unbundling.\nThe number is called out without the leading 0. For example, 021 XXX XXXX is read back as \"21 XXX XXXX\".\nThere is also an extended ANAC service for identifying which carrier handles calls. Dialling these numbers will cause the local switch to announce which carrier the calls are being routed through for a specific category of calls.\nNew Zealand.\nSubscribers may also dial +64 (8) 320-1231 from overseas to test if the (CPN) Caller ID number is being passed on to New Zealand; this should announce the area code and local number as it appears on call display."}
{"id": "2062", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2062", "title": "Amerigo Vespucci", "text": "Amerigo Vespucci (; ; 9 March 1454 \u2013 22 February 1512) was an Italian-born merchant, explorer, and navigator from the Republic of Florence, from whose name the term \"America\" is derived. He became a Castillian citizen in 1505.\nBetween 1497 and 1504, Vespucci participated in at least two voyages of the Age of Discovery, first on behalf of Spain (14991500) and then for Portugal (15011502). In 1503 and 1505, two booklets were published under his name, containing colourful descriptions of these explorations and other alleged voyages. Both publications were extremely popular and widely read across much of Europe. Although historians still dispute the authorship and veracity of these accounts, at the time they were instrumental in raising awareness of the new discoveries and enhancing the reputation of Vespucci as an explorer and navigator.\nVespucci claimed to have understood, back in 1501 during his Portuguese expedition, that Brazil was part of a continent new to Europeans, which he called the \"New World\". The claim inspired cartographer Martin Waldseem\u00fcller to recognize Vespucci's accomplishments in 1507 by applying the Latinized form \"America\" for the first time to a map showing the New World. Other cartographers followed suit, and by 1532 the name America was permanently affixed to the newly discovered continents.\nIt is unknown whether Vespucci was ever aware of these honours. In 1505, he was made a citizen of Castile by royal decree and in 1508, he was appointed to the newly created position of chief navigator for Spain's \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" (House of Trade) in Seville, a post he held until his death in 1512.\nBiography.\nVespucci was born on 9 March 1454, in Florence, a wealthy Italian city-state and a center of Renaissance art and learning.\nFamily and education.\nAmerigo Vespucci was the third son of Nastagio Vespucci, a Florentine notary for the Money-Changers Guild, and Lisa di Giovanni Mini. The family resided in the District of Santa Lucia d'Ognissanti along with other families of the Vespucci clan. Earlier generations of Vespucci had funded a family chapel in the Ognissanti church, and the nearby Hospital of San Giovanni di Dio was founded by Simone di Piero Vespucci in 1380. Vespucci's immediate family was not especially prosperous but they were politically well-connected. Amerigo's grandfather, also named Amerigo Vespucci, served a total of 36 years as the chancellor of the Florentine government, known as the \"Signoria\"; and Nastagio also served in the \"Signoria\" and in other guild offices. More importantly, the Vespuccis had good relations with Lorenzo de' Medici, the powerful de facto ruler of Florence.\nAmerigo's two older brothers, Antonio and Girolamo, were sent to the University of Pisa for their education; Antonio followed his father to become a notary, while Girolamo entered the Church and joined the Knights Templar in Rhodes. Amerigo's career path seemed less certain; instead of following his brothers to the university, he remained in Florence and was tutored by his uncle, Giorgio Antonio Vespucci, a Dominican friar in the monastery of San Marco. Fortunately for Amerigo, his uncle was one of the most celebrated humanist scholars in Florence at the time and provided him with a broad education in literature, philosophy, rhetoric, and Latin. He was also introduced to geography and astronomy, subjects that played an essential part in his career. Amerigo's later writings demonstrated a familiarity with the work of the classic Greek cosmographers, Ptolemy and Strabo, and the more recent work of Florentine astronomer Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli.\nEarly career.\nIn 1478, Guido Antonio Vespucci led a Florentine diplomatic mission to Paris and invited his younger cousin, Amerigo Vespucci, to join him. Amerigo's role is not clear, but it was likely as an attache or private secretary. Along the way they had business in Bologna, Milan, and Lyon. Their objective in Paris was to obtain French support for Florence's war with Naples. Louis XI was noncommittal and the diplomatic mission returned to Florence in 1481 with little to show for their efforts.\nAfter his return from Paris, Amerigo worked for a time with his father and continued his studies in science. In 1482, when his father died, Amerigo went to work for Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, head of a junior branch of the Medici family. Although Amerigo was ten years older, they had been schoolmates under the tutelage of Giorgio Antonio Vespucci. Amerigo served first as a household manager and then gradually took on increasing responsibilities, handling various business dealings for the family both at home and abroad. Meanwhile, he continued to show an interest in geography, at one point buying an expensive map made by the master cartographer Gabriel de Vallseca.\nSeville.\nIn 1488, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco became dissatisfied with his Seville business agent, Tomasso Capponi. He dispatched Vespucci to investigate the situation and provide an assessment of a suggested replacement, Florentine merchant Gianotto Berardi. Vespucci's findings have been lost but Capponi returned to Florence around this time and Berardi took over the Medici business in Seville. In addition to managing Medici's trade in Seville, Berardi had his own business in African slavery and ship chandlery.\nBy 1492 Vespucci had settled permanently in Seville. His motivations for leaving Florence are unclear; he continued to transact some business on behalf of his Medici patrons but more and more he became involved with Berardi's other activities, most notably his support of Christopher Columbus's voyages. Barardi invested half a million \"maravedis\" in Columbus's first voyage, and he won a potentially lucrative contract to provision Columbus's large second fleet. However, profits proved to be elusive. In 1495, Berardi signed a contract with the crown to send 12 resupply ships to Hispaniola but then died unexpectedly in December without completing the terms of the contract.\nVespucci was the executor of Berardi's will, collecting debts and paying outstanding obligations for the firm. Afterwards he was left owing 140,000 \"maravedis\". He continued to provision ships bound for the West Indies, but his opportunities were diminishing; Columbus's expeditions were not providing the hoped-for profits, and his patron, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco Medici, was using other Florentine agents for his business in Seville.\nSometime after he settled in Seville, Vespucci married a Spanish woman, Maria Cerezo. Very little is known about her; Vespucci's will refers to her as the daughter of Gonzalo Fern\u00e1ndez de C\u00f3rdoba. Historian Fern\u00e1ndez-Armesto speculates that she may have been the illegitimate offspring of celebrated military leader, the \"Grand Captain\", a connection that would have been very useful to Vespucci. She was an active participant in his business and held power of attorney for Vespucci when he was away.\nVoyages and alleged voyages.\nThe evidence for Vespucci's voyages of exploration consists almost entirely of a handful of letters written by him or attributed to him. Historians have differed sharply on the authorship, accuracy and veracity of these documents. Consequently, opinions also vary widely regarding the number of voyages undertaken, their routes, and Vespucci's roles and accomplishments. Starting in the late 1490s Vespucci participated in two voyages to the New World that are relatively well-documented in the historical record. Two others have been alleged but the evidence is more problematical. Traditionally, Vespucci's voyages are referred to as the \"first\" through \"fourth\", even by historians who refute one or more of the trips.\nAlleged voyage of 14971498.\nA letter, written to Piero Soderini and published in 1504, purports to be an account by Vespucci of a voyage to the New World, leaving Spain on 10 May 1497 and returning in October 1498. This is perhaps the most controversial of Vespucci's voyages and many historians doubt that it took place as described. Some writers question the authorship and accuracy of the letter and consider it to be a forgery. Others point to the inconsistencies in the narrative of the voyage, particularly the alleged course, starting near Honduras and proceeding northwest for 870 leagues (about )\u2013a course that would have taken them across Mexico to the Pacific Ocean. Feelings also ran high among earlier historians who felt that Vespucci lied about this voyage to gain primacy over Columbus as the first explorer to encounter the mainland.\nVoyage of 14991500.\nIn 1499, Vespucci joined an expedition licensed by Spain and led by Alonso de Ojeda as fleet commander and Juan de la Cosa as chief navigator. Their intention was to explore the coast of a new landmass found by Columbus on his third voyage and in particular investigate a rich source of pearls that Columbus had reported. Vespucci and his backers financed two of the four ships in the small fleet. His role on the voyage is not clear. Writing later about his experience, Vespucci gave the impression that he had a leadership role, but that is unlikely, due to his inexperience. Instead, he may have served as a commercial representative on behalf of the fleet's investors. Years later, Ojeda recalled that \"Morigo Vespuche\" was one of his pilots on the expedition.\nThe vessels left Spain on 18 May 1499 and stopped first in the Canary Islands before reaching South America somewhere near present-day Surinam or French Guiana. From there the fleet split up: Ojeda proceeded northwest toward modern Venezuela with two ships, while the other pair headed south with Vespucci aboard. The only record of the southbound journey comes from Vespucci himself. He assumed they were on the coast of Asia and hoped by heading south they would, according to the Greek geographer Ptolemy, round the unidentified \"Cape of Cattigara\" and reach the Indian Ocean. They passed two huge rivers (the Amazon and the Para) which poured freshwater out to sea. They continued south for another 40 leagues (about ) before encountering a very strong adverse current which they could not overcome. Forced to turn around, the ships headed north, retracing their course to the original landfall. From there Vespucci continued up the South American coast to the Gulf of Paria and along the shore of what is now Venezuela. At some point they may have rejoined Ojeda but the evidence is unclear. In the late summer, they decided to head north for the Spanish colony at Hispaniola in the West Indies to resupply and repair their ships before heading home. After Hispaniola they made a brief slave raid in the Bahamas, capturing 232 natives, and then returned to Spain.\nVoyage of 15011502.\nIn 1501, Manuel I of Portugal commissioned an expedition to investigate a landmass far to the west in the Atlantic Ocean encountered unexpectedly by a wayward Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral on his voyage around Africa to India. That land would eventually become present-day Brazil. The king wanted to know the extent of this new discovery and determine where it lay in relation to the line established by the Treaty of Tordesillas. Any land that lay to the east of the line could be claimed by Portugal. Vespucci's reputation as an explorer and presumed navigator had already reached Portugal, and he was hired by the king to serve as pilot under the command of Gon\u00e7alo Coelho.\nCoelho's fleet of three ships left Lisbon in May 1501. Before crossing the Atlantic they resupplied at Cape Verde, where they encountered Cabral on his way home from his voyage to India. This was the same expedition that had found Brazil on its outward-bound journey the previous year. Coelho left Cape Verde in June, and from this point Vespucci's account is the only surviving record of their explorations. On 17 August 1501 the expedition reached Brazil at a latitude of about 6\u00b0 south. Upon landing it encountered a hostile band of natives who killed and ate one of its crewmen. Sailing south along the coast they found friendlier natives and were able to engage in some minor trading. At 23\u00b0 S they found a bay which they named Rio de Janeiro because it was 1 January 1502. On 13 February 1502, they left the coast to return home. Vespucci estimated their latitude at 32\u00b0 S but experts now estimate they were closer to 25\u00b0 S. Their homeward journey is unclear since Vespucci left a confusing record of astronomical observations and distances travelled.\nAlleged voyage of 15031504.\nIn 1503, Vespucci may have participated in a second expedition for the Portuguese crown, again exploring the east coast of Brazil. There is evidence that a voyage was led by Coelho at about this time but no independent confirmation that Vespucci took part. The only source for this last voyage is the Soderini Letter; but several modern scholars dispute Vespucci's authorship of that letter and it is uncertain whether Vespucci undertook this trip. There are also difficulties with the reported dates and details in the account of this voyage.\nReturn to Seville.\nBy early 1505, Vespucci was back in Seville. His reputation as an explorer and navigator continued to grow and his recent service in Portugal did not seem to damage his standing with King Ferdinand. On the contrary, the king was likely interested in learning about the possibility of a western passage to India. In February, he was summoned by the king to consult on matters of navigation. During the next few months he received payments from the crown for his services and in April he was declared by royal proclamation a citizen of Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nFrom 1505 until his death in 1512, Vespucci remained in service to the Spanish crown. He continued his work as a chandler, supplying ships bound for the Indies. He was also hired to captain a ship as part of a fleet bound for the \"spice islands\" but the planned voyage never took place. In March 1508, he was named chief pilot for the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" or House of Commerce which served as a central trading house for Spain's overseas possessions. He was paid an annual salary of 50,000 \"maravedis\" with an extra 25,000 for expenses. In his new role, Vespucci was responsible for ensuring that ships' pilots were adequately trained and licensed before sailing to the New World. He was also charged with compiling a \"model map\" based on input from pilots who were obligated to share what they learned after each voyage.\nVespucci wrote his will in April 1511. He left most of his modest estate, including five household slaves, to his wife. His clothes, books, and navigational equipment were left to his nephew Giovanni Vespucci. He requested to be buried in a Franciscan habit in his wife's family tomb. Vespucci died on 22 February 1512.\nUpon his death, Vespucci's wife was awarded an annual pension of 10,000 \"maravedis\" to be deducted from the salary of the successor chief pilot. His nephew Giovanni was hired into the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" where he spent his subsequent years spying on behalf of the Florentine state.\nNaming of America.\nVespucci's voyages became widely known in Europe after two accounts attributed to him were published between 1503 and 1505. The \"Soderini Letter\" (1505) came to the attention of a group of humanist scholars studying geography in Saint-Di\u00e9, a small French town in the Duchy of Lorraine. Led by Walter Lud, the academy included Matthias Ringmann and Martin Waldseem\u00fcller. In 1506, they obtained a French translation of the \"Soderini Letter\" as well as a Portuguese maritime map that detailed the coast of lands recently discovered in the western Atlantic. They surmised that this was the \"new world\" or the \"antipodes\" hypothesized by classical writers. The \"Soderini Letter\" gave Vespucci credit for discovery of this new continent and implied that the Portuguese map was based on his explorations.\nIn April 1507, Ringmann and Waldseem\u00fcller published their \"Introduction to Cosmography\" with an accompanying world map. The \"Introduction\" was written in Latin and included a Latin translation of the \"Soderini Letter\". In a preface to the \"Letter\", Ringmann wrote \nI see no reason why anyone could properly disapprove of a name derived from that of Amerigo, the discoverer, a man of sagacious genius. A suitable form would be Amerige, meaning Land of Amerigo, or America, since Europe and Asia have received women's names.\nA thousand copies of the world map were printed with the title \"Universal Geography According to the Tradition of Ptolemy and the Contributions of Amerigo Vespucci and Others\". It was decorated with prominent portraits of Ptolemy and Vespucci and, for the first time, the name America was applied to a map of the New World.\nThe \"Introduction\" and map were a great success and four editions were printed in the first year alone. The map was widely used in universities and was influential among cartographers who admired the craftsmanship that went into its creation. In the following years, other maps were printed that often incorporated the name America. In 1538, Gerardus Mercator used America to name both the North and South continents on his influential map. By this point the name had been securely fixed on the New World.\nMany supporters of Columbus felt that Vespucci had stolen an honour that rightfully belonged to Columbus. However most historians now believe that he was unaware of Waldseem\u00fcller's map before his death in 1512 and many assert that he was not even the author of the Soderini Letter.\nVespucci letters.\nKnowledge of Vespucci's voyages relies almost entirely on a handful of letters written by him or attributed to him. Two of these letters were published during his lifetime and received widespread attention throughout Europe. Several scholars now believe that Vespucci did not write the two published letters in the form in which they circulated during his lifetime. They suggest that they were fabrications based in part on genuine Vespucci letters.\nThe remaining documents were unpublished manuscripts; handwritten letters uncovered by researchers more than 250 years after Vespucci's death. After years of controversy, the authenticity of the three complete letters was convincingly demonstrated by Alberto Magnaghi in 1924. Most historians now accept them as the work of Vespucci but aspects of the accounts are still disputed.\nHistoriography.\nVespucci has been called \"the most enigmatic and controversial figure in early American history\". The debate has become known among historians as the \"Vespucci question\". How many voyages did he make? What was his role on the voyages and what did he learn? The evidence relies almost entirely on a handful of letters attributed to him. Many historians have analysed these documents and have arrived at contradictory conclusions.\nIn 1515, Sebastian Cabot became one of the first to question Vespucci's accomplishments and express doubts about his 1497 voyage. Later, Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas argued that Vespucci was a liar and stole the credit that was due Columbus. By 1600, most regarded Vespucci as an impostor and not worthy of his honours and fame. In 1839, Alexander von Humboldt after careful consideration asserted the 1497 voyage was impossible but accepted the two Portuguese-sponsored voyages. Humboldt also called into question the assertion that Vespucci recognized that he had encountered a new continent. According to Humboldt, Vespucci (and Columbus) died in the belief that they had reached the eastern edge of Asia. Vespucci's reputation was perhaps at its lowest in 1856 when Ralph Waldo Emerson called Vespucci a \"thief\" and \"pickle dealer\" from Seville who managed to get \"half the world baptized with his dishonest name\".\nOpinions began to shift somewhat after 1857 when Brazilian historian Francisco Adolfo de Varnhagen wrote that everything in the \"Soderini Letter\" was true. Other historians followed in support of Vespucci including John Fiske and Henry Harrisse.\nIn 1924, Alberto Magnaghi published the results of his exhaustive review of Vespucci's writings and relevant cartography. He denied Vespucci's authorship of the 1503 \"Mundus Novus\" and the 1505 \"Soderini Letter\", the only two texts published during his lifetime. He suggested that the Soderini letter was not written by Vespucci, but was cobbled together by unscrupulous Florentine publishers who combined several accounts \u2013 some from Vespucci, others from elsewhere. Magnaghi determined that the manuscript letters were authentic and based on them he was the first to propose that only the second and third voyages were true, and the first and fourth voyages (only found in the Soderini letter) were fabrications. While Magnaghi has been one of the chief proponents of a two-voyage narrative, Roberto Levellier was an influential Argentinian historian who endorsed the authenticity of all Vespucci's letters and proposed the most extensive itinerary for his four voyages.\nOther modern historians and popular writers have taken varying positions on Vespucci's letters and voyages, espousing two, three, or four voyages and supporting or denying the authenticity of his two printed letters. Most authors believe that the three manuscript letters are authentic while the first voyage as described in the Soderini letter draws the most criticism and disbelief.\nA two-voyage thesis was accepted and popularized by Frederick J. Pohl (1944), and rejected by Germ\u00e1n Arciniegas (1955), who posited that all four voyages were truthful. Luciano Formisiano (1992) also rejects the Magnaghi thesis (acknowledging that publishers probably tampered with Vespucci's writings) and declares all four voyages genuine, but differs from Arciniegas in details (particularly the first voyage). Samuel Morison (1974) flatly rejected the first voyage but was noncommittal about the two published letters. Felipe Fern\u00e1ndez-Armesto (2007) calls the authenticity question \"inconclusive\" and hypothesizes that the first voyage was probably another version of the second; the third is unassailable, and the fourth is probably true.\nLegacy.\nVespucci's historical importance may rest more with his letters (whether or not he wrote them all) than his discoveries. Burckhardt cites the naming of America after him as an example of the immense role of the Italian literature of the time in determining historical memory. Within a few years of the publication of his two letters, the European public became aware of the newly discovered continents of the Americas. According to Vespucci:\nConcerning my return from those new regions which we found and explored...we may rightly call a new world. Because our ancestors had no knowledge of them, and it will be a matter wholly new to all those who hear about them, for this transcends the view held by our ancients, inasmuch as most of them hold that there is no continent to the south beyond the equator, but only the sea which they named the Atlantic and if some of them did aver that a continent there was, they denied with abundant argument that it was a habitable land. But that this their opinion is false and utterly opposed to the truth...my last voyage has made manifest; for in those southern parts I have found a continent more densely peopled and abounding in animals than our Europe Asia or Africa, and, in addition, a climate milder and more delightful than in any other region known to us, as you shall learn in the following account."}
{"id": "2063", "revid": "390477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2063", "title": "Aristide Maillol", "text": "Aristide Joseph Bonaventure Maillol (; December 8, 1861\u00a0\u2013 September 27, 1944) was a French sculptor, painter, and printmaker.\nBiography.\nMaillol was born in Banyuls-sur-Mer, Roussillon. He decided at an early age to become a painter, and moved to Paris in 1881 to study art. After several applications and several years of living in poverty, his enrollment in the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts was accepted in 1885, and he studied there under Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me and Alexandre Cabanel. His early paintings show the influence of his contemporaries Pierre Puvis de Chavannes and Paul Gauguin.\nGauguin encouraged his growing interest in decorative art, an interest that led Maillol to take up tapestry design. In 1893 Maillol opened a tapestry workshop in Banyuls, producing works whose high technical and aesthetic quality gained him recognition for renewing this art form in France. He began making small terracotta sculptures in 1895, and within a few years his concentration on sculpture led to the abandonment of his work in tapestry.\nIn July 1896, Maillol married Clotilde Narcis, one of his employees at his tapestry workshop. Their only son, Lucian, was born that October.\nMaillol's first major sculpture, \"A Seated Woman\", was modeled after his wife. The first version (in the Museum of Modern Art, New York) was completed in 1902, and renamed \"La M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e\". Maillol, believing that \"art does not lie in the copying of nature\", produced a second, less naturalistic version in 1905. In 1902, the art dealer Ambroise Vollard provided Maillol with his first exhibition.\nThe subject of nearly all of Maillol's mature work is the female body, treated with a classical emphasis on stable forms. The figurative style of his large bronzes is perceived as an important precursor to the greater simplifications of Henry Moore, and his serene classicism set a standard for European (and American) figure sculpture until the end of World War II.\nJosep Pla said of Maillol, \"These archaic ideas, Greek, were the great novelty Maillol brought into the tendency of modern sculpture. What you need to love from the ancients is not the antiquity, it is the sense of permanent, renewed novelty, that is due to the nature and reason.\"\nHis important public commissions include a 1912 commission for a monument to C\u00e9zanne, as well as numerous war memorials commissioned after World War I.\nMaillol served as a juror with Florence Meyer Blumenthal in awarding the Prix Blumenthal (1919\u20131954) a grant awarded to painters, sculptors, decorators, engravers, writers, and musicians.\nHe made a series of woodcut illustrations for an edition of Vergil's \"Eclogues\" published by Harry Graf Kessler in 1926\u201327. He also illustrated \"Daphnis and Chloe\" by Longus (1937) and \"Chansons pour elle\" by Paul Verlaine (1939).\nHe died in Banyuls at the age of eighty-three, in an automobile accident. While driving home during a thunderstorm, the car in which he was a passenger skidded off the road and rolled over. A large collection of Maillol's work is maintained at the Mus\u00e9e Maillol in Paris, which was established by Dina Vierny, Maillol's model and platonic companion during the last 10 years of his life. His home a few kilometers outside Banyuls, also the site of his final resting place, has been turned into a museum, the Mus\u00e9e Maillol Banyuls-sur-Mer, where a number of his works and sketches are displayed.\nThree of his bronzes grace the grand staircase of the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City: \"Summer\" (1910\u201311), \"Venus Without Arms\" (1920), and\" Kneeling Woman: Monument to Debussy\" (1950\u201355). The third, the artist's only reference to music, is a copy of an original created for the French city of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Claude Debussy's birthplace."}
{"id": "2064", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2064", "title": "Antonio Canova", "text": "Antonio Canova (; 1 November 1757 \u2013 13 October 1822) was an Italian Neoclassical sculptor, famous for his marble sculptures. Often regarded as the greatest of the Neoclassical artists, his sculpture was inspired by the Baroque and the classical revival, and has been characterised as having avoided the melodramatics of the former, and the cold artificiality of the latter.\nLife.\nPossagno.\nIn 1757, Antonio Canova was born in the Venetian Republic city of Possagno to Pietro Canova, a stonecutter, and Maria Angela Zardo Fantolini. In 1761, his father died. A year later, his mother remarried. As such, in 1762, he was put into the care of his paternal grandfather Pasino Canova, who was a stonemason, owner of a quarry, and was a \"sculptor who specialized in altars with statues and low reliefs in late Baroque style\". He led Antonio into the art of sculpting.\nBefore the age of ten, Canova began making models in clay, and carving marble. Indeed, at the age of nine, he executed two small shrines of Carrara marble, which are still extant. After these works, he appears to have been constantly employed under his grandfather.\nVenice.\nIn 1770, he was an apprentice for two years to Giuseppe Bernardi, who was also known as 'Torretto'. Afterwards, he was under the tutelage of Giovanni Ferrari until he began his studies at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia. At the Academy, he won several prizes. During this time, he was given his first workshop within a monastery by some local monks.\nThe Senator Giovanni Falier commissioned Canova to produce statues of Orpheus and Eurydice for his garden \u2013 the Villa Falier at Asolo. The statues were begun in 1775, and both were completed by 1777. The pieces exemplify the late Rococo style. On the year of its completion, both works were exhibited for the Feast of the Ascension in Piazza S. Marco. Widely praised, the works won Canova his first renown among the Venetian elite. Another Venetian who is said to have commissioned early works from Canova was the abate Filippo Farsetti, whose collection at Ca' Farsetti on the Grand Canal he frequented.\nIn 1779, Canova opened his own studio at Calle Del Traghetto at S. Maurizio. At this time, Procurator Pietro Vettor Pisani commissioned Canova's first marble statue: a depiction of Daedalus and Icarus. The statue inspired great admiration for his work at the annual art fair; Canova was paid for 100 gold zecchini for the completed work. At the base of the statue, Daedalus' tools are scattered about; these tools are also an allusion to Sculpture, of which the statue is a personification. With such an intention, there is suggestion that Daedalus is a portrait of Canova's grandfather Pasino.\nRome.\nCanova arrived in Rome, on 28 December 1780. Prior to his departure, his friends had applied to the Venetian senate for a pension. Successful in the application, the stipend allotted amounted to three hundred ducats, limited to three years.\nWhile in Rome, Canova spent time studying and sketching the works of Michelangelo.\nIn 1781, Girolamo Zulian \u2013 the Venetian ambassador to Rome \u2013 hired Canova to sculpt \"Theseus and the Minotaur\". Zulian played a fundamental role in Canova's rise to fame, turning some rooms of his palace into a studio for the artist and placing his trust in him despite Canova's early critics in Rome. The statue depicts the victorious Theseus seated on the lifeless body of a Minotaur. The initial spectators were certain that the work was a copy of a Greek original, and were shocked to learn it was a contemporary work. The highly regarded work is now in the collection of the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum, in London.\nBetween 1783\u20131785, Canova arranged, composed, and designed a funerary monument dedicated to Clement XIV for the Church of Santi Apostoli. After another two years, the work met completion in 1787. The monument secured Canova's reputation as the pre-eminent living artist.\nIn 1792, he completed another cenotaph, this time commemorating Clement XIII for St. Peter's Basilica. Canova harmonized its design with the older Baroque funerary monuments in the basilica.\nIn 1790, he began to work on a funerary monument for Titian, which was eventually abandoned by 1795. During the same year, he increased his activity as a painter. Canova was notoriously disinclined to restore sculptures. However, in 1794 he made an exception for his friend and early patron Zulian, restoring a few sculptures that Zulian had moved from Rome to Venice.\nThe following decade was extremely productive, beginning works such as \"Hercules and Lichas\", \"Cupid and Psyche\", \"Hebe\", \"Tomb of Duchess Maria Christina of Saxony-Teschen\", and \"The Penitent Magdalene\".\nIn 1797, he went to Vienna, but only a year later, in 1798, he returned to Possagno for a year.\nFrance and England.\nBy 1800, Canova was the most celebrated artist in Europe. He systematically promoted his reputation by publishing engravings of his works and having marble versions of plaster casts made in his workshop. He became so successful that he had acquired patrons from across Europe including France, England, Russia, Poland, Austria and Holland, as well as several members from different royal lineages, and prominent individuals. Among his patrons were Napoleon and his family, for whom Canova produced much work, including several depictions between 1803 and 1809. The most notable representations were that of \"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\", and \"Venus Victrix\" which was portrayal of Pauline Bonaparte.\n\"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\" had its inception after Canova was hired to make a bust of Napoleon in 1802. The statue was begun in 1803, with Napoleon requesting to be shown in a French General's uniform, Canova rejected this, insisting on an allusion to Mars, the Roman god of War. It was completed in 1806. In 1811, the statue arrived in Paris, but not installed; neither was its bronze copy in the Foro Napoleonico in Milan. In 1815, the original went to the Duke of Wellington, after his victory at Waterloo against Napoleon.\n\"Venus Victrix\" was originally conceived as a robed and recumbent sculpture of Pauline Borghese in the guise of Diana. Instead, Pauline ordered Canova to make the statue a nude Venus. The work was not intended for public viewing.\nOther works for the Napoleon family include, a bust of Napoleon, a statue of Napoleon's mother, and Marie Louise as Concordia.\nIn 1802, Canova was assigned the post of 'Inspector-General of Antiquities and Fine Art of the Papal State', a position formerly held by Raphael. One of his activities in this capacity was to pioneer the restoration of the Appian Way by restoring the tomb of Servilius Quartus. In 1808 Canova became an associated member of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands.\nIn 1814, he began his \"The Three Graces\".\nIn 1815, he was named 'Minister Plenipotentiary of the Pope,' and was tasked with recovering various works of art that were taken to Paris by Napoleon.\nAlso in 1815, he visited London, and met with Benjamin Haydon. It was after the advice of Canova that the Elgin marbles were acquired by the British Museum, with plaster copies sent to Florence, according to Canova's request.\nReturning to Italy.\nIn 1816, Canova returned to Rome with some of the art Napoleon had taken. He was rewarded with several marks of distinction: he was appointed President of the Accademia di San Luca, inscribed into the \"Golden Book of Roman Nobles\" by the Pope's own hands, and given the title of Marquis of Ischia, alongside an annual pension of 3000 crowns.\nIn 1819, he commenced and completed his commissioned work \"Venus Italica\" as a replacement for the Venus de' Medici.\nAfter his 1814 proposal to build a personified statue of Religion for St. Peter's Basilica was rejected, Canova sought to build his own temple to house it. This project came to be the Tempio Canoviano. Canova designed, financed, and partly built the structure himself. The structure was to be a testament to Canova's piety. The building's design was inspired by combining the Parthenon and the Pantheon together. On 11 July 1819, Canova laid the foundation stone dressed in red Papal uniform and decorated with all his medals. It first opened in 1830, and was finally completed in 1836. After the foundation-stone of this edifice had been laid, Canova returned to Rome; but every succeeding autumn he continued to visit Possagno to direct the workmen and encourage them with rewards.\nDuring the period that intervened between commencing operations at Possagno and his death, he executed or finished some of his most striking works. Among these were the group \"Mars and Venus\", the colossal figure of Pius VI, the Piet\u00e0, the \"St John\", and a colossal bust of his friend, the Count Cicognara.\nIn 1820, he made a statue of George Washington for the state of North Carolina. As recommended by Thomas Jefferson, the sculptor used the marble bust of Washington by Giuseppe Ceracchi as a model. It was delivered on 24 December 1821. The statue and the North Carolina State House where it was displayed were later destroyed by fire in 1831. A plaster replica was sent by the king of Italy in 1910, now on view at the North Carolina Museum of History. A marble copy was sculpted by Romano Vio in 1970, now on view in the rotunda of the capitol building.\nIn 1822, he journeyed to Naples, to superintend the construction of wax moulds for an equestrian statue of Ferdinand VII. The adventure was disastrous to his health, but soon became healthy enough to return to Rome. From there, he voyaged to Venice; however, on 13 October 1822, he died there at the age of 64. As he never married, the name became extinct, except through his stepbrothers' lineage of Satori-Canova.\nOn 12 October 1822, Canova instructed his brother to use his entire estate to complete the Tempio in Possagno.\nOn 25 October 1822, his body was placed in the Tempio Canoviano. His heart was interred at the Basilica di Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari in Venice, and his right hand preserved in a vase at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia.\nHis memorial service was so grand that it rivaled the ceremony that the city of Florence held for Michelangelo in 1564.\nIn 1826, Giovanni Battista Sartori sold Canova's Roman studio and took every plaster model and sculpture to Possagno, where they were installed in the Tempio Canoviano.\nWorks.\nAmong Canova's most notable works are:\n\"Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss\" (1787).\n\"Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss\" was commissioned in 1787 by Colonel John Campbell. It is regarded as a masterpiece of Neoclassical sculpture, but shows the mythological lovers at a moment of great emotion, characteristic of the emerging movement of Romanticism. It represents the god Cupid in the height of love and tenderness, immediately after awakening the lifeless Psyche with a kiss.\n\"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\" (1802\u20131806).\n\"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\" had its inception after Canova was hired to make a bust of Napoleon in 1802. The statue was begun in 1802, with Napoleon requesting to be shown in a French General's uniform, Canova rejected this, insisting on an allusion to Mars, the Roman god of War. It was completed in 1806. In 1811, the statue arrived in Paris, but not installed; neither was its bronze copy in the Foro Napoleonico in Milan. In 1815, the original went to the Duke of Wellington, after his victory at Waterloo against Napoleon.\n\"Perseus Triumphant\" (1804\u20131806).\n\"Perseus Triumphant\", sometimes called \"Perseus with the Head of Medusa\", was a statue commissioned by tribune Onorato Duveyriez. It depicts the Greek hero Perseus after his victory over the Gorgon Medusa.\nThe statue was based freely to the Apollo Belvedere and the Medusa Rondanini.\nNapoleon, after his 1796 Italian Campaign, took the Apollo Belvedere to Paris. In the statue's absence, Pope Pius VII acquired Canova's \"Perseus Triumphant\" and placed the work upon the \"Apollo\"'s pedestal. The statue was so successful that when the \"Apollo\" was returned, \"Perseus\" remained as a companion piece.\nOne replica of the statue was commissioned from Canova by the Polish countess Waleria Tarnowska; it's now displayed in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.\nKarl Ludwig Fernow said of the statue that \"every eye must rest with pleasure on the beautiful surface, even when the mind finds its hopes of high and pure enjoyment disappointed.\"\n\"Venus Victrix\" (1805\u20131808).\n\"Venus Victrix\" ranks among the most famous of Canova's works. Originally, Canova wished the depictation to be of a robed Diana, but Pauline Borghese insisted to appear as a nude Venus. The work was not intended for public viewing.\n\"The Three Graces\" (1814\u20131817).\nJohn Russell, the 6th Duke of Bedford, commissioned a version of the now famous work. He had previously visited Canova in his studio in Rome in 1814 and had been immensely impressed by a carving of the Graces the sculptor had made for the Empress Josephine. When the Empress died in May of the same year he immediately offered to purchase the completed piece, but was unsuccessful as Josephine's son Eug\u00e8ne claimed it (his son Maximilian brought it to St. Petersburg, where it can now be found in the Hermitage Museum). Undeterred, the Duke commissioned another version for himself.\nThe sculpting process began in 1814 and was completed in 1817. Finally in 1819 it was installed at the Duke's residence in Woburn Abbey. Canova even made the trip over to England to supervise its installation, choosing for it to be displayed on a pedestal adapted from a marble plinth with a rotating top. This version is now owned jointly by the Victoria and Albert Museum and the National Galleries of Scotland, and is alternately displayed at each.\nArtistic process.\nCanova's sculptures fall into three categories: Heroic compositions, compositions of grace, and sepulchral monuments. In each of these, Canova's underlying artistic motivations were to challenge, if not compete, with classical statues.\nCanova refused to take in pupils and students, but would hire workers to carve the initial figure from the marble. He had an elaborate system of comparative pointing so that the workers were able to reproduce the plaster form in the selected block of marble. These workers would leave a thin veil over the entire statue so Canova's could focus on the surface of the statue.\nWhile he worked, he had people read to him select literary and historical texts.\nLast touch.\nDuring the last quarter of the eighteenth century, it became fashionable to view art galleries at night by torchlight. Canova was an artist that leapt on the fad and displayed his works of art in his studio by candlelight. As such, Canova would begin to finalize the statue with special tools by candlelight, to soften the transitions between the various parts of the nude. After a little recarving, he began to rub the statue down with pumice stone, sometimes for periods longer than weeks or months. If that was not enough, he would use tripoli (rottenstone) and lead.\nHe then applied a now unknown chemical-composition of patina onto the flesh of the figure to lighten the skin tone. Importantly, his friends also denied any usage of acids in his process.\nCriticisms.\nConversations revolving around the justification of art as superfluous usually invoked the name of Canova. Karl Ludwig Fernow believed that Canova was not Kantian enough in his aesthetic, because emphasis seemed to have been placed on agreeableness rather than Beauty. Canova was faulted for creating works that were artificial in complexity.\nLegacy.\nCanova spent large parts of his fortune helping young students and sending patrons to struggling sculptors, including Sir Richard Westmacott and John Gibson.\nHe was introduced into various orders of chivalry.\nThe Romantic period artists buried Canova's name soon after he died, but he is slowly being rediscovered.\nA number of his works, sketches, and writings are collected in the \"Sala Canoviana\" of the Museo Civico of Bassano del Grappa. Other works, including plaster casts are the Museo Canoviano in Asolo.\nLiterary inspirations.\nTwo of Canova's works appear as engravings in \"Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book\", 1834, with poetical illustrations by Letitia Elizabeth Landon. These are of \"The Dancing Girl\" and \"Hebe\"."}
{"id": "2065", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2065", "title": "Auguste Rodin", "text": "Fran\u00e7ois Auguste Ren\u00e9 Rodin (12 November 184017 November 1917) was a French sculptor generally considered the founder of modern sculpture. He was schooled traditionally and took a craftsman-like approach to his work. Rodin possessed a unique ability to model a complex, turbulent, and deeply pocketed surface in clay. He is known for such sculptures as \"The Thinker\", \"Monument to Balzac\", \"The Kiss\", \"The Burghers of Calais\", and \"The Gates of Hell\".\nMany of Rodin's most notable sculptures were criticized as they clashed with predominant figurative sculpture traditions in which works were decorative, formulaic, or highly thematic. Rodin's most original work departed from traditional themes of mythology and allegory. He modeled the human body with naturalism, and his sculptures celebrate individual character and physicality. Although Rodin was sensitive to the controversy surrounding his work, he refused to change his style, and his continued output brought increasing favor from the government and the artistic community.\nFrom the unexpected naturalism of Rodin's first major figure \u2013 inspired by his 1875 trip to Italy \u2013 to the unconventional memorials whose commissions he later sought, his reputation grew, and Rodin became the preeminent French sculptor of his time. By 1900, he was a world-renowned artist. Wealthy private clients sought Rodin's work after his World's Fair exhibit, and he kept company with a variety of high-profile intellectuals and artists. His student, Camille Claudel, became his associate, lover, and creative rival. Rodin's other students included Antoine Bourdelle, Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, and Charles Despiau. He married his lifelong companion, Rose Beuret, in the last year of both their lives. His sculptures suffered a decline in popularity after his death in 1917, but within a few decades his legacy solidified. Rodin remains one of the few sculptors widely known outside the visual arts community.\nBiography.\nFormative years.\nRodin was born in 1840 into a working-class family in Paris, the second child of Marie Cheffer and Jean-Baptiste Rodin, who was a police department clerk. He was largely self-educated, and began to draw at age 10. Between ages 14 and 17, he attended the \"Petite \u00c9cole\", a school specializing in art and mathematics where he studied drawing and painting. His drawing teacher Horace Lecoq de Boisbaudran believed in first developing the personality of his students so that they observed with their own eyes and drew from their recollections, and Rodin expressed appreciation for his teacher much later in life. It was at Petite \u00c9cole that he met Jules Dalou and Alphonse Legros.\nIn 1857, Rodin submitted a clay model of a companion to the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in an attempt to win entrance; he did not succeed, and two further applications were also denied. Entrance requirements were not particularly high at the \"Grande \u00c9cole\", so the rejections were considerable setbacks. Rodin's inability to gain entrance may have been due to the judges' Neoclassical tastes, while Rodin had been schooled in light, 18th-century sculpture. He left the \"Petite \u00c9cole\" in 1857 and earned a living as a craftsman and ornamenter for most of the next two decades, producing decorative objects and architectural embellishments.\nRodin's sister Maria, two years his senior, died of peritonitis in a convent in 1862, and Rodin was anguished with guilt because he had introduced her to an unfaithful suitor. He turned away from art and joined the Catholic order of the Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament. Saint Peter Julian Eymard, founder and head of the congregation, recognized Rodin's talent and sensed his lack of suitability for the order, so he encouraged Rodin to continue with his sculpture. Rodin returned to work as a decorator while taking classes with animal sculptor Antoine-Louis Barye. The teacher's attention to detail and his finely rendered musculature of animals in motion significantly influenced Rodin.\nIn 1864, Rodin began to live with a young seamstress named Rose Beuret (born in June 1844), with whom he stayed for the rest of his life, with varying commitment. The couple had a son named Auguste-Eug\u00e8ne Beuret (1866\u20131934). That year, Rodin offered his first sculpture for exhibition and entered the studio of Albert-Ernest Carrier-Belleuse, a successful mass producer of \"objets d'art\". Rodin worked as Carrier-Belleuse' chief assistant until 1870, designing roof decorations and staircase and doorway embellishments. With the arrival of the Franco-Prussian War, Rodin was called to serve in the French National Guard, but his service was brief due to his near-sightedness. Decorators' work had dwindled because of the war, yet Rodin needed to support his family, as poverty was a continual difficulty for him until about the age of 30. Carrier-Belleuse soon asked him to join him in Belgium, where they worked on ornamentation for the Brussels Stock Exchange.\nRodin planned to stay in Belgium a few months, but he spent the next six years outside of France. It was a pivotal time in his life. He had acquired skill and experience as a craftsman, but no one had yet seen his art, which sat in his workshop since he could not afford castings. His relationship with Carrier-Belleuse had deteriorated, but he found other employment in Brussels, displaying some works at salons, and his companion Rose soon joined him there. Having saved enough money to travel, Rodin visited Italy for two months in 1875, where he was drawn to the work of Donatello and Michelangelo. Their work had a profound effect on his artistic direction. Rodin said, \"It is Michelangelo who has freed me from academic sculpture.\" Returning to Belgium, he began work on \"The Age of Bronze\", a life-size male figure whose naturalism brought Rodin attention but led to accusations of sculptural cheatingits naturalism and scale was such that critics alleged he had cast the work from a living model. Much of Rodin's later work was explicitly larger or smaller than life, in part to demonstrate the folly of such accusations.\nArtistic independence.\nRose Beuret and Rodin returned to Paris in 1877, moving into a small flat on the Left Bank. Misfortune surrounded Rodin: his mother, who had wanted to see her son marry, was dead, and his father was blind and senile, cared for by Rodin's sister-in-law, Aunt Th\u00e9r\u00e8se. Rodin's eleven-year-old son Auguste, possibly developmentally delayed, was also in the ever-helpful Th\u00e9r\u00e8se's care. Rodin had essentially abandoned his son for six years, and would have a very limited relationship with him throughout his life. Father and son joined the couple in their flat, with Rose as caretaker. Charges of fakery surrounding \"The Age of Bronze\" continued. Rodin increasingly sought soothing female companionship in Paris, and Rose stayed in the background.\nRodin earned his living collaborating with more established sculptors on public commissions, primarily memorials and neo-baroque architectural pieces in the style of Carpeaux. In competitions for commissions he submitted models of Denis Diderot, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Lazare Carnot, all to no avail. On his own time, he worked on studies leading to the creation of his next important work, \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\".\nIn 1880, Carrier-Belleuse\u00a0\u2013 then art director of the S\u00e8vres national porcelain factory\u00a0\u2013 offered Rodin a part-time position as a designer. The offer was in part a gesture of reconciliation, and Rodin accepted. That part of Rodin which appreciated 18th-century tastes was aroused, and he immersed himself in designs for vases and table ornaments that brought the factory renown across Europe.\nThe artistic community appreciated his work in this vein, and Rodin was invited to Paris Salons by such friends as writer L\u00e9on Cladel. During his early appearances at these social events, Rodin seemed shy; in his later years, as his fame grew, he displayed the loquaciousness and temperament for which he is better known. French statesman Leon Gambetta expressed a desire to meet Rodin, and the sculptor impressed him when they met at a salon. Gambetta spoke of Rodin in turn to several government ministers, likely including , the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Fine Arts, whom Rodin eventually met.\nRodin's relationship with Turquet was rewarding: through him, he won the 1880 commission to create a portal for a planned museum of decorative arts. Rodin dedicated much of the next four decades to his elaborate \"Gates of Hell\", an unfinished portal for a museum that was never built. Many of the portal's figures became sculptures in themselves, including Rodin's most famous, \"The Thinker\" and \"The Kiss\". With the museum commission came a free studio, granting Rodin a new level of artistic freedom. Soon, he stopped working at the porcelain factory; his income came from private commissions.\nIn 1883, Rodin agreed to supervise a course for sculptor Alfred Boucher in his absence, where he met the 18-year-old Camille Claudel. The two formed a passionate but stormy relationship and influenced each other artistically. Claudel inspired Rodin as a model for many of his figures, and she was a talented sculptor, assisting him on commissions as well as creating her own works. Her \"Bust of Rodin\" was displayed to critical acclaim at the 1892 Salon.\nAlthough busy with \"The Gates of Hell\", Rodin won other commissions. He pursued an opportunity to create a historical monument for the town of Calais. For a monument to French author Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, Rodin was chosen in 1891. His execution of both sculptures clashed with traditional tastes, and met with varying degrees of disapproval from the organizations that sponsored the commissions. Still, Rodin was gaining support from diverse sources that propelled him toward fame.\nIn 1889, the Paris Salon invited Rodin to be a judge on its artistic jury. Though Rodin's career was on the rise, Claudel and Beuret were becoming increasingly impatient with Rodin's \"double life\". Claudel and Rodin shared an atelier at a small old castle (the Ch\u00e2teau de l'Islette in the Loire), but Rodin refused to relinquish his ties to Beuret, his loyal companion during the lean years, and mother of his son. During one absence, Rodin wrote to Beuret, \"I think of how much you must have loved me to put up with my caprices...I remain, in all tenderness, your Rodin.\"\nClaudel and Rodin parted in 1898. Claudel suffered an alleged nervous breakdown several years later and was confined to an institution for 30 years by her family, until her death in 1943, despite numerous attempts by doctors to explain to her mother and brother that she was sane.\nWorks.\nIn 1864, Rodin submitted his first sculpture for exhibition, \"The Man with the Broken Nose\", to the Paris Salon. The subject was an elderly neighborhood street porter. The unconventional bronze piece was not a traditional bust, but instead the head was \"broken off\" at the neck, the nose was flattened and crooked, and the back of the head was absent, having fallen off the clay model in an accident. The work emphasized texture and the emotional state of the subject; it illustrated the \"unfinishedness\" that would characterize many of Rodin's later sculptures. The Salon rejected the piece.\nEarly figures: the inspiration of Italy.\nIn Brussels, Rodin created his first full-scale work, \"The Age of Bronze\", having returned from Italy. Modeled after a Belgian soldier, the figure drew inspiration from Michelangelo's \"Dying Slave\", which Rodin had observed at the Louvre. Attempting to combine Michelangelo's mastery of the human form with his own sense of human nature, Rodin studied his model from all angles, at rest and in motion; he mounted a ladder for additional perspective, and made clay models, which he studied by candlelight. The result was a life-size, well-proportioned nude figure, posed unconventionally with his right hand atop his head, and his left arm held out at his side, forearm parallel to the body.\nIn 1877, the work debuted in Brussels and then was shown at the Paris Salon. The statue's apparent lack of a theme was troubling to critics\u00a0\u2013 commemorating neither mythology nor a noble historical event\u00a0\u2013 and it is not clear whether Rodin intended a theme. He first titled the work \"The Vanquished\", in which form the left hand held a spear, but he removed the spear because it obstructed the torso from certain angles. After two more intermediary titles, Rodin settled on \"The Age of Bronze\", suggesting the Bronze Age, and in Rodin's words, \"man arising from nature\". Later, however, Rodin said that he had had in mind \"just a simple piece of sculpture without reference to subject\".\nIts mastery of form, light, and shadow made the work look so naturalistic that Rodin was accused of \"surmoulage\"\u00a0\u2013 having taken a cast from a living model. Rodin vigorously denied the charges, writing to newspapers and having photographs taken of the model to prove how the sculpture differed. He demanded an inquiry and was eventually exonerated by a committee of sculptors. Leaving aside the false charges, the piece polarized critics. It had barely won acceptance for display at the Paris Salon, and criticism likened it to \"a statue of a sleepwalker\" and called it \"an astonishingly accurate copy of a low type\". Others rallied to defend the piece and Rodin's integrity. The government minister Turquet admired the piece, and \"The Age of Bronze\" was purchased by the state for 2,200 francs\u00a0\u2013 what it had cost Rodin to have it cast in bronze.\nA second male nude, \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\", was completed in 1878. Rodin sought to avoid another charge of \"surmoulage\" by making the statue larger than life: \"St. John\" stands almost 6\u00a0feet 7\u00a0inches (2\u00a0m). While \"The Age of Bronze\" is statically posed, \"St. John\" gestures and seems to move toward the viewer. The effect of walking is achieved despite the figure having both feet firmly on the ground\u00a0\u2013 a technical achievement that was lost on most contemporary critics. Rodin chose this contradictory position to, in his words, \"display simultaneously...views of an object which in fact can be seen only successively\".\nDespite the title, \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\" did not have an obviously religious theme. The model, an Italian peasant who presented himself at Rodin's studio, possessed an idiosyncratic sense of movement that Rodin felt compelled to capture. Rodin thought of John the Baptist, and carried that association into the title of the work. In 1880, Rodin submitted the sculpture to the Paris Salon. Critics were still mostly dismissive of his work, but the piece finished third in the Salon's sculpture category.\nRegardless of the immediate receptions of \"St. John\" and \"The Age of Bronze\", Rodin had achieved a new degree of fame. Students sought him at his studio, praising his work and scorning the charges of \"surmoulage\". The artistic community knew his name.\n\"The Gates of Hell\".\nA commission to create a portal for Paris' planned Museum of Decorative Arts was awarded to Rodin in 1880. Although the museum was never built, Rodin worked throughout his life on \"The Gates of Hell\", a monumental sculptural group depicting scenes from Dante's \"Inferno\" in high relief. Often lacking a clear conception of his major works, Rodin compensated with hard work and a striving for perfection.\nHe conceived \"The Gates\" with the \"surmoulage\" controversy still in mind: \"...I had made the \"St. John\" to refute [the charges of casting from a model], but it only partially succeeded. To prove completely that I could model from life as well as other sculptors, I determined...to make the sculpture on the door of figures smaller than life.\" Laws of composition gave way to the \"Gates\"' disordered and untamed depiction of Hell. The figures and groups in this, Rodin's meditation on the condition of man, are physically and morally isolated in their torment.\n\"The Gates of Hell\" comprised 186 figures in its final form. Many of Rodin's best-known sculptures started as designs of figures for this composition, such as \"The Thinker\", \"The Three Shades\", and \"The Kiss\", and were only later presented as separate and independent works. Other well-known works derived from \"The Gates\" are \"Ugolino\", \"Fallen Caryatid Carrying her Stone\", \"Fugit Amor\", \"She Who Was Once the Helmet-Maker's Beautiful Wife\", \"The Falling Man\", and \"The Prodigal Son\".\n\"The Thinker\" (originally titled \"The Poet\", after Dante) was to become one of the most well-known sculptures in the world. The original was a high bronze piece created between 1879 and 1889, designed for the \"Gates\"' lintel, from which the figure would gaze down upon Hell. While \"The Thinker\" most obviously characterizes Dante, aspects of the Biblical Adam, the mythological Prometheus, and Rodin himself have been ascribed to him. Other observers de-emphasize the apparent intellectual theme of \"The Thinker\", stressing the figure's rough physicality and the emotional tension emanating from it.\n\"The Burghers of Calais\".\nThe town of Calais had contemplated a historical monument for decades when Rodin learned of the project. He pursued the commission, interested in the medieval motif and patriotic theme. The mayor of Calais was tempted to hire Rodin on the spot upon visiting his studio, and soon the memorial was approved, with Rodin as its architect. It would commemorate the six townspeople of Calais who offered their lives to save their fellow citizens.\nDuring the Hundred Years' War, the army of King Edward III besieged Calais, and Edward ordered that the town's population be killed \"en masse\". He agreed to spare them if six of the principal citizens would come to him prepared to die, bareheaded and barefooted and with ropes around their necks. When they came, he ordered that they be executed, but pardoned them when his queen, Philippa of Hainault, begged him to spare their lives. \"The Burghers of Calais\" depicts the men as they are leaving for the king's camp, carrying keys to the town's gates and citadel.\nRodin began the project in 1884, inspired by the chronicles of the siege by Jean Froissart. Though the town envisioned an allegorical, heroic piece centered on Eustache de Saint-Pierre, the eldest of the six men, Rodin conceived the sculpture as a study in the varied and complex emotions under which all six men were laboring. One year into the commission, the Calais committee was not impressed with Rodin's progress. Rodin indicated his willingness to end the project rather than change his design to meet the committee's conservative expectations, but Calais said to continue.\nIn 1889, \"The Burghers of Calais\" was first displayed to general acclaim. It is a bronze sculpture weighing two tons (1,814\u00a0kg), and its figures are 6.6\u00a0ft (2\u00a0m) tall. The six men portrayed do not display a united, heroic front; rather, each is isolated from his brothers, individually deliberating and struggling with his expected fate. Rodin soon proposed that the monument's high pedestal be eliminated, wanting to move the sculpture to ground level so that viewers could \"penetrate to the heart of the subject\". At ground level, the figures' positions lead the viewer around the work, and subtly suggest their common movement forward.\nThe committee was incensed by the untraditional proposal, but Rodin would not yield. In 1895, Calais succeeded in having \"Burghers\" displayed in their preferred form: the work was placed in front of a public garden on a high platform, surrounded by a cast-iron railing. Rodin had wanted it located near the town hall, where it would engage the public. Only after damage during the First World War, subsequent storage, and Rodin's death was the sculpture displayed as he had intended. It is one of Rodin's best-known and most acclaimed works.\nCommissions and controversy.\nCommissioned to create a monument to French writer Victor Hugo in 1889, Rodin dealt extensively with the subject of \"artist and muse\". Like many of Rodin's public commissions, \"Monument to Victor Hugo\" was met with resistance because it did not fit conventional expectations. Commenting on Rodin's monument to Victor Hugo, \"The Times\" in 1909 expressed that \"there is some show of reason in the complaint that [Rodin's] conceptions are sometimes unsuited to his medium, and that in such cases they overstrain his vast technical powers\". The 1897 plaster model was not cast in bronze until 1964.\nThe \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Gens des Lettres\", a Parisian organization of writers, planned a monument to French novelist Honor\u00e9 de Balzac immediately after his death in 1850. The society commissioned Rodin to create the memorial in 1891, and Rodin spent years developing the concept for his sculpture. Challenged in finding an appropriate representation of Balzac given the author's rotund physique, Rodin produced many studies: portraits, full-length figures in the nude, wearing a frock coat, or in a robe\u00a0\u2013 a replica of which Rodin had requested. The realized sculpture displays Balzac cloaked in the drapery, looking forcefully into the distance with deeply gouged features. Rodin's intent had been to show Balzac at the moment of conceiving a work\u00a0\u2013 to express courage, labor, and struggle.\nWhen \"Balzac\" was exhibited in 1898, the negative reaction was not surprising. The \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9\" rejected the work, and the press ran parodies. Criticizing the work, Morey (1918) reflected, \"there may come a time, and doubtless will come a time, when it will not seem \"outre\" to represent a great novelist as a huge comic mask crowning a bathrobe, but even at the present day this statue impresses one as slang.\" A modern critic, indeed, claims that \"Balzac\" is one of Rodin's masterpieces.\nThe monument had its supporters in Rodin's day; a manifesto defending him was signed by Monet, Debussy, and future Premier Georges Clemenceau, among many others. In the BBC series Civilisation, art historian Kenneth Clark praised the monument as \"the greatest piece of sculpture of the 19th Century, perhaps, indeed, the greatest since Michelangelo.\" Rather than try to convince skeptics of the merit of the monument, Rodin repaid the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9\" his commission and moved the figure to his garden. After this experience, Rodin did not complete another public commission. Only in 1939 was \"Monument to Balzac\" cast in bronze and placed on the Boulevard du Montparnasse at the intersection with Boulevard Raspail.\nOther works.\nThe popularity of Rodin's most famous sculptures tends to obscure his total creative output. A prolific artist, he created thousands of busts, figures, and sculptural fragments over more than five decades. He painted in oils (especially in his thirties) and in watercolors. The Mus\u00e9e Rodin holds 7,000 of his drawings and prints, in chalk and charcoal, and thirteen vigorous drypoints. He also produced a single lithograph.\nPortraiture was an important component of Rodin's oeuvre, helping him to win acceptance and financial independence. His first sculpture was a bust of his father in 1860, and he produced at least 56 portraits between 1877 and his death in 1917. Early subjects included fellow sculptor Jules Dalou (1883) and companion Camille Claudel (1884).\nLater, with his reputation established, Rodin made busts of prominent contemporaries such as English politician George Wyndham (1905), Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw (1906), socialist (and former mistress of the Prince of Wales who became King Edward VII) Countess of Warwick (1908), Austrian composer Gustav Mahler (1909), former Argentine president Domingo Faustino Sarmiento and French statesman Georges Clemenceau (1911).\nHis undated drawing \"Study of a Woman Nude, Standing, Arms Raised, Hands Crossed Above Head\" is one of the works seized in 2012 from the collection of Cornelius Gurlitt.\nAesthetic.\nRodin was a naturalist, less concerned with monumental expression than with character and emotion. Departing with centuries of tradition, he turned away from the idealism of the Greeks, and the decorative beauty of the Baroque and neo-Baroque movements. His sculpture emphasized the individual and the concreteness of flesh, and suggested emotion through detailed, textured surfaces, and the interplay of light and shadow. To a greater degree than his contemporaries, Rodin believed that an individual's character was revealed by his physical features.\nRodin's talent for surface modeling allowed him to let every part of the body speak for the whole. The male's passion in \"The Thinker\" is suggested by the grip of his toes on the rock, the rigidness of his back, and the differentiation of his hands. Speaking of \"The Thinker\", Rodin illuminated his aesthetic: \"What makes my Thinker think is that he thinks not only with his brain, with his knitted brow, his distended nostrils and compressed lips, but with every muscle of his arms, back, and legs, with his clenched fist and gripping toes.\"\nSculptural fragments to Rodin were autonomous works, and he considered them the essence of his artistic statement. His fragments\u00a0\u2013 perhaps lacking arms, legs, or a head\u00a0\u2013 took sculpture further from its traditional role of portraying likenesses, and into a realm where forms existed for their own sake. Notable examples are \"The Walking Man\", \"Meditation without Arms\", and \"Iris, Messenger of the Gods\".\nRodin saw suffering and conflict as hallmarks of modern art. \"Nothing, really, is more moving than the maddened beast, dying from unfulfilled desire and asking in vain for grace to quell its passion.\" Charles Baudelaire echoed those themes, and was among Rodin's favorite poets. Rodin enjoyed music, especially the opera composer Gluck, and wrote a book about French cathedrals. He owned a work by the as-yet-unrecognized Van Gogh, and admired the forgotten El Greco.\nMethod.\nInstead of copying traditional academic postures, Rodin preferred his models to move naturally around his studio (despite their nakedness). The sculptor often made quick sketches in clay that were later fine-tuned, cast in plaster, and cast in bronze or carved from marble. Rodin's focus was on the handling of clay.\nGeorge Bernard Shaw sat for a portrait and gave an idea of Rodin's technique: \"While he worked, he achieved a number of miracles. At the end of the first fifteen minutes, after having given a simple idea of the human form to the block of clay, he produced by the action of his thumb a bust so living that I would have taken it away with me to relieve the sculptor of any further work.\"\nHe described the evolution of his bust over a month, passing through \"all the stages of art's evolution\": first, a \"Byzantine masterpiece\", then \"Bernini intermingled\", then an elegant Houdon. \"The hand of Rodin worked not as the hand of a sculptor works, but as the work of \"Elan Vital\". The \"Hand of God\" is his own hand.\"\nAfter he completed his work in clay, he employed highly skilled assistants to re-sculpt his compositions at larger sizes (including any of his large-scale monuments such as \"The Thinker\"), to cast the clay compositions into plaster or bronze, and to carve his marbles. Rodin's major innovation was to capitalize on such multi-staged processes of 19th century sculpture and their reliance on plaster casting.\nSince clay deteriorates rapidly if not kept wet or fired into a terra-cotta, sculptors used plaster casts as a means of securing the composition they would make from the fugitive material that is clay. This was common practice amongst Rodin's contemporaries, and sculptors would exhibit plaster casts with the hopes that they would be commissioned to have the works made in a more permanent material. Rodin, however, would have multiple plasters made and treat them as the raw material of sculpture, recombining their parts and figures into new compositions, and new names.\nAs Rodin's practice developed into the 1890s, he became more and more radical in his pursuit of fragmentation, the combination of figures at different scales, and the making of new compositions from his earlier work. A prime example of this is the bold \"The Walking Man\" (1899\u20131900), which was exhibited at his major one-person show in 1900. This is composed of two sculptures from the 1870s that Rodin found in his studio\u00a0\u2013 a broken and damaged torso that had fallen into neglect and the lower extremities of a statuette version of his 1878 \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\" he was having re-sculpted at a reduced scale.\nWithout finessing the join between upper and lower, between torso and legs, Rodin created a work that many sculptors at the time and subsequently have seen as one of his strongest and most singular works. This is despite the fact that the object conveys two different styles, exhibits two different attitudes toward finish, and lacks any attempt to hide the arbitrary fusion of these two components. It was the freedom and creativity with which Rodin used these practices\u00a0\u2013 along with his activation surfaces of sculptures through traces of his own touch and with his more open attitude toward bodily pose, sensual subject matter, and non-naturalistic surface\u00a0\u2013 that marked Rodin's re-making of traditional 19th century sculptural techniques into the prototype for modern sculpture.\nLater years (1900\u20131917).\nBy 1900, Rodin's artistic reputation was entrenched. Gaining exposure from a pavilion of his artwork set up near the 1900 World's Fair (\"Exposition Universelle\") in Paris, he received requests to make busts of prominent people internationally, while his assistants at the atelier produced duplicates of his works. His income from portrait commissions alone totaled probably 200,000 francs a year. As Rodin's fame grew, he attracted many followers, including the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke, and authors Octave Mirbeau, Joris-Karl Huysmans, and Oscar Wilde.\nRilke stayed with Rodin in 1905 and 1906, and did administrative work for him; he would later write a laudatory monograph on the sculptor. Rodin and Beuret's modest country estate in Meudon, purchased in 1897, was a host to such guests as King Edward, dancer Isadora Duncan, and harpsichordist Wanda Landowska. A British journalist who visited the property noted in 1902 that in its complete isolation, there was \"a striking analogy between its situation and the personality of the man who lives in it\". Rodin moved to the city in 1908, renting the main floor of the H\u00f4tel Biron, an 18th-century townhouse. He left Beuret in Meudon, and began an affair with the American-born Duchesse de Choiseul. From 1910, he mentored the Russian sculptor, Moissey Kogan.\nUnited States.\nWhile Rodin was beginning to be accepted in France by the time of \"The Burghers of Calais\", he had not yet conquered the American market. Because of his technique and the frankness of some of his work, he did not have an easy time selling his work to American industrialists. However, he came to know Sarah Tyson Hallowell (1846\u20131924), a curator from Chicago who visited Paris to arrange exhibitions at the large Interstate Expositions of the 1870s and 1880s. Hallowell was not only a curator but an adviser and a facilitator who was trusted by a number of prominent American collectors to suggest works for their collections, the most prominent of these being the Chicago hotelier Potter Palmer and his wife, Bertha Palmer (1849\u20131918).\nThe next opportunity for Rodin in America was the 1893 Chicago World's Fair. Hallowell wanted to help promote Rodin's work and he suggested a solo exhibition, which she wrote him was \"beaucoup moins beau que l'original\" but impossible, outside the rules. Instead, she suggested he send a number of works for her loan exhibition of French art from American collections and she told him she would list them as being part of an American collection. Rodin sent Hallowell three works, \"Cupid and Psyche\", \"Sphinx\" and \"Andromeda\". All nudes, these works provoked great controversy and were ultimately hidden behind a drape with special permission given for viewers to see them.\n\"Bust of Dalou\" and \"Burgher of Calais\" were on display in the official French pavilion at the fair and so between the works that were on display and those that were not, he was noticed. However, the works he gave Hallowell to sell found no takers, but she soon brought the controversial Quaker-born financier Charles Yerkes (1837\u20131905) into the fold and he purchased two large marbles for his Chicago manse; Yerkes was likely the first American to own a Rodin sculpture.\nOther collectors soon followed including the tastemaking Potter Palmers of Chicago and Isabella Stewart Gardner (1840\u20131924) of Boston, all arranged by Sarah Hallowell. In appreciation for her efforts at unlocking the American market, Rodin eventually presented Hallowell with a bronze, a marble and a terra cotta. When Hallowell moved to Paris in 1893, she and Rodin continued their warm friendship and correspondence, which lasted to the end of the sculptor's life. After Hallowell's death, her niece, the painter Harriet Hallowell, inherited the Rodins and after her death, the American heirs could not manage to match their value in order to export them, so they became the property of the French state.\nGreat Britain.\nAfter the start of the 20th century, Rodin was a regular visitor to Great Britain, where he developed a loyal following by the beginning of the First World War. He first visited England in 1881, where his friend, the artist Alphonse Legros, had introduced him to the poet William Ernest Henley. With his personal connections and enthusiasm for Rodin's art, Henley was most responsible for Rodin's reception in Britain. (Rodin later returned the favor by sculpting a that was used as the frontispiece to Henley's collected works and, after his death, on his monument in London.)\nThrough Henley, Rodin met Robert Louis Stevenson and Robert Browning, in whom he found further support. Encouraged by the enthusiasm of British artists, students, and high society for his art, Rodin donated a significant selection of his works to the nation in 1914.\nAfter the revitalization of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1890, Rodin served as the body's vice-president. In 1903, Rodin was elected president of the International Society of Painters, Sculptors, and Engravers. He replaced its former president, James Abbott McNeill Whistler, upon Whistler's death. His election to the prestigious position was largely due to the efforts of Albert Ludovici, father of English philosopher Anthony Ludovici, who was private secretary to Rodin for several months in 1906, but the two men parted company after Christmas, \"to their mutual relief.\"\nDuring his later creative years, Rodin's work turned increasingly toward the female form, and themes of more overt masculinity and femininity. He concentrated on small dance studies, and produced numerous erotic drawings, sketched in a loose way, without taking his pencil from the paper or his eyes from the model. Rodin met American dancer Isadora Duncan in 1900, attempted to seduce her, and the next year sketched studies of her and her students. In July 1906, Rodin was also enchanted by dancers from the Royal Ballet of Cambodia, and produced some of his most famous drawings from the experience.\nFifty-three years into their relationship, Rodin married Rose Beuret. They married on 29 January 1917, and Beuret died two weeks later, on 16 February. Rodin was ill that year; in January, he suffered weakness from influenza, and on 16 November his physician announced that \"congestion of the lungs has caused great weakness. The patient's condition is grave.\" Rodin died the next day, age 77, at his villa in Meudon, \u00cele-de-France, on the outskirts of Paris.\nA cast of \"The Thinker\" was placed next to his tomb in Meudon; it was Rodin's wish that the figure served as his headstone and epitaph. In 1923, Marcell Tirel, Rodin's secretary, published a book alleging that Rodin's death was largely due to cold, and the fact that he had no heat at Meudon. Rodin requested permission to stay in the Hotel Biron, a museum of his works, but the director of the museum refused to let him stay there.\nLegacy.\nRodin willed to the French state his studio and the right to make casts from his plasters. Because he encouraged the edition of his sculpted work, Rodin's sculptures are represented in many public and private collections. The Mus\u00e9e Rodin was founded in 1916 and opened in 1919 at the H\u00f4tel Biron, where Rodin had lived, and it holds the largest Rodin collection, with more than 6,000 sculptures and 7,000 works on paper. The French order \"L\u00e9gion d'honneur\" made him a Commander, and he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford.\nDuring his lifetime, Rodin was compared to Michelangelo, and was widely recognized as the greatest artist of the era. In the three decades following his death, his popularity waned with changing aesthetic values. Since the 1950s, Rodin's reputation has re-ascended; he is recognized as the most important sculptor of the modern era, and has been the subject of much scholarly work. The sense of incompletion offered by some of his sculpture, such as \"The Walking Man\", influenced the increasingly abstract sculptural forms of the 20th century.\nRodin restored an ancient role of sculpture\u00a0\u2013 to capture the physical and intellectual force of the human subject\u00a0\u2013 and he freed sculpture from the repetition of traditional patterns, providing the foundation for greater experimentation in the 20th century. His popularity is ascribed to his emotion-laden representations of ordinary men and women\u00a0\u2013 to his ability to find the beauty and pathos in the human animal. His most popular works, such as \"The Kiss\" and \"The Thinker\", are widely used outside the fine arts as symbols of human emotion and character. To honor Rodin's artistic legacy, the Google search engine homepage displayed a Google Doodle featuring \"The Thinker\" to celebrate his 172nd birthday on 12 November 2012.\nRodin had enormous artistic influence. A whole generation of sculptors studied in his workshop. These include Gutzon Borglum, Antoine Bourdelle, Constantin Brancusi, Camille Claudel, Charles Despiau, Malvina Hoffman, Carl Milles, Fran\u00e7ois Pompon, Rodo, Gustav Vigeland, Clara Westhoff and Margaret Winser, even though Brancusi later rejected his legacy. Rodin also promoted the work of other sculptors, including Aristide Maillol and Ivan Me\u0161trovi\u0107 whom Rodin once called \"the greatest phenomenon amongst sculptors.\" Other sculptors whose work has been described as owing to Rodin include Joseph Csaky, Alexander Archipenko, Joseph Bernard, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, Georg Kolbe, Wilhelm Lehmbruck, Jacques Lipchitz, Pablo Picasso, Adolfo Wildt, and Ossip Zadkine. Henry Moore acknowledged Rodin's seminal influence on his work.\nSeveral films have been made featuring Rodin as a prominent character or presence. These include \"Camille Claudel\", a 1988 film in which G\u00e9rard Depardieu portrays Rodin, \"Camille Claudel 1915\" from 2013, and \"Rodin\", a 2017 film starring Vincent Lindon as Rodin. Furthermore, the Rodin Studios artists' cooperative housing in New York City, completed in 1917 to designs by Cass Gilbert, was named after Rodin.\nForgeries.\nThe relative ease of making reproductions has also encouraged many forgeries: a survey of expert opinion placed Rodin in the top ten most-faked artists. Rodin fought against forgeries of his works as early as 1901, and since his death, many cases of organized, large-scale forgeries have been revealed. A massive forgery was discovered by French authorities in the early 1990s and led to the conviction of art dealer Guy Hain.\nTo deal with the complexity of bronze reproduction, France has promulgated several laws since 1956 which limit reproduction to twelve casts\u00a0\u2013 the maximum number that can be made from an artist's plasters and still be considered his work. As a result of this limit, \"The Burghers of Calais\", for example, is found in fourteen cities.\nIn the market for sculpture, plagued by fakes, the value of a piece increases significantly when its provenance can be established. A Rodin work with a verified history sold for US$4.8\u00a0million in 1999, and Rodin's bronze \"Eve, grand modele\u00a0\u2013 version sans rocher\" sold for $18.9\u00a0million at a 2008 Christie's auction in New York. Art critics concerned about authenticity have argued that taking a cast does not equal reproducing a Rodin sculpture\u00a0\u2013 especially given the importance of surface treatment in Rodin's work.\nA number of drawings previously attributed to Rodin are now known to have been forged by Ernest Durig."}
{"id": "2067", "revid": "34583110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2067", "title": "Ann Arbor, Michigan", "text": "Ann Arbor is a city in the U.S. state of Michigan and the county seat of Washtenaw County. The 2010 census recorded its population to be 113,934. It is the principal city of the Ann Arbor Metropolitan Statistical Area, which encompasses all of Washtenaw County. Ann Arbor is also included in the larger Greater Detroit Combined Statistical Area.\nAnn Arbor is home to the University of Michigan. The university significantly shapes Ann Arbor's economy as it employs about 30,000 workers, including about 12,000 in the medical center. The city's economy is also centered on high technology, with several companies drawn to the area by the university's research and development infrastructure.\nAnn Arbor was founded in 1824, named for wives of the village's founders, both named Ann, and the stands of bur oak trees. The University of Michigan moved from Detroit to Ann Arbor in 1837, and the city grew at a rapid rate in the early to mid-20th century. During the 1960s and 1970s, the city gained a reputation as a center for left-wing politics. Ann Arbor became a focal point for political activism, such as opposition to the Vietnam War and support for the legalization of cannabis.\nHistory.\nIn about 1774, the Potawatomi founded two villages in the area of what is now Ann Arbor.\nAnn Arbor was founded in 1824 by land speculators John Allen and Elisha Walker Rumsey. On May 25, 1824, the town plat was registered with Wayne County as \"Annarbour\", the earliest known use of the town's name. Allen and Rumsey decided to name it for their wives, both named Ann, and for the stands of bur oak in the of land they purchased for $800 from the federal government at $1.25 per acre. The local Ojibwa named the settlement \"kaw-goosh-kaw-nick\", after the sound of Allen's sawmill.\nAnn Arbor became the seat of Washtenaw County in 1827, and was incorporated as a village in 1833. The Ann Arbor Land Company, a group of speculators, set aside of undeveloped land and offered it to the state of Michigan as the site of the state capitol, but lost the bid to Lansing. In 1837, the property was accepted instead as the site of the University of Michigan, which moved from Detroit.\nSince the university's establishment in the city in 1837, the histories of the University of Michigan and Ann Arbor have been closely linked. The town became a regional transportation hub in 1839 with the arrival of the Michigan Central Railroad, and a north\u2013south railway connecting Ann Arbor to Toledo and other markets to the south was established in 1878. Throughout the 1840s and the 1850s settlers continued to come to Ann Arbor. While the earlier settlers were primarily of British ancestry, the newer settlers also consisted of Germans, Irish, and African-Americans. In 1851, Ann Arbor was chartered as a city, though the city showed a drop in population during the Depression of 1873. It was not until the early 1880s that Ann Arbor again saw robust growth, with new emigrants from Greece, Italy, Russia, and Poland. Ann Arbor saw increased growth in manufacturing, particularly in milling. Ann Arbor's Jewish community also grew after the turn of the 20th century, and its first and oldest synagogue, Beth Israel Congregation, was established in 1916.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, the city gained a reputation as an important center for liberal politics. Ann Arbor also became a locus for left-wing activism and anti-Vietnam War movement, as well as the student movement. The first major meetings of the national left-wing campus group Students for a Democratic Society took place in Ann Arbor in 1960; in 1965, the city was home to the first U.S. teach-in against the Vietnam War. During the ensuing 15 years, many countercultural and New Left enterprises sprang up and developed large constituencies within the city. These influences washed into municipal politics during the early and mid-1970s when three members of the Human Rights Party (HRP) won city council seats on the strength of the student vote. During their time on the council, HRP representatives fought for measures including pioneering antidiscrimination ordinances, measures decriminalizing marijuana possession, and a rent-control ordinance; many of these progressive organizations remain in effect today in modified form.\nTwo religious-conservative institutions were created in Ann Arbor; the Word of God (established in 1967), a charismatic inter-denominational movement; and the Thomas More Law Center (established in 1999).\nFollowing a 1956 vote, the city of East Ann Arbor merged with Ann Arbor to encompass the eastern sections of the city.\nIn the past several decades, Ann Arbor has grappled with the effects of sharply rising land values, gentrification, and urban sprawl stretching into outlying countryside. On November 4, 2003, voters approved a greenbelt plan under which the city government bought development rights on agricultural parcels of land adjacent to Ann Arbor to preserve them from sprawling development. Since then, a vociferous local debate has hinged on how and whether to accommodate and guide development within city limits. Ann Arbor consistently ranks in the \"top places to live\" lists published by various mainstream media outlets every year. In 2008, it was ranked by CNNMoney.com 27th out of 100 \"America's best small cities\". And in 2010, \"Forbes\" listed Ann Arbor as one of the most liveable cities in the United States.\nGeography and cityscape.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, of it is land and is water, much of which is part of the Huron River. Ann Arbor is road miles west of Ypsilanti. Ann Arbor is also road miles west of Detroit. Ann Arbor Charter Township adjoins the city's north and east sides. Ann Arbor is situated on the Huron River in a productive agricultural and fruit-growing region. The landscape of Ann Arbor consists of hills and valleys, with the terrain becoming steeper near the Huron River. The elevation ranges from about along the Huron River to on the city's west side, near the intersection of Maple Road and Pauline Blvd. Generally, the west-central and northwestern parts of the city and U-M's North Campus are the highest parts of the city; the lowest parts are along the Huron River and in the southeast. Ann Arbor Municipal Airport, which is south of the city at , has an elevation of .\nAnn Arbor's \"Tree Town\" nickname stems from the dense forestation of its parks and residential areas. The city contains more than 50,000 trees along its streets and an equal number in parks. In recent years, the emerald ash borer has destroyed many of the city's approximately 10,500 ash trees. The city contains 157 municipal parks ranging from small neighborhood green spots to large recreation areas. Several large city parks and a university park border sections of the Huron River. Fuller Recreation Area, near the University Hospital complex, contains sports fields, pedestrian and bike paths, and swimming pools. The Nichols Arboretum, owned by the University of Michigan, is a arboretum that contains hundreds of plant and tree species. It is on the city's east side, near the university's Central Campus. Located across the Huron River just beyond the university's North Campus is the university's Matthaei Botanical Gardens, which contains 300\u00a0acres of gardens and a large tropical conservatory as well as a wildflower garden specializing in the vegetation of the southern Great Lakes Region..\nThe Kerrytown Shops, Main Street Business District, the State Street Business District, and the South University Business District are commercial areas in downtown Ann Arbor. Three commercial areas south of downtown include the areas near I-94 and Ann Arbor-Saline Road, Briarwood Mall, and the South Industrial area. Other commercial areas include the Arborland/Washtenaw Avenue and Packard Road merchants on the east side, the Plymouth Road area in the northeast, and the Westgate/West Stadium areas on the west side. Downtown contains a mix of 19th- and early-20th-century structures and modern-style buildings, as well as a farmers' market in the Kerrytown district. The city's commercial districts are composed mostly of two- to four-story structures, although downtown and the area near Briarwood Mall contain a small number of high-rise buildings.\nAnn Arbor's residential neighborhoods contain architectural styles ranging from classic 19th- and early 20th-century designs to ranch-style houses. Among these homes are a number of kit houses built in the early 20th century. Contemporary-style houses are farther from the downtown district. Surrounding the University of Michigan campus are houses and apartment complexes occupied primarily by student renters. Tower Plaza, a 26-story condominium building located between the University of Michigan campus and downtown, is the tallest building in Ann Arbor. The 19th-century buildings and streetscape of the Old West Side neighborhood have been preserved virtually intact; in 1972, the district was listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and it is further protected by city ordinances and a nonprofit preservation group.\nClimate.\nAnn Arbor has a typically Midwestern humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), which is influenced by the Great Lakes. There are four distinct seasons: winters are cold and snowy, with average highs around . Summers are warm to hot and humid, with average highs around and with slightly more precipitation. Spring and autumn are transitional between the two. The area experiences lake effect weather, primarily in the form of increased cloudiness during late fall and early winter. The monthly daily average temperature in July is , while the same figure for January is . Temperatures reach or exceed on 10 days, and drop to or below on 4.6 nights. Precipitation tends to be the heaviest during the summer months, but most frequent during winter. Snowfall, which normally occurs from November to April but occasionally starts in October, averages per season. The lowest recorded temperature was on February 11, 1885 and the highest recorded temperature was on July 24, 1934.\nDemographics.\nAs of the 2010 U.S. Census, there were 113,934 people, 20,502 families, and 47,060 households residing in the city. The population density was 4,093.9 people per square mile (1,580.7/km), making it less densely populated than Detroit proper and its inner-ring suburbs like Oak Park and Ferndale, but more densely populated than outer-ring suburbs like Livonia and Troy. The racial makeup of the city was 73.0% White (70.4% non-Hispanic White), 7.7% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 14.4% Asian, 0.0% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 1.0% from other races, and 3.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race made up 4.1% of the population. Ann Arbor has a small population of Arab Americans, including students as well as local Lebanese and Palestinians.\nIn 2013, Ann Arbor had the second-largest community of Japanese citizens in the state of Michigan, at 1,541; this figure trailed only that of Novi, which had 2,666 Japanese nationals.\nIn 2010, out of 47,060 households, 43.6% were family households, 20.1% had individuals under the age of 18 living in them, and 17.0% had individuals over age 65 living in them. Of the 20,502 family households, 19.2% included children under age 18, 34.2% were husband-wife families (estimates did not include same-sex married couples), and 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present. The average household size was 2.17 people, and the average family size was 2.85 people. The median age was 27.8; 14.4% of the population was under age 18, and 9.3% was age 65 or older.\nAccording to the 2012\u20132016 American Community Survey estimates, the median household income was $57,697, and the median family income was $95,528. Males over age 25 and with earnings had a median income of $51,682, versus $39,203 for females. The per capita income for the city was $37,158. Nearly a quarter (23.4%) of people and 6.7% of families had incomes below the poverty level.\nEconomy.\nThe University of Michigan shapes Ann Arbor's economy significantly. It employs about 30,000 workers, including about 12,000 in the medical center. Other employers are drawn to the area by the university's research and development money, and by its graduates. High tech, health services and biotechnology are other major components of the city's economy; numerous medical offices, laboratories, and associated companies are located in the city. Automobile manufacturers, such as General Motors and Visteon, also employ residents.\nHigh tech companies have located in the area since the 1930s, when International Radio Corporation introduced the first mass-produced AC/DC radio (the Kadette, in 1931) as well as the first pocket radio (the Kadette Jr., in 1933). The Argus camera company, originally a subsidiary of International Radio, manufactured cameras in Ann Arbor from 1936 to the 1960s. Current firms include Arbor Networks (provider of Internet traffic engineering and security systems), Arbortext (provider of XML-based publishing software), JSTOR (the digital scholarly journal archive), MediaSpan (provider of software and online services for the media industries), Truven Health Analytics, and ProQuest, which includes UMI. Ann Arbor Terminals manufactured a video-display terminal called the Ann Arbor Ambassador during the 1980s. Barracuda Networks, which provides networking, security, and storage products based on network appliances and cloud services, opened an engineering office in Ann Arbor in 2008 on Depot St. and currently occupies the building previously used as the Borders headquarters on Maynard Street. Duo Security, a cloud-based access security provider protecting thousands of organizations worldwide through two-factor authentication, is headquartered in Ann Arbor. It was formally a unicorn and continues to be headquartered in Ann Arbor after its acquisition by Cisco Systems.\nWebsites and online media companies in or near the city include All Media Guide, the Weather Underground, and Zattoo. Ann Arbor is the home to Internet2 and the Merit Network, a not-for-profit research and education computer network. Both are located in the South State Commons 2 building on South State Street, which once housed the Michigan Information Technology Center Foundation. The city is also home to a secondary office of Google's AdWords program\u2014the company's primary revenue stream. The recent surge in companies operating in Ann Arbor has led to a decrease in its office and flex space vacancy rates. As of December 31, 2012, the total market vacancy rate for office and flex space is 11.80%, a 1.40% decrease in vacancy from one year previous, and the lowest overall vacancy level since 2003. The office vacancy rate decreased to 10.65% in 2012 from 12.08% in 2011, while the flex vacancy rate decreased slightly more, with a drop from 16.50% to 15.02%.\nPfizer, once the city's second largest employer, operated a large pharmaceutical research facility on the northeast side of Ann Arbor. On January 22, 2007, Pfizer announced it would close operations in Ann Arbor by the end of 2008. The facility was previously operated by Warner-Lambert and, before that, Parke-Davis. In December 2008, the University of Michigan Board of Regents approved the purchase of the facilities, and the university anticipates hiring 2,000 researchers and staff during the next 10 years. It is now known as North Campus Research Complex. The city is the home of other research and engineering centers, including those of Lotus Engineering, General Dynamics and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Other research centers sited in the city are the United States Environmental Protection Agency's National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory and the Toyota Technical Center. The city is also home to National Sanitation Foundation International (NSF International), the nonprofit non-governmental organization that develops generally accepted standards for a variety of public health related industries and subject areas.\nBorders Books, started in Ann Arbor, was opened by brothers Tom and Louis Borders in 1971 with a stock of used books. The Borders chain was based in the city, as was its flagship store until it closed in September 2011. Domino's Pizza's headquarters is near Ann Arbor on Domino's Farms, a Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired complex just northeast of the city. Another Ann Arbor-based company is Zingerman's Delicatessen, which serves sandwiches and has developed businesses under a variety of brand names. Zingerman's has grown into a family of companies which offers a variety of products (bake shop, mail order, creamery, coffee) and services (business education). Flint Ink Corp., another Ann Arbor-based company, was the world's largest privately held ink manufacturer until it was acquired by Stuttgart-based XSYS Print Solutions in October 2005. Avfuel, a global supplier of aviation fuels and services, is also headquartered in Ann Arbor. Aastrom Biosciences, a publicly traded company that develops stem cell treatments for cardiovascular diseases, is also headquartered in Ann Arbor.\nMany cooperative enterprises were founded in the city; among those that remain are the People's Food Co-op and the Inter-Cooperative Council at the University of Michigan, a student housing cooperative founded in 1937. There are also three cohousing communities\u2014Sunward, Great Oak, and Touchstone\u2014located immediately to the west of the city limits.\nCulture.\nSeveral performing arts groups and facilities are on the University of Michigan's campus, as are museums dedicated to art, archaeology, and natural history and sciences. Founded in 1879, the University Musical Society is an independent performing arts organization that presents over 60 events each year, bringing international artists in music, dance, and theater. Since 2001 Shakespeare in the Arb has presented one play by Shakespeare each June, in a large park near downtown. Regional and local performing arts groups not associated with the university include the Ann Arbor Civic Theatre, the Arbor Opera Theater, the Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra, the Ann Arbor Ballet Theater, the Ann Arbor Civic Ballet (established in 1954 as Michigan's first chartered ballet company), The Ark, and Performance Network Theatre. Another unique piece of artistic expression in Ann Arbor is the fairy doors. These small portals are examples of installation art and can be found throughout the downtown area.\nThe Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum is located in a renovated and expanded historic downtown fire station. Multiple art galleries exist in the city, notably in the downtown area and around the University of Michigan campus. Aside from a large restaurant scene in the Main Street, South State Street, and South University Avenue areas, Ann Arbor ranks first among U.S. cities in the number of booksellers and books sold per capita. The Ann Arbor District Library maintains four branch outlets in addition to its main downtown building. The city is also home to the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library.\nSeveral annual events\u2014many of them centered on performing and visual arts\u2014draw visitors to Ann Arbor. One such event is the Ann Arbor Art Fairs, a set of four concurrent juried fairs held on downtown streets. Scheduled on Thursday through Sunday of the third week of July, the fairs draw upward of half a million visitors. Another is the Ann Arbor Film Festival, held during the third week of March, which receives more than 2,500 submissions annually from more than 40 countries and serves as one of a handful of Academy Award\u2013qualifying festivals in the United States.\nAnn Arbor has a long history of openness to marijuana, given Ann Arbor's decriminalization of cannabis, the large number of medical marijuana dispensaries in the city (one dispensary, called People's Co-op, was directly across the street from Michigan Stadium until zoning forced it to move one mile to the west), the large number of pro-marijuana residents, and the annual Hash Bash: an event that is held on the first Saturday of April. Until (at least) the successful passage of Michigan's medical marijuana law, the event had arguably strayed from its initial intent, although for years, a number of attendees have received serious legal responses due to marijuana use on University of Michigan property, which does not fall under the city's progressive and compassionate ticketing program.\nAnn Arbor is a major center for college sports, most notably at the University of Michigan, a member of the Big Ten Conference. Several well-known college sports facilities exist in the city, including Michigan Stadium, the largest American football stadium in the world and the third-largest stadium of any kind in the world. Michigan Stadium has a capacity of 107,601, with the final \"extra\" seat said to be reserved for and in honor of former athletic director and Hall of Fame football coach Fitz Crisler. The stadium was completed in 1927 and cost more than $950,000 to build. The stadium is colloquially known as \"The Big House\" due to its status as the largest American football stadium. Crisler Center and Yost Ice Arena play host to the school's basketball (both men's and women's) and ice hockey teams, respectively. Concordia University, a member of the NAIA, also fields sports teams.\nAnn Arbor is represented in the NPSL by semi-pro soccer team AFC Ann Arbor, a club founded in 2014 who call themselves The Mighty Oak.\nA person from Ann Arbor is called an \"Ann Arborite\", and many long-time residents call themselves \"townies\". The city itself is often called \"A\u00b2\" (\"A-squared\") or \"A2\" (\"A two\") or \"AA\", \"The Deuce\" (mainly by Chicagoans), and \"Tree Town\". With tongue-in-cheek reference to the city's liberal political leanings, some occasionally refer to Ann Arbor as \"The People's Republic of Ann Arbor\" or \"25 square miles surrounded by reality\", the latter phrase being adapted from Wisconsin Governor Lee Dreyfus's description of Madison, Wisconsin. In \"A Prairie Home Companion\" broadcast from Ann Arbor, Garrison Keillor described Ann Arbor as \"a city where people discuss socialism, but only in the fanciest restaurants.\" Ann Arbor sometimes appears on citation indexes as an author, instead of a location, often with the academic degree \"MI\", a misunderstanding of the abbreviation for Michigan.\nAnn Arbor is also the city that rock band Tally Hall is based in.\nLaw and government.\nAnn Arbor has a council-manager form of government. The City Council has 11 voting members: the mayor and 10 city council members. Two city council members are elected from each of the city's five wards. The mayor and council serve four-year terms. The mayor and one council member from each ward are elected in Presidential election years, and the other five council members are elected in the alternate even-numbered years. The mayor is elected citywide. The mayor is the presiding officer of the City Council and has the power to appoint all Council committee members as well as board and commission members, with the approval of the City Council. The current mayor of Ann Arbor is Christopher Taylor, a Democrat who was elected as mayor in 2014. Day-to-day city operations are managed by a city administrator chosen by the city council.\nAnn Arbor holds mayoral elections to 2-year terms in even years.\nUntil 2017, City Council held annual elections in which half of the seats (one from each ward) were elected to 2-year terms. These elections were staggered, with each ward having one of their seats up for election in odd years and their other seat up for election in even years. Beginning in 2018 the City Council has had staggered elections to 4-year terms in even years. This means that half of the members (one from each ward) are elected in presidential election years, while the other half are elected in mid-term election years. To facilitate this change in scheduling, the 2017 election elected members to terms that lasted 3-years.\nIn 1960, Ann Arbor voters approved a $2.3 million bond issue to build the current city hall, which was designed by architect Alden B. Dow. The City Hall opened in 1963. In 1995, the building was renamed the Guy C. Larcom, Jr. Municipal Building in honor of the longtime city administrator who championed the building's construction.\nAnn Arbor is part of Michigan's 12th congressional district, represented in Congress by Representative Debbie Dingell, a Democrat. On the state level, the city is part of the 18th district in the Michigan Senate, represented by Democrat Rebekah Warren. In the Michigan House of Representatives, representation is split between the 55th district (northern Ann Arbor, part of Ann Arbor Township, and other surrounding areas, represented by Democrat Adam Zemke), the 53rd district (most of downtown and the southern half of the city, represented by Democrat Yousef Rabhi) and the 52nd district (southwestern areas outside Ann Arbor proper and western Washtenaw County, represented by Democrat Donna Lasinski).\nAs the county seat of Washtenaw County, the Washtenaw County Trial Court (22nd Circuit Court) is located in Ann Arbor at the Washtenaw County Courthouse on Main Street. This court has countywide general jurisdiction and has two divisions: the Civil/Criminal (criminal and civil matters) and the Family Division (which includes Juvenile Court, Friend of the Court, and Probate Court sections). Seven judges serve on the court.\nAnn Arbor also has a local state district court (15th District Court), which serves only the City of Ann Arbor. In Michigan, the state district courts are limited jurisdiction courts which handle traffic violations, civil cases with claims under $25,000, landlord-tenant matters, and misdemeanor crimes.\nThe Ann Arbor Federal Building (attached to a post office) on Liberty Street serves as one of the courthouses for the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan and Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit.\nPolitics.\nProgressive politics have been particularly strong in municipal government since the 1960s. Voters approved charter amendments that have lessened the penalties for possession of marijuana (1974), and that aim to protect access to abortion in the city should it ever become illegal in the State of Michigan (1990). In 1974, Kathy Kozachenko's victory in an Ann Arbor city-council race made her the country's first openly homosexual candidate to win public office. In 1975, Ann Arbor became the first U.S. city to use instant-runoff voting for a mayoral race. Adopted through a ballot initiative sponsored by the local Human Rights Party, which feared a splintering of the liberal vote, the process was repealed in 1976 after use in only one election. As of May 2016, Democrats hold the mayorship and nine out of the ten council seats. Nationally, Ann Arbor is located in Michigan's 12th congressional district, represented by Democrat Debbie Dingell.\nCrime.\nIn 2015, Ann Arbor was ranked 11th safest among cities in Michigan with a population of over 50,000. It ranked safer than cities such as Royal Oak, Livonia, Canton and Clinton Township. The level of most crimes in Ann Arbor has fallen significantly in the past 20 years. In 1995 there were 294 aggravated assaults, 132 robberies and 43 rapes while in 2015 there were 128 aggravated assaults, 42 robberies and 58 rapes (under the revised definition).\nAnn Arbor's crime rate was below the national average in 2000. The violent crime rate was further below the national average than the property crime rate; the two rates were 48% and 11% lower than the U.S. average, respectively.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nPublic schools are part of the Ann Arbor Public Schools (AAPS) district. AAPS has one of the country's leading music programs. In September 2008, 16,539 students had been enrolled in the Ann Arbor Public Schools. Notable schools include Pioneer, Huron, Skyline, and Community high schools, and Ann Arbor Open School. The district has a preschool center with both free and tuition-based programs for preschoolers in the district. The University High School, a \"demonstration school\" with teachers drawn from the University of Michigan's education program, was part of the school system from 1924 to 1968.\nAnn Arbor is home to several private schools, including the Father Gabriel Richard High School, Rudolf Steiner School of Ann Arbor, Clonlara School, Michigan Islamic Academy, and Greenhills School, a prep school. The city is also home to several charter schools such as Central Academy (PreK-12) of the Global Educational Excellence (GEE) charter school company, and Honey Creek Community School.\nHigher education.\nThe University of Michigan dominates the city of Ann Arbor, providing the city with its distinctive college-town character. University buildings are located in the center of the city and the campus is directly adjacent to the State Street and South University downtown areas.\nOther local colleges and universities include Concordia University Ann Arbor, a Lutheran liberal-arts institution; a campus of the University of Phoenix; and Cleary University, a private business school. Washtenaw Community College is located in neighboring Ann Arbor Township. In 2000, the Ave Maria School of Law, a Roman Catholic law school established by Domino's Pizza founder Tom Monaghan, opened in northeastern Ann Arbor, but the school moved to Ave Maria, Florida in 2009, and the Thomas M. Cooley Law School acquired the former Ave Maria buildings for use as a branch campus.\nMedia.\n\"The Ann Arbor News\", owned by the Michigan-based Booth Newspapers chain, was the major newspaper serving Ann Arbor and the rest of Washtenaw County. The newspaper ended its 174-year daily print run in 2009, due to economic difficulties and began producing two printed editions a week under the name AnnArbor.com, It resumed using its former name in 2013. It also produces a daily digital edition named Mlive.com. Another Ann Arbor-based publication that has ceased production was the \"Ann Arbor Paper\", a free monthly. Ann Arbor has been said to be the first significant city to lose its only daily paper. The \"Ann Arbor Chronicle\", an online newspaper, covered local news, including meetings of the library board, county commission, and DDA until September 3, 2014.\nCurrent publications in the city include the \"Ann Arbor Journal\" (\"A2 Journal\"), a weekly community newspaper; the \"Ann Arbor Observer\", a free monthly local magazine; and \"Current\", a free entertainment-focused alt-weekly. The \"Ann Arbor Business Review\" covers local business in the area. \"Car and Driver\" magazine and \"Automobile Magazine\" are also based in Ann Arbor. The University of Michigan is served by many student publications, including the independent \"Michigan Daily\" student newspaper, which reports on local, state, and regional issues in addition to campus news.\nFour major AM radio stations based in or near Ann Arbor are WAAM 1600, a conservative news and talk station; WLBY 1290, a business news and talk station; WDEO 990, Catholic radio; and WTKA 1050, which is primarily a sports station. The city's FM stations include NPR affiliate WUOM 91.7; country station WWWW 102.9; and adult-alternative station WQKL 107.1. Freeform station WCBN-FM 88.3 is a local community radio/college radio station operated by the students of the University of Michigan featuring noncommercial, eclectic music and public-affairs programming. The city is also served by public and commercial radio broadcasters in Ypsilanti, the Lansing/Jackson area, Detroit, Windsor, and Toledo.\nAnn Arbor is part of the Detroit television market. WPXD channel 31, the owned-and-operated Detroit outlet of the ION Television network, is licensed to the city. Until its sign-off on August 31, 2017, WHTV channel 18, a MyNetworkTV-affiliated station for the Lansing market, was broadcast from a transmitter in Lyndon Township, west of Ann Arbor. Community Television Network (CTN) is a city-provided cable television channel with production facilities open to city residents and nonprofit organizations. Detroit and Toledo-area radio and television stations also serve Ann Arbor, and stations from Lansing and Windsor, Ontario, can be seen in parts of the area.\nHealth, environment, and utilities.\nThe University of Michigan Medical Center, the only teaching hospital in the city, took the number 1 slot in \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for best hospital in the state of Michigan, as of 2015. The University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) includes University Hospital, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital and Women's Hospital in its core complex. UMHS also operates out-patient clinics and facilities throughout the city. The area's other major medical centers include a large facility operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs in Ann Arbor, and Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital in nearby Superior Township.\nThe city provides sewage disposal and water supply services, with water coming from the Huron River and groundwater sources. There are two water-treatment plants, one main and three outlying reservoirs, four pump stations, and two water towers. These facilities serve the city, which is divided into five water districts. The city's water department also operates four dams along the Huron River\u2014Argo, Barton, Geddes, and Superior\u2014of which Barton and Superior provide hydroelectric power. The city also offers waste management services, with Recycle Ann Arbor handling recycling service. Other utilities are provided by private entities. Electrical power and gas are provided by DTE Energy. AT&amp;T Inc. is the primary wired telephone service provider for the area. Cable TV service is primarily provided by Comcast.\nA plume of the industrial solvent dioxane is migrating under the city from the contaminated Gelman Sciences, Inc. property on the westside of Ann Arbor. It's currently detected at 0.039 ppb. The Gelman plume is a potential threat to one of the City of Ann Arbor's drinking water sources, the Huron River, which flows through downtown Ann Arbor.\nTransportation.\nSurface roads and paths.\nThe streets in downtown Ann Arbor conform to a grid pattern, though this pattern is less common in the surrounding areas. Major roads branch out from the downtown district like spokes on a wheel to the highways surrounding the city. The city is belted by three freeways: I-94, which runs along the southern and western portion of the city; U.S. Highway 23 (US\u00a023), which primarily runs along the eastern edge of Ann Arbor; and M-14, which runs along the northern edge of the city. Other nearby highways include US\u00a012 (Michigan Ave.), M-17 (Washtenaw Ave.), and M-153 (Ford Rd.). Several of the major surface arteries lead to the I-94/M-14 interchange in the west, US 23 in the east, and the city's southern areas. The city also has a system of bike routes and paths and includes the nearly complete Washtenaw County Border-to-Border Trail.\nBus service.\nThe Ann Arbor Area Transportation Authority (AAATA), which brands itself as \"TheRide\", operates public bus services throughout the city and nearby Ypsilanti. The AATA operates Blake Transit Center on Fourth Ave. in downtown Ann Arbor, and the Ypsilanti Transit Center. A separate zero-fare bus service operates within and between the University of Michigan campuses. Since April 2012, route 98 (the \"AirRide\") connects to Detroit Metro Airport a dozen times a day. There are also limited-stop bus services between Ann Arbor and Chelsea as well as Canton. These two routes, 91 and 92 respectively, are known as the \"ExpressRide\".\nGreyhound Lines provides intercity bus service. The Michigan Flyer, a service operated by Indian Trails, cooperates with AAATA for their AirRide and additionally offers bus service to East Lansing. Megabus has direct service to Chicago, Illinois, while a bus service is provided by Amtrak for rail passengers making connections to services in East Lansing and Toledo, Ohio.\nAirports.\nAnn Arbor Municipal Airport is a small, city-run general aviation airport located south of I-94. Detroit Metropolitan Airport, the area's large international airport, is about east of the city, in Romulus. Willow Run Airport east of the city near Ypsilanti serves freight, corporate, and general aviation clients.\nRailroads.\nThe city was a major rail hub, notably for freight traffic between Toledo and ports north of Chicago, Illinois, from 1878 to 1982; however, the Ann Arbor Railroad also provided passenger service from 1878 to 1950, going northwest to Frankfort and Elberta on Lake Michigan and southeast to Toledo. (In Elberta connections to ferries across the Lake could be made.) The city was served by the Michigan Central Railroad starting in 1837. The Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti Street Railway, Michigan's first interurban, served the city from 1891 to 1929.\nAmtrak, which provides service to the city at the Ann Arbor Train Station, operates the \"Wolverine\" train between Chicago and Pontiac, via Detroit. The present-day train station neighbors the city's old Michigan Central Depot, which was renovated as a restaurant in 1970.\nSister cities.\nAnn Arbor has seven sister cities:"}
{"id": "2070", "revid": "41413576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2070", "title": "Act of Settlement 1701", "text": "The Act of Settlement is an Act of the Parliament of England that was passed in 1701 to settle the succession to the English and Irish crowns on Protestants only. This had the effect of deposing the descendants of Charles I (other than his Protestant granddaughter Princess (later Queen) Anne) as the next Protestant in line to the throne was the Electress Sophia of Hanover, a granddaughter of James VI and I. After her, the crowns would descend only to her non-Catholic heirs.\nThe Act of Supremacy 1558 had confirmed the Church of England's independence from Roman Catholicism under the English monarch. In the political crises known as the Glorious Revolution of 1688 one issue was perceived assaults on the Church of England by King James II, a Roman Catholic. James was deposed in favor of his daughter Mary II and her husband William III. The need for the Act of Settlement was prompted by the failure of William and Mary, as well as of Mary's sisterthe future Queen Anneto produce any surviving children, and the Roman Catholic religion of other members of the House of Stuart. The line of Sophia of Hanover was the most junior among the Stuarts, but consisted of convinced Protestants willing to uphold the Church of England. Sophia died on 8 June 1714, before the death of Queen Anne on 1 August 1714. On Queen Anne's death, Sophia's son duly became King George I and started the Hanoverian dynasty in Britain.\nThe act played a key role in the formation of the Kingdom of Great Britain. England and Scotland had shared a monarch since 1603, but had remained separately governed countries. The Scottish parliament was more reluctant than the English to abandon the House of Stuart, members of which had been Scottish monarchs long before they became English ones. English pressure on Scotland to accept the Act of Settlement was one factor leading to the parliamentary union of the two countries in 1707.\nUnder the Act of Settlement anyone who became a Roman Catholic, or who married one, became disqualified to inherit the throne. The act also placed limits on both the role of foreigners in the British government and the power of the monarch with respect to the Parliament of England. Some of those provisions have been altered by subsequent legislation.\nAlong with the Bill of Rights 1689, the Act of Settlement remains today one of the main constitutional laws governing the succession not only to the throne of the United Kingdom, but to those of the other Commonwealth realms, whether by assumption or by patriation. The Act of Settlement cannot be altered in any realm except by that realm's own parliament and, by convention, only with the consent of all the other realms, as it touches on the succession to the shared crown.\nFollowing the Perth Agreement in 2011, legislation amending the act came into effect across the Commonwealth realms on 26 March 2015, and removed the disqualification arising from marriage to a Roman Catholic. Other provisions of the amended act remain in effect.\nOriginal context.\nFollowing the Glorious Revolution, the line of succession to the English throne was governed by the Bill of Rights 1689, which declared that the flight of James II from England to France during the revolution amounted to an abdication of the throne and that James's daughter Mary II and her husband, William III (who was also James's nephew), were James's successors. The Bill of Rights also provided that the line of succession would go through their descendants, then through Mary's sister Anne and her descendants, and then to the issue of William III by a possible later marriage. During the debate, the House of Lords had attempted to append Sophia and her descendants to the line of succession, but the amendment failed in the Commons.\nMary II died childless in 1694, after which William III did not remarry. In 1700, Prince William, Duke of Gloucester, who was Anne's only child to survive infancy, died of smallpox at the age of 11. Thus, Anne was left as the only person in line to the throne. The Bill of Rights excluded Catholics from the throne, which ruled out James II and his descendants. However, it did not provide for the further succession after Anne. Parliament thus saw the need to settle the succession on Sophia and her descendants, and thereby guarantee the continuity of the Crown in the Protestant line.\nWith religion and lineage initially decided, the ascendancy of William of Orange in 1689 would also bring his partiality to his foreign favourites that followed. By 1701 English jealousy of foreigners was rampant, and action was considered necessary for correction.\nProvisions.\nThe Act of Settlement provided that the throne would pass to the Electress Sophia of Hanover\u00a0\u2013 a granddaughter of James VI and I and a niece of King Charles I\u00a0\u2013 and her descendants, but it excluded \"for ever\" \"all and every Person and Persons who ... is are or shall be reconciled to or shall hold Communion with the See or Church of Rome or shall profess the Popish Religion or shall marry a Papist\". Thus, those who were Roman Catholics, and those who married Roman Catholics, were barred from ascending the throne. The Act did not even mention the concept of marriages involving heirs to the throne and members of non-Christian faiths because that would have been unthinkable in eighteenth century Great Britain.\nThe Act contained eight additional provisions that were to only come into effect upon the death of both William and Anne:\nOpposition.\nThe Tory administration that replaced the Whig Junto in 1699 took responsibility for steering the Act through Parliament. As a result, it passed with little opposition, although five peers voted against it in the House of Lords, including the Earl of Huntingdon, his brother-in-law the Earl of Scarsdale and three others. While many shared their opposition to a 'foreign' king, the general feeling was summed up as 'better a German prince than a French one.'\nEffects.\nFor different reasons, various constitutionalists have praised the Act of Settlement: Henry Hallam called the Act \"the seal of our constitutional laws\" and David Lindsay Keir placed its importance above the Bill of Rights of 1689. Naamani Tarkow has written: \"If one is to make sweeping statements, one may say that, save Magna Carta (more truly, its implications), the Act of Settlement is probably the most significant statute in English history\".\nKingdom of Great Britain.\nThe Act of Settlement was, in many ways, the major cause of the union of Scotland with England and Wales to form the Kingdom of Great Britain. The Parliament of Scotland was not happy with the Act of Settlement and, in response, passed the Act of Security in 1704, through which Scotland reserved the right to choose its own successor to Queen Anne. Stemming from this, the Parliament of England decided that, to ensure the stability and future prosperity of Great Britain, full union of the two parliaments and nations was essential before Anne's death.\nIt used a combination of exclusionary legislation (the Alien Act 1705), politics, and bribery to achieve this within three years under the Act of Union 1707. This success was in marked contrast to the four attempts at political union between 1606 and 1689, which all failed owing to a lack of political will in both kingdoms. By virtue of Article II of the Treaty of Union, which defined the succession to the throne of Great Britain, the Act of Settlement became part of Scots Law as well.\nSuccession to the Crown.\nIn addition to James II (who died a few months after the act received royal assent) and his Roman Catholic children, Prince James and the Princess Royal, the act also excluded the descendants of King James's sister, Henrietta, the youngest daughter of Charles I. Henrietta's daughter, Anne, was then the Queen of Sardinia and a Roman Catholic; Jacobite pretenders after 1807 are descended from her.\nWith the legitimate descendants of Charles I either childless (in the case of William III and Anne) or Roman Catholic, Parliament's choice was limited to the Protestant descendants of Sophia of Hanover, the daughter of the late Elizabeth of Bohemia. Elizabeth was the only other child of King James I not to have died in childhood. Elizabeth had borne nine children who reached adulthood, of whom Sophia was the youngest daughter. However, in 1701, Sophia was the senior Protestant with a legitimate claim to the English throne; Parliament passed over senior living representatives of lines which included Elizabeth Charlotte, Duchess of Orl\u00e9ans; Louis Otto, Prince of Salm, and his sisters; Anne Henriette, Princess of Cond\u00e9; Benedicta Henrietta, Duchess of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg; and Sophia's sister, Louise Hollandine of the Palatinate because they were all Roman Catholic.\nRemoval from the succession due to Catholicism.\nSince the Act's passing the most senior living member of the royal family to have married a Roman Catholic, and thereby to have been removed from the line of succession, is Prince Michael of Kent, who married Baroness Marie-Christine von Reibnitz in 1978; he was fifteenth in the line of succession at the time. He was restored to the line of succession in 2015 when the Succession to the Crown Act 2013 came into force, and became 34th in line.\nThe next most senior living descendant of the Electress Sophia who had been ineligible to succeed on this ground is George Windsor, Earl of St Andrews, the elder son of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, who married the Roman Catholic Sylvana Palma Tomaselli in 1988. His son, Lord Downpatrick, converted to Roman Catholicism in 2003 and is the most senior descendant of Sophia to be barred as a result of his religion. In 2008 his daughter, Lady Marina Windsor, also converted to Catholicism and was removed from the line of succession. More recently, Peter Phillips, the son of Anne, Princess Royal, and eleventh in line to the throne, married Autumn Kelly; Kelly had been brought up as a Roman Catholic, but she converted to Anglicanism prior to the wedding. Had she not done so, Phillips would have forfeited his place in the succession upon their marriage, only to have it restored in 2015.\nExcluding those princesses who have married into Roman Catholic royal families, such as Marie of Edinburgh, Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg and Princess Beatrice of Edinburgh, one member of the Royal Family (that is, with the style of \"Royal Highness\") has converted to Roman Catholicism since the passage of the Act: the Duchess of Kent, wife of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, who converted on 14 January 1994, but her husband did not lose his place in the succession because she was an Anglican at the time of their marriage.\nPresent status.\nAs well as being part of the law of the United Kingdom, the Act of Settlement was received into the laws of all the countries and territories over which the British monarch reigned. It remains part of the laws of the 16 Commonwealth realms and the relevant jurisdictions within those realms. In accordance with established convention, the Statute of Westminster 1931 and later laws, the Act of Settlement (along with the other laws governing the succession of the Commonwealth realms) may only be changed with the agreement of all the realms (and, in some federal realms, the constituent members of those federations).\nAmendment proposals.\nChallenges have been made against the Act of Settlement, especially its provisions regarding Roman Catholics and preference for males. However, changing the Act is a complex process, since the Act governs the shared succession of all the Commonwealth realms. The Statute of Westminster 1931 acknowledges by established convention that any changes to the rules of succession may be made only with the agreement of all of the states involved, with concurrent amendments to be made by each state's parliament or parliaments. Further, as the current monarch's eldest child and, in turn, his eldest child, are Anglican males, any change to the succession laws would have no immediate implications. Consequently, there was little public concern with the issues and debate had been confined largely to academic circles until the November 2010 announcement that Prince William was to marry. This raised the question of what would happen if he were to produce first a daughter and then a son.\n\"The Times\" reported on 6 November 1995 that Prince Charles had said on that day to Tony Blair and Paddy Ashdown that \"Catholics should be able to ascend to the British throne\". Ashdown claimed the Prince said: \"I really can't think why we can't have Catholics on the throne\". In 1998, during debate on a Succession to the Crown Bill, Junior Home Office Minister Lord Williams of Mostyn informed the House of Lords that the Queen had \"no objection to the Government's view that in determining the line of succession to the throne, daughters and sons should be treated in the same way.\"\nAustralia.\nIn October 2011 the Australian federal government was reported to have reached an agreement with all of the states on potential changes to their laws in the wake of amendments to the Act of Settlement. The practice of the Australian states\u2014for example, New South Wales and Victoria\u2014has been, when legislating to repeal some imperial statutes so far as they still applied in Australia, to provide that imperial statutes concerning the royal succession remain in force.\nThe legal process required at the federal level remains, theoretically, unclear. The Australian constitution, as was noted during the crisis of 1936, contains no power for the federal parliament to legislate with respect to the monarchy. Everything thus turns upon the status and meaning of clause 2 in the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900, which provides: \"The provisions of this Act referring to the Queen shall extend to Her Majesty's heirs and successors in the sovereignty of the United Kingdom.\"\nAnne Twomey reviews three possible interpretations of the clause.\nHowever, Twomey expresses confidence that, if the High Court of Australia were to be faced with the problems of covering clause 2, it would find some way to conclude that, with regard to Australia, the clause is subject solely to Australian law. Canadian scholar Richard Toporoski theorised in 1998 that \"if, let us say, an alteration were to be made in the United Kingdom to the Act of Settlement 1701, providing for the succession of the Crown... [i]t is my opinion that the domestic constitutional law of Australia or Papua New Guinea, for example, would provide for the succession in those countries of the same person who became Sovereign of the United Kingdom.\"\nIn practice, when legislating for the Perth Agreement (see below), the Australian governments took the approach of the states requesting, and referring power to, the federal government to enact the legislation on behalf of the states (under paragraph 51(xxxviii) of the Australian Constitution) and the Commonwealth of Australia.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, where the Act of Settlement () is now a part of Canadian constitutional law, Tony O'Donohue, a Canadian civic politician, took issue with the provisions that exclude Roman Catholics from the throne, and which make the monarch of Canada the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, requiring him or her to be an Anglican. This, he claimed, discriminated against non-Anglicans, including Catholics, who are the largest faith group in Canada. In 2002, O'Donohue launched a court action that argued the Act of Settlement violated the \"Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms\", but, the case was dismissed by the court. It found that, as the Act of Settlement is part of the Canadian constitution, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, as another part of the same constitution, does not have supremacy over it. Also, the court noted that, while Canada has the power to amend the line of succession to the Canadian throne, the Statute of Westminster stipulates that the agreement of the governments of the fifteen other Commonwealth realms that share the Crown would first have to be sought if Canada wished to continue its relationship with these countries. An appeal of the decision was dismissed on 16 March 2005. Some commentators state that, as a result of this, any single provincial legislature could hinder any attempts to change this Act, and by extension, to the line of succession for the shared crown of all 16 Commonwealth realms. Others contend that that is not the case, and changes to the succession instituted by an Act of the Parliament of Canada \"[in accord] with the convention of symmetry that preserves the personal unity of the British and Dominion Crowns\".\nWith the announcement in 2007 of the engagement of Peter Phillips to Autumn Kelly, a Roman Catholic and a Canadian, discussion about the Act of Settlement was revived. Norman Spector called in \"The Globe and Mail\" for Prime Minister Stephen Harper to address the issue of the act's bar on Catholics, saying Phillips' marriage to Kelly would be the first time the provisions of the act would bear directly on Canada\u2014Phillips would be barred from acceding to the Canadian throne because he married a Roman Catholic Canadian. (In fact, the Earl of St Andrews had already lost his place in the line of succession when he married the Roman Catholic Canadian Sylvana Palma Tomaselli in 1988. But St Andrews' place in the line of succession was significantly lower than Phillips'.) Criticism of the Act of Settlement due to the Phillips\u2013Kelly marriage was muted when Autumn Kelly converted to Anglicanism shortly before her marriage, thus preserving her husband's place in the line of succession.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFrom time to time there has been debate over repealing the clause that prevents Roman Catholics, or those who marry one, from ascending to the British throne. Proponents of repeal argue that the clause is a bigoted anachronism; Cardinal Winning, who was leader of the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland, called the act an \"insult\" to Catholics. Cardinal Murphy-O'Connor, the leader of the Roman Catholic Church in England, pointed out that Prince William (later the Duke of Cambridge) \"can marry by law a Hindu, a Buddhist, anyone, but not a Roman Catholic.\" Opponents of repeal, such as Enoch Powell and Adrian Hilton, believe that it would lead to the disestablishment of the Church of England as the state religion if a Roman Catholic were to come to the throne. They also note that the monarch must swear to defend the faith and be a member of the Anglican Communion, but that a Roman Catholic monarch would, like all Roman Catholics, owe allegiance to the Pope. This would, according to opponents of repeal, amount to a loss of sovereignty for the Anglican Church.\nWhen in December 1978 there was media speculation that Prince Charles might marry a Roman Catholic, Powell defended the provision that excludes Roman Catholics from ascending the throne, claiming his objection was not rooted in religious bigotry but in political considerations. He stated a Roman Catholic monarch would mean the acceptance of a source of authority external to the realm and \"in the literal sense, foreign to the Crown-in-Parliament ... Between Roman Catholicism and royal supremacy there is, as Saint Thomas More concluded, no reconciliation.\" Powell concluded that a Roman Catholic crown would be the destruction of the Church of England because \"it would contradict the essential character of that church.\"\nHe continued:\nWhen Thomas Hobbes wrote that \"the Papacy is no other than the ghost of the deceased Roman Empire sitting crowned upon the grave thereof\", he was promulgating an enormously important truth. Authority in the Roman Church is the exertion of that \"imperium\" from which England in the 16th century finally and decisively declared its national independence as the \"alter imperium\", the \"other empire\", of which Henry VIII declared \"This realm of England is an empire\" ... It would signal the beginning of the end of the British monarchy. It would portend the eventual surrender of everything that has made us, and keeps us still, a nation.\nThe Scottish Parliament unanimously passed a motion in 1999 calling for the complete removal of any discrimination linked to the monarchy and the repeal of the Act of Settlement. The following year, \"The Guardian\" challenged the succession law in court, claiming that it violated the European Convention on Human Rights, which provides,\nThe enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth, or other status.\nAs the Convention nowhere lists the right to succeed to the Crown as a human right, the challenge was rejected.\nAdrian Hilton, writing in \"The Spectator\" in 2003, defended the Act of Settlement as not \"irrational prejudice or blind bigotry\", but claimed that it was passed because \"the nation had learnt that when a Roman Catholic monarch is upon the throne, religious and civil liberty is lost.\" He points to the Pope's claiming universal jurisdiction, and Hilton argues that \"it would be intolerable to have, as the sovereign of a Protestant and free country, one who owes any allegiance to the head of any other state\" and contends that, if such situation came about, \"we will have undone centuries of common law.\" He said that because the Roman Catholic Church does not recognise the Church of England as an apostolic church, a Roman Catholic monarch who abided by their faith's doctrine would be obliged to view Anglican and Church of Scotland archbishops, bishops, and clergy as part of the laity and therefore \"lacking the ordained authority to preach and celebrate the sacraments.\" (Hilton noted that the Church of Scotland's Presbyterian polity does not include bishops or archbishops.) Hilton said a Roman Catholic monarch would be unable to be crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury and notes that other European states have similar religious provisions for their monarchs: Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, whose constitutions compel their monarchs to be Lutherans; the Netherlands, which has a constitution requiring its monarchs be members of the Protestant House of Orange; and Belgium, which has a constitution that provides for the succession to be through Roman Catholic houses.\nIn December 2004, a private member's bill\u2014the Succession to the Crown Bill\u2014was introduced in the House of Lords. The government, headed by Tony Blair, blocked all attempts to revise the succession laws, claiming it would raise too many constitutional issues and it was unnecessary at the time. In the British general election the following year, Michael Howard promised to work towards having the prohibition removed if the Conservative Party gained a majority of seats in the House of Commons, but the election was won by Blair's Labour Party. Four years later, plans drawn up by Chris Bryant were revealed that would end the exclusion of Catholics from the throne and end the doctrine of agnatic (male-preference) primogeniture in favour of absolute primogeniture, which governs succession solely on birth order and not on sex. The issue was raised again in January 2009, when a private member's bill to amend the Act of Succession was introduced in parliament.\nAcross the realms.\nIn early 2011 Keith Vaz, a Labour Member of Parliament, introduced to the House of Commons at Westminster a private member's bill which proposed that the Act of Settlement be amended to remove the provisions relating to Roman Catholicism and change the primogeniture governing the line of succession to the British throne from agnatic to absolute cognatic. Vaz sought support for his project from the Canadian Cabinet and Prime Minister Stephen Harper, but the Office of the Prime Minister of Canada responded that the issue was \"not a priority for the government or for Canadians without further elaboration on the merits or drawbacks of the proposed reforms\". Stephenson King, Prime Minister of Saint Lucia, said he supported the idea and it was reported that the government of New Zealand did, as well. The Monarchist League of Canada said at the time to the media that it \"supports amending the Act of Settlement in order to modernize the succession rules.\"\nLater the same year, the Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Nick Clegg, announced that the government was considering a change in the law. At approximately the same time, it was reported that British Prime Minister David Cameron had written to each of the prime ministers of the other fifteen Commonwealth realms, asking for their support in changing the succession to absolute primogeniture and notifying them he would raise his proposals at that year's Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth, Australia. Cameron reportedly also proposed removing the restriction on successors being or marrying Roman Catholics; however, potential Roman Catholic successors would be required to convert to Anglicanism prior to acceding to the throne. In reaction to the letter and media coverage, Harper stated that, this time, he was \"supportive\" of what he saw as \"reasonable modernizations\".\nAt CHOGM on 28 October 2011, the prime ministers of the other Commonwealth realms agreed to support Cameron's proposed changes to the Act. The bill put before the Parliament of the United Kingdom would act as a model for the legislation required to be passed in at least some of the other realms, and any changes would only first take effect if the Duke of Cambridge were to have a daughter before a son.\nThe British group Republic asserted that succession reform would not make the monarchy any less discriminatory. As it welcomed the gender equality reforms, the British newspaper \"The Guardian\" criticized the lack of a proposal to remove the ban on Catholics sitting on the throne, as did Alex Salmond, First Minister of Scotland, who pointed out that \"It is deeply disappointing that the reform [of the Act of Settlement of 1701] has stopped short of removing the unjustifiable barrier on a Catholic becoming monarch.\" On the subject, Cameron asserted: \"Let me be clear, the monarch must be in communion with the Church of England because he or she is the head of that Church.\"\nThe disqualification arising from marriage to a Roman Catholic was removed by the Succession to the Crown Act 2013."}
{"id": "2071", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2071", "title": "Afrocelt Sound System", "text": ""}
{"id": "2073", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2073", "title": "Andrew Jackson/First Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "2074", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2074", "title": "Andrew Jackson/Second Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "2075", "revid": "27128830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2075", "title": "Aircraft hijacking", "text": "Aircraft hijacking (also known as airplane hijacking, skyjacking, plane hijacking, plane jacking, air robbery, air piracy, or aircraft piracy, with the latter term being used within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States), is the unlawful seizure of an aircraft by an individual or a group. Dating from the earliest of hijackings, most cases involve the pilot being forced to fly according to the hijacker's demands. However, in rare cases, the hijackers have flown the aircraft themselves and used them in suicide attacks - most notably in the September 11 attacks - and in several cases, planes have been hijacked by the official pilot or co-pilot; i.e. the Lubitz case.\nUnlike carjacking or sea piracy, an aircraft hijacking is not usually committed for robbery or theft. Individuals driven by personal gain often divert planes to destinations where they are not planning to go themselves. Some hijackers intend to use passengers or crew as hostages, either for monetary ransom or for some political or administrative concession by authorities. Various motives have driven such occurrences, such as demanding the release of certain high-profile individuals or for the right of political asylum (notably Flight ET 961), but sometimes a hijacking may have been affected by a failed private life or financial distress, as in the case of Aarno Lamminparras in the Oulu Aircraft Hijacking. Hijackings involving hostages have produced violent confrontations between hijackers and the authorities, during negotiation and settlement. In the case of Lufthansa Flight 181 and Air France Flight 139, the hijackers were not satisfied and showed no inclination to surrender, resulting in attempts by special forces to rescue passengers.\nIn most jurisdictions of the world, aircraft hijacking is punishable by life imprisonment or a long prison sentence. In most jurisdictions where the death penalty is a legal punishment, aircraft hijacking is a capital crime, including in China, India, and the U.S. states of Georgia and Mississippi.\nHistory.\nAirplane hijackings have occurred since the early days of flight. These can be classified in the following eras: 1929\u20131957, 1958\u20131979, 1980\u20132000 and 2001\u2013present. Early incidents involved light planes, but this later involved passenger aircraft as commercial aviation became widespread.\n1929\u20131957.\nBetween 1929 and 1957, there were fewer than 20 incidents of reported hijackings worldwide and several occurred in Eastern Europe. One of the first unconfirmed hijackings occurred in December 1929. J. Howard \"Doc\" DeCelles was flying a postal route for a Mexican firm, Transportes Aeras Transcontinentales, ferrying mail from San Luis Potos\u00ed to Torreon and then on to Guadalajara. A lieutenant named Saturnino Cedillo, the governor of the state of San Luis Potos\u00ed, ordered him to divert. Several other men were also involved, and through an interpreter, DeCelles had no choice but to comply. He was allegedly held captive for several hours under armed guard before being released.\nThe first recorded aircraft hijack took place on February 21, 1931, in Arequipa, Peru. Byron Richards, flying a Ford Tri-Motor, was approached on the ground by armed revolutionaries. He refused to fly them anywhere during a 10-day standoff. Richards was informed that the revolution was successful and he could be freed in return for flying one of the men to Lima. The following year, in September 1932, a Sikorsky S-38 with registration P-BDAD, still bearing the titles of Nyrba do Brasil was seized in the company's hangar by three men, who took a fourth as a hostage. Despite having no flying experience, they managed to take-off. However, the aircraft crashed in S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o de Meriti, killing the four men. Apparently, the hijack was related to the events of the Constitutionalist Revolution in S\u00e3o Paulo and it is considered to be the first hijack that took place in Brazil.\nOn October 28, 1939, the first murder on a plane took place in Brookfield, Missouri, US. The victim was Carl Bivens, a flight instructor, who was teaching a man named Earnest P. \"Larry\" Pletch. While airborne in a Taylor Cub monoplane, Pletch shot Bivens twice in the back of the head. Pletch later told prosecutors, \"Carl was telling me I had a natural ability and I should follow that line\", adding, \"I had a revolver in my pocket and without saying a word to him, I took it out of my overalls and I fired a bullet into the back of his head. He never knew what struck him.\" The \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" stated it was one of the most spectacular crimes of the 20th century. Pletch pleaded guilty and was sentenced to life in prison. However, he was released on March 1, 1957 after serving 17 years, and lived until June 2001.\nIn 1942 near Malta, two New Zealanders, a South African and an Englishman achieved the first confirmed in-air hijack when they overpowered their captors aboard an Italian seaplane that was flying them to a prisoner-of-war camp. As they approached an Allied base, they were strafed by Spitfires unaware of the aircraft's true operators and forced to land on the water. However, all on board survived to be picked up by a British boat.\nIn the years following World War II, Philip Baum, an aviation security expert suggests that the development of a rebellious youth \"piggybacking on to any cause which challenged the status quo or acted in support of those deemed oppressed\", may have been a contributor to attacks against the aviation industry. The first hijacking of a commercial flight occurred on the Cathay Pacific \"Miss Macao\" on July 16, 1948. After this incident and others in the 1950s, airlines recommended that flight crews comply with the hijackers demands rather than risk a violent confrontation. There were also various hijacking incidents and assaults on planes in China and the Middle East.\nThe first hijacking of a flight for political reasons happened in Bolivia, affecting the airline Lloyd Aereo Boliviano on September 26, 1956. The DC-4 was carrying 47 prisoners who were being transported from Santa Cruz, Bolivia to El Alto, in La Paz. A political group was waiting to take them to a concentration camp located in Carahuara de Carangas, Oruro. The 47 prisoners overpowered the crew and gained control of the aircraft while airborne and diverted the plane to Tartagal, Argentina. Prisoners took control of the aircraft and received instructions to again fly to Salta, Argentina as the airfield in Tartagal was not big enough. Upon landing, they told the government of the injustice they were subjected to, and received political asylum.\n1958\u20131979.\nBetween 1958 and 1967, there were approximately 40 hijackings worldwide. Beginning 1958, hijackings \"from\" Cuba to other destinations started to occur, and then in 1961, hijackings \"to\" Cuba became prevalent. The first happened on May 1, 1961, on a flight from Miami to Key West. The perpetrator, armed with a knife and gun, forced the captain to land in Cuba.\nAustralia was relatively untouched by the threat of hijackings until July 19, 1960. On that evening, a 22-year-old Russian man attempted to divert Trans Australia Airlines Flight 408 to Darwin or Singapore. The crew were able to subdue the man after a brief struggle.\nAccording to the FAA, in the 1960s, there were 100 attempts of hijackings involving U.S aircraft: 77 successful and 23 unsuccessful. Recognizing the danger early, the FAA issued a directive on July 28, 1961, which prohibits unauthorized persons from carrying concealed firearms and interfering with crew member duties. The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 was amended to impose severe penalties for those seizing control of a commercial aircraft. Airlines could also refuse to transport passengers who were likely to cause danger. That same year, the FAA and Department of Justice created the Peace Officers Program which put trained marshals on flights. A few years later, on May 7, 1964, the FAA adopted a rule requiring that cockpit doors on commercial aircraft be kept locked at all times. \nIn a five-year period (1968\u20131972) the world experienced 326 hijack attempts, or one every 5.6 days. The incidents were frequent and often just an inconvenience, which resulted in television shows creating parodies. \"Time\" magazine even ran a lighthearted comedy piece called \"What to Do When the Hijacker Comes\". Most incidents occurred in the United States: there were two distinct types: hijackings for transportation elsewhere and hijackings for extortion with the threat of harm. Between 1968 and 1972, there were 90 recorded transport attempts to Cuba. In contrast, there were 26 extortion attempts (see table on the right). The longest and first transcontinental (Los Angeles, Denver, New York, Bangor, Shannon and Rome) from the US started on the 31 October 1969. The Eastern Air Lines Shuttle flight 1320 on May 17, 1970 witnessed the first fatality in the course of a U.S. highjacking. Incidents also became problematic outside of the U.S. For instance, in 1968, El Al Flight 426 was seized by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) militants on 23 July, an incident which lasted 40 days, making it one of the longest. This record was later beaten in 1999. As a result of the evolving threat, President Nixon issued a directive in 1970 to promote security at airports, electronic surveillance and multilateral agreements for tackling the problem.\nFurthermore, a report by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in July 1970 revealed the need for action. Beginning of 1969 until the end of June 1970, there were 118 incidents of unlawful seizure of aircraft and 14 incidents of sabotage and armed attacks against civil aviation. This involved airlines of 47 countries and more than 7,000 passengers. In this period, 96 people were killed and 57 were injured as a result of hijacking, sabotage and armed attacks. The ICAO stated that this is not isolated to one nation or one region, but a worldwide issue to the safe growth of international civil aviation. Incidents also became notorious\u2014in 1971, a man known as D. B. Cooper hijacked a plane and extorted US$200,000 in ransom before parachuting over Oregon. He was never identified. On August 20, 1971, a Pakistan Air Force T-33 military plane was hijacked prior the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971 in Karachi. Lieutenant Matiur Rahman attacked Officer Rashid Minhas and attempted to land in India. Minhas deliberately crashed the plane into the ground near Thatta to prevent the diversion.\nCountries around the world continued their efforts to tackle crimes committed on-board planes. The Tokyo Convention, drafted in 1958, established an agreement between signatories that the \"state in which the aircraft is registered is competent to exercise jurisdiction over crimes committed on board that aircraft while it is in flight\". While the Convention does not make hijacking an international crime, it does contain provisions which obligate the country in which a hijacked aircraft lands to restore the aircraft to its responsible owner, and allow the passengers and crew to continue their journey. The Convention came into force in December 1969. A year later, in December 1970, the Hague Convention was drafted which punishes hijackers, enabling each state to prosecute a hijacker if that state does not extradite them, and to deprive them from asylum from prosecution.\nOn December 5, 1972, the FAA issued emergency rules requiring all passengers and their carry-on baggage to be screened. Airports slowly implemented walk-through metal detectors, hand-searches and x-ray machines, to prohibit weapons and explosive devices. These rules came into effect on January 5, 1973 and were welcomed by most of the public. In 1974, Congress enacted a statute which provided for the death penalty for acts of aircraft piracy resulting in death. Between 1968 and 1977, there were approximately 41 hijackings per year.\n1980\u20132000.\nBy 1980, airport screening and greater cooperation from the international community led to fewer successful hijackings; the number of events had significantly dropped below the 1968 level. Between 1978 and 1988, there were roughly 26 incidents of hijackings a year. A new threat emerged in the 1980s and this was from organised terrorists destroying aircraft to draw attention. For instance, terrorist groups were responsible for the bombing of Air India Flight 182 over the Irish coast. In 1988, Pan Am Flight 103 was bombed flying over Scotland. Terrorist activity which included hijack attempts in the Middle East were also a cause of concern.\nDuring the 1990s, there was relative peace in the United States airspace as the threat of domestic hijacking was seen as a distant memory. Globally, however, hijackings still persisted. Between 1993 and 2003, the highest number of hijackings occurred in 1993 (see table below). This number can be attributed to events in China where hijackers were trying to gain political asylum in Taiwan. Europe and the rest of East Asia were not immune either. On December 26, 1994, Air France Flight 8969 with 172 passengers and crew was hijacked after leaving Algiers. Authorities believed that the goal was to crash the plane into the Eiffel Tower. On June 21, 1995, All Nippon Airways Flight 857 was hijacked by a man claiming to be a member of the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult, demanding the release of its imprisoned leader Shoko Asahara. The incident was resolved when the police stormed the plane.\nOn October 17, 1996, the first hijacking that was brought to an end while airborne was carried out by four operatives of the Austrian special law enforcement unit Cobra on a Russian Aeroflot flight from Malta to Lagos, Nigeria, aboard a Tupolev Tu-154. The operatives escorted inmates detained for deportation to their homelands and were equipped with weapons and gloves. On 12 April 1999, six ELN members hijacked a Fokker 50 of Avianca Flight 9463, flying from Bucaramanga to Bogot\u00e1. Many hostages were held for more than a year, and the last hostage was finally freed 19 months after the hijacking.\n2001\u2013present.\nOn September 11, 2001, four airliners were hijacked by 19 Al-Qaeda extremists that uses the name of Islam: American Airlines Flight 11, United Airlines Flight 175, American Airlines Flight 77 and United Airlines Flight 93. The first two planes were deliberately crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center and the third was crashed into The Pentagon building. The fourth crashed in a field in Stonycreek Township near Shanksville, Pennsylvania after crew and passengers attempted to overpower the hijackers. Authorities believe that the intended target was the U.S. Capitol. In total, 2,996 people perished and more than 6,000 were injured in the attacks, making the hijackings the deadliest in modern history.\nFollowing the attacks, the U.S formed the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) to handle airport screening at U.S airports. Government agencies around the world tightened their airport security, procedures and intelligence gathering. Until the September 11 attacks, there had never been an incident whereby a passenger aircraft was used as a weapon of mass destruction. The 9/11 Commission report stated that it was always assumed that a \"hijacking would take the traditional form\", therefore, airline crews never had a contingency plan for a suicide-hijacking. As Patrick Smith, an airline pilot, summarizes:\nOne of the big ironies here is the success of the 2001 attacks had nothing to do with airport security in the first place. It was a failure of national security. What the men actually exploited was a weakness in our mind-set \u2013 a set of presumptions based on decades-long track record of hijackings. In years past, a hijacking meant a diversion, with hostage negotiations and standoffs. The only weapon that mattered was the intangible one: the element of surprise.\nThroughout the mid-2000s, hijackings still occurred but there were much fewer incidents and casualties. The number of incidents had been declining, even before the September 11 attacks. One notable incident in 2006 was the hijacking of Turkish Airlines Flight 1476, flying from Tirana to Istanbul, which was seized by a man named Hakan Ekinci. The aircraft, with 107 passengers and 6 crew, made distress calls to air traffic control and the plane was escorted by military aircraft before landing safely at Brindisi, Italy. In 2007, several incidents occurred in the Middle East and Northern Africa, one of which men claimed to be affiliated with Al-Qaeda. Towards the end of the decade, AeroMexico experienced its first terror incident when Flight 576 was hijacked by a man demanding to speak with President Calder\u00f3n.\nSince 2010, the Aviation Safety Network estimates there have been 15 hijackings worldwide with three fatalities. This is a considerable lower figure than in previous decades which can be attributed to greater security enhancements and awareness of September 11\u2013style attacks. On June 29, 2012, an attempt was made to hijack Tianjin Airlines Flight GS7554 from Hotan to \u00dcr\u00fcmqi in China. More recently was the 2016 hijacking of EgyptAir Flight MS181, involving an Egyptian man who claimed to have a bomb and ordered the plane to land in Cyprus. He surrendered several hours later, after freeing the passengers and crew.\nCountermeasures.\nAs a result of the U.S\u2013Cuba hijacking epidemic of the late 1960s to early 1970s, international airports introduced screening technology such as metal detectors, x-ray machines and explosive detection tools. In the U.S, these rules were enforced starting from January 1973 and were eventually copied around the world. These security measures did make hijacking a \"higher-risk proposition\" and deter criminals in later decades. Until September 2001, the FAA set and enforced a \"layered\" system of defense: hijacking intelligence, passenger pre-screening, checkpoint screening and on-board security. The idea was that if one layer were later to fail, another would be able stop a hijacker from boarding a plane. However, the 9/11 Commission found that this layered approach was flawed and unsuitable to prevent the September 11 attacks. The U.S Transportation Security Administration has since strengthened this approach, with a greater emphasis on intelligence sharing.\nOn-board security.\nIn the history of hijackings, most incidents involved planes being forced to land at a certain destination with demands. As a result, commercial airliners adopted a \"total compliance\" rule which taught pilots and cabin crew to comply with the hijackers demands. Crews advise passengers to sit quietly to increase their chances of survival. The ultimate goal is to land the plane safely and let the security forces handle the situation. The FAA suggested that the longer a hijacking persisted, the more likely it would end peacefully with the hijackers reaching their goal. Although total compliance is still relevant, the events of September 11 changed this paradigm as this technique cannot prevent a suicide hijacking.\nIt is now evident that each hijacking situation needs to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Cabin crew, now aware of the severe consequences, have a greater responsibility for maintaining control of their aircraft. Most airlines also give crew members training in self-defense tactics. Ever since the 1970s, crew are taught to be vigilant for suspicious behaviour. For example, passengers who have no carry-on luggage, or are standing next to the cockpit door with fidgety movements. There have been various incidents when crew and passengers intervened to prevent attacks: on December 22, 2001, Richard Reid attempted to ignite explosives on American Airlines Flight 63. In 2009, on Northwest Flight 253, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab attempted to detonate explosives sewn into his underwear. In 2012, the attempted hijacking of Tianjin Airlines Flight 7554 was stopped when cabin crew placed a trolley in-front of the cockpit door and asked passengers for help.\nAmerican Airlines Flight 11.\nIn the September 11 attacks, crew on one of the hijacked planes went beyond their scope of training by informing the airline ground crew about the events on board. In separate phone calls, Amy Sweeney and Betty Ong provided information on seat numbers of the attackers and passenger injuries. This helped authorities identify them.\nCockpit security.\nAs early as 1964, the FAA required cockpit doors on commercial aircraft be kept locked during flight. In 2002, U.S Congress passed the Arming Pilots Against Terrorism Act, allowing pilots at U.S airlines to carry guns in the cockpit. Since 2003, these pilots are known as Federal Flight Deck Officers. It is estimated that one in 10 of the 125,000 commercial pilots are trained and armed. Also in 2002, aircraft manufacturers such as Airbus introduced a reinforced cockpit door which is resistant to gunfire and forced entry. Shortly afterwards, the FAA required operators of more than 6,000 aircraft to install tougher cockpit doors by 9 April 2003. Rules were also tightened to restrict cockpit access and make it easier for pilots to lock the doors. In 2015, a Germanwings plane was seized by the co-pilot and deliberately crashed, while the captain was out. The captain was unable to re-enter the cockpit, because the airline had already reinforced the cockpit door. The European Aviation Safety Agency issued a recommendation for airlines to ensure that at least two people, one pilot and a member of cabin crew, occupy the cockpit during flight. The FAA in the United States enforce a similar rule.\nAir marshal service.\nSome countries operate a marshal service, which puts members of law enforcement on high-risk flights based on intelligence. Their role is to keep passengers safe, by preventing hijackings and other criminal acts committed on a plane. Federal marshals in the U.S are required to identify themselves before boarding a plane, however, marshals of other countries often are not. According to the Congressional Research Service, the budget for the U.S Federal Air Marshal Service was US$719 million in 2007. Marshals often sit as regular passengers, at the front of the plane to allow observation of the cockpit. Despite the expansion of the marshal service, they cannot be on every plane, and they rarely face a real threat on a flight. Critics have questioned the need for them.\nAir traffic control.\nThere is no generic or set of rules for handling a hijacking situation. Air traffic controllers are expected to exercise their best judgement and expertise when dealing with the apparent consequences of an unlawful interference/hijack. Depending on the jurisdiction, the controller will inform the authorities such as the military who will escort the hijacked plane. Controllers are expected to keep communications to a minimum and clear the runway for a possible landing.\nAircraft shot down.\nGermany.\nIn January 2005, a federal law came into force in Germany, called the Luftsicherheitsgesetz, which allows \"direct action by armed force\" against a hijacked aircraft to prevent a September 11\u2013style attack. However, in February 2006 the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany struck down these provisions of the law, stating such preventive measures were unconstitutional and would essentially be state-sponsored murder, even if such an act would save many more lives on the ground. The main reason behind this decision was that the state would effectively be killing innocent hostages in order to avoid a terrorist attack. The Court also ruled that the Minister of Defense is constitutionally not entitled to act in terrorism matters, as this is the duty of the state and federal police forces. President of Germany Horst K\u00f6hler urged judicial review of the constitutionality of the Luftsicherheitsgesetz after he signed it into law in 2005.\nIndia.\nIndia published its new anti-hijacking policy in August 2005. The policy came into force after approval from the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). The main points of the policy are:\nUnited States.\nU.S. fighter pilots have been trained to shoot down hijacked commercial airliners if necessary. This was also attempted in 2001, just after the September 11 attacks. In 2003, the military stated that they exercise this several times a week.\nOther countries.\nPoland and Russia are among other countries that have had laws or decrees for shooting down hijacked planes. However, in September 2008 the Polish Constitutional Court ruled that the Polish rules were unconstitutional, and voided them.\nInternational law.\nTokyo Convention.\nThe Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, known as the Tokyo Convention, is an international treaty which entered force on December 4, 1969. As of 2015, it has been ratified by 186 parties. Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention states the following:1. When a person on board has unlawfully committed by force or threat thereof an act of interference, seizure, or other wrongful exercise of control of an aircraft in flight or when such an act is about to be committed, Contracting States shall take all appropriate measures to restore control of the aircraft to its lawful commander or to preserve his control of the aircraft.\n2. In the cases contemplated in the preceding paragraph, the Contracting State in which the aircraft lands shall permit its passengers and crew to continue their journey as soon as practicable, and shall return the aircraft and its cargo to the persons lawfully entitled to possession.The signatories agree that if there is unlawful takeover of an aircraft, or a threat of it on their territory, then they will take all necessary measures to regain or keep control over an aircraft. The captain can also disembark a suspected person on the territory of any country, where the aircraft lands, and that country must agree to it, as stated in Articles 8 and 12 of the Convention.\nHague Convention.\nThe Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (known as the Hague Convention) went into effect on October 14, 1971. As of 2013, the Convention has 185 signatories.\nMontreal Convention.\nThe Montreal Convention is a multilateral treaty adopted by a diplomatic meeting of ICAO member states in 1999. It amended important provisions of the Warsaw Convention's regime concerning compensation for the victims of air disasters."}
{"id": "2076", "revid": "41386844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2076", "title": "Acropolis of Athens", "text": "The Acropolis of Athens is an ancient citadel located on a rocky outcrop above the city of Athens and contains the remains of several ancient buildings of great architectural and historic significance, the most famous being the Parthenon. The word \"acropolis\" is from the Greek words (\"akron\", \"highest point, extremity\") and (\"polis\", \"city\"). Although the term acropolis is generic and there are many other acropoleis in Greece, the significance of the Acropolis of Athens is such that it is commonly known as \"The Acropolis\" without qualification. During ancient times it was known also more properly as Cecropia, after the legendary serpent-man, Cecrops, the supposed first Athenian king.\nWhile there is evidence that the hill was inhabited as far back as the fourth millennium BC, it was Pericles (c. 495\u2013429 BC) in the fifth century BC who coordinated the construction of the site's most important present remains including the Parthenon, the Propylaea, the Erechtheion and the Temple of Athena Nike. The Parthenon and the other buildings were seriously damaged during the 1687 siege by the Venetians during the Morean War when gunpowder being stored in the Parthenon by the Ottomans was hit by a cannonball and exploded.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nThe Acropolis is located on a flattish-topped rock that rises above sea level in the city of Athens, with a surface area of about . While the earliest artifacts date to the Middle Neolithic era, there have been documented habitations in Attica from the Early Neolithic period (6th millennium BC).\nThere is little doubt that a Mycenaean megaron palace stood upon the hill during the late Bronze Age. Nothing of this megaron survives except, probably, a single limestone column-base and pieces of several sandstone steps. Soon after the palace was constructed, a Cyclopean massive circuit wall was built, 760 meters long, up to 10 meters high, and ranging from 3.5 to 6 meters thick. This wall would serve as the main defense for the acropolis until the 5th century. The wall consisted of two parapets built with large stone blocks and cemented with an earth mortar called \"emplekton\" (Greek: \u1f14\u03bc\u03c0\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd). The wall uses typical Mycenaean conventions in that it followed the natural contour of the terrain and its gate, which was towards the south, was arranged obliquely, with a parapet and tower overhanging the incomers' right-hand side, thus facilitating defense. There were two lesser approaches up the hill on its north side, consisting of steep, narrow flights of steps cut in the rock. Homer is assumed to refer to this fortification when he mentions the \"strong-built House of Erechtheus\" (\"Odyssey\" 7.81). At some time before the 13th century BC, an earthquake caused a fissure near the northeastern edge of the Acropolis. This fissure extended some 35 meters to a bed of soft marl in which a well was dug. An elaborate set of stairs was built and the well served as an invaluable, protected source of drinking water during times of siege for some portion of the Mycenaean period.\nArchaic Acropolis.\nNot much is known about the architectural appearance of the Acropolis until the Archaic era. During the 7th and the 6th centuries BC, the site was controlled by Kylon during the failed Kylonian revolt, and twice by Peisistratos; each of these were attempts directed at seizing political power by \"coups d'\u00e9tat\". Apart from the \"Hekatompedon\" mentioned later, Peisistratos also built an entry gate or propylaea. Nevertheless, it seems that a nine-gate wall, the \"Enneapylon\", had been built around the acropolis hill and incorporating the biggest water spring, the \"Clepsydra\", at the northwestern foot.\nA temple to \"Athena Polias\", the tutelary deity of the city, was erected between 570\u2013550 BC. This Doric limestone building, from which many relics survive, is referred to as the \"Hekatompedon\" (Greek for \"hundred\u2013footed\"), \"Ur-Parthenon\" (German for \"original Parthenon\" or \"primitive Parthenon\"), \"H\u2013Architecture\" or \"Bluebeard\" temple, after the pedimental three-bodied man-serpent sculpture, whose beards were painted dark blue. Whether this temple replaced an older one, or just a sacred precinct or altar, is not known. Probably, the \"Hekatompedon\" was built where the Parthenon now stands.\nBetween 529\u2013520 BC yet another temple was built by the Peisistratids, the Old Temple of Athena, usually referred to as the \"Arkhaios Ne\u014ds\" (\u1f00\u03c1\u03c7\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03c2 \u03bd\u03b5\u03ce\u03c2, \"ancient temple\"). This temple of Athena Polias was built upon the \"D\u00f6rpfeld foundations\", between the Erechtheion and the still-standing Parthenon. \"Arkhaios Ne\u014ds\" was destroyed as part of the Achaemenid destruction of Athens during the Second Persian invasion of Greece during 480\u2013479 BC; however, the temple was probably reconstructed during 454 BC, since the treasury of the Delian League was transferred in its opisthodomos. The temple may have been burnt down during 406/405 BC as Xenophon mentions that the old temple of Athena was set afire. Pausanias does not mention it in his 2nd century AD \"Description of Greece\".\nAround 500 BC the \"Hekatompedon\" was dismantled to make place for a new grander building, the \"Older Parthenon\" (often referred to as the \"Pre-Parthenon\", \"early Parthenon\"). For this reason, Athenians decided to stop the construction of the Olympieion temple which was connoted with the tyrant Peisistratos and his sons and, instead, used the Piraeus limestone destined for the Olympieion to build the Older Parthenon. In order to accommodate the new temple, the south part of the summit was cleared, made level by adding some 8,000 two-ton blocks of limestone, a foundation deep at some points, and the rest was filled with soil kept in place by the retaining wall. However, after the victorious Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, the plan was revised and marble was used instead. The limestone phase of the building is referred to as \"Pre-Parthenon I\" and the marble phase as \"Pre-Parthenon II\". In 485 BC, construction stalled to save resources as Xerxes became king of Persia and war seemed imminent.\nThe Older Parthenon was still under construction when the Persians invaded and sacked the city in 480 BC. The building was burned and looted, along with the \"Ancient Temple\" and practically everything else on the rock. After the Persian crisis had subsided, the Athenians incorporated many architectural parts of the unfinished temple (unfluted column drums, triglyphs, metopes, etc.) into the newly built northern curtain wall of the Acropolis, where they served as a prominent \"war memorial\" and can still be seen today. The devastated site was cleared of debris. Statuary, cult objects, religious offerings and unsalvageable architectural members were buried ceremoniously in several deeply dug pits on the hill, serving conveniently as a fill for the artificial plateau created around the classic Parthenon. This \"Persian debris\" was the richest archaeological deposit excavated on the Acropolis by 1890.\nThe Periclean building program.\nAfter winning at Eurymedon during 468 BC, Cimon and Themistocles ordered the reconstruction of the southern and northern walls of the Acropolis. Most of the major temples, including the Parthenon, were rebuilt by order of Pericles during the so-called Golden Age of Athens (460\u2013430 BC). Phidias, an Athenian sculptor, and Ictinus and Callicrates, two famous architects, were responsible for the reconstruction.\nDuring 437 BC, Mnesicles started building the Propylaea, a monumental gate at the western end of the Acropolis with Doric columns of Pentelic marble, built partly upon the old propylaea of Peisistratos. These colonnades were almost finished during 432 BC and had two wings, the northern one decorated with paintings by Polygnotus. About the same time, south of the Propylaea, building started on the small Ionic Temple of Athena Nike in Pentelic marble with tetrastyle porches, preserving the essentials of Greek temple design. After an interruption caused by the Peloponnesian War, the temple was finished during the time of Nicias' peace, between 421 BC and 409 BC.\nConstruction of the elegant temple of Erechtheion in Pentelic marble (421\u2013406 BC) was in accordance with a complex plan which took account of the extremely uneven ground and the need to circumvent several shrines in the area. The entrance, facing east, is lined with six Ionic columns. Unusually, the temple has two porches, one on the northwest corner borne by Ionic columns, the other, to the southwest, supported by huge female figures or Caryatids. The eastern part of the temple was dedicated to Athena Polias, while the western part, serving the cult of the archaic king Poseidon-Erechtheus, housed the altars of Hephaestus and Voutos, brother of Erechtheus. Little is known about the original plan of the interior which was destroyed by fire during the first century BC and has been rebuilt several times.\nDuring the same period, a combination of sacred precincts including the temples of \"Athena Polias\", Poseidon, Erechtheus, Cecrops, Herse, Pandrosos and Aglauros, with its \"Kore Porch\" (Porch of the Maidens) or \"Caryatids' balcony\" was begun. Between the temple of Athena Nike and the Parthenon, there was the Sanctuary of Artemis Brauronia (or the Brauroneion), the goddess represented as a bear and worshipped in the deme of Brauron. According to Pausanias, a wooden statue or \"xoanon\" of the goddess and a statue of Artemis made by Praxiteles during the 4th century BC were both in the sanctuary.\nBehind the Propylaea, Phidias' gigantic bronze statue of Athena Promachos (\"Athena who fights in the front line\"), built between 450 BC and 448 BC, dominated. The base was high, while the total height of the statue was . The goddess held a lance, the gilt tip of which could be seen as a reflection by crews on ships rounding Cape Sounion, and a giant shield on the left side, decorated by Mys with images of the fight between the Centaurs and the Lapiths. Other monuments that have left almost nothing visible to the present day are the Chalkotheke, the Pandroseion, Pandion's sanctuary, Athena's altar, Zeus Polieus's sanctuary and, from Roman times, the circular temple of Augustus and Rome.\nHellenistic and Roman period.\nDuring the Hellenistic and Roman periods, many of the existing buildings in the area of the Acropolis were repaired, due to damage from age, and occasionally, war. Monuments to foreign kings were erected, notably those of the Attalid kings of Pergamon Attalos II (in front of the NW corner of the Parthenon), and Eumenes II, in front of the Propylaia. These were rededicated during the early Roman Empire to Augustus or Claudius (uncertain), and Agrippa, respectively. Eumenes was also responsible for constructing a stoa on the South slope, not unlike that of Attalos in the Agora below.\nDuring the Julio-Claudian period, the Temple of Rome and Augustus, a small, round edifice, about 23 meters from the Parthenon, was to be the last significant ancient construction on the summit of the rock. Around the same time, on the North slope, in a cave next to the one dedicated to Pan since the classical period, a sanctuary was founded where the archons dedicated to Apollo on assuming office. During 161 AD, on the South slope, the Roman Herodes Atticus built his grand amphitheatre or Odeon. It was destroyed by the invading Herulians a century later but was reconstructed during the 1950s.\nDuring the 3rd century, under threat from a Herulian invasion, repairs were made to the Acropolis walls, and the \"Beul\u00e9 Gate\" was constructed to restrict entrance in front of the Propylaia, thus returning the Acropolis to use as a fortress.\nByzantine, Latin and Ottoman period.\nDuring the Byzantine period, the Parthenon was used as a church, dedicated to the Virgin Mary. During the Latin Duchy of Athens, the Acropolis functioned as the city's administrative center, with the Parthenon as its cathedral, and the Propylaea as part of the Ducal Palace. A large tower was added, the \"Frankopyrgos\", demolished during the 19th century.\nAfter the Ottoman conquest of Greece, the Parthenon was used as the garrison headquarters of the Turkish army, and the Erechtheum was turned into the governor's private harem. The buildings of the Acropolis suffered significant damage during the 1687 siege by the Venetians in the Morean War. The Parthenon, which was being used as a gunpowder magazine, was hit by artillery shot and damaged severely.\nDuring subsequent years, the Acropolis was a site of bustling human activity with many Byzantine, Frankish, and Ottoman structures. The dominant feature during the Ottoman period was a mosque inside the Parthenon, complete with a minaret.\nThe Acropolis was besieged thrice during the Greek War of Independence (two sieges from the Greeks in 1821\u20131822 and one from the Ottomans in 1826\u20131827. A new bulwark named after Odysseas Androutsos was built by the Greeks between 1822 and 1825 to protect the recently rediscovered Klepsydra spring which became the sole fresh water supply of the fortress.\nAfter independence, most features that dated from the Byzantine, Frankish and Ottoman periods were cleared from the site in an attempt to restore the monument to its original form, \"cleansed\" of all later additions.\nArchaeological remains.\nThe entrance to the Acropolis was a monumental gateway termed the Propylaea. To the south of the entrance is the tiny Temple of Athena Nike. At the centre of the Acropolis is the Parthenon or Temple of Athena Parthenos (Athena the Virgin). East of the entrance and north of the Parthenon is the temple known as the Erechtheum. South of the platform that forms the top of the Acropolis there are also the remains of the ancient, though often remodelled, Theatre of Dionysus. A few hundred metres away, there is the now partially reconstructed Odeon of Herodes Atticus.\nAll the valuable ancient artifacts are situated in the Acropolis Museum, which resides on the southern slope of the same rock, 280 metres from the Parthenon.\nSite plan.\nSite plan of the Acropolis at Athens showing the major archaeological remains\nThe Acropolis Restoration Project.\nThe Project began during 1975 and the goal of the restoration was to reverse the decay of centuries of attrition, pollution, destruction stemming from military use, and misguided past restorations. The project included collection and identification of all stone fragments, even small ones, from the Acropolis and its slopes and the attempt was made to restore as much as possible using reassembled original material (anastylosis), with new marble from Mount Pentelicus used sparingly. All restoration was made using titanium dowels and is designed to be completely reversible, in case future experts decide to change things. A combination of cutting-edge modern technology and extensive research and reinvention of ancient techniques were used.\nThe Parthenon colonnades, largely destroyed by Venetian bombardment during the 17th century, were restored, with many wrongly assembled columns now properly placed. The roof and floor of the Propylaea were partly restored, with sections of the roof made of new marble and decorated with blue and gold inserts, as in the original. Restoration of the Temple of Athena Nike was completed in 2010.\nA total of 2,675 tons of architectural members were restored, with 686 stones reassembled from fragments of the originals, 905 patched with new marble, and 186 parts made entirely of new marble. A total of 530 cubic meters of new Pentelic marble were used.\nCultural significance.\nEvery four years, the Athenians had a festival called the Great Panathenaea that rivaled the Olympic Games in popularity. During the festival, a procession (believed to be depicted on the Parthenon frieze) traveled through the city via the Panathenaic Way and culminated on the Acropolis. There, a new robe of woven wool (\"peplos\") was placed on either the statue of Athena Polias in the Erechtheum (during the annual Lesser Panathenaea) or on the statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon (during the Great Panathenaea, held every four years).\nWithin the later tradition of Western Civilization and classical revival, the Acropolis, from at least the mid-18th century on, has often been invoked as a key symbol of the Greek legacy and of the glories of Classical Greece.\nGeology.\nThe Acropolis is a klippe consisting of two lithostratigraphic units, the Athens schist and the overlying Acropolis limestone. The Athens schist is a soft reddish rock dating from the upper Cretaceous period. The original sediments were deposited in a river delta approximately 72 million years ago. The Acropolis limestone dates from the upper Jurassic period, predating the underlying Athens schist by about 30 million years. The Acropolis limestone was thrust over the Athens schist by compressional tectonic forces (Plate tectonics), forming a nappe or overthrust sheet. Erosion of the limestone nappe led to the eventual detachment of the Acropolis, forming the present day feature. Where the Athens schist and the limestone meet there are springs and karstic caves. Many of the hills in the Athens region were formed by the erosion of the same nappe as the Acropolis. These include the hills of Lykabettos, Areopagus, and Mouseion. The marble utilized to construct the buildings of the Acropolis was sourced from the quarries of Mount Pentelicus, a mountain to the northeast of the city.\nGeological Issues.\nThe limestone that the Acropolis is built upon is unstable because of the erosion and tectonic shifts that the region is prone to. This instability can cause rock slides that cause damage to the historic site. Various measures have been implemented to protect the site including retaining walls, drainage systems and rock bolts. These measures work to counter the natural processes that threaten the historic site."}
{"id": "2077", "revid": "40820929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2077", "title": "Adam Weishaupt", "text": "Johann Adam Weishaupt (, 6 February 1748 \u2013 18 November 1830) was a German philosopher, professor of civil law and later canon law, and founder of the Illuminati, a secret society.\nEarly life.\nAdam Weishaupt was born on 6 February 1748 in Ingolstadt in the Electorate of Bavaria. Weishaupt's father Johann Georg Weishaupt (1717\u20131753) died when Adam was five years old. After his father's death he came under the tutelage of his godfather Johann Adam Freiherr von Ickstatt who, like his father, was a professor of law at the University of Ingolstadt. Ickstatt was a proponent of the philosophy of Christian Wolff and of the Enlightenment, and he influenced the young Weishaupt with his rationalism. Weishaupt began his formal education at age seven at a Jesuit school. He later enrolled at the University of Ingolstadt and graduated in 1768 at age 20 with a doctorate of law. In 1772 he became a professor of law. The following year he married Afra Sausenhofer of Eichst\u00e4tt.\nAfter Pope Clement XIV's suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1773, Weishaupt became a professor of canon law, a position that was held exclusively by the Jesuits until that time. In 1775 Weishaupt was introduced to the empirical philosophy of Johann Georg Heinrich Feder of the University of G\u00f6ttingen. Both Feder and Weishaupt would later become opponents of Kantian idealism.\nFoundation of the Illuminati.\nOn 1 May 1776 Johann Adam Weishaupt founded the \"Illuminati\" in the Electorate of Bavaria. He adopted the name of \"Brother Spartacus\" within the order. Even encyclopedia references vary on the goal of the order, such as \"New Advent\" saying the Order was not egalitarian or democratic internally, but sought to promote the doctrines of equality and freedom throughout society; while others such as \"Collier's\" have said the aim was to combat religion and foster rationalism in its place.\nThe actual character of the society was an elaborate network of spies and counter-spies. Each isolated cell of initiates reported to a superior, whom they did not know: a party structure that was effectively adopted by some later groups.\nWeishaupt was initiated into the Masonic lodge \"Theodor zum guten Rath\", at Munich in 1777. His project of \"illumination, enlightening the understanding by the sun of reason, which will dispel the clouds of superstition and of prejudice\" was an unwelcome reform. He used Freemasonry to recruit for his own quasi-masonic society, with the goal of \"perfecting human nature\" through re-education to achieve a communal state with nature, freed of government and organized religion. Presenting their own system as pure masonry, Weishaupt and Adolph Freiherr Knigge, who organised his ritual structure, greatly expanded the secret organisation.\nContrary to Immanuel Kant's that Enlightenment (and Weishaupt's Order was in some respects an expression of the Enlightenment Movement) was the passage by man out of his 'self-imposed immaturity' through daring to 'make use of his own reason, without the guidance of another,' Weishaupt's Order of Illuminati prescribed in great detail everything which the members had obediently to read and think, so that Dr. Wolfgang Riedel has commented that this approach to illumination or enlightenment constituted a degradation and twisting of the Kantian principle of Enlightenment. Riedel writes:\n'The independence of thought and judgement required by Kant ... was specifically prevented by the Order of the Illuminati's rules and regulations. Enlightenment takes place here, if it takes place at all, precisely \"under\" the direction of another, namely under that of the \"Superiors\" [of the Order].\nWeishaupt's radical rationalism and vocabulary were not likely to succeed. Writings that were intercepted in 1784 were interpreted as seditious, and the Society was banned by the government of Karl Theodor, Elector of Bavaria, in 1784. Weishaupt lost his position at the University of Ingolstadt and fled Bavaria.\nActivities in exile.\nHe received the assistance of Duke Ernest II of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg (1745\u20131804), and lived in Gotha writing a series of works on illuminism, including \"A Complete History of the Persecutions of the Illuminati in Bavaria\" (1785), \"A Picture of Illuminism\" (1786), \"An Apology for the Illuminati\" (1786), and \"An Improved System of Illuminism\" (1787). Adam Weishaupt died in Gotha on 18 November 1830. He was survived by his second wife, Anna Maria (n\u00e9e Sausenhofer), and his children Nanette, Charlotte, Ernst, Karl, Eduard, and Alfred. Weishaupt was buried next to his son Wilhelm who preceded him in death in 1802.\nAfter Weishaupt's Order of Illuminati was banned and its members dispersed, it left behind no enduring traces of an influence, not even on its own erstwhile members, who went on in the future to develop in quite different directions.\nAssessment of character and intentions.\nWeishaupt's character and intentions have been variously assessed. Some took a negative view, such as Augustin Barruel, who despite writing that Weishaupt's goals were that \"Equality and Liberty, together with the most absolute independence, are to be the substitutes for all rights and all property\" saw this as more dangerous than beneficial, and John Robison who regarded him as a 'human devil' and saw his mission as one of malevolent destructiveness. Others took a more positive view, including Thomas Jefferson, who wrote in a letter to James Madison that \"Barruel\u2019s own parts of the book are perfectly the ravings of a Bedlamite\" and considered Weishaupt as an \"enthusiastic Philanthropist\" who believed in the indefinite perfectibility of man and his intention was simply to \"reinstate natural religion, and by diffusing the light of his morality, to teach us to govern ourselves\".\nIn his defense, Weishaupt wrote a \"Kurze Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten\" in 1787 (A Brief Justification of my Intentions). A translation was done by Dr. Tony Page in which he wrote:\n\"Weishaupt\u2019s plan was to educate Illuminati followers in the highest levels of humanity and morality (basing his teachings on the supremacy of Reason, allied with the spirit of the Golden Rule of not doing to others what one would not wish done to oneself), so that if Illuminati alumni subsequently attained positions of significance and power (such as in the fields of education and politics), they could exert a benevolent and uplifting influence upon society at large. His project was utopian and naively optimistic, and he himself was certainly not without flaws of character \u2013 but neither he nor his plan was evil or violent in and of themselves. It is one of the deplorable and tragic ironies of history that a man who tried to inculcate virtue, philanthropy, social justice and morality has become one of the great hate-figures of 21st-century 'conspiracy' thinking.\"\nWorks.\nWorks relating to the Illuminati.\nSource"}
{"id": "2078", "revid": "16040873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2078", "title": "Acorn Electron", "text": "The Acorn Electron is a budget version of the BBC Micro educational/home computer introduced by Acorn Computers Ltd on 25 August 1983. It has 32 kilobytes of RAM, and its ROM includes BBC BASIC v2 along with its operating system.\nThe Electron was able to save and load programs onto audio cassette via a supplied converter cable that connected it to any standard tape recorder that had the correct sockets. It was capable of basic graphics, and could display onto either a television set, a colour (RGB) monitor or a \"green screen\" monitor.\nFor a short period, the Electron was reportedly the best selling micro in the United Kingdom, with an estimated 200,000 to 250,000 machines sold over its entire commercial lifespan.\nHistory.\nAfter Acorn Computer released the BBC Micro, executives believed that the company needed a less-expensive computer for the mass market. In May 1982, when asked about the recently announced Sinclair ZX Spectrum's potential to hurt sales of the BBC Micro, priced at \u00a3125 for the 16K model compared to around twice that price for the 16K BBC Model A, Acorn co-founder Hermann Hauser responded that in the third quarter of that year Acorn would release a new \u00a3120-150 computer which \"will probably be called the Electron\", a form of \"miniaturised BBC Micro\", having 32 KB of RAM and 32 KB of ROM, with \"higher resolution graphics than those offered by the Spectrum\".\nAcorn co-founder Chris Curry also emphasised the Electron's role as being \"designed to compete with the Spectrum... to get the starting price very low, but not preclude expansion in the long term.\" In order to reduce component costs, and to prevent cloning, the company reduced the number of chips in the Electron from the 102 on the BBC Micro's motherboard to \"something like 12 to 14 chips\" with most functionality on a single 2,400-gate Uncommitted Logic Array (ULA). Reports during the second half of 1982 indicated a potential December release, with Curry providing qualified confirmation of such plans, together with an accurate depiction of the machine's form and capabilities, noting that the \"massive ULA\" would be the \"dominant factor\" in any pre-Christmas release. However, as the end of the year approached, with the ULA not ready for \"main production\", the launch of the Electron was to be delayed until the spring.\nBy June 1983, with the planned March release having passed, the launch of the Electron had been rescheduled for the \"Acorn User\" Exhibition in August 1983, and the machine was indeed launched at the event with a new price of \u00a3199. The company expected to ship the Electron before Christmas, and sell 100,000 by February 1984. Reviews were generally favorable, noting its excellent graphics compared to the Commodore 64. While its speed was acceptable compared to the Commodore and competing computers the Electron was, however, rather slower than the BBC Micro with one review noting that games designed for the BBC Micro ran \"at less than half the speed, with very significant effects on their appeal\". The reduced performance can be attributed to the use of a 4-bit wide memory system instead of the 8-bit wide memory system of the BBC Micro to reduce cost. Due to needing two accesses to the memory instead of one to fetch each byte, along with contention with the video hardware also needing access, reading or writing RAM was much slower than on the BBC Micro.\nProduction difficulties at Astec in Malaysia delayed the machine's introduction, forcing Acorn to look to other manufacturers such as Wongs in Hong Kong and AB Electronics in Wales. By October 1983, Acorn had received orders for more than 150,000 units, but had production targets of only 25,000 a month before Christmas, meaning that the existing backlog would take more than six months to fulfil. Demand for the Electron was high but only two of WH Smith's London branches had inventory. Ultimately, manufacturing in Malaysia ceased with the anticipated but unspecified number of units having been produced, this having been originally reported as 100,000 units. Acorn's marketing manager, Tom Hohenberg, admitted in early 1984 that \"a lot of the trouble stemmed from the ULA\" in getting production to the desired levels, but that such difficulties had been resolved, although Acorn faced an order backlog of almost a quarter of a million units.\nAs the company increased production during 1984, however, the British home computer market greatly weakened. Hohenberg later noted that after the 1983 Christmas season, Electron deliveries had increased to meet a demand that was no longer there, with the market having \"completely dried up\". Acorn's Christmas 1984 sales were greatly below expectations and by March 1985 the company had reduced the Electron's price to \u00a3129. With the company's unsuccessful expansion into the United States abandoned, Acorn's financial situation had deteriorated sufficiently to prompt Olivetti to rescue the company by taking a 49.30% ownership stake. Renewed efforts were made to sell the machine, bundling it with Acorn's own expansions and software, such as one package adding the Plus 1 expansion, joysticks and a ROM cartridge game to the base machine for a total price of \u00a3219. Acorn committed to supporting the machine \"until the end of 1986\", continuing to supply it (as the Merlin M2105) to British Telecom as part of the Healthnet communications system, with small-scale manufacturing continuing while existing stocks were being run down.\nBy autumn, retailers appeared eager to discount the computer, with prices in stores as low as \u00a3100, reportedly less than the distributor prices of the summer months. As the Christmas season approached, Dixons Retail acquired the remaining Electron inventory to sell, bundled with a cassette recorder and software, at a retail price of \u00a399.95, effectively bringing to an end Acorn's interest in the Electron and the home computing market but empowering third-party suppliers whose \"inventiveness and initiative\" contrasted with Acorn's lack of interest and \"false promises\". Acorn subsequently released the Master Compact - a model in the Master series of microcomputers with fewer BBC Micro-style ports and a similar expansion connector to that used by the Electron - with the home audience specifically in mind. Indeed, prior to its release, the Master Compact had been perceived as the successor to the Electron. Superficial similarities between the Compact and Acorn Communicator, together with technical similarities between the Electron (particularly when expanded in the form of the Merlin M2105) and the Communicator, may also have driven rumours of an updated Electron model.\nAlthough the Electron presented challenges to developers in terms of the amount of memory available to programs and, particularly for those writing or porting games to the machine, a reduction in hardware features useful for controlling or presenting content on the screen, developers often discovered creative workarounds to deliver commercially successful products, making the business of writing conversions a viable one for some developers.\nSeveral features that would later be associated with the BBC Master and Archimedes first appeared as features of Electron expansion units, including ROM cartridge slots and the Advanced Disc Filing System, a hierarchical improvement to the BBC's original Disc Filing System.\nThe availability of the Electron at discounted prices from 1985 onwards led to increased demand for third-party software and expansions for the machine. While it may not have been as popular as the Spectrum, Commodore 64 or Amstrad CPC, it did sell in sufficient numbers to ensure that new software titles from established producers were being produced right up until the early 1990s, with mainstream publications dedicated to the machine having effectively supported it for five years beyond the point at which Acorn's own support had ceased.\nHardware expansions.\nSince the Electron provided only a selection of video output ports, a cassette port and the expansion connector, a range of additional expansions were produced to offer ports and connections to various peripherals. The first expansions were largely joystick and printer interfaces or sideways ROM boards. For instance, First Byte Computers developed an interface and software which allowed a \"switched\" joystick to be used with the majority of software titles. This interface became very popular and was sold by W.H. Smiths, Boots, Comet and hundreds of independent computer dealers, selling as many as 23,000 units over a two-year period, helped by a bundling agreement with Dixons.\nAcorn's own expansion strategy was led by the Plus 1 which offered a combination of ports and cartridge connectors, followed by the Plus 3 disc drive unit, but by early 1986 the more general range of expansions had broadened to include floppy drive and RS423 interfaces, Teletext adapters, and other fundamental enhancements to the base machine.\nMulti-function expansions.\nSince the Electron's expansion connector was the basis of practically all external hardware expansions for the machine, unless an expansion propagated this connector to others, as was done by the Acorn Plus 3, the capabilities of any given expansion would limit the capabilities of the expanded machine. Thus, expansions offering a single function, such as joystick ports or a printer port, would need to be disconnected if other capabilities were needed, and then reconnected later. Consequently, multi-function expansions offering a combination of different capabilities offered a significant degree of convenience as well as avoiding wear on the expansion connector.\nAlongside announcements of Acorn's then-unreleased Plus 1, Solidisk previewed a General Purpose Interface for the Electron in early 1984 offering a Centronics printer port, switched joystick port, user port, sideways ROM sockets, and mini-cartridge sockets supported by the 6522 versatile interface adapter (VIA) chip. The Plus 1 itself was released in mid-1984, introducing the influential cartridge format for expansions ultimately used by several other companies.\nAcorn Plus 1.\nThe Acorn Plus 1 added two ROM cartridge slots, an analogue interface (supporting four channels) and a Centronics parallel port, priced at \u00a359.90. The analogue interface was normally used for joysticks, although trackball and graphics tablet devices were available, and the parallel interface was typically used to connect a printer. Game ROM cartridges would boot automatically. Languages in paged ROM cartridges would take precedence over BASIC. (The slot at the front of the interface took priority if both were populated.)\nAccess to ROM occurred at 2\u00a0MHz until RAM access was required, so theoretically programs released on ROM could run up to twice as fast as those released on tape or disc. Despite this, all of the games released on ROM were packaged as ROM filing system cartridges, from which the micro would load programs into main memory in exactly the same way as if it were loading from tape. This meant that programs did not need to be modified for their new memory location and could be written in BASIC but gave no execution speed benefits. Six ROM cartridge titles were announced for the launch of the Plus 1.\nThe cartridge slots provided additional control lines (compared to the lines available via the edge connector on the rear of the Electron) to ease implementation of ROM cartridges. Acorn described the hardware extension possibilities in promotional literature, giving an RS423 cartridge as an example of this capability of the Plus 1.\nAdditional peripheral cartridges by companies such as PRES (via their ARA/ARA2/ASR products) allowed sideways ROM capability, that allowed the standard Acorn ROM space to be programmatically mapped out for alternative EPROMs, either physically via ZIF Sockets, or 'virtually' via ROM images loaded into (battery-backed) RAM in the same ROM address space. This enabled the Electron to achieve the same functionality as that provided by the expansion ROM slots under the keyboard and on the bottom-left of the BBC Micro B keyboard.\nThe addition of the Plus 1 added a number of new *FX or OSBYTE calls that allowed the OS to read values from the analogue interface and write to the parallel interface.\nAfter Acorn's change of focus away from the Electron, and with a shortage of Plus 1 units available to purchase, Advanced Computer Products secured the rights to manufacture the unit under licence from Acorn, obtaining the injection moulds and tooling, thus restarting production in 1987 after Acorn's own production of the unit had ceased in November 1985.\nThe Plus 1 needed memory page &amp;D for its workspace, and the unit added some processing overhead when enabled, both of these things causing issues with the loading and running of software, particularly cassette-based games. To disable the Plus 1, after pressing BREAK, the following commands could be issued:\n *FX163,128,1\n ?&amp;212=&amp;D6\n ?&amp;213=&amp;F1\n ?&amp;2AC=0\nAn official application note described a similar set of commands to \"remove the Plus One completely from the address map disabling the Centronics and A/D ports (additionally disabling the RS423 cartridge if fitted)\".\nSlogger Rombox Plus.\nFollowing on from Slogger's earlier Rombox product - an expansion similar in profile to the Plus 1 but offering eight ROM sockets and propagating the expansion connector to other units - the Rombox Plus was positioned more directly as a competitor to the Plus 1 in that it offered two cartridge slots and a Centronics print port alongside four ROM sockets. Priced at \u00a349.95, the unit was mostly compatible with cartridges designed for the Plus 1 although one reviewer reported physical issues with some expansion cartridges, suggesting some manufacturing inconsistencies given other users' more positive experiences, but indicated that it was still \"worth considering as an alternative to the Plus 1\".\nSoftware Bargains Plus 1.\nIn mid-1989, Software Bargains announced an expansion providing different levels of Plus 1 functionality, offered as a bare printed circuit board without casing and in three different variants: the basic model offered one cartridge port and was bundled with View and Viewsheet cartridges for \u00a329.95; an extended model offered one cartridge port and a printer port with the two bundled cartridges for \u00a336.95; the full model offered two cartridge ports, printer port and the bundled cartridges for \u00a339.95. Various board upgrade options were also offered between the variants, with the product being described mainly as a vehicle to expose the bundled software packages to as many as 150,000 owners of the estimated 200,000 Electrons in the UK who \"have not yet been able to acquire or use View or Viewsheet\".\nCommunications and networking.\nTo support connectivity, Acorn announced a Plus 2 network interface with availability scheduled for early 1985, together with a RS423 cartridge for the Plus 1. Neither of these products were delivered as announced.\nAcorn Plus 2.\nThe Acorn Plus 2 interface was due to provide Econet capability. This interface did not make it to market. However, an Econet interface was produced by Barson Computers in Australia and possibly other individuals and businesses.\nAndyk RS423 cartridge.\nAndyk announced an RS423 cartridge for the Plus 1 providing a serial port, alongside other products, in late 1985. It was priced at \u00a334.99.\nPace Tellstar/Nightingale.\nOriginally reported in mid-1985 as a collaboration between Acorn and Pace Micro Technology, but launched in early 1986, Pace offered a communications product consisting of a RS423 cartridge, bundled with a Nightingale modem and Tellstar communications software, offered at a discounted price of \u00a3145.\nJafa Systems RS423 cartridge.\nJafa Systems announced an RS423 cartridge in late 1989 to \"fill a two year gap in the market\", offering a serial connector compatible with the BBC Micro together with an on-board socket for 8\u00a0KB or 16\u00a0KB EPROM devices or for 32\u00a0KB RAM, the latter being configured to present two sideways RAM banks to the system. Write protect functionality was supported to prevent certain ROM software from attempting to overwrite itself if stored in RAM. The cartridge board itself was priced at around \u00a330, with a case costing \u00a35 extra, and an optional 32\u00a0KB RAM adding another \u00a320. Support for the E00 ADFS offered by PRES for that company's AP3 disc system was indicated as an application for the sideways RAM.\nDisc interfaces.\nThe first disc interface to be announced for the Electron was Pace's Le Box in 1984, offering a single-sided 100\u00a0KB floppy drive controlled by the 8271 controller and accessed using the Amcom Disc Filing System, with pricing at \u00a3299 plus VAT including the drive or around \u00a3199 without. The unit also provided eight sideways ROM sockets and was intended to sit under the Electron itself. The unit was connected via cabling to the expansion edge connector and included its own power supply, and other drives including switchable 40/80 track drives offering up to 400\u00a0KB capacity were dealer-supplied options. Although the product was meant to be on sale at the Acorn User Show in August 1984, and had been advertised, it was \"discontinued\" in early 1985 before getting to market, with a Pace representative indicating that prohibitive pricing of the 8271 chips (each at \"over \u00a380 at times\") had left the company considering a re-launch of the product should the pricing situation become more favourable.\nFollowing on from Acorn's Plus 3 interface, Cumana, Solidisk, Advanced Computer Products and Slogger all offered disc interfaces for the Electron. Unlike disc systems on the BBC Micro and the Acorn Plus 3, many of the systems released for the Electron did not claim RAM workspace (and raise the PAGE variable affecting applications above the default of &amp;E00), making it easier to use cassette-based software transferred to disc and to run larger programs from disc.\nAcorn Plus 3.\nLaunched in late 1984 for a price of \u00a3229, the Acorn Plus 3 was a hardware module that connected independently of the Plus 1 and provided a \"self contained disc interface and 3.5 inch single sided disc drive\" offering over 300\u00a0KB of storage per disc using the newly introduced Advanced Disc Filing System (ADFS). The Plus 3 was also reportedly produced with a double-sided drive fitted.\nAn expansion connector for a second 3.5 or 5.25 inch drive was also provided by the unit, with such drives needing to provide a Shugart-compatible connector and their own power supply. The original Electron edge connector was repeated on the back of the Plus 3, allowing the Plus 1 or other compatible expansion to be connected in conjunction with the Plus 3.\nThe double-density drive of the Plus 3 was driven using a WD1770 drive controller by the ADFS. (The Plus 3 had been rumoured to offer Acorn's DFS and to feature a 8272 double density disk controller before its launch.) Because the WD1770 is capable of single density mode and uses the same IBM360 derived floppy disc format as the Intel 8271 found in the BBC Micro, it was also possible to use the Disc Filing System with an alternate ROM, such as the ACP 1770 DFS.\nThe Plus 3 reset PAGE to &amp;1D00, reducing the amount of free RAM available to the user. The ADFS system could be temporarily disabled (and PAGE reset to &amp;E00) via the command. Later products such as the PRES E00 ADFS remedied the memory demands of the ADFS, along with other issues suffered by the software as delivered with the Plus 3. If using the Plus 3 in screen modes 0\u20133, the pseudo-variable would be thrown off, as the interrupts were disabled during disk access in these modes. The screen would also blank during disc accesses.\nDisks had to be manually mounted and dismounted using the / commands, or using the -+ key combination. Disks could also be booted from via the standard + key-combination, if the !BOOT file was present on the disk. This behaviour was the same as on the BBC Micro.\nThe Plus 3 included an uprated square black power supply unit with mains cord, manufactured by STC, designed and manufactured in England to BS 415 and BS 5850, that was designed to power the Plus 3, in addition to the Electron and the Plus 1 interface as well. This replaced the original cream-coloured \"wall wart\" style power supply, designed to BS 415 and manufactured in Hong Kong.\nRepair note: If the internal power-supply connector, used to power the existing internal 3.5\" drive is damaged, and requires replacement, then the original AMP 800-930 4-pin connector, which was already in short supply during the original production run, may be replaced with a Molex 5264 50-37-5043 \"Mini-SPOX\" connector as an alternative.\nAdvanced Plus 3.\nProduced by Advanced Computer Products (ACP) and sold by PRES, the Advanced Plus 3 (AP3) was a Plus 1 cartridge interface using the WD1770 controller, supplied with Acorn's ADFS and a single-sided 3\u00bd\" disc drive for \u00a399 plus VAT, offering equivalent functionality to the Acorn Plus 3. Announced in late 1987, the product was made possible by an agreement between ACP and Acorn to license the ADFS software. As with many disc interfaces for the Electron, since the interface provided a connector for the drive, this made it possible to connect a 5\u00bc\" floppy disc drive (more common amongst BBC Micro owners) or the more typical 3\u00bd\" drive.\nPRES later released a version of ADFS with support for PAGE at &amp;E00, this being achieved by using RAM provided by the Advanced Battery Backed RAM (ABR) cartridge. This version also fixed two notable bugs in Acorn's ADFS, eliminating unreliability when accessing the first tracks on a disc which had previously necessitated the writing of a file (ZYSYSHELP) as a workaround, and switching off the text cursor during disc compaction which had previously caused disc corruption (since the disc data would be processed using screen memory during this operation, and the cursor would modify that data when blinking). The ROM image was supplied on disc for \u00a317.19, whereas a bundle of the ROM and ABR cartridge was \u00a350.95.\nIn 1989, the Advanced Plus 3 Mark 2 was launched, offering a double-sided drive in place of the single-sided drive previously offered. This meant that the storage capacity of each disc was increased from the 320\u00a0KB of the original Plus 3 to 640\u00a0KB (this being supported by ADFS on the Master Compact).\nCumana Floppy Disc System.\nEarly in 1985, Cumana released a cartridge-based interface providing support for double density storage, a real-time clock and calendar for timestamping of files, and a spare ROM socket for user-fitted sideways ROMs. The filing system used was Cumana's own QFS, supporting 89 files per disc, PAGE at &amp;E00, a non-hierarchical catalogue, ten-character filenames, with a format not directly compatible with either of Acorn's DFS or ADFS. The interface itself cost \u00a3149.95 when originally announced, but settled at around \u00a3115.95 including VAT, also being offered in a promotional bundle with a 5\u00bc\" drive for \u00a3224.15 including VAT. Later pricing put the interface at \u00a374.95 including VAT.\nSolidisk EFS.\nIn mid-1985, Solidisk released a cartridge-based interface with support for single and double density storage and providing Acorn DFS and ADFS compatibility, 16\u00a0KB of on-board sideways RAM, and a connector for a Winchester hard drive. The cartridge itself cost \u00a359, with a bundle including a double-sided, double density, 3\u00bd\" drive costing \u00a3200. A 20\u00a0MB hard drive was offered at a price of \u00a3805.\nAdvanced Plus 4.\nAnnounced in early 1986, the Advanced Plus 4 (AP4) from Advanced Computer Products was a cartridge-based interface employing the WD1770 controller and featuring ACP's 1770 DFS product, providing compatibility with Acorn's DFS from the BBC Micro and thereby supporting seven-character filenames and up to 31 files per disc. However, 8\u00a0KB of on-board static RAM was used as workspace for the filing system, keeping PAGE at &amp;E00. An extra ROM socket was provided for a user-fitted sideways ROM, and being a 1770-based interface, it was reported that Acorn's ADFS could be used instead, although since it was not aware of the additional RAM, PAGE would be raised to &amp;1D00 as it would be when using Acorn's Plus 3. The interface was priced at \u00a369.55 plus VAT.\nSlogger Electron Disc System and Pegasus 400.\nSlogger, an established producer of expansions and a reseller of other disc systems, introduced the Electron Disc System in early 1987, priced at \u00a374.95, featuring the Cumana Floppy Disc System interface, which was combined with an Acorn-compatible DFS, SEDFS, having the capability of reading 40-track discs on 80-track drives plus support for Slogger's tape-to-disc conversion products, and reported as offering \"virtual 100 per cent 8271 emulation\" for compatibility with traditional DFS software. The SEDFS ROM was also available separately for existing Cumana interface owners, priced at \u00a324.95.\nThe SEDFS was later bundled with Slogger's own cartridge-based interface and a 40/80-track switchable drive offering up to 400\u00a0KB storage per disc, with the bundle taking the Pegasus 400 name, introduced as part of a sales tour towards the end of 1987. This package of interface and drive cost \u00a3130. The precise DFS variant used by the Pegasus 400 system introduced \"typeahead\" support permitting keystroke buffering during disc activity on systems with the Turbo-Driver or Master RAM Board fitted and enabled.\nSlogger/Elektuur Turbo boards.\nAnnounced in early 1986, the Slogger Turbo-Driver was a professionally fitted upgrade priced at \u00a342. The board itself plugged into the CPU and BASIC ROM sockets on the main circuit board of the Electron, which merely involved removing socketed components on very early Electron models, but required desoldering work and therefore benefited from a fitting service for later units. The performance benefit of fitting the board was to make some programs, particularly those running in the high bandwidth modes (0 to 3), run up to three times faster.\nThe direct origins of the Slogger product appear to be a board designed by Andyk Limited, announced as the Fast Electron Board in late 1985 with a price of \u00a329.99, whereas the Elektuur modification was described in an article in Dutch Electronics magazine Elektuur and intended for users to perform at home.\nThe Slogger and Elektuur Turbo boards were born out of a hack initially devised at Acorn. By shadowing the lowest 8\u00a0KB of RAM with a static RAM chip outside of reach of the ULA, the CPU could always access it at 2\u00a0MHz. The tradeoff was that the screen could not be located in that 8\u00a0KB. In practice the operating system ROMs always put the screen into the top 20\u00a0KB and as a result this probably only broke compatibility with around 2% of software. Speeding up the low portion of memory is particularly useful on 6502 derived machines because that processor has a faster addressing mode for the first 256 bytes and so it is common for software to put any variables involved in time critical sections of program into that region.\nThe cost of the 64 Kbit SRAM chip would have been more than that of doubling the four 64 KBit DRAM chips to give 8-bit RAM access, fixing both the modest memory and poor performance issues of the Electron.\nSlogger Master RAM Board.\nIntroduced at around the start of 1987 and priced at \u00a364.95 fitted or \u00a354.95 as a kit, the Master RAM Board offered the familiar turbo mode from the Slogger Turbo-Driver alongside a shadow mode providing 32\u00a0KB of static shadow RAM in addition to the existing 32\u00a0KB, thus giving 64\u00a0KB in total. So-called \"legally written software\", this being software using the operating system calls and not writing directly to the screen, could function without significant modification, making substantially more memory available for BASIC, View, Viewsheet, language ROMs and many other applications. By providing extra storage this modification also allowed some games and applications intended for the BBC Micro to function on the Electron despite the lack of a native Mode 7.\nApplications could not directly address video memory in shadow mode without modification, so it was incompatible with most games, although there is no inherent reason why a game could not be written to function in shadow mode. A switch mounted through the case switched between normal, turbo and shadow modes.\nTowards the end of the Electron's commercial lifetime, the Turbo-Driver and Master RAM Boards were offered already fitted to new Electrons in an attempt to increase sales. For a time, Jafa Systems manufactured their own equivalent of the Master RAM Board in order to support their own product range.\nMode 7 display expansions.\nOf the capabilities present in the BBC Micro but absent from the Electron, the Teletext-style \"Mode 7\" was particularly conspicuous because of the very low memory usage of that mode (1000 bytes) and the high number of BBC programs that used it to maximise available memory for program code and data while also providing a colourful 40-column textual display with simple low-resolution graphical decorations.\nSuch display capabilities, desirable in their own right on low-memory computers, were also desirable for delivering content through low-bandwidth communications channels such as that from Teletext and Viewdata services. However, access to such services can be considered to be a separate capability, and the BBC Micro needed to be upgraded to complement its display capability with the Teletext or Prestel adapters to receive such over-the-air or online content.\nJafa Systems provided a number of solutions to remedy the absence of a Teletext display capability. Morley Electronics instead chose to offer an expansion combining the display and reception capabilities.\nSir Computers.\nIn late 1984, Sir Computers announced a Mode 7 adapter unit that plugged into the Electron's expansion connector. Unfortunately, Sir Computers ceased trading before the product was brought to market.\nJafa Systems.\nReleased in 1987 at a price of \u00a389, the Mode 7 Mark 1 Display Unit was a separate unit that connected to the Electron's expansion connector and featured a Motorola 6845 display controller and Mullard SAA5050 character generator to replicate the main elements of the BBC Micro's Teletext display solution. This only used 1\u00a0KB of memory for the display, with the expansion listening to display memory write accesses and buffering the data in its own memory. A ROM was included to extend the operating system to allow activation of Mode 7 as a genuine screen mode and to provide extra commands and to support keyboard shortcuts used on the BBC Micro to emit Teletext control sequences. To support the output of both the Mode 7 display and the existing video output, a lead connected the Electron's RGB output to the expansion, with the expansion providing only RF (television) output.\nConscious of the relatively high price of the Mark 1 unit, John Wike of Jafa devised and, at the end of 1988, introduced a software-based Mode 7 Simulator, priced at \u00a325, supplied on a ROM cartridge that rendered the Mode 7 display in a low-resolution, 8-colour graphics mode. Although cheap and effective in enabling use of some software that only used official operating system routines for text output, this solution proved very slow because the Electron had to be placed into the high-bandwidth Mode 2 display to be able to show eight colours at once. In doing so, the CPU spent a lot of time drawing representations of Mode 7 characters and graphics that in a hardware solution would be achieved without any demand on the CPU. It also used up 20\u00a0KB of RAM for the graphics display rather than the 1000 bytes of a hardware Mode 7.\nA conceptually similar predecessor to the software-based simulator was published by Electron User in early 1987, offering a monochrome Mode 4 simulation of the Teletext display, using the lower 25 character lines of the screen to show the Teletext output, reserving several lines at the top of the screen for a representation of Mode 7 used to prepare the eventual visual output. However, the program did not support direct access to Mode 7 memory locations. The author noted that a Mode 2 version would have been possible but would have required a redesigned character set and \"too much memory\".\nA further refinement of the hardware solution was introduced in 1989 with the Mode 7 Mark 2 Display Unit, which retained the SAA5050 character generator but omitted the 6845 display controller, and was fitted internally in the Electron itself instead of being housed in an external unit, although some kind of ROM expansion unit was needed to hold the driver/utilities ROM. It used software to ensure that the SAA5050 was fed with the correct character data. A software ROM would put the machine into a two-colour, 40-column graphics mode (thus providing one byte per character), and as the ULA read display data from memory in the usual fashion, the SAA5050 would listen to the data it was reading and produce a Mode 7 interpretation of the same information, this being achieved by fitting a board on top of the ULA connecting to its pins. When necessary the hardware would switch between the conventional Electron graphics output and the Mode 7 output being produced by the add-on, feeding it to the Electron's built-in video output sockets via the red, green and blue lines on the motherboard.\nThe disadvantage to this system is that while the SAA5050 would expect to be repeatedly fed the same 40 bytes of data for every display scanline of each character row, the ULA would read a different set of 40 bytes for every display scanline in order to produce a full graphics display. A software ROM worked around this by duplicating the data intended for a Mode 7 display in memory. Although this produced a Mode 7 that had less of an impact upon CPU performance than a software solution, gave the same visual quality as the BBC Micro, and supported direct access to Mode 7 screen addresses as well as accesses via operating system routines, it still used 10\u00a0KB of memory for the display and reduced the amount of readily-usable application memory (as indicated by HIMEM) by another 6\u00a0KB.\nHowever, with users increasingly able to rely on expansions such as the Slogger Master RAM board to provide more memory, and with this combination of expansions acknowledged throughout the user manual, the emphasis of the Mode 7 Simulator and Mark 2 Display Unit was arguably to deliver the actual display capabilities for those applications that needed them, instead of using Mode 7 as a way of economising with regard to memory usage, and to do so at a reasonable price. In this latter regard, the Mark 2 model was available as a kit costing \u00a325 or as an assembled product (requiring some soldering) costing \u00a349, with a fitting service available for \u00a310.\nThe Jafa interfaces did not provide a Teletext or Viewdata reception capability, but the Mark 2 was explicitly stated to work in conjunction with the Morley Electronics Teletext Adapter. Meanwhile, the manual for the Mark 2 noted that the product would provide the functionality of a Viewdata terminal if combined with Jafa's RS423 cartridge.\nMorley Electronics.\nMorley Electronics produced a Teletext Adaptor expansion for the BBC Micro and the Electron. Since the BBC Micro has the Mode 7 display capability, the model aimed at the BBC Micro merely provided the content reception capability needed to receive and decode Teletext signals, connecting to the user port and power supply. However, the Electron models provided both display and reception capabilities, doing so by routing either the RGB or UHF signals (depending on the model) through the unit in order to introduce the Mode 7 output produced by the unit, also connecting via a cartridge. The Teletext display capabilities in the Electron models exceeded those of the BBC Micro, with one reviewer noting that the enhanced capabilities permitted \"black text on a coloured background, something I've always wanted to do on my Beeb\". The UHF model of the Electron adapter also supported overlaying of Teletext onto video and framing of video.\nSecond processor expansions.\nAcorn did demonstrate a prototype \"Tube\" interface for the Electron alongside the Plus 3 interface at the Compec exhibition in November 1984, although this was never brought to market directly by Acorn.\nAdvanced Plus 5.\nDespite Acorn's withdrawal from the Electron peripheral market, Advanced Computer Products developed the Advanced Plus 5 (AP5) expansion, featuring Tube, 1\u00a0MHz bus and user port interfaces, which plugged into a Plus 1 cartridge socket. This provided a sufficient level of compatibility that both the 6502 and Z80 second processor products from Acorn were shown to work, providing a Tube implementation that was \"as faithful as you can get\", with it also being noted that the Electron being available for as little as \u00a350 at that point in its commercial lifespan was a \"very cheap way of getting a CP/M machine\". Some differences in the memory map of the Electron meant that BBC Micro software would need modifications to work on the Electron with AP5. The price of the unit in late 1986 was \u00a366.70.\nThe additional facilities of the AP5 alongside the Tube interface permitted various expansions for the BBC Micro to be made available for the Electron. These included the Hybrid Music 5000 and the AMX Mouse.\nPMS Electron Second Processor.\nIn 1986, Permanent Memory Systems announced a second processor product for the Electron, the PMS-E2P, as a self-contained cartridge for use with the Plus 1 containing a second 2\u00a0MHz 6502A processor plus 64\u00a0KB of RAM, priced at \u00a389. This was based on a product originally developed by John Wike of Jafa Systems. It provided an alternative to buying the combination of the P.R.E.S. Advanced Plus 5 and Acorn 6502 2nd Processor.\nSound system expansions.\nDespite the Electron having only limited sound generation capabilities, few expansions were offered to overcome the machine's limitations.\nMillsgrade Voxbox.\nAdvertised in late 1985, the Voxbox by Millsgrade Limited was an expansion connecting to the Electron's expansion connector that provided allophone-based speech synthesis, with driver software provided on cassette. The supplied software supported the definition of spoken words built up from the allophones - these allophones or sounds being stored in the expansion's own ROM - and for catalogues of words to be created and saved. A program was supplied that extended BASIC to allow the use of the synthesiser in user programs. The expansion used the General Instrument SP0256A-AL2 speech synthesis chip.\nSound Expansion cartridge.\nOriginally announced in 1987 by Project Expansions to be priced at around \u00a340, the Sound Expansion cartridge could be fitted in a Plus 1 (or compatible) slot and provide sound output equivalent to that of the BBC Micro, with Superior Software's Speech bundled as a \"limited offer\". A product of the same name and with similar functionality was subsequently sold by Complex Software for around \u00a355, employing its own adjustable speaker in the cartridge unit.\nHybrid Music 5000.\nHybrid Technology's Music 5000 was adapted and released by PRES for use with the 1\u00a0MHz bus of the Advanced Plus 5 expansion, with the Music 5000 itself priced at \u00a3113.85. The only functional differences between the Electron adaptation and the original BBC Micro unit involved the use of Mode 6 for the display and the reduced performance of the Electron imposing some limitations on processing in programs written for the system.\nMerlin M2105.\nAn unusual variant of the Electron was sold by British Telecom Business Systems as the BT Merlin M2105 Communications Terminal, being previewed by British Telecom at the Communications '84 show. This consisted of a rebadged Electron plus a large expansion unit containing 32\u00a0KB of battery-backed RAM (making up 64\u00a0KB of RAM in total), up to 64\u00a0KB of ROM resident in four sockets (making up to 96\u00a0KB of ROM in total), a Centronics printer port, an RS423 serial port, a modem, and the speech generator previously offered for the BBC Micro. The ROM firmware provided dial-up communications facilities, text editing and text messaging functions.\nInitially trialled in a six month pilot at 50 florists, with the intention of rolling out to all 2,500 members of the UK network, these were used by the Interflora florists network in the UK for over a decade. Used mostly for sending messages, despite providing support for other applications, limited availability of the product led Interflora to look for alternatives after five years, although users appeared to be happy with the product as it was.\nThis generic product combination of the Electron and accompanying expansion was apparently known as the Chain during development, itself having a different board layout, with British Telecom having intended the M2105 to be a product supporting access to an online service known as Healthnet. This service aimed to improve and speed up communications within hospitals so that patients could be treated and discharged more quickly, and to facilitate transfers of information to doctors and health workers outside hospitals, with communications taking place over conventional telephone lines. The service was to be introduced in the Hammersmith and Fulham district health authority, with installation starting at Charing Cross Hospital. The Electron was said to be particularly suitable for deployment in this application in that it had a \"large expansion bus\", ostensibly making the machine amenable to the necessary adaptations required for the role, together with its \"price, and the fact it has a real keyboard\". As a Healthnet terminal, the M2105 was intended to support the exchange of forms, letters and memos.\nThe adoption of an Acorn product in this role was perhaps also unusual in that much of BT's Merlin range of this era had been supplied by ICL, notably the M2226 small business computer and M3300 \"communicating word processor\". Nevertheless, the M2105 offered interoperability with other BT products such as the QWERTYphone which was able to receive messages from the M2105 and the Merlin Tonto.\nThe hardware specifications of the M2105, observed from manufactured units, include the 6502 CPU (SY6502 or R6502), ULA and 32\u00a0KB of dynamic RAM fitted in the Electron main unit, plus 32\u00a0KB of static RAM, two 6522 VIA devices for interfacing, AM2910PC modem, SCN2681A UART, and TMS5220 plus TMS6100 for speech synthesis. The speech synthesis was used for the \"voice response\" function which answered incoming voice calls by playing a synthesised message to the caller. The components chosen and the capabilities provided (excluding speech synthesis) are broadly similar to those featured by the Acorn Communicator which was another product of Acorn's custom systems division.\nThe product documentation indicates a specification with 48\u00a0KB of RAM plus 16\u00a0KB of \"non volatile CMOS RAM\" and 96\u00a0KB of ROM, although this particular composition of RAM is apparently contradicted by the RAM devices present on surviving M2105 machines. However, the earlier Chain variant of the board does appear to provide only 16\u00a0KB of static RAM using two HM6264LP-15 chips, also providing an extra 16\u00a0KB of dynamic RAM using eight MK4516-15 chips, suggesting that the product evolved during development.\nTechnical information.\nMuch of the core functionality of the BBC Micro - the video and memory controller, cassette input/output, timers and sound generation - was replicated using a single customized ULA chip designed by Acorn in conjunction with Ferranti, albeit with only one sound channel instead of three (and one noise channel), and without the character-based Teletext Mode 7.\nThe edge connector on the rear of the Electron exposes all address and data bus lines from the CPU, including the upper eight bits of the address bus, in contrast to the limited selection available via the BBC Micro's expansion ports, with the One Megahertz Bus as the principal mechanism for general purpose expansion on the BBC Micro only providing the lower eight bits of the address bus. In addition, various control signals provided by the CPU and ULA are exposed via the Electron's expansion connector.\nFor Issue 1-4 motherboards, the ULA had an issue similar to those experienced by other socketed CPUs. Over time, the thermal heating and cooling could cause the ULA to rise slightly out of its socket just enough to cause the machine to start exhibiting 'hanging' or other startup-failure issues, such as a continuous 'startup beep'. This was despite a metal cover, and locking-bar mechanism designed to prevent this from occurring. Pushing down on the metal cover to reseat the ULA was normally sufficient to rectify these issues. Issue 5 and 6 boards utilized a different epoxy resin covering directly over the ULA, which resolved this issue.\nThe keyboard includes a form of quick keyword input, similar to that used on the Sinclair Spectrum, through use of the 'Func' key in combination with other keys labelled with BASIC keywords. However, unlike the Spectrum, this method of rapid keyword entry is optional, and keywords can be entered manually if preferred.\nThe ULA mediates access to 32\u00a0KB of addressable RAM using 4 64-kilobit RAM chips (4164), sharing the RAM between the CPU and the video signal generation (or screen refresh) performed by the ULA itself. Two accesses have to be made to the RAM to get each byte (albeit with a single RAS), delivering a maximum transfer rate to or from RAM of one byte per 2\u00a0MHz cycle. In generating the video signal, the ULA is able to take advantage of this 2\u00a0MHz bandwidth when producing the picture for the high-bandwidth screen modes. Due to signalling constraints, the CPU can only access RAM at 1\u00a0MHz, even when it is not competing with the video system.\nWhen the ULA is consuming all of the RAM bandwidth during the active portion of a display line, the CPU is unable to access the RAM. (The Electron uses the Synertek variant of the 6502 processor as that allowed the clock to be stopped for this 40 microsecond period.) In other modes the CPU and video accesses are interleaved with each accessor acquiring bytes at 1\u00a0MHz.\nIn contrast, the BBC Micro employs one or two sets of 8 16-kilobit devices, with the RAM running at twice the speed (4\u00a0MHz) of the CPU (2\u00a0MHz), allowing the video system (screen refresh) and CPU memory accesses to be interleaved, with each accessor able to transfer bytes at 2\u00a0MHz. The RAM access limitations imposed by the Electron's ULA therefore reduce the effective CPU speed by as much as a factor of four relative to the BBC Micro in the more demanding display modes, and as much as a factor of two otherwise. Byte transfers from ROM occur at 2\u00a0MHz, however.\nHardware.\nThe hardware specification according to official documentation, combined with more technical documentation and analysis is as follows:\nQuirks.\nLike the BBC Micro, the Electron was constrained by limited memory resources. Of the 32\u00a0KB RAM, 3\u00bd KB was allocated to the OS at startup and at least 10\u00a0KB was taken up by the display buffer in contiguous display modes.\nDue to the timing of interrupts it was possible to disable either the top 100 or bottom 156 lines of the display with palette changes. Many games took advantage of this, gaining storage by leaving non-graphical data in the disabled area.\nOther games would load non-graphical data into the display, leaving it visible as regions of apparently randomly coloured pixels.\nAlthough page flipping was a hardware possibility, the limited memory forced most applications to do all their drawing directly to the visible screen, often resulting in graphical flicker or visible redraw. A notable exception is Players' \"Joe Blade\" series.\nTricks.\nFiretrack: smooth vertical scrolling.\nAlthough programs can alter the position of the screen in memory, the non-linear format of the display means that vertical scrolling can only be done in blocks of 8 pixels without further work.\n\"Firetrack\", released on a compilation by Superior Software, exploits a division in the way the Electron handles its display \u2013 of the seven available graphics modes, two are configured so that the final two of every ten scanlines are blank and are not based on the contents of RAM. If 16 scanlines of continuous graphical data are written to a character-block-aligned portion of the screen then they will appear as a continuous block in most modes but in the two non-continuous modes they will be displayed as two blocks of eight scanlines, separated in the middle by two blank scanlines.\nIn order to keep track of its position within the display, the Electron maintains an internal display address counter. The same counter is used in both the continuous and non-continuous graphics modes and switching modes mid-frame does not cause any adjustment to the counter.\n\"Firetrack\" switches from a non-continuous to a continuous graphics mode part way down the display. By using the palette to mask the top area of the display and taking care about when it changes mode it can shift the continuous graphics at the bottom of the display down in two pixel increments because the internal display counter is not incremented on blank scanlines during non-continuous graphics modes.\nExile: sampled speech.\n\"Exile\" turns the Electron's one channel output into a digital speaker for PCM output.\nThe speaker can be programmatically switched on or off at any time but is permanently attached to a hardware counter so is normally only able to output a square wave. But if set to a frequency outside the human audible range then the ear can't perceive the square wave, only the difference between the speaker being switched on and off. This gives the effect of a simple toggle speaker similar to that seen in the 48\u00a0KB Sinclair ZX Spectrum. \"Exile\" uses this to output 1-bit audio samples.\nFrak! and Zalaga: Polyphonic music.\nAs part of their copy protection, illegal copies of Aardvark Software's \"Frak!\" and \"Zalaga\" would cause a pseudo-polyphonic rendition of Trumpet Hornpipe, the Captain Pugwash theme tune, to play endlessly rather than loading the game properly (Pugwash being a pirate). On the Electron version of Frak!, the tune was the main theme from \"Benny Hill\" (Boots Randolph's \"Yakety Sax\"). The polyphony was achieved via fast note-switching to achieve the necessary chords.\nPopular games.\nAlthough not as well supported by the biggest software publishers as rivals like the Commodore 64 and Sinclair ZX Spectrum, a good range of games were available for the Electron. The traditional BBC Micro publishers such as Acornsoft, Superior Software and Micro Power offered the widest support. Notable popular games particularly associated with the Electron include:\nThere were also many popular games officially converted to the Electron from arcade machines (including \"Crystal Castles\", \"Tempest\", \"Commando\", \"Paperboy\" and \"Yie Ar Kung-Fu\") or other home computer systems (including \"Impossible Mission\", \"Jet Set Willy\", \"The Way of the Exploding Fist\", \"Tetris\", \"The Last Ninja\", \"Barbarian\" and \"SimCity\").\nDespite Acorn themselves effectively shelving the Electron in 1985, games continued to be developed and released by professional software houses until 1991. There were around 1,400 games released for the Acorn Electron, several thousand extra public domain titles were released on disc through Public Domain libraries. Notable enterprises which produced discs of such software are BBC PD, Electron User Group and HeadFirst PD.\nEmulation.\nSeveral emulators of the machine exist: ElectrEm for Windows/Linux/macOS, Elkulator for Windows/Linux/DOS, ElkJS is a browser-based (JavaScript/HTML5) emulator, and the multi-system emulators MESS and Clock Signal feature support for the Electron. Electron software is predominantly archived in the UEF file format.\nThere are also two known FPGA based recreations of the Acorn Electron hardware. ElectronFPGA for the Papilio Duo hardware and the Acorn-Electron core for the FPGA Arcade \"Replay\" board.\nDesign team.\nThe operating system ROM locations 0xFC00-0xFFFF contain the following text, which is different from the 'thanks' list in the original BBC Model B (Code here):\nAdditionally, the last bytes of both the BASIC ROM and 'Plus 3 Interface' ADFS v1.0 ROM include the word \"Roger\", thought to be a reference to Roger Wilson.\nThe case was designed by industrial designer Allen Boothroyd of Cambridge Product Design Ltd."}
{"id": "2079", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2079", "title": "Autumn equinox", "text": ""}
{"id": "2080", "revid": "19234916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2080", "title": "A Fire Upon the Deep", "text": "A Fire Upon the Deep is a 1992 science fiction novel by American writer Vernor Vinge. It is a space opera involving superhuman intelligences, aliens, variable physics, space battles, love, betrayal, genocide, and a communication medium resembling Usenet. \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" won the Hugo Award in 1993, sharing it with \"Doomsday Book\" by Connie Willis.\nBesides the normal print book editions, the novel was also included on a CD-ROM sold by ClariNet Communications along with the other nominees for the 1993 Hugo awards. The CD-ROM edition included numerous annotations by Vinge on his thoughts and intentions about different parts of the book, and was later released as a standalone e-book (no longer available).\nSetting.\nThe novel is set in various locations in the Milky Way. The galaxy is divided into four concentric volumes called the \"Zones of Thought\"; it is not clear to the novel's characters whether this is a natural phenomenon or an artificially-produced one, but it seems to roughly correspond with galactic-scale stellar density and a Beyond region is mentioned in the Sculptor Galaxy as well. The Zones reflect fundamental differences in basic physical laws, and one of the main consequences is their effect on intelligence, both biological and artificial. Artificial intelligence and automation is most directly affected, in that advanced hardware and software from the Beyond or the Transcend will work less and less well as a ship \"descends\" towards the Unthinking Depths. But even biological intelligence is affected to a lesser degree. The four zones are spoken of in terms of \"low\" to \"high\" as follows:\nPlot.\nAn expedition from Straumli Realm, an ambitious young human civilization in the high Beyond, investigates a five-billion-year-old data archive in the low Transcend that offers the possibility of unimaginable riches. The expedition's facility, High Lab, is gradually compromised by a dormant superintelligence within the archive later known as the Blight. However, shortly before the Blight's final \"flowering\", two self-aware entities created similarly to the Blight plot to aid the humans before the Blight can escape.\nRecognizing the danger of what they have awakened, the researchers at High Lab attempt to flee in two ships, one carrying all the adults and the second carrying all the children in \"coldsleep boxes\". Suspicious, the Blight discovers that the first ship contains a data storage device in its cargo manifest; assuming it contains information that could harm it, the Blight destroys the ship. The second ship escapes. The Blight assumes that it is no threat, but later realizes that it is actually carrying away a \"countermeasure\" against it.\nThe ship lands on a distant planet with a medieval-level civilization of dog-like creatures, dubbed \"Tines\", who live in packs as group minds. Upon landing, however, the two surviving adults are ambushed and killed by Tine fanatics known as Flenserists, in whose realm they have landed. The Flenserists capture a young boy named Jefri Olsndot and his wounded sister, Johanna. While Jefri is taken deeper into Flenserist territory, Johanna is rescued by a Tine pilgrim who witnessed the ambush and deliver her to a neighboring kingdom ruled by a Tine named Woodcarver. The Flenserists tell Jefri that Johanna had been killed by Woodcarver and exploit him in order to develop advanced technology (such as cannon and radio communication), while Johanna and the knowledge stored in her \"dataset\" device help Woodcarver rapidly develop in turn.\nA distress signal from the sleeper ship eventually reaches \"Relay\", a major node in the galactic communications network. A benign transcendent entity named \"Old One\" contacts Relay, seeking information about the Blight and the humans who released it, and reconstitutes a human man named Pham Nuwen from an old wreck to act as its agent, using his doubt of his own memory's veracity to bend him to the Old One's will. Ravna Bergsndot, the only human Relay employee, traces the sleeper ship's signal to the Tines world and persuades her employer to investigate what the human ship took from High Lab, contracting the merchant vessel \"Out of Band II\", owned by two sentient plant Skroderiders, Blueshell and Greenstalk, to transport them.\nBefore the mission is launched, the Blight attacks Relay and concurrently kills Old One. As Old One dies, it downloads what information it can into Pham to defeat the Blight, and Pham, Ravna and the Skroderiders barely escape Relay's destruction in the \"Out of Band II\".\nThe Blight expands, taking over races and \"rewriting\" their people to become its agents, murdering several other Powers, and seizing other archives in the Beyond, looking for what was taken. It finally realizes where the danger truly lies and sends a hastily assembled fleet in pursuit of the \"Out of Band II\".\nThe humans arrive at the Tines homeworld and ally with Woodcarver to defeat the Flenserists. Pham initiates Countermeasure, which extends the Slow Zone by thousands of light years, enveloping the Blight at the cost of wrecking thousands of uninvolved civilizations and causing trillions of deaths. The humans are stranded on the Tines world, now in the depths of the \"Slow Zone\". Activating the countermeasure costs Pham his life, but just before Pham dies, he realizes that, although his body is a reconstruction, his memories are real. Vinge expands on Pham's background story in \"A Deepness in the Sky\".\nIntelligent species.\nAprahanti.\nA race of humanoids with colorful butterfly-like wings who attempt to use the chaos wrought by the Blight to reestablish their waning hegemony. Despite their attractive, delicate appearance, the Aprahanti are an extremely fearsome and vicious species.\nBlight.\nAn ancient, malevolent super-intelligent entity which strives to constantly expand and can easily manipulate electronics and even organic beings.\nDirokimes.\nAn older race which originally inhabited Sjandra Kei before the arrival of humanity.\nHumans.\nAll humans in the novel (except Pham) are descended from Nyjoran stock. Their ancestors were \"Tuvo-Norsk\" asteroid miners from Old Earth's solar system, which is noted as being on the other side of the galaxy in the Slow Zone. (\"Nyjora\" sounds similar to New Norwegian \"New Earth\".) One of the major human habitations is Sjandra Kei, three systems comprising roughly 28\u00a0billion individuals. Their main language is Samnorsk, the Norwegian term for a hypothetical unification of the Bokm\u00e5l and Nynorsk forms of the language. (Vinge indicates in the book's dedication that several key ideas in it came to him while at a conference in Troms\u00f8, Norway.)\nSkroders/Riders/Skroderiders.\nA race of plantlike beings with fronds that are used for expression. The riders have no native capacity for short-term memory. Five billion years ago, someone gave the species wheeled mechanical constructs (\"skrodes\") to move around and to provide short-term memory. It is later revealed that their \"benefactor\" was the Blight, and it is able to corrupt and remotely operate the Riders via their skrodes.\nTines.\nA canid race, each \"person\" comprising a group mind of 4\u20138 members, who communicate using very short-range ultrasonic waves from drumlike organs called \"tympana\". Each \"soul\" can survive and evolve by adding members to replace those who die, potentially for hundreds of years, as Woodcarver does.\nKalir.\nA race of insectoid humanoids which constitutes one of the \"majority races\" of the Vrinimi organization.\nRelated works.\nVinge first used the concepts of \"Zones of Thought\" in a 1988 novella \"The Blabber\", which occurs after \"Fire\". Vinge's novel \"A Deepness in the Sky\" (1999) is a prequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" set 20,000 years earlier and featuring Pham Nuwen. Vinge's \"The Children of the Sky\", \"a near-term sequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\", set ten years later, was released in October 2011.\nVinge's former wife, Joan D. Vinge, has also written stories in the Zones of Thought universe, based on his notes. These include \"The Outcasts of Heaven Belt\", \"Legacy\", and (as of 2008) a planned novel featuring Pham Nuwen.\nTitle.\nVinge's original title for the novel was \"Among the Tines\"; its final title was suggested by his editors.\nAwards and nominations.\n\"A Fire Upon the Deep\" shared the 1993 Hugo Award for Best Novel with \"Doomsday Book\". The book was nominated for the 1992 Nebula Award for Best Novel, the 1993 John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel, and the 1993 Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel.\nCritical reactions.\nJo Walton wrote: \"Any one of the ideas in \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" would have kept an ordinary writer going for years. For me it's the book that does everything right, the example of what science fiction does when it works. ... \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" remains a favourite and a delight to re-read, absorbing even when I know exactly what\u2019s coming.\""}
{"id": "2082", "revid": "4185342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2082", "title": "Aeronautics", "text": "Aeronautics is the science or art involved with the study, design, and manufacturing of air flight\u2013capable machines, and the techniques of operating aircraft and rockets within the atmosphere. The British Royal Aeronautical Society identifies the aspects of \"aeronautical Art, Science and Engineering\" and \"The profession of Aeronautics (which expression includes Astronautics).\"\nWhile the term originally referred solely to \"operating\" the aircraft, it has since been expanded to include technology, business, and other aspects related to aircraft. \nThe term \"aviation\" is sometimes used interchangeably with aeronautics, although \"aeronautics\" includes lighter-than-air craft such as airships, and includes ballistic vehicles while \"aviation\" technically does not.\nA significant part of aeronautical science is a branch of dynamics called aerodynamics, which deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion, such as an aircraft.\nHistory.\nEarly ideas.\nAttempts to fly without any real aeronautical understanding have been made from the earliest times, typically by constructing wings and jumping from a tower with crippling or lethal results.\nWiser investigators sought to gain some rational understanding through the study of bird flight. An early example appears in ancient Egyptian texts. Later medieval Islamic Golden Age scientists such as Abbas ibn Firnas also made such studies. The founders of modern aeronautics, Leonardo da Vinci in the Renaissance and Cayley in 1799, both began their investigations with studies of bird flight.\nMan-carrying kites are believed to have been used extensively in ancient China. In 1282 the Italian explorer Marco Polo described the Chinese techniques then current. The Chinese also constructed small hot air balloons, or lanterns, and rotary-wing toys.\nAn early European to provide any scientific discussion of flight was Roger Bacon, who described principles of operation for the lighter-than-air balloon and the flapping-wing ornithopter, which he envisaged would be constructed in the future. The lifting medium for his balloon would be an \"aether\" whose composition he did not know.\nIn the late fifteenth century, Leonardo da Vinci followed up his study of birds with designs for some of the earliest flying machines, including the flapping-wing ornithopter and the rotating-wing helicopter. Although his designs were rational, they were not based on particularly good science. Many of his designs, such as a four-person screw-type helicopter, have severe flaws. He did at least understand that \"An object offers as much resistance to the air as the air does to the object.\" (Newton would not publish the Third law of motion until 1687.) His analysis led to the realisation that manpower alone was not sufficient for sustained flight, and his later designs included a mechanical power source such as a spring. Da Vinci's work was lost after his death and did not reappear until it had been overtaken by the work of George Cayley.\nBalloon flight.\nThe modern era of lighter-than-air flight began early in the 17th century with Galileo's experiments in which he showed that air has weight. Around 1650 Cyrano de Bergerac wrote some fantasy novels in which he described the principle of ascent using a substance (dew) he supposed to be lighter than air, and descending by releasing a controlled amount of the substance. Francesco Lana de Terzi measured the pressure of air at sea level and in 1670 proposed the first scientifically credible lifting medium in the form of hollow metal spheres from which all the air had been pumped out. These would be lighter than the displaced air and able to lift an airship. His proposed methods of controlling height are still in use today; by carrying ballast which may be dropped overboard to gain height, and by venting the lifting containers to lose height. In practice de Terzi's spheres would have collapsed under air pressure, and further developments had to wait for more practicable lifting gases.\nFrom the mid-18th century the Montgolfier brothers in France began experimenting with balloons. Their balloons were made of paper, and early experiments using steam as the lifting gas were short-lived due to its effect on the paper as it condensed. Mistaking smoke for a kind of steam, they began filling their balloons with hot smoky air which they called \"electric smoke\" and, despite not fully understanding the principles at work, made some successful launches and in 1783 were invited to give a demonstration to the French \"Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences\".\nMeanwhile, the discovery of hydrogen led Joseph Black in c. 1780 to propose its use as a lifting gas, though practical demonstration awaited a gas tight balloon material. On hearing of the Montgolfier Brothers' invitation, the French Academy member Jacques Charles offered a similar demonstration of a hydrogen balloon. Charles and two craftsmen, the Robert brothers, developed a gas tight material of rubberised silk for the envelope. The hydrogen gas was to be generated by chemical reaction during the filling process.\nThe Montgolfier designs had several shortcomings, not least the need for dry weather and a tendency for sparks from the fire to set light to the paper balloon. The manned design had a gallery around the base of the balloon rather than the hanging basket of the first, unmanned design, which brought the paper closer to the fire. On their free flight, De Rozier and d'Arlandes took buckets of water and sponges to douse these fires as they arose. On the other hand, the manned design of Charles was essentially modern. As a result of these exploits, the hot-air balloon became known as the \"Montgolfi\u00e8re\" type and the hydrogen balloon the \"Charli\u00e8re\".\nCharles and the Robert brothers' next balloon, \"La Caroline\", was a Charli\u00e8re that followed Jean Baptiste Meusnier's proposals for an elongated dirigible balloon, and was notable for having an outer envelope with the gas contained in a second, inner ballonet. On 19 September 1784, it completed the first flight of over 100\u00a0km, between Paris and Beuvry, despite the man-powered propulsive devices proving useless.\nIn an attempt the next year to provide both endurance and controllability, de Rozier developed a balloon having both hot air and hydrogen gas bags, a design which was soon named after him as the \"Rozi\u00e8re.\" The principle was to use the hydrogen section for constant lift and to navigate vertically by heating and allowing to cool the hot air section, in order to catch the most favourable wind at whatever altitude it was blowing. The balloon envelope was made of goldbeater's skin. The first flight ended in disaster and the approach has seldom been used since.\nCayley and the foundation of modern aeronautics.\nSir George Cayley (1773\u20131857) is widely acknowledged as the founder of modern aeronautics. He was first called the \"father of the aeroplane\" in 1846 and Henson called him the \"father of aerial navigation.\" He was the first true scientific aerial investigator to publish his work, which included for the first time the underlying principles and forces of flight.\nIn 1809 he began the publication of a landmark three-part treatise titled \"On Aerial Navigation\" (1809\u20131810). In it he wrote the first scientific statement of the problem, \"The whole problem is confined within these limits, viz. to make a surface support a given weight by the application of power to the resistance of air.\" He identified the four vector forces that influence an aircraft: \"thrust\", \"lift\", \"drag\" and \"weight\" and distinguished stability and control in his designs.\nHe developed the modern conventional form of the fixed-wing aeroplane having a stabilising tail with both horizontal and vertical surfaces, flying gliders both unmanned and manned.\nHe introduced the use of the whirling arm test rig to investigate the aerodynamics of flight, using it to discover the benefits of the curved or cambered aerofoil over the flat wing he had used for his first glider. He also identified and described the importance of dihedral, diagonal bracing and drag reduction, and contributed to the understanding and design of ornithopters and parachutes.\nAnother significant invention was the tension-spoked wheel, which he devised in order to create a light, strong wheel for aircraft undercarriage.\nThe 19th century.\nDuring the 19th century Cayley's ideas were refined, proved and expanded on. Important investigators included Otto Lilienthal and Horatio Phillips.\nBranches.\nAeronautics may be divided into three main branches comprising Aviation, Aeronautical science and Aeronautical engineering.\nAviation.\nAviation is the art or practice of aeronautics. Historically aviation meant only heavier-than-air flight, but nowadays it includes flying in balloons and airships.\nAeronautical engineering.\nAeronautical engineering covers the design and construction of aircraft, including how they are powered, how they are used and how they are controlled for safe operation.\nA major part of aeronautical engineering is aerodynamics, the science of passing through the air.\nWith the increasing activity in space flight, nowadays aeronautics and astronautics are often combined as aerospace engineering.\nAerodynamics.\nThe science of aerodynamics deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion, such as an aircraft.\nThe study of aerodynamics falls broadly into three areas:\n\"Incompressible flow\" occurs where the air simply moves to avoid objects, typically at subsonic speeds below that of sound (Mach 1).\n\"Compressible flow\" occurs where shock waves appear at points where the air becomes compressed, typically at speeds above Mach 1.\n\"Transonic flow\" occurs in the intermediate speed range around Mach 1, where the airflow over an object may be locally subsonic at one point and locally supersonic at another.\nRocketry.\nA rocket or rocket vehicle is a missile, spacecraft, aircraft or other vehicle which obtains thrust from a rocket engine. In all rockets, the exhaust is formed entirely from propellants carried within the rocket before use. Rocket engines work by action and reaction. Rocket engines push rockets forwards simply by throwing their exhaust backwards extremely fast.\nRockets for military and recreational uses date back to at least 13th-century China. Significant scientific, interplanetary and industrial use did not occur until the 20th century, when rocketry was the enabling technology of the Space Age, including setting foot on the moon.\nRockets are used for fireworks, weaponry, ejection seats, launch vehicles for artificial satellites, human spaceflight and exploration of other planets. While comparatively inefficient for low speed use, they are very lightweight and powerful, capable of generating large accelerations and of attaining extremely high speeds with reasonable efficiency.\nChemical rockets are the most common type of rocket and they typically create their exhaust by the combustion of rocket propellant. Chemical rockets store a large amount of energy in an easily released form, and can be very dangerous. However, careful design, testing, construction and use minimizes risks."}
{"id": "2083", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2083", "title": "Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re", "text": "The Lumi\u00e8re brothers (, ; ), Auguste Marie Louis Nicolas Lumi\u00e8re (19 October 1862 \u2013 10 April 1954) and Louis Jean Lumi\u00e8re (5 October 1864 \u2013 7 June 1948), were manufacturers of photography equipment, best known for their Cin\u00e9matographe motion picture system and the short films they produced between 1895 and 1905. Their screening of a single film on 22 March 1895 for around 200 members of the \"Society for the Development of the National Industry\" in Paris was probably the first presentation of projected film. Their first commercial public screening on 28 December 1895 for around 40 paying visitors and invited relations has traditionally been regarded as the birth of cinema, although it had in fact been preceded by paying shows to thousands of people in the USA and Germany. \nHistory.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers were born in Besan\u00e7on, France, to Charles-Antoine Lumi\u00e8re (1840\u20131911) and Jeanne Jos\u00e9phine Costille Lumi\u00e8re, who were married in 1861 and moved to Besan\u00e7on, setting up a small photographic portrait studio where Auguste and Louis were born. They moved to Lyon in 1870, where son Edouard and three daughters were born. Auguste and Louis both attended La Martiniere, the largest technical school in Lyon. Their father Charles-Antoine set up a small factory producing photographic plates, but even with Louis and a young sister working from 5 a.m. to 11 p.m. it teetered on the verge of bankruptcy, and by 1882 it looked as if they would fail. When Auguste returned from military service, the boys designed the machines necessary to automate their father's plate production and devised a very successful new photo plate, 'etiquettes bleue', and by 1884 the factory employed a dozen workers.\nThey patented several significant processes leading up to their film camera, most notably film perforations (originally implemented by Emile Reynaud) as a means of advancing the film through the camera and projector. The original cin\u00e9matographe had been patented by L\u00e9on Guillaume Bouly on 12 February 1892. The cin\u00e9matographe \u2014 a three-in-one device that could record, develop, and project motion pictures \u2014 was further developed by the Lumi\u00e8res. The brothers patented their own version on 13 February 1895. \nThe date of the recording of their first film is in dispute. In an interview with Georges Sadoul given in 1948, Louis Lumi\u00e8re claimed that he shot the film in August 1894 - before the arrival of the kinetoscope in France. This is questioned by historians, who consider that a functional Lumi\u00e8re camera did not exist before the beginning of 1895. \nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers saw film as a novelty and had withdrawn from the film business by 1905. They went on to develop the first practical photographic colour process, the Lumi\u00e8re Autochrome.\nLouis died on 6 June 1948 and Auguste on 10 April 1954. They are buried in a family tomb in the New Guilloti\u00e8re Cemetery in Lyon.\nFirst film screenings.\nOn 22 March 1895 in Paris, at the \"Society for the Development of the National Industry\", in front of a small audience, one of whom was said to be L\u00e9on Gaumont, then director of the company the Comptoir G\u00e9neral de la Photographie, the Lumi\u00e8res privately screened a single film, \"La Sortie de l'usine Lumi\u00e8re \u00e0 Lyon\". The main focus of the conference by Louis Lumi\u00e8re concerned the recent developments in the photographic industry, mainly the research on polychromy (colour photography). It was much to Lumi\u00e8re's surprise that the moving black-and-white images retained more attention than the coloured stills. The American Woodville Latham screened films to a paying public two months later on 20 May 1895 at 156 Broadway, New York City. \nThe Lumi\u00e8res gave their first paid public screening on 28 December 1895, at Salon Indien du Grand Caf\u00e9 in Paris. This presentation consisted of the following 10 short films, lasting 50 seconds each, (in order of presentation):\nEach film is 17 meters long, which, when hand cranked through a projector, runs approximately 50 seconds.\n \nThe Lumi\u00e8res went on tour with the cin\u00e9matographe in 1896, visiting cities including Brussels, Bombay, London, Montreal, New York City, and Buenos Aires.\nIn 1896, only a few months after the initial screenings in Europe, films by the Lumiere Brothers were shown in Egypt, first in the Tousson stock exchange in Alexandria on 5 November 1896 and then in the Hamam Schneider (Schneider Bath) in Cairo.\n Their actuality films, or \"actualit\u00e9s\", are often cited as the first, primitive documentaries, but they had been preceded in this by the work of Birt Acres and Robert Paul in Britain. They made the first steps towards slapstick films with \"L'Arroseur Arros\u00e9\", and the early versions of \"Le Saut \u00e0 la couverture\" and \"La Voltige\"\nEarly colour photography.\nThe brothers stated that \"the cinema is an invention without any future\" and declined to sell their camera to other filmmakers such as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s. This made many film makers upset. Consequently, their role in the history of film was exceedingly brief. In parallel with their cinema work they experimented with colour photography. They worked on a number of colour photographic processes in the 1890s including the Lippmann process (interference heliochromy) and their own 'bichromated glue' process, a subtractive colour process, examples of which were exhibited at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1900. This last process was commercialised by the Lumieres but commercial success had to wait for their next colour process. In 1903 they patented a colour photographic process, the \"Autochrome Lumi\u00e8re\", which was launched on the market in 1907. Throughout much of the 20th century, the Lumi\u00e8re company was a major producer of photographic products in Europe, but the brand name, Lumi\u00e8re, disappeared from the marketplace following merger with Ilford. \nFilm systems that preceded the Cin\u00e9matographe Lumi\u00e8re.\nEarlier moving images in for instance phantasmagoria shows, the ph\u00e9nakisticope, the zoetrope and \u00c9mile Reynaud's Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Optique consisted of hand-drawn images. A system that could record reality in motion, in a fashion much like it is seen by the eyes, had a greater impact on people. \nEadweard Muybridge's Zoopraxiscope projected moving painted silhouettes based on his chronophotography photography. The only Zoopraxiscope disc with actual photographs was made with an early form of stop motion. Less-known predecessors, such as Jules Duboscq's Bioscope were not projected.\nLouis Le Prince's \"Roundhay Garden Scene\" (1888) is now widely regarded as the first example of filmed moving pictures, but Le Prince disappeared without a trace in 1890 before he managed to present his work or publish about it.\nWilliam Friese-Greene patented a \"machine camera\" in 1889, which embodied many aspects of later film cameras. He displayed the results at photographic societies in 1890 and developed further cameras but did not publicly project the results. \nOttomar Ansch\u00fctz's Electrotachyscope projected very short loops of high photographic quality. \nThomas Edison believed projection of films wasn't as viable a business model as offering the films in the \"peepshow\" kinetoscope device. Watching the images on the screen turned out to be much preferred by audiences. Thomas Edison's Kinetoscope (developed by William Kennedy Dickson), premiered publicly in 1894. \nKazimierz Pr\u00f3szy\u0144ski allegedly built his camera and projecting device, called Pleograph, in 1894. \nLauste and Latham's Eidoloscope was demonstrated for members of the press on 21 April 1895, and opened to the paying public on Broadway on 20 May. They shot films up to twenty minutes long at speeds over thirty frames per second and showed them in many US cities. The Eidoloscope Company was dissolved in 1896 after various internal disputes.\nMax and Emil Skladanowsky, inventors of the Bioscop, had offered projected moving images to a paying public in Berlin from 1 November 1895 until the end of the month. Their machinery was relatively cumbersome and their films much shorter. Their booking in Paris was cancelled after the news of the Lumi\u00e8re screening. Nonetheless, they toured their films to other countries."}
{"id": "2084", "revid": "37250781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2084", "title": "Acts of the Apostles", "text": "The Acts of the Apostles (, \"Pr\u00e1xeis Apost\u00f3l\u014dn\"; ), often referred to simply as Acts, or formally the Book of Acts, is the fifth book of the New Testament; it tells of the founding of the Christian church and the spread of its message to the Roman Empire.\nActs and the Gospel of Luke make up a two-part work, Luke\u2013Acts, by the same anonymous author, usually dated to around 80\u201390 AD, although some experts now suggest 90\u2013110. The first part, the Gospel of Luke, tells how God fulfilled his plan for the world's salvation through the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth, the promised Messiah. Acts continues the story of Christianity in the 1st century, beginning with the ascension of Jesus to Heaven. The early chapters, set in Jerusalem, describe the Day of Pentecost (the coming of the Holy Spirit) and the growth of the church in Jerusalem. Initially, the Jews are receptive to the Christian message, but later they turn against the followers of Jesus. Rejected by the Jews, the message is taken to the Gentiles under the guidance of the Apostle Peter. The later chapters tell of Paul's conversion, his mission in Asia Minor and the Aegean, and finally his imprisonment in Rome, where, as the book ends, he awaits trial.\nLuke\u2013Acts is an attempt to answer a theological problem, namely how the Messiah of the Jews came to have an overwhelmingly non-Jewish church; the answer it provides is that the message of Christ was sent to the Gentiles because the Jews rejected it. Luke\u2013Acts can also be seen as a defense of (or \"apology\" for) the Jesus movement addressed to the Jews: the bulk of the speeches and sermons in Acts are addressed to Jewish audiences, with the Romans serving as external arbiters on disputes concerning Jewish customs and law. On the one hand, Luke portrays the followers of Jesus as a sect of the Jews, and therefore entitled to legal protection as a recognised religion; on the other, Luke seems unclear as to the future God intends for Jews and Christians, celebrating the Jewishness of Jesus and his immediate followers while also stressing how the Jews had rejected God's promised Messiah.\nComposition and setting.\nTitle, unity of Luke \u2013 Acts, authorship and date.\nThe title \"Acts of the Apostles\" was first used by Irenaeus in the late 2nd century. It is not known whether this was an existing title or one invented by Irenaeus; it does seem clear that it was not given by the author, as the word \"pr\u00e1xeis\" (deeds, acts) only appears once in the text (Acts 19:18) and there it does not refer to the apostles but refers to deeds confessed by followers to the apostles.\nThe Gospel of Luke and Acts make up a two-volume work which scholars call Luke\u2013Acts. Together they account for 27.5% of the New Testament, the largest contribution attributed to a single author, providing the framework for both the Church's liturgical calendar and the historical outline into which later generations have fitted their idea of the story of Jesus and the early church. The author is not named in either volume. According to Church tradition dating from the 2nd century, the author was the \"Luke\" named as a companion of the apostle Paul in three of the letters attributed to Paul himself; this view is still sometimes advanced, but \"a critical consensus emphasizes the countless contradictions between the account in Acts and the authentic Pauline letters.\" (An example can be seen by comparing Acts's accounts of Paul's conversion (Acts 9:1\u201331, 22:6\u201321, and 26:9\u201323) with Paul's own statement that he remained unknown to Christians in Judea after that event (Galatians 1:17\u201324).) The author \"is an admirer of Paul, but does not share Paul's own view of himself as an apostle; his own theology is considerably different from Paul's on key points and does not represent Paul's own views accurately.\" He was educated, a man of means, probably urban, and someone who respected manual work, although not a worker himself; this is significant, because more high-brow writers of the time looked down on the artisans and small business people who made up the early church of Paul and were presumably Luke's audience.\nThe earliest possible date for Luke-Acts is around 62 AD, the time of Paul's imprisonment in Rome, but most scholars date the work to 80\u201390 AD on the grounds that it uses Mark as a source, looks back on the destruction of Jerusalem, and does not show any awareness of the letters of Paul (which began circulating late in the first century); if it does show awareness of the Pauline epistles, and also of the work of the Jewish historian Josephus, as some believe, then a date in the early 2nd century is possible.\nManuscripts.\nThere are two major textual variants of Acts, the Western text-type and the Alexandrian. The oldest complete Alexandrian manuscripts date from the 4th century and the oldest Western ones from the 6th, with fragments and citations going back to the 3rd. Western texts of Acts are 6.2\u20138.4% longer than Alexandrian texts, the additions tending to enhance the Jewish rejection of the Messiah and the role of the Holy Spirit, in ways that are stylistically different from the rest of Acts. The majority of scholars prefer the Alexandrian (shorter) text-type over the Western as the more authentic, but this same argument would favour the Western over the Alexandrian for the Gospel of Luke, as in that case the Western version is the shorter; the debate therefore continues.\nGenre, sources and historicity of Acts.\nThe title \"Acts of the Apostles\" (\"Praxeis Apostolon\") would seem to identify it with the genre telling of the deeds and achievements of great men (\"praxeis\"), but it was not the title given by the author. The anonymous author aligned Luke\u2013Acts to the \"narratives\" (\u03b4\u03b9\u03ae\u03b3\u03b7\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, \"di\u0113g\u0113sis\") which many others had written, and described his own work as an \"orderly account\" (\u1f00\u03ba\u03c1\u03b9\u03b2\u1ff6\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03b5\u03be\u1fc6\u03c2). It lacks exact analogies in Hellenistic or Jewish literature.\nThe author may have taken as his model the works of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who wrote a well-known history of Rome, or the Jewish historian Josephus, author of a history of the Jews. Like them, he anchors his history by dating the birth of the founder (Romulus for Dionysius, Moses for Josephus, Jesus for Luke) and like them he tells how the founder is born from God, taught authoritatively, and appeared to witnesses after death before ascending to heaven. By and large the sources for Acts can only be guessed at, but the author would have had access to the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Jewish scriptures), the Gospel of Mark, and either the hypothetical collection of \"sayings of Jesus\" called the Q source or the Gospel of Matthew. He transposed a few incidents from Mark's gospel to the time of the Apostles\u2014for example, the material about \"clean\" and \"unclean\" foods in Mark 7 is used in Acts 10, and Mark's account of the accusation that Jesus has attacked the Temple (Mark 14:58) is used in a story about Stephen (Acts 6:14). There are also points of contacts (meaning suggestive parallels but something less than clear evidence) with 1 Peter, the Letter to the Hebrews, and 1 Clement. Other sources can only be inferred from internal evidence\u2014the traditional explanation of the three \"we\" passages, for example, is that they represent eyewitness accounts. The search for such inferred sources was popular in the 19th century, but by the mid-20th it had largely been abandoned.\nActs was read as a reliable history of the early church well into the post-Reformation era, but by the 17th century biblical scholars began to notice that it was incomplete and tendentious\u2014its picture of a harmonious church is quite at odds with that given by Paul's letters, and it omits important events such as the deaths of both Peter and Paul. The mid-19th-century scholar Ferdinand Baur suggested that the author had re-written history to present a united Peter and Paul and advance a single orthodoxy against the Marcionites (Marcion was a 2nd-century heretic who wished to cut Christianity off entirely from the Jews); Baur continues to have enormous influence, but today there is less interest in determining the historical accuracy of Acts (although this has never died out) than in understanding the author's theological program.\nAudience and authorial intent.\nLuke was written to be read aloud to a group of Jesus-followers gathered in a house to share the Lord's supper. The author assumes an educated Greek-speaking audience, but directs his attention to specifically Christian concerns rather than to the Greco-Roman world at large. He begins his gospel with a preface addressed to Theophilus (; \"cf.\" ), informing him of his intention to provide an \"ordered account\" of events which will lead his reader to \"certainty\". He did not write in order to provide Theophilus with historical justification\u2014\"did it happen?\"\u2014but to encourage faith\u2014\"what happened, and what does it all mean?\"\nActs (or Luke\u2013Acts) is intended as a work of \"edification,\" meaning \"the empirical demonstration that virtue is superior to vice.\" The work also engages with the question of a Christian's proper relationship with the Roman Empire, the civil power of the day: could a Christian obey God and also Caesar? The answer is ambiguous. The Romans never move against Jesus or his followers unless provoked by the Jews, in the trial scenes the Christian missionaries are always cleared of charges of violating Roman laws, and Acts ends with Paul in Rome proclaiming the Christian message under Roman protection; at the same time, Luke makes clear that the Romans, like all earthly rulers, receive their authority from Satan, while Christ is ruler of the kingdom of God.\nStructure and content.\nStructure.\nActs has two key structural principles. The first is the geographic movement from Jerusalem, centre of God's Covenantal people, the Jews, to Rome, centre of the Gentile world. This structure reaches back to the author's preceding work, the Gospel of Luke, and is signaled by parallel scenes such as Paul's utterance in Acts 19:21, which echoes Jesus's words in Luke 9:51: Paul has Rome as his destination, as Jesus had Jerusalem. The second key element is the roles of Peter and Paul, the first representing the Jewish Christian church, the second the mission to the Gentiles.\nContent.\nThe Gospel of Luke began with a prologue addressed to Theophilus; Acts likewise opens with an address to Theophilus and refers to \"my earlier book\", almost certainly the gospel.\nThe apostles and other followers of Jesus meet and elect Matthias to replace Judas as a member of The Twelve. On Pentecost, the Holy Spirit descends and confers God's power on them, and Peter and John preach to many in Jerusalem and perform healings, casting out of evil spirits, and raising of the dead. The first believers share all property in common, eat in each other's homes, and worship together. At first many Jews follow Christ and are baptized, but the followers of Jesus begin to be increasingly persecuted by other Jews. Stephen is accused of blasphemy and stoned. Stephen's death marks a major turning point: the Jews have rejected the message, and henceforth it will be taken to the Gentiles.\nThe death of Stephen initiates persecution, and many followers of Jesus leave Jerusalem. The message is taken to the Samaritans, a people rejected by Jews, and to the Gentiles. Saul of Tarsus, one of the Jews who persecuted the followers of Jesus, is converted by a vision to become a follower of Christ (an event which Luke regards as so important that he relates it three times). Peter, directed by a series of visions, preaches to Cornelius the Centurion, a Gentile God-fearer, who becomes a follower of Christ. The Holy Spirit descends on Cornelius and his guests, thus confirming that the message of eternal life in Christ is for all mankind. The Gentile church is established in Antioch (north-western Syria, the third-largest city of the empire), and here Christ's followers are first called Christians.\nThe mission to the Gentiles is promoted from Antioch and confirmed at a meeting in Jerusalem between Paul and the leadership of the Jerusalem church. Paul spends the next few years traveling through western Asia Minor and the Aegean, preaching, converting, and founding new churches. On a visit to Jerusalem he is set on by a Jewish mob. Saved by the Roman commander, he is accused by the Jews of being a revolutionary, the \"ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes\", and imprisoned. Later, Paul asserts his right as a Roman citizen, to be tried in Rome and is sent by sea to Rome, where he spends another two years under house arrest, proclaiming the Kingdom of God and teaching freely about \"the Lord Jesus Christ\". Acts ends abruptly without recording the outcome of Paul's legal troubles.\nTheology.\nPrior to the 1950s, Luke\u2013Acts was seen as a historical work, written to defend Christianity before the Romans or Paul against his detractors; since then the tendency has been to see the work as primarily theological. Luke's theology is expressed primarily through his overarching plot, the way scenes, themes and characters combine to construct his specific worldview. His \"salvation history\" stretches from the Creation to the present time of his readers, in three ages: first, the time of \"the Law and the Prophets\" (Luke 16:16), the period beginning with Genesis and ending with the appearance of John the Baptist (Luke 1:5\u20133:1); second, the epoch of Jesus, in which the Kingdom of God was preached (Luke 3:2\u201324:51); and finally the period of the Church, which began when the risen Christ was taken into Heaven, and would end with his second coming.\nLuke\u2013Acts is an attempt to answer a theological problem, namely how the Messiah, promised to the Jews, came to have an overwhelmingly non-Jewish church; the answer it provides, and its central theme, is that the message of Christ was sent to the Gentiles because the Jews rejected it. This theme is introduced in Chapter 4 of the Gospel of Luke, when Jesus, rejected in Nazareth, recalls that the prophets were rejected by Israel and accepted by Gentiles; at the end of the gospel he commands his disciples to preach his message to all nations, \"beginning from Jerusalem.\" He repeats the command in Acts, telling them to preach \"in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the Earth.\" They then proceed to do so, in the order outlined: first Jerusalem, then Judea and Samaria, then the entire (Roman) world.\nFor Luke, the Holy Spirit is the driving force behind the spread of the Christian message, and he places more emphasis on it than do any of the other evangelists. The Spirit is \"poured out\" at Pentecost on the first Samaritan and Gentile believers and on disciples who had been baptised only by John the Baptist, each time as a sign of God's approval. The Holy Spirit represents God's power (at his ascension, Jesus tells his followers, \"You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you\"): through it the disciples are given speech to convert thousands in Jerusalem, forming the first church (the term is used for the first time in Acts 5).\nOne issue debated by scholars is Luke's political vision regarding the relationship between the early church and the Roman Empire. On the one hand, Luke generally does not portray this interaction as one of direct conflict. Rather, there are ways in which each may have considered having a relationship with the other rather advantageous to its own cause. For example, early Christians may have appreciated hearing about the protection Paul received from Roman officials against Gentile rioters in Philippi (Acts 16:16\u201340) and Ephesus (Acts 19:23\u201341), and against Jewish rioters on two occasions (Acts 17:1\u201317; Acts 18:12\u201317). Meanwhile, Roman readers may have approved of Paul's censure of the illegal practice of magic (Acts 19:17\u201319) as well as the amicability of his rapport with Roman officials such as Sergius Paulus (Acts 13:6\u201312) and Festus (Acts 26:30\u201332). Furthermore, Acts does not include any account of a struggle between Christians and the Roman government as a result of the latter's imperial cult. Thus Paul is depicted as a moderating presence between the church and the Roman Empire.\nOn the other hand, events such as the imprisonment of Paul at the hands of the empire (Acts 22\u201328) as well as several encounters that reflect negatively on Roman officials (for instance, Felix's desire for a bribe from Paul in Acts 24:26) function as concrete points of conflict between Rome and the early church. Perhaps the most significant point of tension between Roman imperial ideology and Luke's political vision is reflected in Peter's speech to the Roman centurion, Cornelius (Acts 10:36). Peter states that \"this one\" [\u03bf\u1f57\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2], i.e. Jesus, \"is lord [\u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2] of all.\" The title, \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, was often ascribed to the Roman emperor in antiquity, rendering its use by Luke as an appellation for Jesus an unsubtle challenge to the emperor's authority.\nComparison with other writings.\nGospel of Luke.\nAs the second part of the two-part work Luke\u2013Acts, Acts has significant links to the Gospel of Luke. Major turning points in the structure of Acts, for example, find parallels in Luke: the presentation of the child Jesus in the Temple parallels the opening of Acts in the Temple, Jesus's forty days of testing in the wilderness prior to his mission parallel the forty days prior to his Ascension in Acts, the mission of Jesus in Samaria and the Decapolis (the lands of the Samaritans and Gentiles) parallels the missions of the Apostles in Samaria and the Gentile lands, and so on (see Gospel of Luke). These parallels continue through both books. There are also differences between Luke and Acts, amounting at times to outright contradiction. For example, the gospel seems to place the Ascension on Easter Sunday, immediately after the Resurrection, while Acts 1 puts it forty days later. There are similar conflicts over the theology, and while not seriously questioning the single authorship of Luke\u2013Acts, these differences do suggest the need for caution in seeking too much consistency in books written in essence as popular literature.\nPauline epistles.\nActs agrees with Paul's letters on the major outline of Paul's career: he is converted and becomes a Christian missionary and apostle, establishing new churches in Asia Minor and the Aegean and struggling to free Gentile Christians from the Jewish Law. There are also agreements on many incidents, such as Paul's escape from Damascus, where he is lowered down the walls in a basket. But details of these same incidents are frequently contradictory: for example, according to Paul it was a pagan king who was trying to arrest him in Damascus, but according to Luke it was the Jews (2 Corinthians 11:33 and Acts 9:24). Acts speaks of \"Christians\" and \"disciples\", but Paul never uses either term, and it is striking that Acts never brings Paul into conflict with the Jerusalem church and places Paul under the authority of the Jerusalem church and its leaders, especially James and Peter (Acts 15 vs. Galatians 2). Acts omits much from the letters, notably Paul's problems with his congregations (internal difficulties are said to be the fault of the Jews instead), and his apparent final rejection by the church leaders in Jerusalem (Acts has Paul and Barnabas deliver an offering that is accepted, a trip that has no mention in the letters). There are also major differences between Acts and Paul on Christology (the understanding of Christ's nature), eschatology (understanding of the \"last things\"), and apostleship."}
{"id": "2085", "revid": "37261445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2085", "title": "Assyria", "text": "Assyria (), also called the Assyrian Empire, was a Mesopotamian kingdom and empire of the ancient Near East in the area today known as the Levant that existed as a state from perhaps as early as the 25th century BCE (in the form of the Assur city-state) until its collapse between 612 BCE and 609 BCE \u2014 spanning the periods of the Early to Middle Bronze Age through to the late Iron Age. This vast span of time is divided into the Early Period (2500\u20132025 BCE), Old Assyrian Empire (2025\u20131378 BCE), Middle Assyrian Empire (1392\u2013934 BCE) and Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013609 BCE).\nFrom the end of the seventh century BCE (when the Neo-Assyrian state fell) to the mid-seventh century CE, it survived as a geopolitical entity, for the most part ruled by foreign powers such as the Parthian and early Sasanian Empires between the mid-second century BCE and late third century CE during which a number of independent Assyrian states such as Adiabene, Osroene, Beth Nuhadra and Beth Garmai arose. The final part of this period saw Mesopotamia become a major centre of Syriac Christianity and the birthplace of the Church of the East and Syriac Orthodox Church. Greeks, Romans, and subsequently Arabs and Ottomans also took over control of the Assyrian lands.\nA Semitic-speaking realm, Assyria was centred on the Tigris in Upper Mesopotamia, in modern terms, northern Iraq, northeast Syria, and southeast Turkey. The Assyrians came to rule powerful empires in several periods. Making up a substantial part of the greater Mesopotamian \"cradle of civilization\", which included Sumer, the Akkadian Empire, and Babylonia, Assyria reached the height of technological, scientific and cultural achievements for its time. Starting around 900 BCE, the Assyrians began campaigning to expand their empire and to dominate other people. They conquered, exacted tribute, and built new fortified towns, palaces and temples. By constant warfare the Assyrians created an empire that stretched from eastern Libya and Cyprus in the East Mediterranean to Iran, and from present-day Armenia and Azerbaijan in the Transcaucasia to the Arabian Peninsula and Egypt in the south.\nThe name \"Assyria\" originates with the Assyrian state's original capital, the ancient city of A\u0161\u0161ur, which dates to c. 2600 BCE \u2014 originally one of a number of Akkadian-speaking city-states in Mesopotamia. In the 25th and 24th centuries BCE, Assyrian kings were pastoral leaders. From the late 24th century BCE, the Assyrians became subject to Sargon of Akkad, who united all the Akkadian- and Sumerian-speaking peoples of Mesopotamia under the Akkadian Empire, which lasted from 2334 BCE to 2154 BCE. After the Assyrian Empire fell, the greater remaining part of Assyria formed a geopolitical region and province of other empires, although between the mid-2nd century BCE and late 3rd century CE a patchwork of small independent Assyrian kingdoms arose, including Assur, Adiabene, Osroene, Beth Nuhadra, Beth Garmai, and Hatra.\nThe region of Assyria fell under the successive control of the Median Empire of 620 to 549 BCE, the Achaemenid Empire of 550 to 330 BCE, the Macedonian Empire (late 4th century BCE), the Seleucid Empire of 312 to 63 BCE, the Parthian Empire of 247 BCE to 224 CE, the Roman Empire (from 116 to 118 CE) and the Sasanian Empire of 224 to 651 CE. The Arab Islamic conquest of the area in the mid-seventh century finally dissolved Assyria (Assuristan, a region which by then also included the former Babylonia) as a single entity, after which the remnants of the Assyrian people (by now almost all Christians) gradually became an ethnic, linguistic, cultural and religious minority in the Assyrian homeland, surviving there to this day as an indigenous people of the region.\nNomenclature.\nAssyria was also sometimes known as \"Subartu\" and \"Azuhinum\" prior to the rise of the city-state of Ashur, after which it became A\u0161\u0161\u016br\u0101yu. After the fall of the Assyrian Empire, from 605 BCE through to the late seventh century CE, people referred to the area variously as Achaemenid Assyria, Atouria, Ator, Athor, and sometimes as \"Syria\" - which etymologically derives from \"Assyria\". Strabo (died 24 CE) references \"Syria\" (Greek), \"Assyria\" (Latin) and As\u014drist\u0101n (Middle Persian). \"Assyria\" can also refer to the geographic region or heartland where Assyria, its empires and the Assyrian people were (and still are) centered.\nThe indigenous modern Eastern Aramaic-speaking Assyrian Christian ethnic minority in northern Iraq, northeast Syria, southeast Turkey and northwest Iran are the descendants of the ancient Assyrians (see Assyrian continuity). As Babylonia is called after the city of Babylon, Assyria means \"land of Asshur\".\nEtymologically, \"Assyria\" is connected to the name of \"Syria\",\nwith both names ultimately deriving from the Akkadian . Theodor N\u00f6ldeke in 1881 was the first to give philological support to the assumption that \"Syria\" and \"Assyria\" have the same etymology, a suggestion going back to John Selden (1617). The 21st-century discovery of the \u00c7inek\u00f6y inscription also confirmed that \"Syria\", being a Cilician and Greek corruption of the name \"Assyria\", ultimately derives from the Assyrian term \"A\u0161\u0161\u016br\u0101yu\".\nPre-history.\nIn prehistoric times, the region that was to become known as Assyria (and Subartu) was home to a Neanderthal culture such as has been found at the Shanidar Cave. The earliest Neolithic sites in what will be Assyria were the Jarmo culture c. 7100 BCE, the Halaf culture c. 6100 BCE, and the Hassuna culture c. 6000 BCE.\nThe Akkadian-speaking people (the earliest historically-attested Semitic-speaking people) who would eventually found Assyria appear to have entered Mesopotamia at some point during the latter 4th millennium BCE (c. 3500\u20133000 BCE), eventually intermingling with the earlier Sumerian-speaking population, who came from northern Mesopotamia, with Akkadian names appearing in written record from as early as the 29th century BCE.\nDuring the 3rd millennium BCE, a very intimate cultural symbiosis developed between the Sumerians and the Akkadians throughout Mesopotamia, which included widespread bilingualism. The influence of Sumerian (a language isolate) on Akkadian, and vice versa, is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence. This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium BCE as a \"sprachbund\". Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of Mesopotamia somewhere after the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BCE (the exact dating being a matter of debate), although Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century CE, as did use of the Akkadian cuneiform.\nThe cities of Assur, Nineveh, Gasur and Arbela together with a number of other towns and cities, existed since at least before the middle of the 3rd millennium BCE (c. 2600 BCE), although they appear to have been Sumerian-ruled administrative centres at this time, rather than independent states.\nGreco-Roman classical writers such as Julius Africanus, Marcus Velleius Paterculus and Diodorus Siculus dated the founding of Assyria to various dates between 2284 BCE and 2057 BCE, listing the earliest king as Belus or Ninus.\nAccording to the Biblical generations of Noah, in Genesis chapter 10, the city of A\u0161\u0161ur was allegedly founded by Ashur the son of Shem, who was deified by later generations as the city's patron god. However, the much older attested Assyrian tradition itself lists the first king of Assyria as the 25th century BCE Tudiya, and an early urbanised Assyrian king named Ushpia (c. 2050 BCE) as having dedicated the first temple to the god Ashur in the city in the mid-21st century BCE. It is highly likely that the city was named in honour of its patron Assyrian god with the same name.\nHistory.\nEarly Period, 2600\u20132025 BCE.\nThe city of A\u0161\u0161ur, together with a number of other Assyrian cities, seem to have been established by 2600 BCE. However it is likely that they were initially Sumerian-dominated administrative centres. In the late 26th century BCE, Eannatum of Lagash, then the dominant Sumerian ruler in Mesopotamia, mentions \"smiting Subartu\" (Subartu being the Sumerian name for Assyria). Similarly, in c. the early 25th century BCE, Lugal-Anne-Mundu the king of the Sumerian state of Adab lists Subartu as paying tribute to him.\nOf the early history of the kingdom of Assyria, little is known. In the Assyrian King List, the earliest king recorded was Tudiya. According to Georges Roux he would have lived in the mid 25th century BCE, i.e. E. In archaeological reports from Ebla, it appeared that Tudiya's activities were confirmed with the discovery of a tablet where he concluded a treaty for the operation of a \"karum\" (trading colony) in Eblaite territory, with \"king\" Ibrium of Ebla (who is now known to have been the vizier of Ebla for king Ishar-Damu).\nTudiya was succeeded on the list by Adamu, the first known reference to the Semitic name \"Adam\" and then a further thirteen rulers (Yangi, Suhlamu, Harharu, Mandaru, Imsu, Harsu, Didanu, Hanu, Zuabu, Nuabu, Abazu, Belus and Azarah). Nothing concrete is yet known about these names, although it has been noted that a much later Babylonian tablet listing the ancestral lineage of Hammurabi, the Amorite king of Babylon, seems to have copied the same names from Tudiya through Nuabu, though in a heavily corrupted form.\nThe earliest kings, such as Tudiya, who are recorded as \"kings who lived in tents\", were independent semi-nomadic pastoralist rulers. These kings at some point became fully urbanised and founded the \"city state\" of A\u0161\u0161ur in the mid 21st-century BCE.\nAkkadian Empire and Neo-Sumerian Empires, 2334\u20132050 BCE.\nDuring the Akkadian Empire (2334\u20132154 BCE), the Assyrians, like all the Akkadian-speaking Mesopotamians (and also the Sumerians), became subject to the dynasty of the city-state of Akkad, centered in central Mesopotamia. The Akkadian Empire founded by Sargon the Great claimed to encompass the surrounding \"four-quarters\". The region of Assyria, north of the seat of the empire in central Mesopotamia, had also been known as Subartu by the Sumerians, and the name Azuhinum in Akkadian records also seems to refer to Assyria proper. The Sumerians were eventually absorbed into the Akkadian (Assyro-Babylonian) population.\nAssyrian rulers were subject to Sargon and his successors, and the city of Ashur became a regional administrative center of the Empire, implicated by the Nuzi tablets. During this period, the Akkadian-speaking Semites of Mesopotamia came to rule an empire encompassing not only Mesopotamia itself but large swathes of Asia Minor, ancient Iran, Elam, the Arabian Peninsula, Canaan and Syria.\nAssyria seems to have already been firmly involved in trade in Asia Minor by this time; the earliest known reference to Anatolian \"karu\" in Hatti was found on later cuneiform tablets describing the early period of the Akkadian Empire (c. 2350 BCE). On those tablets, Assyrian traders in Burushanda implored the help of their ruler, Sargon the Great, and this appellation continued to exist throughout the Assyrian Empire for about 1,700 years. The name \"Hatti\" itself even appears in later accounts of his grandson, Naram-Sin, campaigning in Anatolia.\nAssyrian and Akkadian traders spread the use of writing in the form of the Mesopotamian cuneiform script to Asia Minor and the Levant (modern Syria and Lebanon). However, towards the end of the reign of Sargon the Great, the Assyrian faction rebelled against him; \"the tribes of Assyria of the upper country\u2014in their turn attacked, but they submitted to his arms, and Sargon settled their habitations, and he smote them grievously\".\nThe Akkadian Empire was destroyed by economic decline and internal civil war, followed by attacks from barbarian Gutian people in 2154 BCE. The rulers of Assyria during the period between c. 2154 BCE and 2112 BCE once again became fully independent, as the Gutians are only known to have administered southern Mesopotamia. However, the king list is the only information from Assyria for this period.\nMost of Assyria briefly became part of the Neo-Sumerian Empire (or 3rd dynasty of Ur) founded in c. 2112 BCE. Sumerian domination extended as far as the city of Ashur but appears not to have reached Nineveh and the far north of Assyria. One local ruler (\"shakkanakku\") named Z\u0101riqum (who does not appear on any Assyrian king list) is listed as paying tribute to Amar-Sin of Ur. Ashur's rulers appear to have remained largely under Sumerian domination until the mid-21st century BC (c. 2050 BCE); the king list names Assyrian rulers for this period and several are known from other references to have also borne the title of \"shakkanakka\" or vassal governors for the neo-Sumerians.\nOld Assyrian Empire, 2025\u20131522 BCE.\nThe Old Assyrian Empire is one of four periods into which the history of Assyria is divided, the other three being: the Early Assyrian Period, the Middle Assyrian Period and the New Assyrian Period.\nUshpia (2080 BCE) appears to have been the first fully urbanised independent king of Assyria, and is traditionally held to have dedicated temples to the god Ashur in the city of the same name. He was followed by Sulili, Kikkiya and Akiya, of whom little is known aside from Kikkiya conducting various building works in Assur. A number of scholars also place Zariqum, a contemporary of Amar-Sin (2046\u20132038 BCE) of Ur as an Assyrian ruler, though he does not appear on the Assyrian king list, but is claimed by Amar-Sin to be the 'governor' of Assur.\nIn approximately 2025 BC, a king named Puzur-Ashur I came to the throne of Assyria, and there is some debate among scholars as to whether he was the founder of a new dynasty or a descendant of Ushpia. He is mentioned as having conducted building projects in Assur, and he and his successors took the title \"I\u0161\u0161i\u2019ak A\u0161\u0161ur\" (meaning viceroy of Ashur). From this time Assyria began to expand trading colonies called Karum into Hurrian and Hattian lands in Anatolia. He was succeeded by Shalim-ahum (c. 2000 BC), a king who is attested in a contemporary record of the time, leaving inscriptions in an archaic form of Akkadian. In addition to the expansions into Anatolia Ilu-shuma (C. 1995\u20131974 BC) (Middle chronology) appears to have conducted military campaigns in southern Mesopotamia, either in conquest of the city-states of the south, or in order to protect his fellow Akkadian-speakers from incursions by Elamites from the east and/or Amorites from the west \u2013 He is known to have built the old temple of Ishtar in Assur. He was succeeded by another powerful king, the long reigning Erishum I (1973\u20131934 BCE) who is notable for one of the earliest examples of written legal codes and introducing the limmu (eponym) lists that were to continue throughout Assyrian history. He is known to have greatly expanded Assyrian trading colonies in Anatolia, with twenty one being listed during his reign. These Karum traded in: tin, textiles, lapis lazuli, iron, antimony, copper, bronze, wool, and grain, in exchange for gold and silver. Erishum also kept numerous written records, and conducted major building works in Assyria, including the building of temples to Ashur, Ishtar and Adad.\nThese policies were continued by Ikunum (1933\u20131921 BCE), Sargon I (1920\u20131881 BCE), likely named after his predecessor Sargon of Akkad, (during Sargon I's later reign Babylon was founded as a small city-state), and Puzur-Ashur II (1880\u20131873 BCE). Naram-Sin (1872\u20131828 BCE) repelled an attempted usurpation of his throne by the future king Shamshi-Adad I late in his reign, however his successor Erishum II was deposed by Shamshi-Adad I in 1809 BCE, bringing an end to the dynasty founded either by Ushpia or Puzur-Ashur I.\nShamshi-Adad I (1808\u20131776 BCE) was already the ruler of Terqa, and although he claimed Assyrian ancestry as a descendant of Ushpia, he is regarded as a foreign Amorite usurper by later Assyrian tradition. However, he greatly expanded the Old Assyrian Empire, incorporating the northern half of Mesopotamia, swathes of eastern and southern Anatolia and much of the Levant into his large empire, and campaigned as far west as the eastern shores of the Mediterranean. His son and successor Ishme-Dagan I (1775\u20131764 BCE) gradually lost territory in southern Mesopotamia and the Levant to the state of Mari and Eshnunna respectively, and had mixed relations with Hammurabi, the king who had turned the hitherto young and insignificant city-state of Babylon into a major power and empire.\nAfter Shamsi-Adad I's death Assyria was reduced to vassalage by Hammurabi; Mut-Ashkur (1763\u20131753 BCE), Rimush and Asinum were subservient to Hammurabi, who also took ownership of Assyrian trading colonies, thus bringing an end to the Old Assyrian Empire.\nHowever, the Babylonian empire proved to be short lived, rapidly collapsing after the death of Hammurabi c. 1750 BCE. An Assyrian governor named Puzur-Sin deposed Asinum who was regarded as a foreign Amorite and a puppet of the new and ineffectual Babylonian king Sumuabum, and the Babylonian and Amorite presence was expunged from Assyria by Puzur-Sin and his successor Ashur-dugul, who reigned for six years. A king called Adasi (1720\u20131701 BCE) finally restored strength and stability to Assyria, ending the civil unrest that had followed the ejection of the Babylonians and Amorites, founding the new \"Adaside Dynasty\". Bel-bani (1700\u20131691 BCE) succeeded Adasi and further strengthened Assyria against potential threats, and remained a revered figure even in the time of Ashurbanipal over a thousand years later.\nThere followed a long, prosperous and peaceful period in Assyrian history, rulers such as Libaya (1691\u20131674 BCE), Sharma-Adad I, Iptar-Sin, Bazaya, Lullaya, Shu-Ninua and Sharma-Adad II appear to have had peaceful and largely uneventful reigns\nAssyria remained strong and secure; when Babylon was sacked and its Amorite rulers deposed by the Hittite Empire and subsequently fell to the Kassites in 1595 BCE, both powers were unable to make any inroads into Assyria, and there seems to have been no trouble between the first Kassite ruler of Babylon, Agum II, and Erishum III (1598\u20131586 BCE) of Assyria, and a mutually beneficial treaty was signed between the two rulers. Shamshi-Adad II (1585\u20131580 BCE), Ishme-Dagan II (1579\u20131562 BCE) and Shamshi-Adad III (1562\u20131548 BCE) seem also to have had peaceful tenures, although few records have thus far been discovered about their reigns. Similarly, Ashur-nirari I (1547\u20131522 BCE) seems not to have been troubled by the newly founded Mitanni Empire in Asia Minor, the Hittite empire, or Babylon during his 25-year reign. He and his successor Puzur-Ashur III (1521\u20131497 BCE) are known to have been active kings, improving the infrastructure, dedicating temples and conducting various building projects throughout the kingdom. Enlil-nasir I, Nur-ili, Ashur-shaduni and Ashur-rabi I (who deposed his predecessor) followed.\nDecline, 1450\u20131393 BCE.\nThe emergence of the Hurri-Mitanni Empire and allied Hittite empire in the 16th century BCE did eventually lead to a short period of sporadic Mitannian-Hurrian domination in the latter half of the 15th century BCE. The Mitannians (an Indo-Aryan speaking people) are thought to have entered Anatolia from the north, conquered and formed the ruling class over the indigenous Hurrians of eastern Anatolia. The indigenous Hurrians spoke the Hurrian language, a language in the now wholly extinct Hurro-Urartian language family.\nAshur-nadin-ahhe I (1450\u20131431 BCE) was courted by the Egyptians, who were rivals of Mitanni, and attempting to gain a foothold in the Near East. Amenhotep II sent the Assyrian king a tribute of gold to seal an alliance against the Hurri-Mitannian empire. It is likely that this alliance prompted Saushtatar, the emperor of Mitanni, to invade Assyria, and sack the city of Ashur, after which Assyria became a sometime vassal state. Ashur-nadin-ahhe I was deposed, either by Shaustatar or by his own brother Enlil-nasir II (1430\u20131425 BCE) in 1430 BCE, who then paid tribute to the Mitanni. Ashur-nirari II (1424\u20131418 BCE) had an uneventful reign and appears to have also paid tribute to the Mitanni Empire.\nThe Assyrian monarchy survived, and the Mitannian influence appears to have been short-lived.\nThey appear not to have been always willing or indeed able to interfere in Assyrian internal and international affairs.\nAshur-bel-nisheshu (1417\u20131409 BCE) seems to have been independent of Mitannian influence, as evidenced by his signing a mutually beneficial treaty with Karaindash, the Kassite king of Babylonia in the late 15th century. He also undertook extensive rebuilding work in Ashur itself, and Assyria appears to have redeveloped its former highly sophisticated financial and economic systems during his reign. Ashur-rim-nisheshu (1408\u20131401 BCE) also undertook building work, strengthening the city walls of the capital. Ashur-nadin-ahhe II (1400\u20131393 BCE) also received a tribute of gold and diplomatic overtures from Egypt, probably in an attempt to gain Assyrian military support against Egypt's Mitannian and Hittite rivals in the region. However, the Assyrian king appears not to have been in a strong enough position to challenge Mitanni or the Hittites.\nEriba-Adad I (1392\u20131366 BCE), a son of Ashur-bel-nisheshu, ascended the throne in 1392 BCE and finally broke the ties to the Mitanni Empire, and instead turned the tables, and began to exert Assyrian influence on the Mitanni.\nMiddle Assyrian Empire 1392\u20131056 BCE.\nThe Middle period (1365 BCE\u20131056 BCE) saw reigns of great kings, such as Ashur-uballit I, Arik-den-ili, Tukulti-Ninurta I and Tiglath-Pileser I. During this period, Assyria overthrew the empire of the Hurri-Mitanni and eclipsed the Hittite Empire, Egyptian Empire, Babylonia, Elam, Canaan and Phrygia in the Near East.\nBy the reign of Eriba-Adad I (1392\u20131366 BCE) Mitanni influence over Assyria was on the wane. Eriba-Adad I became involved in a dynastic battle between Tushratta and his brother Artatama II and after this his son Shuttarna III, who called himself king of the Hurri while seeking support from the Assyrians.\nAshur-uballit I (1365\u20131330 BCE) went further, defeating Shuttarna III and bringing an end to the Mitanni empire, the Assyrian king then annexing its territories in Anatolia and the Levant, turning Assyria once more into a major empire. The ambitious Assyrian king went further still, attacking and conquering Babylonia, and imposing a puppet ruler loyal to himself upon its throne. Assyria then annexed hitherto Babylonian territory in central Mesopotamia. Enlil-nirari (1330\u20131319 BCE) also defeated Babylonia's Kassite kings.\nThe Hittites, having failed to save Mitanni, allied with Babylon in an unsuccessful economic war against Assyria for many years. Assyria was now a large and powerful empire, and a major threat to Egyptian and Hittite interests in the region, and was perhaps the reason that these two powers, fearful of Assyrian might, made peace with one another.\nArik-den-ili (1318\u20131307 BCE) campaigned further still, entering northern Ancient Iran and subjugating the 'pre-Iranic' Gutians, Turukku and Nigimhi, before campaigning deeper into the Levant, subjugating the Suteans, Ahlamu and Yauru. His successor Adad-nirari I (1307\u20131275 BCE) was another highly successful military leader, he defeated and conquered the Hurro-Mitanni kingdom of Hanigalbat and the rest of the independent Hurro-Mitanni kingdoms of Anatolia, despite the Hittites attempting to support their allies, and inflicted a crushing defeat on Babylonia at the Battle of K\u0101r I\u0161tar, annexing large swathes of Babylonian territory. Hittite kings during his reign assumed a placatory attitude towards the Assyrian king.\nShalmaneser I (1274\u20131245 BCE) conquered eight kingdoms in central Anatolia in his first year, and in the next he defeated a coalition of Hittites, Hurrians, Mitanni and Ahlamu, annexing yet more territory in Anatolia and the Levant, and retaining Assyrian dominion over Babylonia and the northwest of ancient Iran. Shalmaneser also conducted extensive building work in Assur, Nineveh and Arbela, and founded the city of Kalhu (the Biblical Calah/Nimrud).\nShalmaneser's son and successor, Tukulti-Ninurta I (1244\u20131207 BCE), won a major victory against the Hittites and their king Tudhaliya IV at the Battle of Nihriya and took thousands of prisoners. Rather than being content to simply subjugate Babylonian kings as his predecessors had, he conquered Babylonia directly, taking Kashtiliash IV as a captive and ruled there himself as king for seven years, taking on the old title \"King of Sumer and Akkad\" first used by Sargon of Akkad. Tukulti-Ninurta I thus became the first Akkadian speaking native Mesopotamian to rule the state of Babylonia, its founders having been foreign Amorites, succeeded by equally foreign Kassites. Tukulti-Ninurta petitioned the god Shamash before beginning his counter offensive. Kashtiliash IV was captured, single-handed by Tukulti-Ninurta according to \"his\" account, who \"trod with my feet upon his lordly neck as though it were a footstool\" and deported him ignominiously in chains to Assyria. The victorious Assyrians demolished the walls of Babylon, massacred many of the inhabitants, pillaged and plundered his way across the city to the Esagila temple, where he made off with the statue of Marduk.\nMiddle Assyrian texts recovered at ancient D\u016br-Katlimmu, include a letter from Tukulti-Ninurta to his \"sukkal rabi'u\", or grand vizier, Ashur-iddin advising him of the approach of his general Shulman-mushabshu escorting the captive Kashtiliash, his wife, and his retinue which incorporated a large number of women, on his way to exile after his defeat. In the process he defeated the Elamites, who had themselves coveted Babylon. He also wrote an epic poem documenting his victorious wars against Babylon and Elam. He progressed further south into what is today Arabia, conquering the \"pre-Arab\" South Semitic kingdoms of Dilmun and Meluhha. After a Babylonian revolt, he raided and plundered the temples in Babylon, regarded as an act of sacrilege. As relations with the priesthood in Ashur began deteriorating, Tukulti-Ninurta built a new capital city; Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta.\nA series of short reigning kings followed, these being Ashur-nadin-apli (1207\u20131204 BCE), Ashur-nirari III (1203\u20131198 BCE), Enlil-kudurri-usur (1197\u20131193 BCE) and Ninurta-apal-Ekur (1192\u20131190 BCE), and there were no significant expansions of the empire during their short tenures, and Babylonia seems to have freed itself from the Assyrian yoke for a time.\nAshur-dan I (1190\u20131144 BCE) conquered huge swathes of Babylonia, subjugating its king, and taking much booty home to Assyria. However, this led to conflict with the powerful Elamites of the southwest of ancient Iran, who were themselves preying upon Babylonia. The Elamites managed to actually take the Assyrian city of Arrapha (modern Kirkuk), before being finally defeated and driven from the Assyrian empire. Civil unrest ensued in Assyria after Ashur-Dan I's death, and Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur and Mutakkil-Nusku followed in quick succession during 1133 BC.\nAshur-resh-ishi I (1133\u20131116 BCE) restored the tradition of powerful conquering kings. He campaigned to the east, taking the Zagros region of ancient Iran, and subjugated the Amorites, Ahlamu and the newly appeared Arameans in the Levant. He also defeated the ambitious Nebuchadnezzar I of Babylonia, annexing Babylonian territory in the process.\nTiglath-pileser I (1115\u20131074 BCE) proved to be a long reigning and all conquering ruler, who firmly underlined Assyria's position as the world's leading military power.\nHis first campaign was against the Phrygians and Kaskians in 1112 BCE, who had attempted to occupy certain Assyrian ruled Hittite districts in the Upper Euphrates; then he overran Commagene and eastern Cappadocia, and drove the Hittites from the Assyrian province of Subartu, northeast of Malatia.\nIn a subsequent campaign, the Assyrian forces penetrated into the mountains south of Lake Van and then turned westward to receive the submission of Malatia and Urartu. In his fifth year, Tiglath-Pileser attacked Cilicia and Comana in Cappadocia, and placed a record of his victories engraved on copper plates in a fortress he built to secure his Cilician conquests.\nThe Aramaeans of northern and central Syria were the next targets of the Assyrian king, who made his way as far as the sources of the Tigris. The control of the high road to the Mediterranean was secured by the possession of the Hittite town of Pitru at the junction between the Euphrates and Sajur; thence he proceeded to conquer the Canaanite/Phoenician city-states of Byblos, Tyre, Sidon, Simyra, Berytus (Beirut), Aradus and finally Arvad where he embarked onto a ship to sail the Mediterranean, on which he killed a \"nahiru\" or \"sea-horse\" (which A. Leo Oppenheim translates as a narwhal) in the sea. He was passionately fond of hunting and was also a great builder. The general view is that the restoration of the temple of the gods Ashur and Hadad at the Assyrian capital of Assur (Ashur) was one of his initiatives. He was succeeded by Asharid-apal-Ekur who reigned for only a short time.\nAshur-bel-kala (1073\u20131056 BCE) kept the vast empire together, campaigning successfully against Urartu and Phrygia to the north and the Arameans to the west. He maintained friendly relations with Marduk-shapik-zeri of Babylon, however upon the death of that king, he invaded Babylonia and deposed the new ruler Kada\u0161man-Buria\u0161, appointing Adad-apla-iddina as his vassal in Babylon. He built some of the earliest examples of both Zoological Gardens and Botanical Gardens in Ashur, collecting all manner of animals and plants from his empire, and receiving a collection of exotic animals as tributes from Egypt.\nLate in his reign, the Middle Assyrian Empire erupted into civil war, when a rebellion was orchestrated by Tukulti-Mer, a pretender to the throne of Assyria. Ashur-bel-kala eventually crushed Tukulti-Mer and his allies, however the civil war in Assyria had allowed hordes of Arameans to take advantage of the situation, and press in on Assyrian controlled territory from the west. Ashur-bel-kala counterattacked them, and conquered as far as Carchemish and the source of the Khabur river, but by the end of his reign many of the areas of Syria and Phoenicia-Canaan to the west of these regions as far as the Mediterranean, previously under firm Assyrian control, were eventually lost to the Middle Assyrian Empire.\nSociety and law in the Middle Assyrian Period.\nThe Middle Assyrian kingdom was well organized, and in the firm control of the king, who also functioned as the High Priest of Ashur, the state god. He had certain obligations to fulfill in the cult, and had to provide resources for the temples. The priesthood became a major power in Assyrian society. Conflicts with the priesthood are thought to have been behind the murder of king Tukulti-Ninurta I.\nThe Middle Assyrian Period was marked by the long wars fought that helped build Assyria into a warrior society. The king depended on both the citizen class and priests in his capital, and the landed nobility who supplied the horses needed by Assyria's military. Documents and letters illustrate the importance of the latter to Assyrian society. Assyria needed less artificial irrigation than Babylonia, and horse-breeding was extensive. Portions of elaborate texts about the care and training of them have been found. Trade was carried out in all directions. The mountain country to the north and west of Assyria was a major source of metal ore, as well as lumber. Economic factors were a common \"casus belli\".\nAll free male citizens were obliged to serve in the army for a time, a system which was called the \"ilku\"-service. A legal code was produced during the 14th and 13th centuries which, among other things, clearly shows that the social position of women in Assyria was lower than that of neighbouring societies. Men were permitted to divorce their wives with no compensation paid to the latter. If a woman committed adultery, she could be beaten or put to death. It's not certain if these laws were seriously enforced, but they appear to be a backlash against some older documents that granted things like equal compensation to both partners in divorce.\nThe women of the king's harem and their servants were also subject to harsh punishments, such as beatings, mutilation, and death. Assyria, in general, had much harsher laws than most of the region. Executions were not uncommon, nor were whippings followed by forced labour. Some offenses allowed the accused a trial under torture or duress. One tablet that covers property rights has brutal penalties for violators. A creditor could force debtors to work for him, but not sell them.\nIn the Middle Assyrian Laws, sex crimes were punished identically whether they were homosexual or heterosexual. An individual faced no punishment for penetrating a cult prostitute, someone of an equal or lower social class, such as slaves, or someone whose gender roles were not considered solidly masculine. Such sexual relations were even seen as good fortune. However, homosexual relationships with royal attendants, between soldiers, or with those where a social better was submissive or penetrated were either treated as rape or seen as bad omens, and punishments applied.\nFurthermore, the article 'Homosexualit\u00e4t' in \"Reallexicon der Assyriologie\" states, \"Homosexuality in itself is thus nowhere condemned as licentiousness, as immorality, as social disorder, or as transgressing any human or divine law. Anyone could practice it freely, just as anyone could visit a prostitute, provided it was done without violence and without compulsion, and preferably as far as taking the passive role was concerned, with specialists. That there was nothing religiously amiss with homosexual love between men is seen by the fact that they prayed for divine blessing on it.\"\nAssyria during the Bronze Age Collapse, 1200\u2013936 BCE.\nThe Bronze Age Collapse from 1200 BCE to 900 BCE was a Dark Age for the entire Near East, North Africa, Asia Minor, Caucasus, Mediterranean and Balkan regions, with great upheavals and mass movements of people.\nAssyria and its empire were not unduly affected by these tumultuous events for some 150 years, perhaps the only ancient power that was not, and in fact thrived for most of the period. However, upon the death of Ashur-bel-kala in 1056 BCE, Assyria went into a \"comparative\" decline for the next 100 or so years. The empire shrank significantly, and by 1020 BCE, Assyria appears to have controlled only areas close to Assyria itself, essential to keeping trade routes open in eastern Aramea, South Eastern Asia Minor, central Mesopotamia and north western Iran.\nNew West Semitic-speaking peoples such as the Arameans and Suteans moved into areas to the west and south of Assyria, including overrunning much of Babylonia to the south, Indo-European speaking Iranic peoples such as the Medes, Persians, Sarmatians and Parthians moved into the lands to the east of Assyria, displacing the native Kassites and Gutians and pressuring Elam and Mannea (all of which ancient non-Indo-European civilisations of Ancient Iran), and to the north in Asia Minor the Phrygians overran that part of the Hittites not already destroyed by Assyria, and Lydia emerged, a new Hurrian state named Urartu arose in the Caucasus, and Cimmerians, Colchians (Georgians) and Scythians around the Black Sea and Caucasus. Egypt was divided and in disarray, and Israelites were battling with other West Asian peoples such as the Amalekites, Moabites, Edomites and Ammonites and the non-Semitic-speaking Peleset/Philistines (who have been conjectured to be one of the so-called Sea Peoples) for the control of southern Canaan. Dorian Greeks usurped the earlier Mycenaean Greeks in western Asia Minor, and the Sea Peoples ravaged the Eastern Mediterranean.\nOther new peoples, such as the Chaldeans, Sarmatians, Arabs, Nubians and Kushites were to emerge later, during the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013605 BCE).\nDespite the apparent weakness of Assyria in comparison to its former might, at heart it in fact remained a solid, well defended nation whose warriors were the best in the world. Assyria, with its stable monarchy, powerful army and secure borders was in a stronger position during this time than potential rivals such as Egypt, Babylonia, Elam, Phrygia, Urartu, Persia, Lydia and Media. Kings such as Eriba-Adad II, Ashur-rabi II, Ashurnasirpal I, Tiglath-Pileser II and Ashur-Dan II successfully defended Assyria's borders and upheld stability during this tumultuous time.\nAssyrian kings during this period appear to have adopted a policy of maintaining and defending a compact, secure nation and satellite colonies immediately surrounding it, and interspersed this with sporadic punitive raids and invasions of neighbouring territories when the need arose, including campaigning as far as the Mediterranean and sacking Babylonia.\nNeo-Assyrian Empire.\nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire is usually considered to have begun with the ascension of Adad-nirari II, in 911 BC, lasting until the fall of Nineveh at the hands of the Medes/Persians and Babylonians, Chaldeans in 609 BC.\nAssyria maintained a large and thriving rural population, combined with a number of well fortified cities, Major Assyrian cities during this period included; Nineveh, Assur, Kalhu (Calah, Nimrud), Arbela (Erbil), Arrapha (Karka, Kirkuk), Dur-Sharrukin, Imgur-Enlil, Carchemish, Harran, Tushhan, Til-Barsip, Ekallatum, Kanesh, Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta, Urhai (Edessa), Guzana, Kahat, Amid (Diyarbakir), M\u00e9rida (Mardin, Tabitu, Nuhadra (Dohuk), Ivah, Sepharvaim, Rachae, Purushanda, Sabata, Birtha (Tikrit), Tell Shemshara, Dur-Katlimmu and Shekhna.\nAssyria is often noted for its brutality and cruelty during this period, although Assyrian harshness was reserved solely for those who took up arms against the Assyrian king, and none of the Assyrian kings of the Neo-Assyrian Empire or preceding Middle Assyrian Empire conducted genocides, massacres or ethnic cleansings against civilian populations, non-combatant men, or women and children. However, the monument of Ashurnasirpal II describing his conquest of one city states: \"Of some, I cut off their feet and hands; of others I cut off their ears, noses and lips; of the young men's ears I made a heap; of the old men's heads I made a minaret. . . . The male children and female children I burned in the flames of the city.\"\nExpansion, 911\u2013627 BC.\nAssyria once more began to expand with the rise of Adad-nirari II in 911 BC. He cleared Aramean and other tribal peoples from Assyria's borders and began to expand in all directions into Anatolia, Ancient Iran, Levant and Babylonia.\nAshurnasirpal II (883\u2013859 BC) continued this expansion apace, subjugating much of the Levant to the west, the newly arrived Persians and Medes to the east, annexed central Mesopotamia from Babylon to the south, and expanded deep into Asia Minor to the north. He moved the capital from Ashur to Kalhu (Calah/Nimrud) and undertook impressive building works throughout Assyria. Shalmaneser III (859\u2013824 BC) projected Assyrian power even further, conquering to the foothills of the Caucasus, Israel and Aram-Damascus, and subjugating Persia and the Arabs who dwelt to the south of Mesopotamia, as well as driving the Egyptians from Canaan. It was during the reign of Shalmaneser III that the Arabs and Chaldeans first enter the pages of recorded history.\nLittle further expansion took place under Shamshi-Adad V and his successor, the regent queen Semiramis, however when Adad-nirari III (811\u2013783 BC) came of age, he took the reins of power from mother and set about a relentless campaign of conquest; subjugated the Arameans, Phoenicians, Philistines, Israelites, Neo-Hittites and Edomites, Persians, Medes and Manneans, penetrating as far as the Caspian Sea. He invaded and subjugated Babylonia, and then the migrant Chaldean and Sutean tribes settled in south eastern Mesopotamia whom he conquered and reduced to vassalage.\nAfter the reign of Adad-nirari III, Assyria entered a period of instability and decline, losing its hold over most of its vassal and tributary territories by the middle of the 8th century BC, until the reign of Tiglath-Pileser III (745\u2013727 BC). He created the world's first professional army, introduced Imperial Aramaic as the lingua franca of Assyria and its vast empire, and reorganised the empire drastically. Tiglath-Pileser III conquered as far as the East Mediterranean, bringing the Greeks of Cyprus, Phoenicia, Judah, Philistia, Samaria and the whole of Aramea under Assyrian control. Not satisfied with merely holding Babylonia in vassalage, Tiglath-Pileser deposed its king and had himself crowned king of Babylon. The imperial, economic, political, military and administrative reforms of Tiglath-Pileser III were to prove a blueprint for future empires, such as those of the Persians, Greeks, Romans, Carthaginians, Byzantines, Arabs and Turks.\nShalmaneser V reigned only briefly, but once more drove the Egyptians from southern Canaan, where they were fomenting revolt against Assyria. Sargon II quickly took Samaria, effectively ending the northern Kingdom of Israel and carrying 27,000 people away into captivity into the Israelite diaspora. He was forced to fight a war to drive out the Scythians and Cimmerians who had attempted to invade Assyria's vassal states of Persia and Media. The Neo-Hittite states of northern Syria were conquered, as well as Cilicia. Lydia and Commagene. King Midas of Phrygia, fearful of Assyrian power, offered his hand in friendship. Elam was defeated and Babylonia and Chaldea reconquered. He made a new capital city named Dur Sharrukin. He was succeeded by his son Sennacherib who moved the capital to Nineveh and made the deported peoples work on improving Nineveh's system of irrigation canals. Nineveh was transformed into the largest city in the world at the time.\nEsarhaddon had Babylon rebuilt, he imposed a \"vassal treaty\" upon his Persian, Median and Parthian subjects, and he once more defeated the Scythes and Cimmerians. Tiring of Egyptian interference in the Assyrian Empire, Esarhaddon decided to conquer Egypt. In 671 BC he crossed the Sinai Desert, invaded and took Egypt with surprising ease and speed. He drove its foreign Nubian/Kushite and Ethiopian rulers out, destroying the Kushite Empire in the process. Esarhaddon declared himself \"king of Egypt, Libya, and Kush\". Esarhaddon stationed a small army in northern Egypt and describes how; \"All Ethiopians (read Nubians/Kushites) I deported from Egypt, leaving not one left to do homage to me\". He installed native Egyptian princes throughout the land to rule on his behalf.\nUnder Ashurbanipal (669\u2013627 BC), an unusually well educated king for his time who could speak, read and write in Sumerian, Akkadian and Aramaic, Assyrian domination spanned from the Caucasus Mountains (modern Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan) in the north to Nubia, Egypt, Libya and Arabia in the south, and from the East Mediterranean, Cyprus and Antioch in the west to Persia, Cissia and the Caspian Sea in the east.\nUltimately, Assyria conquered Babylonia, Chaldea, Elam, Media, Persia, Urartu (Armenia), Phoenicia, Aramea/Syria, Phrygia, the Neo-Hittite States, the Hurrian lands, Arabia, Gutium, Israel, Judah, Samarra, Moab, Edom, Corduene, Cilicia, Mannea, and Cyprus, and defeated and/or exacted tribute from Scythia, Cimmeria, Lydia, Nubia, Ethiopia and others. At its height, the Empire encompassed the whole of the modern nations of Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain, and Cyprus, together with large swathes of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Sudan, Libya, Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan.\nDownfall, 626\u2013609 BC.\nThe Assyrian Empire was severely crippled following the death of Ashurbanipal in 627 BC, the nation and its empire descending into a prolonged and brutal series of civil wars involving three rival kings, Ashur-etil-ilani, Sin-shumu-lishir and Sin-shar-ishkun. Egypt's 26th Dynasty, which had been installed by the Assyrians as vassals, quietly detached itself from Assyria, although it was careful to retain friendly relations.\nThe Scythians and Cimmerians took advantage of the bitter fighting among the Assyrians to raid Assyrian colonies, with hordes of horse-borne marauders ravaging parts of Asia Minor and the Caucasus, where the vassal kings of Urartu and Lydia begged their Assyrian overlord for help in vain. They also raided the Levant, Israel and Judah (where Ashkelon was sacked by the Scythians) and all the way into Egypt whose coasts were ravaged and looted with impunity.\nThe Iranic peoples under the Medes, aided by the previous Assyrian destruction of the hitherto dominant Elamites of Ancient Iran, also took advantage of the upheavals in Assyria to coalesce into a powerful Median-dominated force which destroyed the \"pre-Iranic\" kingdom of Mannea and absorbed the remnants of the pre-Iranic Elamites of southern[Iran, and the equally pre-Iranic Gutians, Manneans and Kassites of the Zagros Mountains and the Caspian Sea.\nCyaxares (technically a vassal of Assyria), in an alliance with the Scythians and Cimmerians, launched a surprise attack on a civil war beleaguered Assyria in 615 BC, sacking Kalhu (the Biblical Calah/Nimrud) and taking Arrapha (modern Kirkuk) and Gasur. Nabopolassar, still pinned down in southern Mesopotamia by Assyrian forces, was completely uninvolved in this major breakthrough against Assyria.\nDespite the sorely depleted state of Assyria, bitter fighting ensued; throughout 614 BC the Medes continued to gradually make hard fought inroads into Assyria itself, scoring a decisive and devastating victory over the Assyrian forces at the battle of Assur. In 613 BC, however, the Assyrians scored a number of counterattacking victories over the Medes-Persians, Babylonians-Chaldeans and Scythians-Cimmerians. This led to the unification of the forces ranged against Assyria who launched a massive combined attack, finally besieging and entering Nineveh in late 612 BC, with Sin-shar-ishkun being slain in the bitter street by street fighting. Despite the loss of almost all of its major cities, and in the face of overwhelming odds, Assyrian resistance continued under Ashur-uballit II (612\u2013609 BC), who fought his way out of Nineveh and coalesced Assyrian forces around Harran which finally fell in 609 BC. The same year, Ashur-uballit II besieged Harran with the help of the Egyptian army, but this failed too, and this last defeat ended the Assyrian Empire. During the aftermath, Egypt, along with remnants of the Assyrian army, suffered a defeat at the battle of Carchemish, in 605 BC, but the Assyrian troops did not participate to this battle as the army of the Assyrian state because certainly by 609 BC at the very latest, Assyria had been destroyed as an independent political entity, although it was to launch major rebellions against the Achaemenid Empire in 546 BC and 520 BC, and remained a geo-political region, ethnic entity and colonised province.\nAssyria after the empire.\nAchaemenid Assyria, Osroene, As\u014drist\u0101n, Athura and Hatra.\nAssyria was initially ruled by the short-lived Median Empire (609\u2013549 BC) after its fall. In a twist of fate, Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon (together with his son and co-regent Belshazzar), was himself an Assyrian from Harran. He had overthrown the short-lived Chaldean dynasty in Babylonia, after which the Chaldeans disappeared from history, being fully absorbed into the native population of Babylonia. However, apart from plans to dedicate religious temples in the city of Harran, Nabonidus showed little interest in rebuilding Assyria. Nineveh and Kalhu remained in ruins with only small numbers of Assyrians living within them; conversely, a number of towns and cities, such as Arrapkha, Guzana, Nohadra and Harran, remained intact, and Assur and Arbela (Irbil) were not completely destroyed, as is attested by their later revival. However, Assyria spent much of this short period in a degree of devastation, following its fall.\nAchaemenid Assyria (549\u2013330 BC).\nAfter the Medes were overthrown by the Persians as the dominant force in Ancient Iran, Assyria was ruled by the Persian Achaemenid Empire (as Athura) from 549 BC to 330 BC (see Achaemenid Assyria). Between 546 and 545 BC, Assyria rebelled against the new Persian Dynasty, which had usurped the previous Median dynasty. The rebellion centered around Tyareh was eventually quashed by Cyrus the Great.\nAssyria seems to have recovered dramatically, and flourished during this period. It became a major agricultural and administrative centre of the Achaemenid Empire, and its soldiers were a mainstay of the Persian Army. In fact, Assyria even became powerful enough to raise another full-scale revolt against the Persian empire in 520\u2013519 BC.\nThe Persians had spent centuries under Assyrian domination (their first ruler Achaemenes and his successors, having been vassals of Assyria), and Assyrian influence can be seen in Achaemenid art, infrastructure and administration. Early Persian rulers saw themselves as successors to Ashurbanipal, and Mesopotamian Aramaic was retained as the \"lingua franca\" of the empire for over two hundred years, and Greek writers such as Thucydides still referred to it as \"the Assyrian language\". Nineveh was never rebuilt however, and 200 years after it was sacked Xenophon reported only small numbers of Assyrians living amongst its ruins. Conversely the ancient city of Assur once more became a rich and prosperous entity.\nIt was in 5th century BC Assyria that the Syriac language and Syriac script evolved. Five centuries later these were later to have a global influence as the liturgical language and written script for Syriac Christianity and its accompanying Syriac literature which also emerged in Assyria before spreading throughout the Near East, Asia Minor, The Caucasus, Central Asia, the Indian Subcontinent and China.\nMacedonian and Seleucid Assyria.\nIn 332 BC, Assyria fell to Alexander the Great, the Macedonian Emperor, who called the inhabitants \"Assyrioi\". The Macedonian Empire (332\u2013312) was partitioned in 312 BC. It thereafter became part of the Seleucid Empire (312 BC). It is from this period that the later \"Syria\" vs \"Assyria\" naming controversy arises, the Seleucids applied the name 'Syria' which is a 9th-century BC Indo-Anatolian derivation of 'Assyria' (see Etymology of Syria) not only to Assyria itself, but also to the Levantine lands to the west (historically known as Aram and Eber Nari), which had been part of the Assyrian empire but, the north east corner aside, never a part of Assyria proper.\nWhen the Seleucids lost control of Assyria proper, the name \"Syria\" survived but was erroneously applied not only to the land of Assyria itself, but also now to Aramea (also known as Eber Nari) to the west that had once been part of the Assyrian empire, but apart from the north eastern corner, had never been a part of Assyria itself, nor inhabited by Assyrians. This was to lead to both the Assyrians from Northern Mesopotamia and the Arameans and Phoenicians from the Levant being collectively dubbed \"Syrians\" (and later also \"Syriacs\") in Greco-Roman and later European culture, regardless of ethnicity, history or geography.\nDuring Seleucid rule, Assyrians ceased to hold the senior military, economic and civil positions they had enjoyed under the Achaemenids, being largely replaced by Greeks. The Greek language also replaced Mesopotamian East Aramaic as the lingua franca of the empire, although this did not affect the Assyrian population themselves, who were not Hellenised during the Seleucid era.\nDuring the Seleucid period in southern Mesopotamia, Babylon was gradually abandoned in favour of a new city named Seleucia on the Tigris, effectively bringing an end to \"Babylonia\" as a geo-political entity.\nParthian Assyria (150 BC \u2013 225 AD).\nBy 150 BC, Assyria was largely under the control of the Parthian Empire. The Parthians seem to have exercised only loose control over Assyria, and between the mid 2nd century BC and 4th century AD a number of Neo-Assyrian states arose; these included the ancient capital of Assur itself, Adiabene with its capital of Arbela (modern Irbil), Beth Nuhadra with its capital of Nohadra (modern Dohuk), Osroene, with its capitals of Edessa and Amid (modern Sanliurfa and Diyarbakir), Hatra, and \"\u0712\u071d\u072c\u0713\u072a\u0721\u071d\" (Beth Garmai) with its capital at Arrapha (modern Kirkuk). Adiabenian rulers converted to Judaism from paganism in the 1st century. After 115 AD, there are no historic traces of Jewish royalty in Adiabene.\nThese freedoms were accompanied by a major Assyrian cultural revival, and temples to the Assyrian national gods Ashur, Sin, Hadad, Ishtar, Ninurta, Tammuz and Shamash were once more dedicated throughout Assyria and Upper Mesopotamia during this period.\nIn addition, Christianity arrived in Assyria soon after the death of Christ and the Assyrians began to gradually convert to Christianity from the ancient Mesopotamian religion during the period between the early first and third centuries. Assyria became an important centre of Syriac Christianity and Syriac Literature, with the Church of the East evolving in Assyria, and the Syriac Orthodox Church partly also, with Osroene becoming the first independent Christian state in history.\nRoman Assyria (116\u2013118).\nHowever, in 116, under Trajan, Assyria and its independent states were briefly taken over by Rome as the province of Assyria. The Assyrian kingdom of Adiabene was destroyed as an independent state during this period. Roman rule lasted only a few years, and the Parthians once more regained control with the help of the Assyrians, who were incited to overthrow the Roman garrisons by the Parthian king. However, a number of Assyrians were conscripted into the Roman Army, with many serving in the region of Hadrian's Wall in Roman Britain, and inscriptions in Aramaic made by soldiers have been discovered in Northern England dating from the second century.\nWith loose Parthian rule restored, Assyria and its patchwork of states continued much as they had before the Roman interregnum, although Assyria and Mesopotamia as a whole became a front line between the Roman and Parthian empires. Other new religious movements also emerged in the form of gnostic sects such as Mandeanism, as well as the now extinct Manichean religion.\nChristian period.\nSassanid Assyria (226 \u2013 c. 650).\nIn 226, Assyria was largely taken over by the Sasanian Empire. After driving out the Romans and Parthians, the Sassanid rulers set about annexing the independent states within Assyria during the mid- to late 3rd century, the last being Assur itself in the late 250s to early 260s. Christianity continued to spread, and many of the ethnically Assyrian churches that exist today are among the oldest in the world. For example, the Syriac Orthodox Church is purported to have been founded by St Peter himself in 67 AD.\nNevertheless, although predominantly Christian, a minority of Assyrians still held onto their ancient Mesopotamian religion until as late as the 10th or 11th century AD. The Assyrians lived in a province known as Asuristan, and the region was on the frontier of the Byzantine and Sassanian empires.\nThe land was known as As\u014drist\u0101n (the Sassanid Persian name meaning \"Land of the Assyrians\") during this period, and became the birthplace of the distinct Church of the East (now split into the Assyrian Church of the East, Ancient Church of the East and Chaldean Catholic Church) and a centre of the Syriac Orthodox Church, with a flourishing Syriac (Assyrian) Christian culture which exists there to this day. Temples were still being dedicated to the national god Ashur (as well as other Mesopotamian gods) in his home city, in Harran and elsewhere during the 4th and 5th centuries AD, indicating the ancient pre-Christian Assyrian identity was still extant to some degree.\nDuring the Sasanian period, much of what had once been Babylonia in southern Mesopotamia was incorporated into Assyria, and in effect the whole of Mesopotamia came to be known as As\u014drist\u0101n. Parts of Assyria appear to have been semi independent as late as the latter part of the 4th century AD, with a king named Sennacherib II reputedly ruling the northern reaches in 370s AD.\nArab Islamic conquest (630\u2013780).\nCenturies of constant warfare between the Byzantine Empire and Sassanid Empire left both empires exhausted, which made both of them open to loss in a war against the Muslim Arab army, under the newfound Rashidun Caliphate. After the early Islamic conquests, Assyria was dissolved as an official administrative entity by an empire. Under Arab rule, Mesopotamia as a whole underwent a gradual process of further Arabisation and the beginning of Islamification, and the region saw a large influx of \"non-indigenous\" Arabs, Kurds, Iranian, and Turkic peoples.\nHowever, the indigenous Assyrian population of northern Mesopotamia retained their language, religion, culture and identity.\nUnder the Arab Islamic empires, the Christian Assyrians were classed as \"dhimmis\", who had certain restrictions imposed upon them. Assyrians were thus excluded from specific duties and occupations reserved for Muslims, they did not enjoy the same political rights as Muslims, their word was not equal to that of a Muslim in legal and civil matters without a Muslim witness, they were subject to payment of a special tax (jizyah) and they were banned from spreading their religion further in Muslim-ruled lands. However, personal matters such as marriage and divorce were governed by the cultural laws of the Assyrians.\nFor those reasons, and even during the Sassanian period before Islamic rule, The Assyrian Church of the East formed a church structure that spread Nestorian Christianity to as far away as China, in order to proselytize away from Muslim-ruled regions in Iran and their homeland in Mesopotamia, with evidence of their massive church structure being the Nestorian Stele, an artifact found in China which documented over 100 years of Christian history in China from 600 to 781 AD. Assyrian Christians maintained relations with fellow Christians in Armenia and Georgia throughout the Middle Ages. In the 12th century AD, Assyrian priests interceded on behalf of persecuted Arab Muslims in Georgia.\nMongol Empire (1200\u20131300).\nThe first signs of trouble for the Assyrians started in the 13th century, when the Mongols first invaded the Near East after the fall of Baghdad in 1258 to Hulagu Khan. Assyrians at first did very well under Mongol rule, as the Shamanist Mongols were sympathetic to them, with Assyrian priests having traveled to Mongolia centuries before. The Mongols in fact spent most of their time oppressing Muslims and Jews, outlawing the practice of circumcision and , as they found them repulsive and violent. Therefore, as one of the only groups in the region looked at in a good light, Assyrians were given special privileges and powers, with H\u00fcleg\u00fc even appointing an Assyrian Christian governor to Erbil (Arbela), and allowing the Syriac Orthodox Church to build a church there.\nHowever, the Mongol rulers in the Near East eventually converted to Islam. Sustained persecutions of Christians throughout the entirety of the Ilkhanate began in earnest in 1295 under the rule of O\u00efrat amir Nauruz, which affected the indigenous Christians greatly. During the reign of the Ilkhan \u00d6ljeit\u00fc, the inhabitants of Erbil seized control of the citadel and much of the city in rebellion against the Muslims. In spring 1310, the Mongol Malik (governor) of the region attempted to seize it from them with the help of the Kurds and Arabs, but was defeated. After his defeat he decided to siege the city. The Assyrians held out for three months, but the citadel was at last taken by Ilkhanate troops and Arab, Turkic and Kurdish tribesmen on 1 July 1310. The defenders of the citadel fought to the last man, and many of the inhabitants of the lower town were subsequently massacred.\nRegardless of these hardships, the Assyrian people remained numerically dominant in the north of Mesopotamia as late as the 14th century AD, and the city of Assur functioned as their religious and cultural capital. The seat of the Catholicos of the Church of the East was Seleucia-Ctesiphon, not Assur. In the mid-14th century the Muslim Turkish ruler Tamurlane conducted a religiously motivated massacre of the indigenous Christians, and entirely destroyed the vast Church of the East structure established throughout the Far East outside what had been the Sasanid Empire, with the exception of the St Thomas Christians of the Malabar Coast in India, who numbered 4.2 million in the 2011 census of Kerala. After Timur's campaign, ancient Assyria's cultural and religious capital of Assur fell entirely into ruins and part of it was used as a graveyard until the 1970s.\nBreakup of the Church of the East (1552\u20131830).\nAround 100 years after the massacres by Timur, a religious schism known as the Schism of 1552 occurred among the Christians of northern Mesopotamia. A large number of followers of the Church of the East were dissatisfied with the leadership of the Church, at this point based in the Rabban Hormizd Monastery near Alqosh, and in particular with the system of hereditary succession of the patriarch. Three bishops elected the abbot of the monastery, Shimun VIII Yohannan Sulaqa, as a rival patriarch. These did not have the rank of metropolitan bishop, which was required for appointing a patriarch and which was granted only to members of the patriarch's family. Sulaqa therefore went to Rome to be made a patriarch, entered into communion with the Catholic Church and was appointed \"Patriarch of Mosul in Eastern Syria\" or \"Patriarch of the Chaldean church of Mosul\" by Pope Julius III in 1553. He won support only in Diyarbak\u0131r (known also as Amid), where he set up his residence, and in Mardin. In 1555, he was killed by the Turkish authorities after being denounced by the traditionalist patriarch, but the metropolitans he had ordained elected a successor for him, initiating the Shimun line of patriarchs, all of whom took the name Shimun (Simon). The patriarchs of this line requested and obtained confirmation from Rome only until 1583. In 1672 they clearly broke off communion with Rome, but continued as a line of patriarchs independent from that at Alqosh, with their seat, from then on, at Qodchanis in the Hakkari mountains. In a letter of 29 June 1653, 19 years before the Shimun line broke off relations with Rome, Shimun XI Eshuyow (1638\u20131656) called himself Patriarch of the Chaldeans. There is no record of a response from Rome confirming him as Catholic patriarch.\nBiblical Aramaic was until recently called Chaldaic or Chaldee, and East Syrian Christians, whose liturgical language was and is a form of Aramaic, were called Chaldeans, as an ethnic, not a religious term. Hormuzd Rassam (1826\u20131910) still applied the term \"Chaldeans\" no less to those not in communion with Rome than to the Catholic Chaldeans and stated that \"the present Chaldeans, with a few exceptions, speak the same dialect used in the Targum, and in some parts of Ezra and Daniel, which are called 'Chaldee'.\"\nLong before 1672, the Shimun line, as it \"gradually returned to the traditional worship of the Church of the East, thereby losing the allegiance of the western regions\", moved from Turkish-controlled Diyarbak\u0131r to Urmia in Persia. The bishopric of Diyarbak\u0131r became subject to the Alqosh patriarch. Bishop Joseph of Diyarbak\u0131r converted to the Catholic faith in 1667 or 1668. In 1677, he obtained recognition from the Turkish authorities as invested with independent power in Diyarbak\u0131r and Mardin, and in 1681 he was recognized by Rome as \"patriarch of the Chaldean nation deprived of its patriarch\". Thus was instituted the Josephite line, a third line of patriarchs.\nIn the Alqosh line, Eliya VII (1591\u20131617), Eliya VIII (1617\u20131660) and Eliya IX (1660\u20131700) contacted Rome at various times but without establishing union. Union was achieved in 1771 under Eliya XI, who died in 1778. His successor Eliya XII, after sending his profession of faith to Rome and receiving confirmation as Catholic patriarch, adopted a traditionalist position in 1779. His opponents elected Yohannan Hormizd, a young nephew of Eliya XI, whom Eliya XI had intended to be his successor. Although Yohannan Hormizd won the support of most of the followers of the Alqosh patriarchate, Rome considered his election to be irregular and, instead of accepting him as patriarch, merely confirmed him as metropolitan of Mosul and patriarchal administrator. He was thus granted the powers and the insignia of a patriarch, but not the title. It made the same arrangement in Diyarbak\u0131r, appointing as patriarchal administrator Augustine Hindi, a nephew of Joseph IV, whom his uncle wished to be his successor as patriarch. There were thus two traditionalist patriarchates (the Eliya line and the Shimun) and, under administrators, two Catholic patriarchates (Diyarbak\u0131r and Alqosh/Mosul).\nIn 1804, Eliya XI died and had no traditionalist successor. Augustine Hindi died in 1827 and, in 1830, Rome appointed Yohannan Hormizd as patriarch of all the Catholics. The Shimun line, which had been the first to enter union with Rome, remained at the head of the traditionalist church that in 1976 adopted the name Assyrian Church of the East, and that continued to be in the hands of the same family until the death in 1975 of Shimun XXI Eshai. At the same time, the originally traditionalist Alqosh line continues, without hereditary succession, at the head of the Chaldean Catholic Church.\nModern history.\nOttoman Empire (1900\u20131928).\nAfter these splits, the Assyrians suffered a number of religiously and ethnically motivated massacres throughout the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries, such as the Massacres of Badr Khan which resulted in the massacre of over 10,000 Assyrians in the 1840s, culminating in the large scale Hamidian massacres of unarmed men, women and children by Turks and Kurds in the 1890s at the hands of the Ottoman Empire and its associated (largely Kurdish and Arab) militias, which greatly reduced their numbers, particularly in southeastern Turkey where over 25,000 Assyrians were murdered. The Adana massacre of 1909 largely aimed at Armenian Christians also accounted for the murder of some 1,500 Assyrians.\nThe Assyrians suffered a further catastrophic series of events during World War I in the form of the religiously and ethnically motivated Assyrian Genocide at the hands of the Ottomans and their Kurdish and Arab allies from 1915 to 1918. Some sources claim that the highest number of Assyrians killed during the period was 750,000, while a 1922 Assyrian assessment set it at 275,000. The Assyrian Genocide ran largely in conjunction with the similarly ethno-religiously motivated Armenian Genocide, Greek Genocide and Great Famine of Mount Lebanon.\nIn reaction against Ottoman cruelty, the Assyrians took up arms, and an Assyrian independence movement began during the turbulent events of World War I. For a time, the Assyrians fought successfully against overwhelming numbers, scoring a number of victories against the Ottomans and Kurds, and also hostile Arab and Iranian groups. However, due to the collapse of the Russian Empire\u2014due to the Russian Revolution\u2014and the similar collapse of the Armenian Defense, the Assyrians were left without allies. As a result, the Assyrians were vastly outnumbered, outgunned, surrounded, cut off, and without supplies. The only option they had was to flee the region into northwest Iran and fight their way, with around 50,000 civilians in tow, to British train lines going to Mandatory Iraq. The sizable Assyrian presence in south eastern Anatolia which had endured for over four millennia was thus reduced to no more than 15,000 by the end of World War I, and by 1924 many of those who remained were forcibly expelled in a display of ethnic cleansing by the Turkish government, with many leaving and later founding villages in the Sapna and Nahla valleys in the Dohuk Governorate of Iraq.\nIn 1920 the Assyrian settlements in Mindan and Baquba were attacked by Iraqi Arabs, but the Assyrian tribesmen displayed their military prowess by successfully defeating and driving off the Arab forces. The Assyrians also sided with the British during the Iraqi revolt against the British.\nThe Assyrian Levies were founded by the British in 1922, with ancient Assyrian military rankings, such as Rab-shakeh, Rab-talia and Turtanu, being revived for the first time in millennia for this force. The Assyrians were prized by the British rulers for their fighting qualities, loyalty, bravery and discipline, and were used to help the British put down insurrections among the Arabs, Kurds and Turcoman, guard the borders with Iran and Turkey, and protect British military installations. During the 1920s Assyrian levies saw action in effectively defeating Arab and Kurdish forces during anti-British rebellions in Iraq.\nSimele Massacre and World War II (1930\u20131950).\nAfter Iraq was granted independence by the British in 1933, the Assyrians suffered the Simele Massacre, where thousands of unarmed villagers (men, women and children) were slaughtered by joint Arab-Kurdish forces of the Iraqi Army. The massacres of civilians followed a clash between armed Assyrian tribesmen and the Iraqi army, where the Iraqi forces suffered a defeat after trying to disarm the Assyrians, whom they feared would attempt to secede from Iraq. Armed Assyrian Levies were prevented by the British from going to the aid of these civilians, and the British government then whitewashed the massacres at the League of Nations.\nDespite these betrayals, the Assyrians were allied with the British during World War II, with eleven Assyrian companies seeing action in Palestine/Israel and another four serving in Greece, Cyprus and Albania. Assyrians played a major role in the victory over Arab-Iraqi forces at the Battle of Habbaniya and elsewhere in 1941, when the Iraqi government decided to join World War II on the side of Nazi Germany. The British presence in Iraq lasted until 1955, and Assyrian Levies remained attached to British forces until this time, after which they were disarmed and disbanded.\nA further persecution of Assyrians took place in the Soviet Union in the late 1940s and early 1950s when thousands of Assyrians settled in Georgia, Armenia and southern Russia were forcibly deported from their homes in the dead of night by Stalin without warning or reason to Central Asia, with most being relocated to Kazakhstan, where a small minority still remain.\nBa'athism (1966\u20132003).\nThe period from the 1940s through to 1963 was a period of respite for the Assyrians in northern Iraq and north east Syria. The regime of Iraqi President Kassim in particular saw the Assyrians accepted into mainstream society. Many urban Assyrians became successful businessmen, a number of Assyrians moved south to cities such as Baghdad, Basra and Nasiriyah to enhance their economic prospects, others were well represented in politics, the military, the arts and entertainment, Assyrian towns, villages, farmsteads and Assyrian quarters in major cities flourished undisturbed, and Assyrians came to excel and be over-represented in sports such as boxing, football, athletics, wrestling and swimming.\nHowever, in 1963, the Ba'ath Party took power by force in Iraq, and came to power in Syria the same year. The Baathists, though secular, were Arab nationalists, and set about attempting to Arabize the many non-Arab peoples of Iraq and Syria, including the Assyrians. This policy included refusing to acknowledge the Assyrians as an ethnic group, banning the publication of written material in Eastern Aramaic, and banning its teaching in schools, together with an attempt to \"Arabize\" the ancient pre-Arab heritage of Mesopotamian civilisation.\nThe policies of the Baathists have also long been mirrored in Turkey, whose nationalist governments have refused to acknowledge the Assyrians as an ethnic group since the 1920s, and have attempted to Turkify the Assyrians by calling them \"Semitic Turks\" and forcing them to adopt Turkish names and language. In Iran, Assyrians continued to enjoy cultural, religious and ethnic rights, but due to the Islamic Revolution of 1979 their community has been diminished.\nIn the aftermath of the Iraq War of 2003, Assyrians became the targets of Islamist terrorist attacks and intimidation from both Sunni and Shia groups, as well as criminal kidnapping organisations; forcing many in southern and central Iraq to relocate to safer Assyrian regions in the north of the country or north east Syria.\nKurdistan Region (2005\u2013present).\nIn 2017, the KRG replaced the Alqosh mayor, Faiz Abed Jahwareh with a KDP member, Lara Zara, and Assyrian protested in response. The Iraqi Government ordered Lara Zara to vacate her post, and return the title of Mayor to Jahwareh.\nSyrian Civil War (2012\u2013present).\nIn recent years, Assyrians in northern Iraq and northeast Syria have become the target of attacks amounting to genocide by Islamist militants like ISIL and Nusra Front. In 2014, ISIL attacked Assyrian towns and villages in the Assyrian homelands of northern Iraq and north east Syria, and Assyrians forced from their homes in cities such as Mosul had their houses and possessions stolen, both by ISIL and also by their own former Arab Muslim neighbours.\nAssyrian Bronze Age and Iron Age monuments and archaeological sites, as well as numerous Assyrian churches and monasteries, have been systematically vandalised and destroyed by ISIL. These include the ruins of Nineveh, Kalhu (Nimrud, Assur, Dur-Sharrukin and Hatra). ISIL destroyed a 3,000-year-old Ziggurat. ISIL destroyed Virgin Mary Church, in 2015 St. Markourkas Church was destroyed and the cemetery was bulldozed.\nAssyrians in both Iraq and Syria have responded by forming armed Assyrian militias to defend their territories, and despite being heavily outnumbered and outgunned have had success in driving ISIL from Assyrian towns and villages, and defending others from attack. Armed Assyrian militias have also fought ISIL alongside armed groups of Kurds, Turcoman, Yezidis, Shabaks, Armenian Christians, Kawilya, Mandeans, Circassians and Shia Muslim Arabs and Iranians. \"Dewkh Nawsha\", which translates to \"those who sacrifice\", is a militia that was formed days after ISIL took over Mosul in 2014. The military force is made up of volunteers, who come from all over the Nineveh Plains. Dewkh Nawsha is supported by Assyrian Patriotic Party and are led by Wilson Khammu.\nIt is estimated that nearly 60 percent of Iraqi Assyrians have fled. Assyrians who have fled have ended up all over the world. 2009 U.S Census Bureau survey, reported that roughly 100,000 have relocated to the United States.\nCulture.\nAssyria continued to exist as a geopolitical entity until the Arab-Islamic conquest in the mid-7th century. Assyrian identity; personal, family and tribal names; and both the spoken and written evolution of Mesopotamian Aramaic (which still contains many Akkadian loan words and an Akkadian grammatical structure) have survived among the Assyrian people from ancient times to this day. An Assyrian calendar has been revived.\nLanguage.\nEmerging in Sumer c. 3500 BC, cuneiform writing began as a system of pictograms. Around 3000 BC, the pictorial representations became simplified and more abstract as the number of characters in use grew smaller. The original Sumerian script was adapted for the writing of the Akkadian, Assyrian, and Hittite languages. The K\u00fcltepe texts, which were written in Old Assyrian, had Hittite loanwords and names, which constitute the oldest record of any language of the Indo-European language family. Most of the archaeological evidence is typical of Anatolia rather than of Assyria, but the use of both cuneiform and the dialect is the best indication of Assyrian presence. From 1700 BC and onward, the Sumerian language was preserved by the ancient Babylonians and Assyrians only as a liturgical and classical language for religious, artistic and scholarly purposes.\nAssyrian was a dialect of Akkadian, a member of the eastern branch of the Semitic family and the oldest historically attested of the Semitic languages, which began to appear in written form in the 29th century BC. The first inscriptions in Assyria proper, called Old Assyrian (OA), were made in the Old Assyrian period. The ancient Assyrians also used Sumerian in their literature and liturgy, although to a more limited extent in the Middle- and Neo-Assyrian periods, when Akkadian became the main literary language.\nDuring the 3rd millennium BC, a very intimate cultural symbiosis developed between the Sumerians and Akkadian-speakers, which included widespread bilingualism. The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence. This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the 3rd millennium BC as a \"Sprachbund\". Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of Mesopotamia somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BC (the exact dating being a matter of debate), but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century AD.\nIn the Neo-Assyrian period, the Aramaic language became increasingly common, more so than Akkadian\u2014this was thought to be largely due to the mass deportations undertaken by Assyrian kings, in which large Aramaic-speaking populations, conquered by the Assyrians, were relocated to Assyria and interbred with the Assyrians, and due to the fact that Tiglath-pileser II made it the lingua franca of Assyria and its empire in the 8th century BC. The destruction of the Assyrian capitals of Nineveh and Assur by the Babylonians, Medes and their allies, ensured that much of the bilingual elite (but not all) were wiped out. By the 7th century BC, much of the Assyrian population used distinct Akkadian-influenced Eastern Aramaic varieties and not Akkadian itself. The last Akkadian inscriptions in Mesopotamia date from the 1st century AD. The Syriac language also emerged in Assyria during the 5th century BC, and during the Christian era, Syriac literature and Syriac script were to become hugely influential.\nHowever, the descendant Akkadian-influenced Eastern Aramaic dialects from the Neo-Assyrian Empire, as well as Akkadian and Mesopotamian Aramaic personal, tribal, family and place names, still survive to this day among Assyrian people and are spoken fluently by up to 1,000,000 Assyrians, with a further number having lesser and varying degrees of fluency. These dialects which contain many Akkadian loan words and grammatical features are very different from the now almost extinct Western Aramaic of the Arameans in the Levant and Trans-Jordan, which does not have any Akkadian grammatical structure or loan words.\nAfter 90 years of effort, the University of Chicago in 2011 completed an Assyrian dictionary, the style of which is more like an encyclopedia than a dictionary.\nReligion.\nAncient Assyrian religion.\nThe Assyrians, like the rest of the Mesopotamian peoples, followed ancient Mesopotamian religion, with their national god Ashur having the most importance to them during the Assyrian Empire. This religion gradually declined with the advent of Syriac Christianity between the first and tenth centuries. Their primary religion is now Syriac Christianity, which is directly connected to the disciple Peter.\nThe major deities worshipped in Assyria include;\nThe original, polytheistic religion of the Assyrians was widely adhered to until around the 4th century, and survived in pockets until at least the 10th century. However, Assyrians today are mostly Christian, with most following the Assyrian Church of the East, Chaldean Catholic Church, Ancient Church of the East, Syriac Orthodox Church, Syriac Catholic Church, Assyrian Pentecostal Church and Assyrian Evangelical Church. Assyrians had begun to adopt Christianity (as well as for a time Manicheanism and gnosticism) between the 1st and 3rd centuries AD.\nChristianity.\nThe tradition of the Church of the East is that Thomas the Apostle and his disciples Addai (Thaddeus of Edessa) and Mari brought Christianity to Mesopotamia, thus attributing to the first century the founding of the episcopal see of Seleucia-Ctesiphon, which became that Church's primatial see in 410. There is clear evidence of the presence of Christianity in Osroene in the second century. At that time, Christians were persecuted in the Roman Empire, but were at peace under the expanding Persian Empire. Shapur I (241\u2013272), the second \"shahinshah\" (king of kings) of the Sasanian dynasty, occupied Roman territory, advancing as far as Antioch in 260, and deported eastward much of the population to strengthen the economy of his own empire. One of those deported in 253 was Bishop Demetrius of Antioch, who then became the first bishop of Beth Lapat. After 312, when Constantine the Great legalized Christianity in the Roman Empire, Christians in Persia came under suspicion of pro-Roman sympathies and were persecuted, especially under Shapur II (309\u2013379).\nUnder Yazdegerd I (399\u2013421) the situation of the Christian minority improved considerably. In 410, on the recommendation of several Western bishops (the signatories included the bishops of Antioch, Aleppo, Edessa and Amid) Yazdegerd called the Council of Seleucia-Ctesiphon, which organized the Persian Church after the model approved by the First Council of Nicea for the Church in the Roman Empire. The Church of the East was arranged as six ecclesiastical provinces, with the bishops in each grouped around a metropolitan, while the bishop of Seleucia-Ctesiphon, the capital city, referred to in the acts of the council as the Grand Metropolitan, held authority throughout the Church and for that reason was called (probably only from a later date) the Catholicos.\nPapa bar Aggai, who in about 315, almost 100 years before this council, suffered a sudden stroke during a synod held to depose him, is looked on as the first Catholicos of the Church of the East, although this may only mean that he was the first bishop of Seleucia-Ctesiphon.\nIn a synod held in Markabta in 424, the participating bishops recalled the circumstances concerning Papa, blaming the opposition to him on the influence of unnamed Western bishops, and declared or reaffirmed that the Catholicos of Seleucia-Ctesiphon was totally independent. They excluded any right of appeal against him to any patriarch in the West. They \"defined, by the word of God, that Easterners cannot appeal to Western patriarchs against their patriarch. Any case that cannot be resolved in his presence shall be reserved to the tribunal of Christ [...] There can be no reason for thinking or saying that the Catholicos of the East can be judged by superiors or by another patriarch. He himself is to be the judge of all his subjects, and judgment on himself is reserved to Christ, who has chosen him, raised him up and placed him at the head of his Church.\"\nThis was six years before the 431 Council of Ephesus, the enforcement within the Byzantine Empire of whose condemnation of Nestorianism is sometimes given as what led to the break between the Church of the East and the Western Churches.\nIn 484, Catholicos Babowai wrote to some Western bishops asking them to get the Byzantine emperor to intercede with the Persian king Peroz I on behalf of persecuted Christians. His letter was intercepted, reportedly by Barsauma, metropolitan of Nisibis, between whom and Babowai there was a heated dispute. It was shown to the king, who then had Babowai executed. Barsauma called the Synod of Beth Lapat, which, as well as condemning some of Babowai's policies, permitted marriage of clergy and of vowed monks and reputedly adopted Nestorian teaching. Under Babowai's successor, Acacius of Seleucia-Ctesiphon, a synod held in the capital in 486 revoked the decrees of the Synod of Beth Lapat, whose acts have consequently not been preserved, and in its own name affirmed the teaching of Theodore of Mopsuestia against Monophysitism, forbade wandering monks or clergy, and allowed marriage of clergy and monks.\nIn 489, the Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno closed the theological school of Edessa because of its promotion of the teaching of Theodore of Mopsuestia. Barsauma welcomed its teachers and revived the school of Nisibis. A century later, an attempt by the school's director to include influences other than that of Theodore alone His initiative was opposed by Babai the Great (551\u2013628), whose exposition of the theology of Theodore of Mopsuestia became the official teaching of the Church of the East.\nAt this time miaphysitism was advancing in the Persian Empire. Its followers were mainly from the \"hundreds of thousands\" of Western Syriac Christians whom Khosrow I (531\u2013579) and Khosrow II (590 and 591\u2013628) deported to their own territory, as well as descendants of those previously deported, but there were also some defectors from the local Church of the East. In addition, West Syrian opponents of the Council of Chalcedon sought refuge in Persia from the pro-Chalcedonian policy of Emperors Justin I and Justinian I and actively propagated their own theology. Jacob Baradaeus, who was ordained as Bishop of Edessa in about 543, set about ordaining bishops and priests throughout the Syriac-speaking areas of West Asia to such an extent that he was even claimed to have ordained over 100,000 clergy and nearly 30 bishops. Whatever the number, he set up a church structure parallel to and independent of that approved by the Byzantine emperors, so that the Syriac Orthodox Church has been called Jacobite in reference to him. For Miaphysites in Persia, particularly strong in Tagrit, he in 559 appointed as \"metropolitan of the East\" Ahudemmeh, a convert from the Church of the East, who won from Khosrow I freedom of worship for the Miaphysites (unlike the Chalcedonian Christians). Ahudemmeh made many converts among the Arabs. The Miaphysites of Persia united with the Syriac Orthodox Church, and in 629 Patriarch Athanasius I Gammolo placed at their head Marutha of Tagrit with the title of Maphrian and a wide-ranging autonomy that would allay Persian suspicion that, as spiritual subjects of a patriarch who lived under Byzantine rule, the Miaphysites would tend to be disloyal.\nWeakened by their long struggle against the Byzantines, the Persians were unable to withstand the Arab conquest. Seleucia-Ctesiphon fell in 637. The last Persian king Yazdegerd III became a fugitive and was murdered for his money in 651/2.\nFor Christians in Persia, the change from Zoroastrian to Islamic rulers did not worsen their situation, but rather bettered it, especially for the \"Nestorians\" (East Syrians). This was a time of increased missionary activity by the Church of the East, whose success in China with the missionary Alopen is attested by the Nestorian Stele and in India by the continued maintenance of its liturgy by the Syro-Malabar Church. The patriarchate of Timothy I (780\u2013823) was a high point of the Church's expansion.\nAfter the general destruction wrought by Genghis Khan, the Church of the East fared no worse under the Mongols of the Ilkhanate than under the Arabs, but at the end of the 14th century Timur brought disaster on it, exterminating it in many regions, so that it survived only in the Kurdistan mountains and in India.\nAn account of the divisions within the Church of the East from the mid-16th to the early 19th century is given above. The separate patriarchates at one stage grew to four, but were reduced in 1830 to two: the now more numerous Chaldean Catholic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East. The latter was further divided in the 20th century, with a split between the Assyrian Church of the East and the Ancient Church of the East over reforms by Shimun XXI Eshai in the 1960s.\nAfter the Arab conquest had removed the previously existing frontier between the Byzantine and Persian Empires, the Syriac Orthodox Church no longer needed to maintain a clear distinction between the part under the direct rule of the Patriarch and the part in the care of the Maphrian. From 793 the Maphrian was no longer elected by the Eastern bishops but simply appointed by the Patriarch. The Maphrianate thus became, until abolished in 1860, a mere title for the second in dignity within the Church. The Church itself, like that of the East, underwent divisions. William Taylor states that for 475 years, from 1364 to 1839, there were two rival series of Patriarchs, one in Mardin, the other in Tur Abdin.\nIn 1665 the Syrian Orthodox Church won the allegiance of about a third of the Saint Thomas Christians in southwestern India, whose traditional liturgy had been that of the Church of the East. However, due to Anglican influence, they lost many of these in the 19th and 20th centuries through the setting up of the more Evangelical Mar Thoma Syrian Church and St. Thomas Evangelical Church of India and about half of those remaining in the 20th century declared their Church (the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church) autocephalous, while those remaining in obedience to the Patriarch (the Jacobite Syrian Christian Church) have been granted autonomy within the Syrian Orthodox Church such as was once granted to the Maphran-headed part of the Church in Persia.\nAt about the same time as the Syriac Orthodox Church was expanding into India, where now three-quarters of its membership live, Capuchin and Jesuit missionaries won to union with Rome the majority of the Syriac Orthodox in Aleppo, including, in 1656, their bishop, Andrew Akijan, who in 1662 was elected Patriarch of the Syriac Orthodox Church. On his death in 1677, two strong factions emerged, each of which elected a Patriarch, one pro-, the other anti-Rome. The Ottoman civil authorities recognized the non-Catholic Patriarch and suppressed the Catholic faction, eventually forcing it underground. In 1782 the newly elected Syriac Orthodox Patriarch declared himself Catholic and moved to Lebanon. He was replaced as Patriarch of the Syriac Orthodox Church, but initiated a series of Catholic patriarchs that in 1828 was recognized by the Ottoman authorities as heading a distinct Catholic Syriac Church. In 1850, the Catholic patriarchal seat was moved to Mardin. Many of its faithful were massacred during the First World War. The patriarchal seat is now Beirut, where it was moved in the 1920.\nPatriarch Ignatius Peter IV (1872\u20131894) made an attempt in 1889 to set up a Latin-rite branch of his Syriac Orthodox Church by having the Goan Antonio Francisco Xavier Alvares ordained, with the religious name of Mar Julius I, as Archbishop of Ceylon, Goa and India. In May 1892, Alvares, with the consent of the Patriarch, ordained Ren\u00e9 Vilatte as Archbishop of America. In later years Vilatte consecrated \"a number of men who are the episcopal ancestors of an enormous variety of descendants\" in what is called the independent sacramental movement or independent Catholicism.\nIn 1933, the seat of the patriarchate of the Syriac Orthodox Church was moved from the \"Saffron Monastery\" (Mor Hananyo Monastery) of Tur Abdin, 4 kilometres north of Mardin, Turkey to Homs, Syria and in 1959 to Bab Tuma (literally meaning \"Thomas Gate\"), Damascus, capital of Syria; but the Patriarch actually resides at the Mar Aphrem Monastery in Maarat Saidnaya, about 25 kilometres north of Damascus.\nThe Syriac Orthodox Church has today about 2 million followers, three-quarters of whom belong to the autonomous Jacobite Syrian Christian Church in India. The Syriac Catholic Church has about 160,000 faithful, some 65,000 of them in Syria, 55,000 in Iraq, as well as about 15,000 in Lebanon and the United States.\nA 2009 study by Sargon Donabed and Shamiran Mako cites the remark made by Horatio Southgate, on learning that the Armenians called the Syrians \"Assouri\" (not \"Asorestants\u2019i\", the Armenian word for Assyrian), that the Syrians call themselves sons of Asshur. They also mention a dispute in 1939 between a Syrian Orthodox writer from Mosul who protested against application to his co-religionists of the name \"Assyrians\" and the editor of a publication that supported it. They say that the rejection of the \"Assyrian\" label in favour of \"Syrian\" or \"Aramean\" was promoted by the church and later became prevalent in modern scholarship. Thus J.F. Coakley described as \"bogus ethnology\" the \"Assyrians\" description. Donabeg and Mako deplore and argue against this judgment and that of other academics and attribute its prevalence in part to political considerations.\nThe continuing trend towards identification as Arameans is evidenced also in the government of Israel's recognition in September 2014 of the Arameans in Israel as a distinct nationality.\nArchitecture.\nAssyrian architecture, like that of Babylonia, was influenced by Sumero-Akkadian styles (and to some degree Mitanni), but early on developed its own distinctive style. Palaces sported colourful wall decorations, and seal-cutting (an art learned from Mittani) developed apace. Schools for scribes taught both the Babylonian and Assyrian dialects of Akkadian, and Sumerian and Akkadian literary works were often copied with an Assyrian flavour.\nThe Assyrian dialect of Akkadian was used in legal, official, religious, and practical texts such as medicine or instructions on manufacturing items. During the 13th to 10th centuries, picture tales appeared as a new art form: a continuous series of images carved on square stone steles. Somewhat reminiscent of a comic book, these show events such as warfare or hunting, placed in order from the upper left to the lower right corner of the stele with captions written underneath them. These and the excellent cut seals show that Assyrian art was beginning to surpass that of Babylon. Architecture saw the introduction of a new style of ziggurat, with two towers and colorful enameled tiles.\nArts and sciences.\nAssyrian art preserved to the present day predominantly dates to the Neo-Assyrian period. Art depicting battle scenes, and occasionally the impaling of whole villages in gory detail, was intended to show the power of the emperor, and was generally made for propaganda purposes. These stone reliefs lined the walls in the royal palaces where foreigners were received by the king. Other stone reliefs depict the king with different deities and conducting religious ceremonies. Many stone reliefs were discovered in the royal palaces at Nimrud (Kalhu) and Khorsabad (Dur-Sharrukin). A rare discovery of metal plates belonging to wooden doors was made at Balawat (Imgur-Enlil).\nAssyrian sculpture reached a high level of refinement in the Neo-Assyrian period. One prominent example is the winged bull lamassu or shedu that guard the entrances to the king's court. These were apotropaic meaning they were intended to ward off evil. C.W. Ceram states in \"The March of Archaeology\" that lamassi were typically sculpted with five legs so that four legs were always visible, whether the image were viewed frontally or in profile.\nAlthough works of precious gems and metals usually do not survive the ravages of time, some fine pieces of Assyrian jewelry were found in royal tombs at Nimrud.\nThere is ongoing discussion among academics over the nature of the Nimrud lens, a piece of quartz unearthed by Austen Henry Layard in 1850, in the Nimrud palace complex in northern Iraq. A small minority believe that it is evidence for the existence of ancient Assyrian telescopes, which could explain the great accuracy of Assyrian astronomy. Other suggestions include its use as a magnifying glass for jewellers, or as a decorative furniture inlay. The Nimrud Lens is held in the British Museum.\nThe Assyrians were also innovative in military technology, with the use of heavy cavalry, sappers and siege engines.\nLegacy.\nAchaemenid Assyria (539\u2013330 BC) retained a separate identity, official correspondence being in Imperial Aramaic, and there was even a determined revolt of the two Assyrian provinces of Mada and Athura in 520 BC. Under Seleucid rule, however, Aramaic gave way to Greek as the official administrative language. Aramaic was marginalised as an official language, but remained spoken in both Assyria and Babylonia by the general populace. It also remained the spoken tongue of the indigenous Assyrian/Babylonian citizens of all Mesopotamia under Persian, Greek and Roman rule, and indeed well into the Arab period it was still the language of the majority, particularly in the north of Mesopotamia, surviving to this day among the Assyrian Christians.\nBetween 150 BC and 226 AD, Assyria changed hands between the Parthian Empire and the Romans until coming under the rule of the Sasanian Empire from 226 to 651, where it was known as As\u014drist\u0101n.\nA number of at least partly neo-Assyrian kingdoms existed in the area between in the late classical and early Christian period also; Adiabene, Hatra and Osroene.\nClassical historiographers and Biblical writers had only retained a fragmented, very dim and often inaccurate picture of Assyria. It was remembered that there had been an Assyrian empire predating the Persian one, but all particulars were lost. Thus Jerome's \"Chronicon\" lists 36 kings of the Assyrians, beginning with Ninus, son of Belus, down to Sardanapalus, the last king of the Assyrians before the empire fell to Arbaces the Median. Almost none of these have been substantiated as historical, with the exception of the Neo-Assyrian and Babylonian rulers listed in the \"Canon of Kings\", beginning with Nabonassar.\nThe Assyrians began to form and adopt a distinct Eastern Christianity, with its accompanying Syriac literature, between the 1st and 3rd centuries AD; however, ancient Mesopotamian religion was still alive and well into the fourth century and pockets survived into the 10th century and possibly as late as the 17th century in Mardin. However, the religion is now dead, and the Assyrian people, though still retaining Eastern Aramaic dialects as a mother tongue, are now wholly Christian.\nThe modern discovery of Babylonia and Assyria begins with excavations in Nineveh in 1845, which revealed the Library of Ashurbanipal. Decipherment of the cuneiform script was a formidable task that took more than a decade; but, by 1857, the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland was convinced that reliable reading of cuneiform texts was possible. Assyriology has since pieced together the formerly largely forgotten history of Mesopotamia. In the wake of the archaeological and philological rediscovery of ancient Assyria, Assyrian nationalism became increasingly popular among the surviving remnants of the Assyrian people, who have come to strongly identify with ancient Assyria."}
{"id": "2086", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2086", "title": "Abijah", "text": "Abijah ( \"Aviya\") is a Biblical Hebrew unisex name which means \"my Father is Yah\". The Hebrew form \"Aviyahu\" also occurs in the Bible.\nRussian name.\nThe variant used in the Russian language is \"\" (\"Aviya\"), with \"\" or \"\" (\"Abiya\"), being older forms. Included into various, often handwritten, church calendars throughout the 17th\u201319th centuries, it was omitted from the official Synodal Menologium at the end of the 19th century. In 1924\u20131930, the name (as \"\", a form of \"Abiya\") was included into various Soviet calendars, which included the new and often artificially created names promoting the new Soviet realities and encouraging the break with the tradition of using the names in the Synodal Menologia. In Russian it is only used as a female name. Diminutives of this name include \"\" (\"Ava\") and \"\" (\"Viya\")."}
{"id": "2087", "revid": "2615838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2087", "title": "Ark", "text": "Ark may refer to:"}
{"id": "2088", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2088", "title": "Aphasia", "text": "Aphasia is an inability to comprehend or formulate language because of damage to specific brain regions. The major causes are a cerebral vascular accident (stroke) or head trauma. Aphasia can also be the result of brain tumors, brain infections, or neurodegenerative diseases, but the latter are far less prevalent.\nTo be diagnosed with aphasia, a person's speech or language must be significantly impaired in one (or more) of the four aspects of communication following acquired brain injury. Alternately, in the case of progressive aphasia, it must have significantly declined over a short period of time. The four aspects of communication are auditory comprehension, verbal expression, reading and writing, and functional communication.\nThe difficulties of people with aphasia can range from occasional trouble finding words, to losing the ability to speak, read, or write; intelligence, however, is unaffected. Expressive language and receptive language can both be affected as well. Aphasia also affects visual language such as sign language. In contrast, the use of formulaic expressions in everyday communication is often preserved. For example, while a person with aphasia, particularly Broca's aphasia, may not be able to ask a loved one when their birthday is, they may still be able to sing \"Happy Birthday\". One prevalent deficit in the aphasias is anomia, which is a difficulty in finding the correct word.\nWith aphasia, one or more modes of communication in the brain have been damaged and are therefore functioning incorrectly. Aphasia is not caused by damage to the brain that results in motor or sensory deficits, which produces abnormal speech; that is, aphasia is not related to the mechanics of speech but rather the individual's language cognition (although a person can have both problems, particularly if they suffered a hemorrhage that damaged a large area of the brain). An individual's \"language\" is the socially shared set of rules, as well as the thought processes that go behind verbalized speech. It is not a result of a more peripheral motor or sensory difficulty, such as paralysis affecting the speech muscles or a general hearing impairment.\nAphasia affects about 2 million people in the US and 250,000 people in Great Britain. Nearly 180,000 people acquire the disorder every year in the US alone. Any person of any age can develop aphasia, given that it is often caused by a traumatic injury. However, people who are middle aged and older are the most likely to acquire aphasia, as the other etiologies are more likely at older ages.; for example, approximately 75% of all strokes occur in individuals over the age of 65. Strokes account for most documented cases of aphasia: 25% to 40% of people who survive a stroke develop aphasia as a result of damage to the language-processing regions of the brain. \nAphasia and dysphasia.\nTechnically, dysphasia means impaired language and aphasia means lack of language. There have been calls to use the term 'aphasia' regardless of severity. Reasons for doing so include dysphasia being easily confused with the swallowing disorder dysphagia, consumers and speech pathologists preferring the term aphasia, and many languages other than English using a word similar to aphasia. It would appear that the term \"aphasia\" is more commonly encountered in North America, while \"dysphasia\" is more frequently found in British literature.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPeople with aphasia may experience any of the following behaviors due to an acquired brain injury, although some of these symptoms may be due to related or concomitant problems, such as dysarthria or apraxia, and not primarily due to aphasia. Aphasia symptoms can vary based on the location of damage in the brain. Signs and symptoms may or may not be present in individuals with aphasia and may vary in severity and level of disruption to communication. Often those with aphasia will try to hide their inability to name objects by using words like \"thing\". So when asked to name a pencil they may say it is a thing used to write.\nRelated behaviors.\nGiven the previously stated signs and symptoms the following behaviors are often seen in people with aphasia as a result of attempted compensation for incurred speech and language deficits:\nCauses.\nAphasia is most often caused by stroke, but any disease or damage to the parts of the brain that control language can cause aphasia. Some of these can include brain tumors, traumatic brain injury, and progressive neurological disorders. In rare cases, aphasia may also result from herpesviral encephalitis. The herpes simplex virus affects the frontal and temporal lobes, subcortical structures, and the hippocampal tissue, which can trigger aphasia. \nIn acute disorders, such as head injury or stroke, aphasia usually develops quickly. When caused by brain tumor, infection, or dementia, it develops more slowly.\nSubstantial damage to tissue anywhere within the region shown in blue on the figure which is shown at the right can potentially result in aphasia. Aphasia can also sometimes be caused by damage to subcortical structures deep within the left hemisphere, including the thalamus, the internal and external capsules, and the caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia. The area and extent of brain damage or atrophy will determine the type of aphasia and its symptoms. A very small number of people can experience aphasia after damage to the right hemisphere only. It has been suggested that these individuals may have had an unusual brain organization prior to their illness or injury, with perhaps greater overall reliance on the right hemisphere for language skills than in the general population.\nPrimary progressive aphasia (PPA), while its name can be misleading, is actually a form of dementia that has some symptoms closely related to several forms of aphasia. It is characterized by a gradual loss in language functioning while other cognitive domains are mostly preserved, such as memory and personality. PPA usually initiates with sudden word-finding difficulties in an individual and progresses to a reduced ability to formulate grammatically correct sentences (syntax) and impaired comprehension. The etiology of PPA is not due to a stroke, traumatic brain injury (TBI), or infectious disease; it is still uncertain what initiates the onset of PPA in those affected by it.\nEpilepsy can also include transient aphasia as a prodromal or episodic symptom. Aphasia is also listed as a rare side-effect of the fentanyl patch, an opioid used to control chronic pain.\nClassification.\nAphasia is best thought of as a collection of different disorders, rather than a single problem. Each individual with aphasia will present with their own particular combination of language strengths and weaknesses. Consequently, it is a major challenge just to document the various difficulties that can occur in different people, let alone decide how they might best be treated. Most classifications of the aphasias tend to divide the various symptoms into broad classes. A common approach is to distinguish between the fluent aphasias (where speech remains fluent, but content may be lacking, and the person may have difficulties understanding others), and the nonfluent aphasias (where speech is very halting and effortful, and may consist of just one or two words at a time).\nHowever, no such broad-based grouping has proven fully adequate. There is wide variation among people even within the same broad grouping, and aphasias can be highly selective. For instance, people with naming deficits (anomic aphasia) might show an inability only for naming buildings, or people, or colors.\nIt is important to note that there are typical difficulties with speech and language that come with normal aging as well. As we age, language can become more difficult to process resulting in a slowing of verbal comprehension, reading abilities and more likely word finding difficulties. With each of these though, unlike some aphasias, functionality within daily life remains intact.\nClassical-localizationist approaches.\nLocalizationist approaches aim to classify the aphasias according to their major presenting characteristics and the regions of the brain that most probably gave rise to them. Inspired by the early work of nineteenth-century neurologists Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke, these approaches identify two major subtypes of aphasia and several more minor subtypes:\nRecent classification schemes adopting this approach, such as the Boston-Neoclassical Model, also group these classical aphasia subtypes into two larger classes: the nonfluent aphasias (which encompasses Broca's aphasia and transcortical motor aphasia) and the fluent aphasias (which encompasses Wernicke's aphasia, conduction aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia). These schemes also identify several further aphasia subtypes, including: anomic aphasia, which is characterized by a selective difficulty finding the names for things; and global aphasia, where both expression and comprehension of speech are severely compromised.\nMany localizationist approaches also recognize the existence of additional, more \"pure\" forms of language disorder that may affect only a single language skill. For example, in pure alexia, a person may be able to write but not read, and in pure word deafness, they may be able to produce speech and to read, but not understand speech when it is spoken to them.\nCognitive neuropsychological approaches.\nAlthough localizationist approaches provide a useful way of classifying the different patterns of language difficulty into broad groups, one problem is that a sizeable number of individuals do not fit neatly into one category or another. Another problem is that the categories, particularly the major ones such as Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia, still remain quite broad. Consequently, even amongst individuals who meet the criteria for classification into a subtype, there can be enormous variability in the types of difficulties they experience.\nInstead of categorizing every individual into a specific subtype, cognitive neuropsychological approaches aim to identify the key language skills or \"modules\" that are not functioning properly in each individual. A person could potentially have difficulty with just one module, or with a number of modules. This type of approach requires a framework or theory as to what skills/modules are needed to perform different kinds of language tasks. For example, the model of Max Coltheart identifies a module that recognizes phonemes as they are spoken, which is essential for any task involving recognition of words. Similarly, there is a module that stores phonemes that the person is planning to produce in speech, and this module is critical for any task involving the production of long words or long strings of speech. Once a theoretical framework has been established, the functioning of each module can then be assessed using a specific test or set of tests. In the clinical setting, use of this model usually involves conducting a battery of assessments, each of which tests one or a number of these modules. Once a diagnosis is reached as to the skills/modules where the most significant impairment lies, therapy can proceed to treat these skills.\nProgressive aphasias.\nPrimary progressive aphasia (PPA) is a neurodegenerative focal dementia that can be associated with progressive illnesses or dementia, such as \nfrontotemporal dementia / Pick Complex Motor neuron disease, Progressive supranuclear palsy, and Alzheimer's disease, which is the gradual process of progressively losing the ability to think. Gradual loss of language function occurs in the context of relatively well-preserved memory, visual processing, and personality until the advanced stages. Symptoms usually begin with word-finding problems (naming) and progress to impaired grammar (syntax) and comprehension (sentence processing and semantics).&lt;American Speech-Language-Hearing Association&gt; The loss of language before the loss of memory differentiates PPA from typical dementias. People suffering from PPA may have difficulties comprehending what others are saying. They can also have difficulty trying to find the right words to make a sentence. There are three classifications of Primary Progressive Aphasia : Progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), Semantic Dementia (SD), and Logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA)\nProgressive Jargon Aphasia is a fluent or receptive aphasia in which the person's speech is incomprehensible, but appears to make sense to them. Speech is fluent and effortless with intact syntax and grammar, but the person has problems with the selection of nouns. Either they will replace the desired word with another that sounds or looks like the original one or has some other connection or they will replace it with sounds. As such, people with jargon aphasia often use neologisms, and may perseverate if they try to replace the words they cannot find with sounds. Substitutions commonly involve picking another (actual) word starting with the same sound (e.g., clocktower - colander), picking another semantically related to the first (e.g., letter - scroll), or picking one phonetically similar to the intended one (e.g., lane - late).\nDeaf aphasia.\nThere have been many instances showing that there is a form of aphasia among deaf individuals. Sign languages are, after all, forms of language that have been shown to use the same areas of the brain as verbal forms of language. Mirror neurons become activated when an animal is acting in a particular way or watching another individual act in the same manner. These mirror neurons are important in giving an individual the ability to mimic movements of hands. Broca's area of speech production has been shown to contain several of these mirror neurons resulting in significant similarities of brain activity between sign language and vocal speech communication. Facial communication is a significant portion of how animals interact with each other. Humans use facial movements to create, what other humans perceive, to be faces of emotions. While combining these facial movements with speech, a more full form of language is created which enables the species to interact with a much more complex and detailed form of communication. Sign language also uses these facial movements and emotions along with the primary hand movement way of communicating. These facial movement forms of communication come from the same areas of the brain. When dealing with damages to certain areas of the brain, vocal forms of communication are in jeopardy of severe forms of aphasia. Since these same areas of the brain are being used for sign language, these same, at least very similar, forms of aphasia can show in the Deaf community. Individuals can show a form of Wernicke's aphasia with sign language and they show deficits in their abilities in being able to produce any form of expressions. Broca's aphasia shows up in some people, as well. These individuals find tremendous difficulty in being able to actually sign the linguistic concepts they are trying to express.\nSeverity.\nThe severity of the type of aphasia varies depending on the size of the stroke. However, there is much variance between how often one type of severity occurs in certain types of aphasia. For instance, any type of aphasia can range from mild to profound. Regardless of the severity of aphasia, people can make improvements due to spontaneous recovery and treatment in the acute stages of recovery. Additionally, while most studies propose that the greatest outcomes occur in people with severe aphasia when treatment is provided in the acute stages of recovery, Robey (1998) also found that those with severe aphasia are capable of making strong language gains in the chronic stage of recovery as well. This finding implies that persons with aphasia have the potential to have functional outcomes regardless of how severe their aphasia may be. While there is no distinct pattern of the outcomes of aphasia based on severity alone, global aphasia typically makes functional language gains, but may be gradual since global aphasia affects many language areas.\nCognitive deficits in aphasia.\nWhile aphasia has traditionally been described in terms of language deficits, there is increasing evidence that many people with aphasia commonly experience co-occurring non-linguistic cognitive deficits. By some accounts, cognitive deficits, such as attention and working memory constitute the underlying cause of language impairment in people with aphasia. Others suggest that cognitive deficits often co-occur but are comparable to cognitive deficits in stroke patients without aphasia and reflect general brain dysfunction following injury. The degree to which deficits in attention and other cognitive domains underlie language deficits in aphasia is still unclear.\nIn particular, people with aphasia often demonstrate short-term and working memory deficits. These deficits can occur in both the verbal domain as well as the visuospatial domain. Furthermore, these deficits are often associated with performance on language specific tasks such as naming, lexical processing, and sentence comprehension, and discourse production. Other studies have found that most, but not all people with aphasia demonstrate performance deficits on tasks of attention, and their performance on these tasks correlate with language performance and cognitive ability in other domains. Even patients with mild aphasia, who score near the ceiling on tests of language often demonstrate slower response times and interference effects in non-verbal attention abilities.\nIn addition to deficits in short-term memory, working memory, and attention, people with aphasia can also demonstrate deficits in executive function. For instance, people with aphasia may demonstrate deficits in initiation, planning, self-monitoring, and cognitive flexibility. Other studies have found that people with aphasia demonstrate reduced speed and efficiency during completion executive function assessments.\nRegardless of their role in the underlying nature of aphasia, cognitive deficits have a clear role in the study and rehabilitation of aphasia. For instance, the severity of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia has been associated with lower quality of life, even more so than the severity of language deficits. Furthermore, cognitive deficits may influence language treatment outcomes in aphasia. Non-linguistic cognitive deficits have also been the target of interventions directed at improving language ability, though outcomes are not definitive. While some studies have demonstrated language improvement secondary to cognitively-focused treatment, others have found little evidence that the treatment of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia has an influence on language outcomes.\nOne important caveat in the measurement and treatment of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia is the degree to which assessments of cognition rely on language abilities for successful performance. Most studies have attempted to circumvent this challenge by utilizing non-verbal cognitive assessments to evaluate cognitive ability in people with aphasia. However, the degree to which these tasks are truly \u2018non-verbal\u2019 and not mediated by language in unclear. For instance, Wall et al. found that language and non-linguistic performance was related, except when non-linguistic performance was measured by \u2018real life\u2019 cognitive tasks.\nPrevention of aphasia.\nAphasia is largely caused by unavoidable instances. However, some precautions can be taken to decrease risk for experiencing one of the two major causes of aphasia: stroke and traumatic brain injury (TBI). To decrease the probability of having an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, one should take the following precautions:\nTo prevent aphasia due to traumatic injury, one sure take precautionary measures when engaging in dangerous activities such as:\nAdditionally, one should always seek medical attention after sustaining head trauma due to a fall or accident. The sooner that one receives medical attention for a traumatic brain injury, the less likely one is to experience long-term or severe effects.\nManagement.\nWhen addressing Wernicke's aphasia, according to Bakheit et al. (2007), the lack of awareness of the language impairments, a common characteristic of Wernicke's aphasia, may affect the rate and extent of therapy outcomes. Robey (1998) determined that at least 2 hours of treatment per week is recommended for making significant language gains. Spontaneous recovery may cause some language gains, but without speech-language therapy, the outcomes can be half as strong as those with therapy.\nWhen addressing Broca's aphasia, better outcomes occur when the person participates in therapy, and treatment is more effective than no treatment for people in the acute period. Two or more hours of therapy per week in acute and post-acute stages produced the greatest results. High-intensity therapy was most effective, and low-intensity therapy was almost equivalent to no therapy.\nPeople with global aphasia are sometimes referred to as having irreversible aphasic syndrome, often making limited gains in auditory comprehension, and recovering no functional language modality with therapy. With this said, people with global aphasia may retain gestural communication skills that may enable success when communicating with conversational partners within familiar conditions. Process-oriented treatment options are limited, and people may not become competent language users as readers, listeners, writers, or speakers no matter how extensive therapy is. However, people's daily routines and quality of life can be enhanced with reasonable and modest goals. After the first month, there is limited to no healing to language abilities of most people. There is a grim prognosis leaving 83% who were globally aphasic after the first month they will remain globally aphasic at the first year. Some people are so severely impaired that their existing process-oriented treatment approaches offer signs of progress, and therefore cannot justify the cost of therapy.\nPerhaps due to the relative rareness of conduction aphasia, few studies have specifically studied the effectiveness of therapy for people with this type of aphasia. From the studies performed, results showed that therapy can help to improve specific language outcomes. One intervention that has had positive results is auditory repetition training. Kohn et al. (1990) reported that drilled auditory repetition training related to improvements in spontaneous speech, Francis et al. (2003) reported improvements in sentence comprehension, and Kalinyak-Fliszar et al. (2011) reported improvements in auditory-visual short-term memory.\nMost acute cases of aphasia recover some or most skills by working with a speech-language pathologist. Recovery and improvement can continue for years after the stroke. After the onset of Aphasia, there is approximately a six-month period of spontaneous recovery; during this time, the brain is attempting to recover and repair the damaged neurons. Improvement varies widely, depending on the aphasia's cause, type, and severity. Recovery also depends on the person's age, health, motivation, handedness, and educational level.\nThere is no one treatment proven to be effective for all types of aphasias. The reason that there is no universal treatment for aphasia is because of the nature of the disorder and the various ways it is presented, as explained in the above sections. Aphasia is rarely exhibited identically, implying that treatment needs to be catered specifically to the individual. Studies have shown that, although there is no consistency on treatment methodology in literature, there is a strong indication that treatment, in general, has positive outcomes. Therapy for aphasia ranges from increasing functional communication to improving speech accuracy, depending on the person's severity, needs and support of family and friends. Group therapy allows individuals to work on their pragmatic and communication skills with other individuals with aphasia, which are skills that may not often be addressed in individual one-on-one therapy sessions. It can also help increase confidence and social skills in a comfortable setting.\nEvidence does not support the use of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for improving aphasia after stroke. Moderate quality evidence does indicate naming performance improvements for nouns but not verbs using tDCS\nSpecific treatment techniques include the following:\nSemantic feature analysis (SFA) -a type of aphasia treatment that targets word-finding deficits. It is based on the theory that neural connections can be strengthened by using related words and phrases that are similar to the target word, to eventually activate the target word in the brain. SFA can be implemented in multiple forms such as verbally, written, using picture cards, etc. The SLP provides prompting questions to the individual with aphasia in order for the person to name the picture provided. Studies show that SFA is an effective intervention for improving confrontational naming.\nMelodic intonation therapy is used to treat non-fluent aphasia and has proved to be effective in some cases. However, there is still no evidence from randomized controlled trials confirming the efficacy of MIT in chronic aphasia. MIT is used to help people with aphasia vocalize themselves through speech song, which is then transferred as a spoken word. Good candidates for this therapy include people who have had left hemisphere strokes, non-fluent aphasias such as Broca's, good auditory comprehension, poor repetition and articulation, and good emotional stability and memory. An alternative explanation is that the efficacy of MIT depends on neural circuits involved in the processing of rhythmicity and formulaic expressions (examples taken from the MIT manual: \u201cI am fine,\u201d \u201chow are you?\u201d or \u201cthank you\u201d); while rhythmic features associated with melodic intonation may engage primarily left-hemisphere subcortical areas of the brain, the use of formulaic expressions is known to be supported by right-hemisphere cortical and bilateral subcortical neural networks.\nSystematic reviews support the effectiveness and importance of partner training. According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD), involving family with the treatment of an aphasic loved one is ideal for all involved, because while it will no doubt assist in their recovery, it will also make it easier for members of the family to learn how best to communicate with them.\nWhen a person's speech is insufficient, different kinds of augmentative and alternative communication could be considered such as alphabet boards, pictorial communication books, specialized software for computers or apps for tablets or smartphones.\nIntensity of treatment.\nThe intensity of aphasia therapy is determined by the length of each session, total hours of therapy per week, and total weeks of therapy provided. There is no consensus about what \"intense\" aphasia therapy entails, or how intense therapy should be to yield the best outcomes. A 2016 Cochrane review of speech and language therapy for people with aphasia found that treatments that are higher intensity, higher dose or over a long duration of time led to significantly better functional communication but people were more likely to drop out of high intensity treatment (up to 15 hours per week).\nIntensity of therapy is also dependent on the recency of stroke. People with aphasia react differently to intense treatment in the acute phase (0\u20133 months post stroke), sub-acute phase (3\u20136 months post stroke), or chronic phase (6+ months post stroke). Intensive therapy has been found to be effective for people with nonfluent and fluent chronic aphasia, but less effective for people with acute aphasia.&gt; People with sub-acute aphasia also respond well to intensive therapy of 100 hours over 62 weeks. This suggests people in the sub-acute phase can improve greatly in language and functional communication measures with intensive therapy compared to regular therapy.\nIndividualized service delivery.\nIntensity of treatment should be individualized based on the recency of stroke, therapy goals, and other specific characteristics such as age, size of lesion, overall health status, and motivation. Each individual reacts differently to treatment intensity and is able to tolerate treatment at different times post-stroke. Intensity of treatment after a stroke should be dependent on the person's motivation, stamina, and tolerance for therapy.\nOutcomes.\nIf the symptoms of aphasia last longer than two or three months after a stroke, a complete recovery is unlikely. However, it is important to note that some people continue to improve over a period of years and even decades. Improvement is a slow process that usually involves both helping the individual and family understand the nature of aphasia and learning compensatory strategies for communicating.\nAfter a traumatic brain injury (TBI) or cerebrovascular accident (CVA), the brain undergoes several healing and re-organization processes, which may result in improved language function. This is referred to as spontaneous recovery. Spontaneous recovery is the natural recovery the brain makes without treatment, and the brain begins to reorganize and change in order to recover. There are several factors that contribute to a person's chance of recovery caused by stroke, including stroke size and location. Age, sex, and education have not been found to be very predictive.\nSpecific to aphasia, spontaneous recovery varies among affected people and may not look the same in everyone, making it difficult to predict recovery.\nThough some cases of Wernicke's aphasia have shown greater improvements than more mild forms of aphasia, people with Wernicke's aphasia may not reach as high a level of speech abilities as those with mild forms of aphasia.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded case of aphasia is from an Egyptian papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, which details speech problems in a person with a traumatic brain injury to the temporal lobe.\nDuring the second half of the 19th century, aphasia was a major focus for scientists and philosophers who were working in the beginning stages of the field of psychology.\nIn medical research, speechlessness was described as an incorrect prognosis, and there was no assumption that underlying language complications existed. Broca and his colleagues were some of the first to write about aphasia, but Wernicke was the first credited to have written extensively about aphasia being a disorder that contained comprehension difficulties. Despite claims of who reported on aphasia first, it was F.J. Gall that gave the first full description of aphasia after studying wounds to the brain, as well as his observation of speech difficulties resulting from vascular lesions. A recent book on the entire history of aphasia is available (Reference: Tesak, J. &amp; Code, C. (2008) \"Milestones in the History of Aphasia: Theories and Protagonists\". Hove, East Sussex: Psychology Press).\nEtymology.\n\"Aphasia\" is from Greek \"a-\" (\"without\") + \"ph\u00e1sis\" (\"\u03c6\u03ac\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\", \"speech\").\nThe word \"aphasia\" comes from the word \u1f00\u03c6\u03b1\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 \"aphasia\", in Ancient Greek, which means \"speechlessness\", derived from \u1f04\u03c6\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 \"aphatos\", \"speechless\" from \u1f00- \"a-\", \"not, un\" and \u03c6\u03b7\u03bc\u03af \"phemi\", \"I speak\".\nFurther research.\nResearch is currently being done using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to witness the difference in how language is processed in normal brains vs aphasic brains. This will help researchers to understand exactly what the brain must go through in order to recover from Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and how different areas of the brain respond after such an injury.\nAnother intriguing approach being tested is that of drug therapy. Research is in progress that will hopefully uncover whether or not certain drugs might be used in addition to speech-language therapy in order to facilitate recovery of proper language function. It's possible that the best treatment for Aphasia might involve combining drug treatment with therapy, instead of relying on one over the other.\nOne other method being researched as a potential therapeutic combination with speech-language therapy is brain stimulation. One particular method, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), alters brain activity in whatever area it happens to stimulate, which has recently led scientists to wonder if this shift in brain function caused by TMS might help people re-learn languages.\nThe research being put into Aphasia has only just begun. Researchers appear to have multiple ideas on how Aphasia could be more effectively treated in the future."}
{"id": "2089", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2089", "title": "Aorta", "text": "The aorta ( ) is the main and largest artery in the human body, originating from the left ventricle of the heart and extending down to the abdomen, where it splits into two smaller arteries (the common iliac arteries). The aorta distributes oxygenated blood to all parts of the body through the systemic circulation.\nStructure.\nSections.\nIn anatomical sources, the aorta is usually divided into sections.\nOne way of classifying a part of the aorta is by anatomical compartment, where the thoracic aorta (or thoracic portion of the aorta) runs from the heart to the diaphragm. The aorta then continues downward as the abdominal aorta (or abdominal portion of the aorta) from the diaphragm to the aortic bifurcation.\nAnother system divides the aorta with respect to its course and the direction of blood flow. In this system, the aorta starts as the ascending aorta, travels superiorly from the heart, and then makes a hairpin turn known as the aortic arch. Following the aortic arch, the aorta then travels inferiorly as the descending aorta. The descending aorta has two parts. The aorta begins to descend in the thoracic cavity and is consequently known as the thoracic aorta. After the aorta passes through the diaphragm, it is known as the abdominal aorta. The aorta ends by dividing into two major blood vessels, the common iliac arteries and a smaller midline vessel, the median sacral artery.\nAscending aorta.\nThe ascending aorta begins at the opening of the aortic valve in the left ventricle of the heart. It runs through a common pericardial sheath with the pulmonary trunk. These two blood vessels twist around each other, causing the aorta to start out posterior to the pulmonary trunk, but end by twisting to its right and anterior side.\nThe transition from ascending aorta to aortic arch is at the pericardial reflection on the aorta.\nAt the root of the ascending aorta, the lumen has three small pockets between the cusps of the aortic valve and the wall of the aorta, which are called the aortic sinuses or the sinuses of Valsalva. The left aortic sinus contains the origin of the left coronary artery and the right aortic sinus likewise gives rise to the right coronary artery. Together, these two arteries supply the heart. The posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a coronary artery. For this reason the left, right and posterior aortic sinuses are also called left-coronary, right-coronary and non-coronary sinuses.\nAortic arch.\nThe aortic arch loops over the left pulmonary artery and the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk, to which it remains connected by the ligamentum arteriosum, a remnant of the fetal circulation that is obliterated a few days after birth. In addition to these blood vessels, the aortic arch crosses the left main bronchus. Between the aortic arch and the pulmonary trunk is a network of autonomic nerve fibers, the cardiac plexus or \"aortic plexus\". The left vagus nerve, which passes anterior to the aortic arch, gives off a major branch, the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which loops under the aortic arch just lateral to the ligamentum arteriosum. It then runs back to the neck.\nThe aortic arch has three major branches: from proximal to distal, they are the brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery, and the left subclavian artery. The brachiocephalic trunk supplies the right side of the head and neck as well as the right arm and chest wall, while the latter two together supply the left side of the same regions.\nThe aortic arch ends, and the descending aorta begins at the level of the intervertebral disc between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae.\nThoracic aorta.\nThe thoracic descending aorta gives rise to the intercostal and subcostal arteries, as well as to the superior and inferior left bronchial arteries and variable branches to the esophagus, mediastinum, and pericardium. Its lowest pair of branches are the superior phrenic arteries, which supply the diaphragm, and the subcostal arteries for the twelfth rib.\nAbdominal aorta.\nThe abdominal aorta begins at the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm at the level of the twelfth thoracic vertebra. It gives rise to lumbar and musculophrenic arteries, renal and middle suprarenal arteries, and visceral arteries (the celiac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery and the inferior mesenteric artery). It ends in a bifurcation into the left and right common iliac arteries. At the point of the bifurcation, there also springs a smaller branch, the median sacral artery.\nDevelopment.\nThe ascending aorta develops from the outflow tract, which initially starts as a single tube connecting the heart with the aortic arches (which will form the great arteries) in early development but is then separated into the aorta and the pulmonary trunk.\nThe aortic arches start as five pairs of symmetrical arteries connecting the heart with the dorsal aorta, and then undergo a significant remodelling to form the final asymmetrical structure of the great arteries, with the 3rd pair of arteries contributing to the common carotids, the right 4th forming the base and middle part of the right subclavian artery and the left 4th being the central part of the aortic arch. The smooth muscle of the great arteries and the population of cells that form the aorticopulmonary septum that separates the aorta and pulmonary artery is derived from cardiac neural crest. This contribution of the neural crest to the great artery smooth muscle is unusual as most smooth muscle is derived from mesoderm. In fact the smooth muscle within the abdominal aorta is derived from mesoderm, and the coronary arteries, which arise just above the semilunar valves, possess smooth muscle of mesodermal origin. A failure of the aorticopulmonary septum to divide the great vessels results in persistent truncus arteriosus.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe aorta is an elastic artery, and as such is quite distensible. The aorta consists of a heterogeneous mixture of smooth muscle, nerves, intimal cells, endothelial cells, fibroblast-like cells, and a complex extracellular matrix. The vascular wall consists of several layers known as the tunica externa, tunica media, and tunica intima. The thickness of the aorta requires an extensive network of tiny blood vessels called vasa vasorum, which feed the tunica externa and tunica media outer layers of the aorta. The aortic arch contains baroreceptors and chemoreceptors that relay information concerning blood pressure and blood pH and carbon dioxide levels to the medulla oblongata of the brain. This information is processed by the brain and the autonomic nervous system mediates the homeostatic responses.\nWithin the tunica media, smooth muscle and the extracellular matrix are quantitatively the largest components of the aortic vascular wall. The fundamental unit of the aorta is the elastic lamella, which consists of smooth muscle and elastic matrix. The medial layer of the aorta consist of concentric musculoelastic layers (the elastic lamella) in mammals. The smooth muscle component does not dramatically alter the diameter of the aorta but rather serves to increase the stiffness and viscoelasticity of the aortic wall when activated. The elastic matrix dominates the biomechanical properties of the aorta. The elastic matrix forms lamellae, consisting of elastic fibers, collagens (predominately type III), proteoglycans, and glycoaminoglycans.\nVariation.\nVariations may occur in the location of the aorta, and the way in which arteries branch off the aorta. The aorta, normally on the left side of the body, may be found on the right in dextrocardia, in which the heart is found on the right, or situs inversus, in which the location of all organs are flipped.\nVariations in the branching of individual arteries may also occur. For example, the left vertebral artery may arise from the aorta, instead of the left common carotid artery.\nIn patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital disorder, the fetal ductus arteriosis fails to close, leaving an open vessel connecting the pulmonary artery to the proximal descending aorta.\nFunction.\nThe aorta supplies all of the systemic circulation, which means that the entire body, except for the respiratory zone of the lung, receives its blood from the aorta. Broadly speaking, branches from the ascending aorta supply the heart; branches from the aortic arch supply the head, neck, and arms; branches from the thoracic descending aorta supply the chest (excluding the heart and the respiratory zone of the lung); and branches from the abdominal aorta supply the abdomen. The pelvis and legs get their blood from the common iliac arteries.\nBlood flow and velocity.\nThe pulsatile nature of blood flow creates a pulse wave that is propagated down the arterial tree, and at bifurcations reflected waves rebound to return to semilunar valves and the origin of the aorta. These return waves create the dicrotic notch displayed in the aortic pressure curve during the cardiac cycle as these reflected waves push on the aortic semilunar valve. With age, the aorta stiffens such that the pulse wave is propagated faster and reflected waves return to the heart faster before the semilunar valve closes, which raises the blood pressure. The stiffness of the aorta is associated with a number of diseases and pathologies, and noninvasive measures of the pulse wave velocity are an independent indicator of hypertension. Measuring the pulse wave velocity (invasively and non-invasively) is a means of determining arterial stiffness. Maximum aortic velocity may be noted as Vmax or less commonly as AoVmax.\nMean arterial pressure (MAP) is highest in the aorta, and the MAP decreases across the circulation from aorta to arteries to arterioles to capillaries to veins back to atrium. The difference between aortic and right atrial pressure accounts for blood flow in the circulation. When the left ventricle contracts to force blood into the aorta, the aorta expands. This stretching gives the potential energy that will help maintain blood pressure during diastole, as during this time the aorta contracts passively. This Windkessel effect of the great elastic arteries has important biomechanical implications. The elastic recoil helps conserve the energy from the pumping heart and smooth out the pulsatile nature created by the heart. Aortic pressure is highest at the aorta and becomes less pulsatile and lower pressure as blood vessels divide into arteries, arterioles, and capillaries such that flow is slow and smooth for gases and nutrient exchange.\nOther animals.\nAll amniotes have a broadly similar arrangement to that of humans, albeit with a number of individual variations. In fish, however, there are two separate vessels referred to as aortas. The ventral aorta carries de-oxygenated blood from the heart to the gills; part of this vessel forms the ascending aorta in tetrapods (the remainder forms the pulmonary artery). A second, dorsal aorta carries oxygenated blood from the gills to the rest of the body and is homologous with the descending aorta of tetrapods. The two aortas are connected by a number of vessels, one passing through each of the gills.\nAmphibians also retain the fifth connecting vessel, so that the aorta has two parallel arches.\nHistory.\nThe word 'Aorta' stems from the Late Latin \"\" from Classical Greek \"aort\u0113\" (), from \"aeir\u014d\", \"I lift, raise\" () This term was first applied by Aristotle when describing the aorta and describes accurately how it seems to be 'suspended' above the heart.\nThe function of the aorta is documented in the Talmud, where it is noted as one of three major vessels entering or leaving the heart, and where perforation is linked to death."}
{"id": "2090", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2090", "title": "Albert of Brandenburg Prussia", "text": ""}
{"id": "2093", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2093", "title": "Abimelech", "text": "Abimelech (also spelled Abimelek or Avimelech; ) was the name of multiple Philistine kings mentioned in the Hebrew Bible.\nEtymology.\nThe name or title \"Abimelech\" is formed from Hebrew words for \"father\" and \"king,\" and may be interpreted in a variety of ways, including \"Father-King\", \"My father is king,\" or \"Father of a king.\" In the Pentateuch, it is used as a title for kings in the land of Canaan.\nAt the time of the Amarna tablets (mid-14th century BC), there was an Egyptian governor of Tyre similarly named Abimilki, who is sometimes speculated to be connected with one or more of the biblical Abimelechs.\nAbimelech of Gerar.\nAbimelech was most prominently the name of a polytheistic king of Gerar who is mentioned in two of the three wife-sister narratives in Genesis, in connection with both Abraham (chap. 20) and Isaac (chap. 26). \nKing Abimelech of Gerar also appears in an extra-biblical tradition recounted in texts such as the \"Kitab al-Magall\", the \"Cave of Treasures\" and the \"Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan\", as one of 12 regional kings in Abraham's time said to have built the city of Jerusalem for Melchizedek.\nOther people with this name.\nApart from the king (or kings) of Gerar, the Bible also records this name for:\nOther literary references include:"}
{"id": "2095", "revid": "16084631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2095", "title": "Anomalous operation", "text": ""}
{"id": "2099", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2099", "title": "Andrew Tridgell", "text": "Andrew \"Tridge\" Tridgell (born 28 February 1967) is an Australian computer programmer. He is the author of and a contributor to the Samba file server, and co-inventor of the rsync algorithm.\nHe has analysed complex proprietary protocols and algorithms, to allow compatible free and open source software implementations.\nProjects.\nTridgell was a major developer of the Samba software, analyzing the Server Message Block protocol used for workgroup and network file sharing by Microsoft Windows products. He developed the hierarchical memory allocator, originally as part of Samba.\nFor his PhD dissertation, he co-developed rsync, including the rsync algorithm, a highly efficient file transfer and synchronisation tool. He was also the original author of rzip, which uses a similar algorithm to rsync. He developed spamsum, based on locality-sensitive hashing algorithms.\nHe is the author of KnightCap, a reinforcement-learning based chess engine.\nTridgell was also a leader in hacking the TiVo to make it work in Australia, which uses the PAL video format.\nIn April 2005, Tridgell tried to produce free software (now known as SourcePuller) that interoperated with the BitKeeper source code repository. This was cited as the reason that BitMover revoked a license allowing Linux developers free use of their BitKeeper product. Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux kernel, and Tridgell were thus involved in a public debate about the events, in which Tridgell stated that, not having bought or owned BitKeeper \u2013 and thus having never agreed to its license \u2013 he could not violate it, and was analyzing the protocol ethically, as he had done with Samba. Tridgell's involvement in the project resulted in Torvalds accusing him of playing dirty tricks with BitKeeper. Tridgell claimed his analysis started with simply telneting to a BitKeeper server and typing codice_1.\nIn 2011 Tridgell got involved with the software development of ArduPilot Mega, an open source Arduino-based UAV controller board, working on an entry for the UAV Challenge Outback Rescue.\nAcademic achievements.\nTridgell completed a PhD at the Computer Sciences Laboratory of the Australian National University. His original doctorate work was in the area of speech recognition but was never completed. His submitted dissertation 'Efficient Algorithms for Sorting and Synchronization' was based on his work on the rsync algorithm."}
