{"id": "8182", "revid": "8410945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8182", "title": "Dwight D. Eisenhower", "text": "Dwight David \"Ike\" Eisenhower (; October 14, 1890 \u2013 March 28, 1969) was an American military officer and statesman who served as the 34th president of the United States from 1953 to 1961. During World War II, he became a five-star general in the Army and served as Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe. He was responsible for planning and supervising the invasion of North Africa in Operation Torch in 1942\u201343 and the successful invasion of Normandy in 1944\u201345 from the Western Front.\nEisenhower, born David Dwight Eisenhower, was raised in Abilene, Kansas, in a large family of mostly Pennsylvania Dutch ancestry. His family had a strong religious background. His mother became a Jehovah's Witness. Eisenhower, however, did not belong to any organized church until 1952. He graduated from West Point in 1915 and later married Mamie Doud, with whom he had two sons. During World War I, he was denied a request to serve in Europe and instead commanded a unit that trained tank crews. Following the war, he served under various generals and was promoted to the rank of brigadier general in 1941. After the United States entered World War II, Eisenhower oversaw the invasions of North Africa and Sicily before supervising the invasions of France and Germany. After the war, he served as Army Chief of Staff (1945\u20131948), as president of Columbia University (1948\u20131953) and as the first Supreme Commander of NATO (1951\u20131952).\nIn 1952, Eisenhower entered the presidential race as a Republican to block the isolationist foreign policies of Senator Robert A. Taft; Taft opposed NATO and wanted no foreign entanglements. Eisenhower won that election and the 1956 election in landslides, both times defeating Adlai Stevenson II. Eisenhower's main goals in office were to contain the spread of communism and reduce federal deficits. In 1953, he threatened to use nuclear weapons until China agreed to peace terms in the Korean War. China did agree and an armistice resulted which remains in effect. His New Look policy of nuclear deterrence prioritized inexpensive nuclear weapons while reducing funding for expensive Army divisions. He continued Harry S. Truman's policy of recognizing Taiwan as the legitimate government of China, and he won congressional approval of the Formosa Resolution. His administration provided major aid to help the French fight off Vietnamese Communists in the First Indochina War. After the French left, he gave strong financial support to the new state of South Vietnam. He supported regime-changing military coups in Iran and Guatemala orchestrated by his own administration. During the Suez Crisis of 1956, he condemned the Israeli, British, and French invasion of Egypt, and he forced them to withdraw. He also condemned the Soviet invasion during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 but took no action. After the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957, Eisenhower authorized the establishment of NASA, which led to the Space Race. He deployed 15,000 soldiers during the 1958 Lebanon crisis. Near the end of his term, he failed to set up a summit meeting with the Soviets when a U.S. spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union. He approved the Bay of Pigs invasion, which was left to John F. Kennedy to carry out.\nOn the domestic front, Eisenhower was a moderate conservative who continued New Deal agencies and expanded Social Security. He covertly opposed Joseph McCarthy and contributed to the end of McCarthyism by openly invoking executive privilege. He signed the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and sent Army troops to enforce federal court orders which integrated schools in Little Rock, Arkansas. His largest program was the Interstate Highway System. He promoted the establishment of strong science education via the National Defense Education Act. His two terms saw unprecedented economic prosperity except for a minor recession in 1958. In his farewell address to the nation, he expressed his concerns about the dangers of massive military spending, particularly deficit spending and government contracts to private military manufacturers, which he dubbed \"the military\u2013industrial complex\". Historical evaluations of his presidency place him among the upper tier of American presidents.\nFamily background.\nThe Eisenhauer (German for \"iron hewer/miner\") family migrated from Karlsbrunn in Nassau-Saarbr\u00fccken, to America, first settling in York, Pennsylvania, in 1741, and in the 1880s moving to Kansas. Accounts vary as to how and when the German name Eisenhauer was anglicized to Eisenhower. Eisenhower's Pennsylvania Dutch ancestors, who were primarily farmers, included Hans Nikolaus Eisenhauer of Karlsbrunn, who migrated to Lancaster, Pennsylvania, in 1741.\nHans's great-great-grandson, David Jacob Eisenhower (1863\u20131942), Eisenhower's father, was a college-educated engineer, despite his own father Jacob's urging to stay on the family farm. Eisenhower's mother, Ida Elizabeth (Stover) Eisenhower, born in Virginia, of predominantly German Protestant ancestry, moved to Kansas from Virginia. She married David on September 23, 1885, in Lecompton, Kansas, on the campus of their alma mater, Lane University. Dwight David Eisenhower's lineage also included English ancestors (on both sides) and Scottish ancestors (through his maternal line).\nDavid owned a general store in Hope, Kansas, but the business failed due to economic conditions and the family became impoverished. The Eisenhowers then lived in Texas from 1889 until 1892, and later returned to Kansas, with $24 () to their name at the time. David worked as a railroad mechanic and then at a creamery. By 1898, the parents made a decent living and provided a suitable home for their large family.\nEarly life and education.\nDwight David Eisenhower was born on October 14, 1890, in Denison, Texas, the third of seven sons born to David J. Eisenhower and Ida Stover. His mother originally named him David Dwight but reversed the two names after his birth to avoid the confusion of having two Davids in the family. All of the boys were called \"Ike\", such as \"Big Ike\" (Edgar) and \"Little Ike\" (Dwight); the nickname was intended as an abbreviation of their last name. By World War II, only Dwight was still called \"Ike\".\nIn 1892, the family moved to Abilene, Kansas, which Eisenhower considered his hometown. As a child, he was involved in an accident that cost his younger brother Earl an eye, for which he was remorseful for the remainder of his life. Dwight developed a keen and enduring interest in exploring the outdoors. He learned about hunting and fishing, cooking, and card playing from an illiterate named Bob Davis who camped on the Smoky Hill River.\nWhile Eisenhower's mother was against war, it was her collection of history books that first sparked Eisenhower's early and lasting interest in military history. He persisted in reading the books in her collection and became a voracious reader on the subject. Other favorite subjects early in his education were arithmetic and spelling.\nHis parents set aside specific times at breakfast and at dinner for daily family Bible reading. Chores were regularly assigned and rotated among all the children, and misbehavior was met with unequivocal discipline, usually from David. His mother, previously a member (with David) of the River Brethren sect of the Mennonites, joined the International Bible Students Association, later known as Jehovah's Witnesses. The Eisenhower home served as the local meeting hall from 1896 to 1915, though Eisenhower never joined the International Bible Students. His later decision to attend West Point saddened his mother, who felt that warfare was \"rather wicked\", but she did not overrule his decision. While speaking of himself in 1948, Eisenhower said he was \"one of the most deeply religious men I know\" though unattached to any \"sect or organization\". He was baptized in the Presbyterian Church in 1953.\nEisenhower attended Abilene High School and graduated with the class of 1909. As a freshman, he injured his knee and developed a leg infection that extended into his groin, which his doctor diagnosed as life-threatening. The doctor insisted that the leg be amputated but Dwight refused to allow it, and surprisingly recovered, though he had to repeat his freshman year. He and brother Edgar both wanted to attend college, though they lacked the funds. They made a pact to take alternate years at college while the other worked to earn the tuitions.\nEdgar took the first turn at school, and Dwight was employed as a night supervisor at the Belle Springs Creamery. When Edgar asked for a second year, Dwight consented and worked for a second year. At that time, a friend \"Swede\" Hazlett was applying to the Naval Academy and urged Dwight to apply to the school, since no tuition was required. Eisenhower requested consideration for either Annapolis or West Point with his U.S. Senator, Joseph L. Bristow. Though Eisenhower was among the winners of the entrance-exam competition, he was beyond the age limit for the Naval Academy. He then accepted an appointment to West Point in 1911.\nAt West Point, Eisenhower relished the emphasis on traditions and on sports, but was less enthusiastic about the hazing, though he willingly accepted it as a plebe. He was also a regular violator of the more detailed regulations, and finished school with a less than stellar discipline rating. Academically, Eisenhower's best subject by far was English. Otherwise, his performance was average, though he thoroughly enjoyed the typical emphasis of engineering on science and mathematics.\nIn athletics, Eisenhower later said that \"not making the baseball team at West Point was one of the greatest disappointments of my life, maybe my greatest\". He made the varsity football team and was a starter as running back and linebacker in 1912, when he tackled the legendary Jim Thorpe of the Carlisle Indians. Eisenhower suffered a torn knee while being tackled in the next game, which was the last he played; he re-injured his knee on horseback and in the boxing ring, so he turned to fencing and gymnastics.\nEisenhower later served as junior varsity football coach and cheerleader. He graduated in the middle of the class of 1915, which became known as \"the class the stars fell on\", because 59 members eventually became general officers.\nPersonal life.\nWhile Eisenhower was stationed in Texas, he met Mamie Doud of Boone, Iowa. They were immediately taken with each other. He proposed to her on Valentine's Day in 1916. A November wedding date in Denver was moved up to July 1 due to the pending U.S. entry into World War\u00a0I. They moved many times during their first 35 years of marriage.\nThe Eisenhowers had two sons. Doud Dwight \"Icky\" Eisenhower (1917\u20131921) died of scarlet fever at the age of three. Eisenhower was mostly reluctant to discuss his death. Their second son, John Eisenhower (1922\u20132013), was born in Denver, Colorado. John served in the United States Army, retired as a brigadier general, became an author and served as U.S. Ambassador to Belgium from 1969 to 1971. Coincidentally, John graduated from West Point on D-Day, June 6, 1944. He married Barbara Jean Thompson on June 10, 1947. John and Barbara had four children: David, Barbara Ann, Susan Elaine and Mary Jean. David, after whom Camp David is named, married Richard Nixon's daughter Julie in 1968.\nEisenhower was a golf enthusiast later in life, and he joined the Augusta National Golf Club in 1948. He played golf frequently during and after his presidency and was unreserved in expressing his passion for the game, to the point of golfing during winter; he ordered his golf balls painted black so he could see them better against snow on the ground. He had a small, basic golf facility installed at Camp David, and became close friends with the Augusta National Chairman Clifford Roberts, inviting Roberts to stay at the White House on numerous occasions. Roberts, an investment broker, also handled the Eisenhower family's investments.\nOil painting was one of Eisenhower's hobbies. He began painting while at Columbia University, after watching Thomas E. Stephens paint Mamie's portrait. In order to relax, Eisenhower painted about 260 oils during the last 20 years of his life. The images were mostly landscapes, but also portraits of subjects such as Mamie, their grandchildren, General Montgomery, George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln. Wendy Beckett stated that Eisenhower's work, \"simple and earnest, rather cause us to wonder at the hidden depths of this reticent president\". A conservative in both art and politics, he in a 1962 speech denounced modern art as \"a piece of canvas that looks like a broken-down Tin Lizzie, loaded with paint, has been driven over it\".\n\"Angels in the Outfield\" was Eisenhower's favorite movie. His favorite reading material for relaxation were the Western novels of Zane Grey. With his excellent memory and ability to focus, Eisenhower was skilled at card games. He learned poker, which he called his \"favorite indoor sport\", in Abilene. Eisenhower recorded West Point classmates' poker losses for payment after graduation, and later stopped playing because his opponents resented having to pay him. A friend reported that after learning to play contract bridge at West Point, Eisenhower played the game six nights a week for five months. Eisenhower continued to play bridge throughout his military career. While stationed in the Philippines, he played regularly with President Manuel Quezon, earning him the nickname, the \u201cBridge Wizard of Manila\". During WWII, an unwritten qualification for an officer's appointment to Eisenhower's staff was the ability to play a sound game of bridge. He played even during the stressful weeks leading up to the D-Day landings. His favorite partner was General Alfred Gruenther, considered the best player in the U.S. Army; he appointed Gruenther his second-in-command at NATO partly because of his skill at bridge. Saturday night bridge games at the White House were a feature of his presidency. He was a strong player, though not an expert by modern standards. The great bridge player and popularizer Ely Culbertson described his game as classic and sound with \"flashes of brilliance\", and said that \"You can always judge a man's character by the way he plays cards. Eisenhower is a calm and collected player and never whines at his losses. He is brilliant in victory but never commits the bridge player's worst crime of gloating when he wins.\" Bridge expert Oswald Jacoby frequently participated in the White House games, and said, \"The President plays better bridge than golf. He tries to break 90 at golf. At bridge, you would say he plays in the 70s.\"\nWorld War I (1914\u20131918).\nAfter graduation in 1915, Second Lieutenant Eisenhower requested an assignment in the Philippines, which was denied. He served initially in logistics and then the infantry at various camps in Texas and Georgia until 1918. In 1916, while stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Eisenhower was football coach for St. Louis College, now St. Mary's University. Eisenhower was an honorary member of the Sigma Beta Chi fraternity at St. Mary's University. In late 1917, while he was in charge of training at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia, his wife Mamie had their first son.\nWhen the U.S. entered World War I, he immediately requested an overseas assignment but was again denied and then assigned to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas. In February 1918, he was transferred to Camp Meade in Maryland with the 65th Engineers. His unit was later ordered to France, but to his chagrin he received orders for the new tank corps, where he was promoted to brevet lieutenant colonel in the National Army. He commanded a unit that trained tank crews at Camp Colt\u00a0\u2013 his first command\u00a0\u2013 at the site of \"Pickett's Charge\" on the Gettysburg, Pennsylvania Civil War battleground. Though Eisenhower and his tank crews never saw combat, he displayed excellent organizational skills, as well as an ability to accurately assess junior officers' strengths and make optimal placements of personnel.\nOnce again his spirits were raised when the unit under his command received orders overseas to France. This time his wishes were thwarted when the armistice was signed a week before his departure date. Completely missing out on the warfront left him depressed and bitter for a time, despite receiving the Distinguished Service Medal for his work at home. In World War II, rivals who had combat service in the first great war (led by Gen. Bernard Montgomery) sought to denigrate Eisenhower for his previous lack of combat duty, despite his stateside experience establishing a camp, completely equipped, for thousands of troops, and developing a full combat training schedule.\nIn service of generals.\nAfter the war, Eisenhower reverted to his regular rank of captain and a few days later was promoted to major, a rank he held for 16 years. The major was assigned in 1919 to a transcontinental Army convoy to test vehicles and dramatize the need for improved roads in the nation. Indeed, the convoy averaged only from Washington, D.C., to San Francisco; later the improvement of highways became a signature issue for Eisenhower as president.\nHe assumed duties again at Camp Meade, Maryland, commanding a battalion of tanks, where he remained until 1922. His schooling continued, focused on the nature of the next war and the role of the tank in it. His new expertise in tank warfare was strengthened by a close collaboration with George S. Patton, Sereno E. Brett, and other senior tank leaders. Their leading-edge ideas of speed-oriented offensive tank warfare were strongly discouraged by superiors, who considered the new approach too radical and preferred to continue using tanks in a strictly supportive role for the infantry. Eisenhower was even threatened with court-martial for continued publication of these proposed methods of tank deployment, and he relented.\nFrom 1920, Eisenhower served under a succession of talented generals\u00a0\u2013 Fox Conner, John J. Pershing, Douglas MacArthur and George Marshall. He first became executive officer to General Conner in the Panama Canal Zone, where, joined by Mamie, he served until 1924. Under Conner's tutelage, he studied military history and theory (including Carl von Clausewitz's \"On War\"), and later cited Conner's enormous influence on his military thinking, saying in 1962 that \"Fox Conner was the ablest man I ever knew.\" Conner's comment on Eisenhower was, \"[He] is one of the most capable, efficient and loyal officers I have ever met.\" On Conner's recommendation, in 1925\u201326 he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where he graduated first in a class of 245 officers. He then served as a battalion commander at Fort Benning, Georgia, until 1927.\nDuring the late 1920s and early 1930s, Eisenhower's career in the post-war army stalled somewhat, as military priorities diminished; many of his friends resigned for high-paying business jobs. He was assigned to the American Battle Monuments Commission directed by General Pershing, and with the help of his brother Milton Eisenhower, then a journalist at the U.S. Agriculture Department, he produced a guide to American battlefields in Europe. He then was assigned to the Army War College and graduated in 1928. After a one-year assignment in France, Eisenhower served as executive officer to General George V. Moseley, Assistant Secretary of War, from 1929 to February 1933. Major Dwight D. Eisenhower graduated from the Army Industrial College (Washington, DC) in 1933 and later served on the faculty (it was later expanded to become the Industrial College of the Armed Services and is now known as the Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy).\nHis primary duty was planning for the next war, which proved most difficult in the midst of the Great Depression. He then was posted as chief military aide to General Douglas MacArthur, Army Chief of Staff. In 1932 he participated in the clearing of the Bonus March encampment in Washington, D.C. Although he was against the actions taken against the veterans and strongly advised MacArthur against taking a public role in it, he later wrote the Army's official incident report, endorsing MacArthur's conduct.\nIn 1935 he accompanied MacArthur to the Philippines, where he served as assistant military adviser to the Philippine government in developing their army. Eisenhower had strong philosophical disagreements with MacArthur regarding the role of the Philippine Army and the leadership qualities that an American army officer should exhibit and develop in his subordinates. The resulting antipathy between Eisenhower and MacArthur lasted the rest of their lives.\nHistorians have concluded that this assignment provided valuable preparation for handling the challenging personalities of Winston Churchill, George S. Patton, George Marshall, and Bernard Montgomery during World War II. Eisenhower later emphasized that too much had been made of the disagreements with MacArthur, and that a positive relationship endured. While in Manila, Mamie suffered a life-threatening stomach ailment but recovered fully. Eisenhower was promoted to the rank of permanent lieutenant colonel in 1936. He also learned to fly, making a solo flight over the Philippines in 1937, and obtained his private pilot's license in 1939 at Fort Lewis. Also around this time, he was offered a post by the Philippine Commonwealth Government, namely by then Philippine President Manuel L. Quezon on recommendations by MacArthur, to become the chief of police of a new capital being planned, now named Quezon City, but he declined the offer.\nEisenhower returned to the United States in December 1939 and was assigned as commanding officer (CO) of the 1st Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment at Fort Lewis, Washington, later becoming the regimental executive officer. In March 1941 he was promoted to colonel and assigned as chief of staff of the newly activated IX Corps under Major General Kenyon Joyce. In June 1941, he was appointed chief of staff to General Walter Krueger, Commander of the Third Army, at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas. After successfully participating in the Louisiana Maneuvers, he was promoted to brigadier general on October 3, 1941. Although his administrative abilities had been noticed, on the eve of the American entry into World War II he had never held an active command above a battalion and was far from being considered by many as a potential commander of major operations.\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nAfter the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Eisenhower was assigned to the General Staff in Washington, where he served until June 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat Japan and Germany. He was appointed Deputy Chief in charge of Pacific Defenses under the Chief of War Plans Division (WPD), General Leonard T. Gerow, and then succeeded Gerow as Chief of the War Plans Division. Next, he was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff in charge of the new Operations Division (which replaced WPD) under Chief of Staff General George C. Marshall, who spotted talent and promoted accordingly.\nAt the end of May 1942, Eisenhower accompanied Lt. Gen. Henry H. Arnold, commanding general of the Army Air Forces, to London to assess the effectiveness of the theater commander in England, Maj. Gen. James E. Chaney. He returned to Washington on June 3 with a pessimistic assessment, stating he had an \"uneasy feeling\" about Chaney and his staff. On June 23, 1942, he returned to London as Commanding General, European Theater of Operations (ETOUSA), based in London and with a house on Coombe, Kingston upon Thames, and took over command of ETOUSA from Chaney. He was promoted to lieutenant general on July 7.\nOperations Torch and Avalanche.\nIn November 1942, Eisenhower was also appointed Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force of the North African Theater of Operations (NATOUSA) through the new operational Headquarters Allied (Expeditionary) Force Headquarters (A(E)FHQ). The word \"expeditionary\" was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons. The campaign in North Africa was designated Operation Torch and was planned in the underground headquarters within the Rock of Gibraltar. Eisenhower was the first non-British person to command Gibraltar in 200 years.\nFrench cooperation was deemed necessary to the campaign, and Eisenhower encountered a \"preposterous situation\" with the multiple rival factions in France. His primary objective was to move forces successfully into Tunisia, and intending to facilitate that objective, he gave his support to Fran\u00e7ois Darlan as High Commissioner in North Africa, despite Darlan's previous high offices of state in Vichy France and his continued role as commander-in-chief of the French armed forces. The Allied leaders were \"thunderstruck\" by this from a political standpoint, though none of them had offered Eisenhower guidance with the problem in the course of planning the operation. Eisenhower was severely criticized for the move. Darlan was assassinated on December 24 by Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle. Eisenhower did not take action to prevent the arrest and extrajudicial execution of Bonnier de La Chapelle by associates of Darlan acting without authority from either Vichy or the Allies, considering it a criminal rather than a military matter. Eisenhower later appointed, as High Commissioner, General Henri Giraud, who had been installed by the Allies as Darlan's commander-in-chief, and who had refused to postpone the execution.\nOperation Torch also served as a valuable training ground for Eisenhower's combat command skills; during the initial phase of \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Erwin Rommel's move into the Kasserine Pass, Eisenhower created some confusion in the ranks by some interference with the execution of battle plans by his subordinates. He also was initially indecisive in his removal of Lloyd Fredendall, commanding U.S. II Corps. He became more adroit in such matters in later campaigns. In February 1943, his authority was extended as commander of AFHQ across the Mediterranean basin to include the British Eighth Army, commanded by General Sir Bernard Montgomery. The Eighth Army had advanced across the Western Desert from the east and was ready for the start of the Tunisia Campaign. Eisenhower gained his fourth star and gave up command of ETOUSA to become commander of NATOUSA.\nAfter the capitulation of Axis forces in North Africa, Eisenhower oversaw the invasion of Sicily. Once Mussolini, the Italian leader, had fallen in Italy, the Allies switched their attention to the mainland with Operation Avalanche. But while Eisenhower argued with President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, who both insisted on unconditional terms of surrender in exchange for helping the Italians, the Germans pursued an aggressive buildup of forces in the country. The Germans made the already tough battle more difficult by adding 19 divisions and initially outnumbering the Allied forces 2 to 1.\nSupreme Allied commander and Operation Overlord.\nIn December 1943, President Roosevelt decided that Eisenhower\u00a0\u2013 not Marshall\u00a0\u2013 would be Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. The following month, he resumed command of ETOUSA and the following month was officially designated as the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), serving in a dual role until the end of hostilities in Europe in May 1945. He was charged in these positions with planning and carrying out the Allied assault on the coast of Normandy in June 1944 under the code name Operation Overlord, the liberation of Western Europe and the invasion of Germany.\nEisenhower, as well as the officers and troops under him, had learned valuable lessons in their previous operations, and their skills had all strengthened in preparation for the next most difficult campaign against the Germans\u2014a beach landing assault. His first struggles, however, were with Allied leaders and officers on matters vital to the success of the Normandy invasion; he argued with Roosevelt over an essential agreement with De Gaulle to use French resistance forces in covert and sabotage operations against the Germans in advance of Operation Overlord. Admiral Ernest J. King fought with Eisenhower over King's refusal to provide additional landing craft from the Pacific. Eisenhower also insisted that the British give him exclusive command over all strategic air forces to facilitate Overlord, to the point of threatening to resign unless Churchill relented, which he did. Eisenhower then designed a bombing plan in France in advance of Overlord and argued with Churchill over the latter's concern with civilian casualties; de Gaulle interjected that the casualties were justified in shedding the yoke of the Germans, and Eisenhower prevailed. He also had to skillfully manage to retain the services of the often unruly George S. Patton, by severely reprimanding him when Patton earlier had slapped a subordinate, and then when Patton gave a speech in which he made improper comments about postwar policy.\nThe D-Day Normandy landings on June 6, 1944, were costly but successful. Two months later (August 15), the invasion of Southern France took place, and control of forces in the southern invasion passed from the AFHQ to the SHAEF. Many thought that victory in Europe would come by summer's end, but the Germans did not capitulate for almost a year. From then until the end of the war in Europe on May 8, 1945, Eisenhower, through SHAEF, commanded all Allied forces, and through his command of ETOUSA had administrative command of all U.S. forces on the Western Front north of the Alps. He was ever mindful of the inevitable loss of life and suffering that would be experienced on an individual level by the troops under his command and their families. This prompted him to make a point of visiting every division involved in the invasion. Eisenhower's sense of responsibility was underscored by his draft of a statement to be issued if the invasion failed. It has been called one of the great speeches of history:\nOur landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision to attack at this time and place was based on the best information available. The troops, the air and the Navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.\nLiberation of France and victory in Europe.\nOnce the coastal assault had succeeded, Eisenhower insisted on retaining personal control over the land battle strategy, and was immersed in the command and supply of multiple assaults through France on Germany. Field Marshal Montgomery insisted priority be given to his 21st Army Group's attack being made in the north, while Generals Bradley (12th U.S. Army Group) and Devers (Sixth U.S. Army Group) insisted they be given priority in the center and south of the front (respectively). Eisenhower worked tirelessly to address the demands of the rival commanders to optimize Allied forces, often by giving them tactical latitude; many historians conclude this delayed the Allied victory in Europe. However, due to Eisenhower's persistence, the pivotal supply port at Antwerp was successfully, albeit belatedly, opened in late 1944.\nIn recognition of his senior position in the Allied command, on December 20, 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army, equivalent to the rank of Field Marshal in most European armies. In this and the previous high commands he held, Eisenhower showed his great talents for leadership and diplomacy. Although he had never seen action himself, he won the respect of front-line commanders. He interacted adeptly with allies such as Winston Churchill, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery and General Charles de Gaulle. He had serious disagreements with Churchill and Montgomery over questions of strategy, but these rarely upset his relationships with them. He dealt with Soviet Marshal Zhukov, his Russian counterpart, and they became good friends.\nIn December 1944, the Germans launched a surprise counter offensive, the Battle of the Bulge, which the Allies turned back in early 1945 after Eisenhower repositioned his armies and improved weather allowed the Army Air Force to engage. German defenses continued to deteriorate on both the Eastern Front with the Red Army and the Western Front with the Western Allies. The British wanted to capture Berlin, but Eisenhower decided it would be a military mistake for him to attack Berlin, and said orders to that effect would have to be explicit. The British backed down, but then wanted Eisenhower to move into Czechoslovakia for political reasons. Washington refused to support Churchill's plan to use Eisenhower's army for political maneuvers against Moscow. The actual division of Germany followed the lines that Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin had previously agreed upon. The Soviet Red Army captured Berlin in a very large-scale bloody battle, and the Germans finally surrendered on May 7, 1945.\nIn 1945, Eisenhower anticipated that someday an attempt would be made to recharacterize Nazi crimes as propaganda (Holocaust denial) and took steps against it by demanding extensive still and movie photographic documentation of Nazi death camps.\nAfter World War II (1945\u20131953).\nMilitary Governor in Germany and Army Chief of Staff.\nFollowing the German unconditional surrender, Eisenhower was appointed military governor of the American occupation zone, located primarily in Southern Germany, and headquartered at the IG Farben Building in Frankfurt am Main. Upon discovery of the Nazi concentration camps, he ordered camera crews to document evidence of the atrocities in them for use in the Nuremberg Trials. He reclassified German prisoners of war (POWs) in U.S. custody as Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEFs), who were no longer subject to the Geneva Convention. Eisenhower followed the orders laid down by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) in directive JCS 1067, but softened them by bringing in 400,000 tons of food for civilians and allowing more fraternization. In response to the devastation in Germany, including food shortages and an influx of refugees, he arranged distribution of American food and medical equipment. His actions reflected the new American attitudes of the German people as Nazi victims not villains, while aggressively purging the ex-Nazis.\nIn November 1945, Eisenhower returned to Washington to replace Marshall as Chief of Staff of the Army. His main role was rapid demobilization of millions of soldiers, a job that was delayed by lack of shipping. Eisenhower was convinced in 1946 that the Soviet Union did not want war and that friendly relations could be maintained; he strongly supported the new United Nations and favored its involvement in the control of atomic bombs. However, in formulating policies regarding the atomic bomb and relations with the Soviets, Truman was guided by the U.S. State Department and ignored Eisenhower and the Pentagon. Indeed, Eisenhower had opposed the use of the atomic bomb against the Japanese, writing, \"First, the Japanese were ready to surrender and it wasn't necessary to hit them with that awful thing. Second, I hated to see our country be the first to use such a weapon.\" Initially, Eisenhower hoped for cooperation with the Soviets. He even visited Warsaw in 1945. Invited by Boles\u0142aw Bierut and decorated with the highest military decoration, he was shocked by the scale of destruction in the city. However, by mid-1947, as East\u2013West tensions over economic recovery in Germany and the Greek Civil War escalated, Eisenhower agreed with a containment policy to stop Soviet expansion.\n1948 presidential election.\nIn June 1943, a visiting politician had suggested to Eisenhower that he might become President of the United States after the war. Believing that a general should not participate in politics, Merlo J. Pusey wrote that \"figuratively speaking, [Eisenhower] kicked his political-minded visitor out of his office\". As others asked him about his political future, Eisenhower told one that he could not imagine wanting to be considered for any political job \"from dogcatcher to Grand High Supreme King of the Universe\", and another that he could not serve as Army Chief of Staff if others believed he had political ambitions. In 1945, Truman told Eisenhower during the Potsdam Conference that if desired, the president would help the general win the 1948 election, and in 1947 he offered to run as Eisenhower's running mate on the Democratic ticket if MacArthur won the Republican nomination.\nAs the election approached, other prominent citizens and politicians from both parties urged Eisenhower to run for president. In January 1948, after learning of plans in New Hampshire to elect delegates supporting him for the forthcoming Republican National Convention, Eisenhower stated through the Army that he was \"not available for and could not accept nomination to high political office\"; \"life-long professional soldiers\", he wrote, \"in the absence of some obvious and overriding reason, [should] abstain from seeking high political office\". Eisenhower maintained no political party affiliation during this time. Many believed he was forgoing his only opportunity to be president as Republican Thomas E. Dewey was considered the probable winner and would presumably serve two terms, meaning that Eisenhower, at age 66 in 1956, would be too old to have another chance to run.\nPresident at Columbia University and NATO Supreme Commander.\nIn 1948, Eisenhower became President of Columbia University, an Ivy League university in New York City, where he was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa. The choice was subsequently characterized as not having been a good fit for either party. During that year, Eisenhower's memoir, \"Crusade in Europe\", was published. Critics regarded it as one of the finest U.S. military memoirs, and it was a major financial success as well. Eisenhower sought the advice of Augusta National's Roberts about the tax implications of this, and in due course Eisenhower's profit on the book was substantially aided by what author David Pietrusza calls \"a ruling without precedent\" by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. It held that Eisenhower was not a professional writer, but rather, marketing the lifetime asset of his experiences, and thus he had to pay only capital gains tax on his $635,000 advance instead of the much higher personal tax rate. This ruling saved Eisenhower about $400,000.\nEisenhower's stint as the president of Columbia University was punctuated by his activity within the Council on Foreign Relations, a study group he led as president concerning the political and military implications of the Marshall Plan, and The American Assembly, Eisenhower's \"vision of a great cultural center where business, professional and governmental leaders could meet from time to time to discuss and reach conclusions concerning problems of a social and political nature\". His biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook suggested that this period served as \"the political education of General Eisenhower\", since he had to prioritize wide-ranging educational, administrative, and financial demands for the university. Through his involvement in the Council on Foreign Relations, he also gained exposure to economic analysis, which would become the bedrock of his understanding in economic policy. \"Whatever General Eisenhower knows about economics, he has learned at the study group meetings,\" one Aid to Europe member claimed.\nEisenhower accepted the presidency of the university to expand his ability to promote \"the American form of democracy\" through education. He was clear on this point to the trustees involved in the search committee. He informed them that his main purpose was \"to promote the basic concepts of education in a democracy\". As a result, he was \"almost incessantly\" devoted to the idea of the American Assembly, a concept he developed into an institution by the end of 1950.\nWithin months of beginning his tenure as the president of the university, Eisenhower was requested to advise U.S. Secretary of Defense James Forrestal on the unification of the armed services. About six months after his appointment, he became the informal Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington. Two months later he fell ill with what was diagnosed as acute gastroenteritis, and he spent over a month in recovery at the Augusta National Golf Club. He returned to his post in New York in mid-May, and in July 1949 took a two-month vacation out-of-state. Because the American Assembly had begun to take shape, he traveled around the country during mid-to-late 1950, building financial support from Columbia Associates, an alumni association.\nEisenhower was unknowingly building resentment and a reputation among the Columbia University faculty and staff as an absentee president who was using the university for his own interests. As a career military man, he naturally had little in common with the academics.\nHe did have some successes at Columbia. Puzzled as to why no American university had understaken the \"continuous study of the causes, conduct and consequences of war\", Eisenhower undertook the creation of the Institute of War and Peace Studies, a research facility whose purpose was to \"study war as a tragic social phenomenon\". Eisenhower was able to use his network of wealthy friends and acquaintances to secure initial funding for it. Under its founding director, international relations scholar William T. R. Fox, the institute began in 1951 and became a pioneer in International security studies, one that would be emulated by other institutes in the United States and Britain later in the decade. The Institute of War and Peace Studies thus become one of the projects which Eisenhower considered constituted his \"unique contribution\" to Columbia.\nThe contacts gained through university and American Assembly fund-raising activities would later become important supporters in Eisenhower's bid for the Republican party nomination and the presidency. Meanwhile, Columbia University's liberal faculty members became disenchanted with the university president's ties to oilmen and businessmen, including Leonard McCollum, the president of Continental Oil; Frank Abrams, the chairman of Standard Oil of New Jersey; Bob Kleberg, the president of the King Ranch; H. J. Porter, a Texas oil executive; Bob Woodruff, the president of the Coca-Cola Corporation; and Clarence Francis, the chairman of General Foods.\nAs the president of Columbia, Eisenhower gave voice and form to his opinions about the supremacy and difficulties of American democracy. His tenure marked his transformation from military to civilian leadership. His biographer Travis Beal Jacobs also suggested that the alienation of the Columbia faculty contributed to sharp intellectual criticism of him for many years.\nThe trustees of Columbia University declined to accept Eisenhower's offer to resign in December 1950, when he took an extended leave from the university to become the Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and he was given operational command of NATO forces in Europe. Eisenhower retired from active service as an army general on June 3, 1952, and he resumed his presidency of Columbia. Meanwhile Eisenhower had become the Republican Party nominee for president of the United States, a contest that he won on November 4. Eisenhower tendered his resignation as university president on November 15, 1952, effective January 19, 1953, the day before his inauguration.\nNATO did not have strong bipartisan support in Congress at the time that Eisenhower assumed its military command. Eisenhower advised the participating European nations that it would be incumbent upon them to demonstrate their own commitment of troops and equipment to the NATO force before such would come from the war-weary United States.\nAt home, Eisenhower was more effective in making the case for NATO in Congress than the Truman administration had been. By the middle of 1951, with American and European support, NATO was a genuine military power. Nevertheless, Eisenhower thought that NATO would become a truly European alliance, with the American and Canadian commitments ending after about ten years.\nPresidential campaign of 1952.\nPresident Truman sensed a broad-based desire for an Eisenhower candidacy for president, and he again pressed him to run for the office as a Democrat in 1951. But Eisenhower voiced his disagreements with the Democrats and declared himself to be a Republican. A \"Draft Eisenhower\" movement in the Republican Party persuaded him to declare his candidacy in the 1952 presidential election to counter the candidacy of non-interventionist Senator Robert A. Taft. The effort was a long struggle; Eisenhower had to be convinced that political circumstances had created a genuine duty for him to offer himself as a candidate, and that there was a mandate from the public for him to be their president. Henry Cabot Lodge and others succeeded in convincing him, and he resigned his command at NATO in June 1952 to campaign full-time.\nEisenhower defeated Taft for the nomination, having won critical delegate votes from Texas. His campaign was noted for the simple slogan \"I Like Ike\". It was essential to his success that Eisenhower express opposition to Roosevelt's policy at the Yalta Conference and to Truman's policies in Korea and China\u2014matters in which he had once participated. In defeating Taft for the nomination, it became necessary for Eisenhower to appease the right wing Old Guard of the Republican Party; his selection of Richard Nixon as the Vice-President on the ticket was designed in part for that purpose. Nixon also provided a strong anti-communist reputation, as well as youth to counter Eisenhower's more advanced age.\nEisenhower insisted on campaigning in the South in the general election, against the advice of his campaign team, refusing to surrender the region to the Democratic Party. The campaign strategy was dubbed \"K1C2\" and was intended to focus on attacking the Truman administration on three failures: the Korean War, Communism, and corruption.\nTwo controversies tested him and his staff during the campaign, but they did not damage the campaign. One involved a report that Nixon had improperly received funds from a secret trust. Nixon spoke out adroitly to avoid potential damage, but the matter permanently alienated the two candidates. The second issue centered on Eisenhower's relented decision to confront the controversial methods of Joseph McCarthy on his home turf in a Wisconsin appearance. Just two weeks before the election, Eisenhower vowed to go to Korea and end the war there. He promised to maintain a strong commitment against Communism while avoiding the topic of NATO; finally, he stressed a corruption-free, frugal administration at home.\nEisenhower defeated Democratic candidate Adlai Stevenson II in a landslide, with an electoral margin of 442 to 89, marking the first Republican return to the White House in 20 years. He also brought a Republican majority in the House, by eight votes, and in the Senate, evenly divided with Vice President Nixon providing Republicans the majority.\nEisenhower was the last president born in the 19th century, and he was the oldest president-elect at age 62 since James Buchanan in 1856. He was the third commanding general of the Army to serve as president, after George Washington and Ulysses S. Grant, and the last to have not held political office prior to being president until Donald Trump entered office in January 2017.\nElection of 1956.\nThe United States presidential election of 1956 was held on November 6, 1956. Eisenhower, the popular incumbent, successfully ran for re-election. The election was a re-match of 1952, as his opponent in 1956 was Stevenson, a former Illinois governor, whom Eisenhower had defeated four years earlier. Compared to the 1952 election, Eisenhower gained Kentucky, Louisiana, and West Virginia from Stevenson, while losing Missouri. His voters were less likely to bring up his leadership record. Instead what stood out this time, \"was the response to personal qualities\u2014 to his sincerity, his integrity and sense of duty, his virtue as a family man, his religious devotion, and his sheer likeableness.\"\nPresident (1953\u20131961).\nTruman and Eisenhower had minimal discussions about the transition of administrations due to a complete estrangement between them as a result of campaigning. Eisenhower selected Joseph M. Dodge as his budget director, then asked Herbert Brownell Jr. and Lucius D. Clay to make recommendations for his cabinet appointments. He accepted their recommendations without exception; they included John Foster Dulles and George M. Humphrey with whom he developed his closest relationships, as well as Oveta Culp Hobby. His cabinet consisted of several corporate executives and one labor leader, and one journalist dubbed it \"eight millionaires and a plumber.\" The cabinet was known for its lack of personal friends, office seekers, or experienced government administrators. He also upgraded the role of the National Security Council in planning all phases of the Cold War.\nPrior to his inauguration, Eisenhower led a meeting of advisors at Pearl Harbor addressing foremost issues; agreed objectives were to balance the budget during his term, to bring the Korean War to an end, to defend vital interests at lower cost through nuclear deterrent, and to end price and wage controls. He also conducted the first pre-inaugural cabinet meeting in history in late 1952; he used this meeting to articulate his anti-communist Russia policy. His inaugural address was also exclusively devoted to foreign policy and included this same philosophy as well as a commitment to foreign trade and the United Nations.\nEisenhower made greater use of press conferences than any previous president, holding almost 200 over his two terms. He saw the benefit of maintaining a good relationship with the press, and he saw value in them as a means of direct communication with the American people.\nThroughout his presidency, Eisenhower adhered to a political philosophy of dynamic conservatism. He described himself as a \"progressive conservative\" and used terms such as \"progressive moderate\" and \"dynamic conservatism\" to describe his approach. He continued all the major New Deal programs still in operation, especially Social Security. He expanded its programs and rolled them into the new Cabinet-level agency of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, while extending benefits to an additional ten million workers. He implemented racial integration in the Armed Services in two years, which had not been completed under Truman.\nIn a private letter, Eisenhower wrote: \nWhen the 1954 Congressional elections approached, it became evident that the Republicans were in danger of losing their thin majority in both houses. Eisenhower was among those who blamed the Old Guard for the losses, and he took up the charge to stop suspected efforts by the right wing to take control of the GOP. He then articulated his position as a moderate, progressive Republican: \"I have just one purpose\u00a0... and that is to build up a strong progressive Republican Party in this country. If the right wing wants a fight, they are going to get it\u00a0... before I end up, either this Republican Party will reflect progressivism or I won't be with them anymore.\"\nEisenhower initially planned on serving only one term, but he remained flexible in case leading Republicans wanted him to run again. He was recovering from a heart attack late in September 1955 when he met with his closest advisors to evaluate the GOP's potential candidates; the group concluded that a second term was well advised, and he announced that he would run again in February 1956. Eisenhower was publicly noncommittal about having Nixon as the Vice President on his ticket; the question was an especially important one in light of his heart condition. He personally favored Robert B. Anderson, a Democrat who rejected his offer, so Eisenhower resolved to leave the matter in the hands of the party. In 1956, Eisenhower faced Adlai Stevenson again and won by an even larger landslide, with 457 of 531 electoral votes and 57.6-percent of the popular vote. The level of campaigning was curtailed out of health considerations.\nEisenhower made full use of his valet, chauffeur, and secretarial support; he rarely drove or even dialed a phone number. He was an avid fisherman, golfer, painter, and bridge player, and preferred active rather than passive forms of entertainment. On August 26, 1959, he was aboard the maiden flight of Air Force One, which replaced the \"Columbine\" as the presidential aircraft.\nInterstate Highway System.\nEisenhower championed and signed the bill that authorized the Interstate Highway System in 1956. He justified the project through the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 as essential to American security during the Cold War. It was believed that large cities would be targets in a possible war, so the highways were designed to facilitate their evacuation and ease military maneuvers.\nEisenhower's goal to create improved highways was influenced by difficulties that he encountered during his involvement in the Army's 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy. He was assigned as an observer for the mission, which involved sending a convoy of Army vehicles coast to coast. His subsequent experience with the German autobahn limited-access road systems during the concluding stages of World War II convinced him of the benefits of an Interstate Highway System. The system could also be used as a runway for airplanes, which would be beneficial to war efforts. Franklin D. Roosevelt put this system into place with the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1944. He thought that an interstate highway system would be beneficial for military operations and would also provide a measure of continued economic growth for the nation. The legislation initially stalled in Congress over the issuance of bonds to finance the project, but the legislative effort was renewed and Eisenhower signed the law in June 1956.\nForeign policy.\nIn 1953, the Republican Party's Old Guard presented Eisenhower with a dilemma by insisting he disavow the Yalta Agreements as beyond the constitutional authority of the Executive Branch; however, the death of Joseph Stalin in March 1953 made the matter a moot point. At this time, Eisenhower gave his Chance for Peace speech in which he attempted, unsuccessfully, to forestall the nuclear arms race with the Soviet Union by suggesting multiple opportunities presented by peaceful uses of nuclear materials. Biographer Stephen Ambrose opined that this was the best speech of Eisenhower's presidency. Eisenhower sought to make foreign markets available to American business, saying that it is a \"serious and explicit purpose of our foreign policy, the encouragement of a hospitable climate for investment in foreign nations.\"\nNevertheless, the Cold War escalated during his presidency. When the Soviet Union successfully tested a hydrogen bomb in late November 1955, Eisenhower, against the advice of Dulles, decided to initiate a disarmament proposal to the Soviets. In an attempt to make their refusal more difficult, he proposed that both sides agree to dedicate fissionable material away from weapons toward peaceful uses, such as power generation. This approach was labeled \"Atoms for Peace\".\nThe U.N. speech was well received but the Soviets never acted upon it, due to an overarching concern for the greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal. Indeed, Eisenhower embarked upon a greater reliance on the use of nuclear weapons, while reducing conventional forces, and with them the overall defense budget, a policy formulated as a result of Project Solarium and expressed in NSC 162/2. This approach became known as the \"New Look\", and was initiated with defense cuts in late 1953.\nIn 1955, American nuclear arms policy became one aimed primarily at arms control as opposed to disarmament. The failure of negotiations over arms until 1955 was due mainly to the refusal of the Russians to permit any sort of inspections. In talks located in London that year, they expressed a willingness to discuss inspections; the tables were then turned on Eisenhower, when he responded with an unwillingness on the part of the U.S. to permit inspections. In May of that year the Russians agreed to sign a treaty giving independence to Austria, and paved the way for a Geneva summit with the US, UK and France. At the Geneva Conference, Eisenhower presented a proposal called \"Open Skies\" to facilitate disarmament, which included plans for Russia and the U.S. to provide mutual access to each other's skies for open surveillance of military infrastructure. Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev dismissed the proposal out of hand.\nIn 1954, Eisenhower articulated the domino theory in his outlook towards communism in Southeast Asia and also in Central America. He believed that if the communists were allowed to prevail in Vietnam, this would cause a succession of countries to fall to communism, from Laos through Malaysia and Indonesia ultimately to India. Likewise, the fall of Guatemala would end with the fall of neighboring Mexico. That year, the loss of North Vietnam to the communists and the rejection of his proposed European Defence Community (EDC) were serious defeats, but he remained optimistic in his opposition to the spread of communism, saying \"Long faces don't win wars\". As he had threatened the French in their rejection of EDC, he afterwards moved to restore West Germany as a full NATO partner. In 1954, he also induced Congress to create an Emergency Fund for International Affairs in order to support America's use of cultural diplomacy to strengthen international relations throughout Europe during the cold war.\nWith Eisenhower's leadership and Dulles' direction, CIA activities increased under the pretense of resisting the spread of communism in poorer countries; the CIA in part deposed the leaders of Iran in Operation Ajax, of Guatemala through Operation Pbsuccess, and possibly the newly independent Republic of the Congo (L\u00e9opoldville). In 1954, Eisenhower wanted to increase surveillance inside the Soviet Union. With Dulles' recommendation, he authorized the deployment of thirty Lockheed U-2's at a cost of $35 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in ). The Eisenhower administration also planned the Bay of Pigs Invasion to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba, which John F. Kennedy was left to carry out.\nSpace Race.\nEisenhower and the CIA had known since at least January 1957, nine months before \"Sputnik\", that Russia had the capability to launch a small payload into orbit and was likely to do so within a year. He may also privately have welcomed the Soviet satellite for its legal implications: By launching a satellite, the Soviet Union had in effect acknowledged that space was open to anyone who could access it, without needing permission from other nations.\nOn the whole, Eisenhower's support of the nation's fledgling space program was officially modest until the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957, gaining the Cold War enemy enormous prestige around the world. He then launched a national campaign that funded not just space exploration but a major strengthening of science and higher education. The Eisenhower administration determined to adopt a non-aggressive policy that would allow \"space-crafts of any state to overfly all states, a region free of military posturing and launch Earth satellites to explore space\". His Open Skies Policy attempted to legitimize illegal Lockheed U-2 flyovers and Project Genetrix while paving the way for spy satellite technology to orbit over sovereign territory, however Nikolai Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchev declined Eisenhower's proposal at the Geneva conference in July 1955. In response to Sputnik being launched in October 1957, Eisenhower created NASA as a civilian space agency in October 1958, signed a landmark science education law, and improved relations with American scientists.\nFear spread through the United States that the Soviet Union would invade and spread communism, so Eisenhower wanted to not only create a surveillance satellite to detect any threats but ballistic missiles that would protect the United States. In strategic terms, it was Eisenhower who devised the American basic strategy of nuclear deterrence based upon the triad of B-52 strategic bombers, land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), and Polaris submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs).\nNASA planners projected that human spaceflight would pull the United States ahead in the Space Race as well as accomplishing their long time goal; however, in 1960, an Ad Hoc Panel on Man-in-Space concluded that \"man-in-space can not be justified\" and was too costly. Eisenhower later resented the space program and its gargantuan price tag\u2014he was quoted as saying, \"Anyone who would spend $40 billion in a race to the moon for national prestige is nuts.\"\nKorean War, Free China and Red China.\nIn late 1952 Eisenhower went to Korea and discovered a military and political stalemate. Once in office, when the Chinese People's Volunteer Army began a buildup in the Kaesong sanctuary, he threatened to use nuclear force if an armistice was not concluded. His earlier military reputation in Europe was effective with the Chinese communists. The National Security Council, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Strategic Air Command (SAC) devised detailed plans for nuclear war against Red China. With the death of Stalin in early March 1953, Russian support for a Chinese communists hard-line weakened and Red China decided to compromise on the prisoner issue.\nIn July 1953, an armistice took effect with Korea divided along approximately the same boundary as in 1950. The armistice and boundary remain in effect today. The armistice, concluded despite opposition from Secretary Dulles, South Korean President Syngman Rhee, and also within Eisenhower's party, has been described by biographer Ambrose as the greatest achievement of the administration. Eisenhower had the insight to realize that unlimited war in the nuclear age was unthinkable, and limited war unwinnable.\nA point of emphasis in Eisenhower's campaign had been his endorsement of a policy of liberation from communism as opposed to a policy of containment. This remained his preference despite the armistice with Korea. Throughout his terms Eisenhower took a hard-line attitude toward Red China, as demanded by conservative Republicans, with the goal of driving a wedge between Red China and the Soviet Union.\nEisenhower continued Truman's policy of recognizing the Republic of China (Taiwan) as the legitimate government of China, not the Peking (Beijing) regime. There were localized flare-ups when the People's Liberation Army began shelling the islands of Quemoy and Matsu in September 1954. Eisenhower received recommendations embracing every variation of response to the aggression of the Chinese communists. He thought it essential to have every possible option available to him as the crisis unfolded.\nThe Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with the Republic of China was signed in December 1954. He requested and secured from Congress their \"Free China Resolution\" in January 1955, which gave Eisenhower unprecedented power in advance to use military force at any level of his choosing in defense of Free China and the Pescadores. The Resolution bolstered the morale of the Chinese nationalists, and signaled to Beijing that the U.S. was committed to holding the line.\nEisenhower openly threatened the Chinese communists with use of nuclear weapons, authorizing a series of bomb tests labeled Operation Teapot. Nevertheless, he left the Chinese communists guessing as to the exact nature of his nuclear response. This allowed Eisenhower to accomplish all of his objectives\u2014the end of this communist encroachment, the retention of the Islands by the Chinese nationalists and continued peace. Defense of the Republic of China from an invasion remains a core American policy.\nBy the end of 1954 Eisenhower's military and foreign policy experts\u2014the NSC, JCS and State Dept.\u2014had unanimously urged him, on no less than five occasions, to launch an atomic attack against Red China; yet he consistently refused to do so and felt a distinct sense of accomplishment in having sufficiently confronted communism while keeping world peace.\nSoutheast Asia.\nEarly in 1953, the French asked Eisenhower for help in French Indochina against the Communists, supplied from China, who were fighting the First Indochina War. Eisenhower sent Lt. General John W. \"Iron Mike\" O'Daniel to Vietnam to study and assess the French forces there. Chief of Staff Matthew Ridgway dissuaded the President from intervening by presenting a comprehensive estimate of the massive military deployment that would be necessary. Eisenhower stated prophetically that \"this war would absorb our troops by divisions.\"\nEisenhower did provide France with bombers and non-combat personnel. After a few months with no success by the French, he added other aircraft to drop napalm for clearing purposes. Further requests for assistance from the French were agreed to but only on conditions Eisenhower knew were impossible to meet\u00a0\u2013 allied participation and congressional approval. When the French fortress of Dien Bien Phu fell to the Vietnamese Communists in May 1954, Eisenhower refused to intervene despite urgings from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Vice President and the head of NCS.\nEisenhower responded to the French defeat with the formation of the SEATO (Southeast Asia Treaty Organization) Alliance with the UK, France, New Zealand and Australia in defense of Vietnam against communism. At that time the French and Chinese reconvened Geneva peace talks; Eisenhower agreed the US would participate only as an observer. After France and the Communists agreed to a partition of Vietnam, Eisenhower rejected the agreement, offering military and economic aid to southern Vietnam. Ambrose argues that Eisenhower, by not participating in the Geneva agreement, had kept the U.S. out of Vietnam; nevertheless, with the formation of SEATO, he had in the end put the U.S. back into the conflict.\nIn late 1954, Gen. J. Lawton Collins was made ambassador to \"Free Vietnam\" (the term South Vietnam came into use in 1955), effectively elevating the country to sovereign status. Collins' instructions were to support the leader Ngo Dinh Diem in subverting communism, by helping him to build an army and wage a military campaign. In February 1955, Eisenhower dispatched the first American soldiers to Vietnam as military advisors to Diem's army. After Diem announced the formation of the Republic of Vietnam (RVN, commonly known as South Vietnam) in October, Eisenhower immediately recognized the new state and offered military, economic, and technical assistance.\nIn the years that followed, Eisenhower increased the number of U.S. military advisors in South Vietnam to 900 men. This was due to North Vietnam's support of \"uprisings\" in the south and concern the nation would fall. In May 1957 Diem, then President of South Vietnam, made a state visit to the United States for ten days. President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diem's honor in New York City. Although Diem was publicly praised, in private Secretary of State John Foster Dulles conceded that Diem had been selected because there were no better alternatives.\nAfter the election of November 1960, Eisenhower in briefing with John F. Kennedy pointed out the communist threat in Southeast Asia as requiring prioritization in the next administration. Eisenhower told Kennedy he considered Laos \"the cork in the bottle\" with regard to the regional threat.\nLegitimation of Francoist Spain.\nThe Pact of Madrid, signed on September 23, 1953 by Francoist Spain and the United States, was a significant effort to break international isolation of Spain after World War II, together with the Concordat of 1953. This development came at a time when other victorious Allies of World War II and much of the rest of the world remained hostile (for the 1946 United Nations condemnation of the Francoist regime, see \"Spanish Question\") to a fascist regime sympathetic to the cause of the former Axis powers and established with Nazi assistance. This accord took the form of three separate executive agreements that pledged the United States to furnish economic and military aid to Spain. The United States, in turn, was to be permitted to construct and to utilize air and naval bases on Spanish territory (Naval Station Rota, Mor\u00f3n Air Base, Torrej\u00f3n Air Base and Zaragoza Air Base).\nEisenhower personally visited Spain in December 1959 to meet dictator Francisco Franco and consolidate his international legitimation.\nThe Middle East and Eisenhower doctrine.\nEven before he was inaugurated Eisenhower accepted a request from the British government to restore the Shah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi) to power. He therefore authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh. This resulted in an increased strategic control over Iranian oil by U.S. and British companies.\nIn November 1956, Eisenhower forced an end to the combined British, French and Israeli invasion of Egypt in response to the Suez Crisis, receiving praise from Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser. Simultaneously he condemned the brutal Soviet invasion of Hungary in response to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. He publicly disavowed his allies at the United Nations, and used financial and diplomatic pressure to make them withdraw from Egypt. Eisenhower explicitly defended his strong position against Britain and France in his memoirs, which were published in 1965.\nAfter the Suez Crisis the United States became the protector of unstable friendly governments in the Middle East via the \"Eisenhower Doctrine\". Designed by Secretary of State Dulles, it held the U.S. would be \"prepared to use armed force\u00a0... [to counter] aggression from any country controlled by international communism\". Further, the United States would provide economic and military aid and, if necessary, use military force to stop the spread of communism in the Middle East.\nEisenhower applied the doctrine in 1957\u201358 by dispensing economic aid to shore up the Kingdom of Jordan, and by encouraging Syria's neighbors to consider military operations against it. More dramatically, in July 1958, he sent 15,000 Marines and soldiers to Lebanon as part of Operation Blue Bat, a non-combat peace-keeping mission to stabilize the pro-Western government and to prevent a radical revolution from sweeping over that country.\nThe mission proved a success and the Marines departed three months later. The deployment came in response to the urgent request of Lebanese president Camille Chamoun after sectarian violence had erupted in the country. Washington considered the military intervention successful since it brought about regional stability, weakened Soviet influence, and intimidated the Egyptian and Syrian governments, whose anti-West political position had hardened after the Suez Crisis.\nMost Arab countries were skeptical about the \"Eisenhower doctrine\" because they considered \"Zionist imperialism\" the real danger. However, they did take the opportunity to obtain free money and weapons. Egypt and Syria, supported by the Soviet Union, openly opposed the initiative. However, Egypt received American aid until the Six-Day War in 1967.\nAs the Cold War deepened, Dulles sought to isolate the Soviet Union by building regional alliances of nations against it. Critics sometimes called it \"pacto-mania\".\n1960 U-2 incident.\nOn May 1, 1960, a U.S. one-man U-2 spy plane was reportedly shot down at high altitude over Soviet airspace. The flight was made to gain photo intelligence before the scheduled opening of an east\u2013west summit conference, which had been scheduled in Paris, 15 days later. Captain Francis Gary Powers had bailed out of his aircraft and was captured after parachuting down onto Russian soil. Four days after Powers disappeared, the Eisenhower Administration had NASA issue a very detailed press release noting that an aircraft had \"gone missing\" north of Turkey. It speculated that the pilot might have fallen unconscious while the autopilot was still engaged, and falsely claimed that \"the pilot reported over the emergency frequency that he was experiencing oxygen difficulties.\"\nSoviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced that a \"spy-plane\" had been shot down but intentionally made no reference to the pilot. As a result, the Eisenhower Administration, thinking the pilot had died in the crash, authorized the release of a cover story claiming that the plane was a \"weather research aircraft\" which had unintentionally strayed into Soviet airspace after the pilot had radioed \"difficulties with his oxygen equipment\" while flying over Turkey. The Soviets put Captain Powers on trial and displayed parts of the U-2, which had been recovered almost fully intact.\nThe Four Power Paris Summit in May 1960 with Eisenhower, Nikita Khrushchev, Harold Macmillan and Charles de Gaulle collapsed because of the incident. Eisenhower refused to accede to Khrushchev's demands that he apologize. Therefore, Khrushchev would not take part in the summit. Up until this event, Eisenhower felt he had been making progress towards better relations with the Soviet Union. Nuclear arms reduction and Berlin were to have been discussed at the summit. Eisenhower stated it had all been ruined because of that \"stupid U-2 business\".\nThe affair was an embarrassment for United States prestige. Further, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held a lengthy inquiry into the U-2 incident. In Russia, Captain Powers made a forced confession and apology. On August 19, 1960, Powers was convicted of espionage and sentenced to imprisonment. On February 10, 1962, Powers was exchanged for Rudolf Abel in Berlin and returned to the U.S.\nCivil rights.\nWhile President Truman had begun the process of desegregating the Armed Forces in 1948, actual implementation had been slow. Eisenhower made clear his stance in his first State of the Union address in February 1953, saying \"I propose to use whatever authority exists in the office of the President to end segregation in the District of Columbia, including the Federal Government, and any segregation in the Armed Forces\". When he encountered opposition from the services, he used government control of military spending to force the change through, stating \"Wherever Federal Funds are expended\u00a0..., I do not see how any American can justify\u00a0... a discrimination in the expenditure of those funds\".\nWhen Robert B. Anderson, Eisenhower's first Secretary of the Navy, argued that the U.S. Navy must recognize the \"customs and usages prevailing in certain geographic areas of our country which the Navy had no part in creating,\" Eisenhower overruled him: \"We have not taken and we shall not take a single backward step. There must be no second class citizens in this country.\"\nThe administration declared racial discrimination a national security issue, as Communists around the world used the racial discrimination and history of violence in the U.S. as a point of propaganda attack.\nEisenhower told District of Columbia officials to make Washington a model for the rest of the country in integrating black and white public school children. He proposed to Congress the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and of 1960 and signed those acts into law. The 1957 act for the first time established a permanent civil rights office inside the Justice Department and a Civil Rights Commission to hear testimony about abuses of voting rights. Although both acts were much weaker than subsequent civil rights legislation, they constituted the first significant civil rights acts since 1875.\nIn 1957 the state of Arkansas refused to honor a federal court order to integrate their public school system stemming from the \"Brown\" decision. Eisenhower demanded that Arkansas governor Orval Faubus obey the court order. When Faubus balked, the president placed the Arkansas National Guard under federal control and sent in the 101st Airborne Division. They escorted and protected nine black students' entry to Little Rock Central High School, an all-white public school, marking the first time since the Reconstruction Era the federal government had used federal troops in the South to enforce the U. S. Constitution. Martin Luther King Jr. wrote to Eisenhower to thank him for his actions, writing \"The overwhelming majority of southerners, Negro and white, stand firmly behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock\".\nEisenhower's administration contributed to the McCarthyist Lavender Scare with President Eisenhower issuing his Executive Order 10450 in 1953. During Eisenhower's presidency thousands of lesbian and gay applicants were barred from federal employment and over 5,000 federal employees were fired under suspicions of being homosexual. From 1947 to 1961 the number of firings based on sexual orientation were far greater than those for membership in the Communist Party, and government officials intentionally campaigned to make \"homosexual\" synonymous with \"Communist traitor\" such that LGBT people were treated as a national security threat stemming from the belief they were susceptible to blackmail and exploitation.\nRelations with Congress.\nEisenhower had a Republican Congress for only his first two years in office; in the Senate, the Republican majority was by a one-vote margin. Senator Robert A. Taft assisted the President greatly in working with the Old Guard, and was sorely missed when his death (in July 1953) left Eisenhower with his successor William Knowland, whom Eisenhower disliked.\nThis prevented Eisenhower from openly condemning Joseph McCarthy's highly criticized methods against communism. To facilitate relations with Congress, Eisenhower decided to ignore McCarthy's controversies and thereby deprive them of more energy from involvement of the White House. This position drew criticism from a number of corners. In late 1953, McCarthy declared on national television that the employment of communists within the government was a menace and would be a pivotal issue in the 1954 Senate elections. Eisenhower was urged to respond directly and specify the various measures he had taken to purge the government of communists.\nAmong Eisenhower's objectives in not directly confronting McCarthy was to prevent McCarthy from dragging the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) into McCarthy's witch hunt for communists, which might interfere with the AEC's work on hydrogen bombs and other weapons programs. In December 1953, Eisenhower learned that one of America's nuclear scientists, J. Robert Oppenheimer, had been accused of being a spy for the Soviet Union. Although Eisenhower never really believed that these allegations were true, in January 1954 he ordered that \"a blank wall\" be placed between Oppenheimer and all defense-related activities. The Oppenheimer security hearing was conducted later that year, resulting in the physicist losing his security clearance. The matter was controversial at the time and remained so in later years, with Oppenheimer achieving a certain martyrdom. The case would reflect poorly on Eisenhower as well, but the president had never examined it in any detail and had instead relied excessively upon the advice of his subordinates, especially that of AEC chairman Lewis Strauss. Eisenhower later suffered a major political defeat when his nomination of Strauss to be Secretary of Commerce was defeated in the Senate in 1959, in part due to Strauss's role in the Oppenheimer matter.\nIn May 1955, McCarthy threatened to issue subpoenas to White House personnel. Eisenhower was furious, and issued an order as follows: \"It is essential to efficient and effective administration that employees of the Executive Branch be in a position to be completely candid in advising with each other on official matters\u00a0... it is not in the public interest that any of their conversations or communications, or any documents or reproductions, concerning such advice be disclosed.\" This was an unprecedented step by Eisenhower to protect communication beyond the confines of a cabinet meeting, and soon became a tradition known as executive privilege. Eisenhower's denial of McCarthy's access to his staff reduced McCarthy's hearings to rants about trivial matters, and contributed to his ultimate downfall.\nIn early 1954, the Old Guard put forward a constitutional amendment, called the Bricker Amendment, which would curtail international agreements by the Chief Executive, such as the Yalta Agreements. Eisenhower opposed the measure. The Old Guard agreed with Eisenhower on the development and ownership of nuclear reactors by private enterprises, which the Democrats opposed. The President succeeded in getting legislation creating a system of licensure for nuclear plants by the AEC.\nThe Democrats gained a majority in both houses in the 1954 election. Eisenhower had to work with the Democratic Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson (later U.S. president) in the Senate and Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House, both from Texas. Joe Martin, the Republican Speaker from 1947 to 1949 and again from 1953 to 1955, wrote that Eisenhower \"never surrounded himself with assistants who could solve political problems with professional skill. There were exceptions, Leonard W. Hall, for example, who as chairman of the Republican National Committee tried to open the administration's eyes to the political facts of life, with occasional success. However, these exceptions were not enough to right the balance.\"\nSpeaker Martin concluded that Eisenhower worked too much through subordinates in dealing with Congress, with results, \"often the reverse of what he has desired\" because Members of Congress, \"resent having some young fellow who was picked up by the White House without ever having been elected to office himself coming around and telling them 'The Chief wants this'. The administration never made use of many Republicans of consequence whose services in one form or another would have been available for the asking.\"\nJudicial appointments.\nSupreme Court.\nEisenhower appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:\nWhittaker was unsuited for the role and soon retired. Stewart and Harlan were conservative Republicans, while Brennan was a Democrat who became a leading voice for liberalism. In selecting a Chief Justice, Eisenhower looked for an experienced jurist who could appeal to liberals in the party as well as law-and-order conservatives, noting privately that Warren \"represents the kind of political, economic, and social thinking that I believe we need on the Supreme Court\u00a0... He has a national name for integrity, uprightness, and courage that, again, I believe we need on the Court\". In the next few years Warren led the Court in a series of liberal decisions that revolutionized the role of the Court.\nStates admitted to the Union.\nTwo states were admitted to the Union during Eisenhower's presidency.\nHealth issues.\nEisenhower began chain smoking cigarettes at West Point, often three or four packs a day. He joked that he \"gave [himself] an order\" to stop cold turkey in 1949. But Evan Thomas says the true story was more complex. At first he removed cigarettes and ashtrays, but that did not work. He told a friend:\nHe was the first president to release information about his health and medical records while in office, but people around him deliberately misled the public about his health. On September 24, 1955, while vacationing in Colorado, he had a serious heart attack. Dr. Howard Snyder, his personal physician, misdiagnosed the symptoms as indigestion, and failed to call in the help that was urgently needed. Snyder later falsified his own records to cover his blunder and to protect Eisenhower's need to portray he was healthy enough to do his job.\nThe heart attack required six weeks' hospitalization, during which time Nixon, Dulles, and Sherman Adams assumed administrative duties and provided communication with the President. He was treated by Dr. Paul Dudley White, a cardiologist with a national reputation, who regularly informed the press of the President's progress. Instead of eliminating him as a candidate for a second term as president, his physician recommended a second term as essential to his recovery.\nAs a consequence of his heart attack, Eisenhower developed a left ventricular aneurysm, which was in turn the cause of a mild stroke on November 25, 1957. This incident occurred during a cabinet meeting when Eisenhower suddenly found himself unable to speak or move his right hand. The stroke had caused aphasia. The president also suffered from Crohn's disease, chronic inflammatory condition of the intestine, which necessitated surgery for a bowel obstruction on June 9, 1956. To treat the intestinal block, surgeons bypassed about ten inches of his small intestine. His scheduled meeting with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was postponed so he could recover at his farm. He was still recovering from this operation during the Suez Crisis. Eisenhower's health issues forced him to give up smoking and make some changes to his dietary habits, but he still indulged in alcohol. During a visit to England he complained of dizziness and had to have his blood pressure checked on August 29, 1959; however, before dinner at Chequers on the next day his doctor General Howard Snyder recalled Eisenhower \"drank several gin-and-tonics, and one or two gins on the rocks\u00a0... three or four wines with the dinner\".\nThe last three years of Eisenhower's second term in office were ones of relatively good health. Eventually after leaving the White House, he suffered several additional and ultimately crippling heart attacks. A severe heart attack in August 1965 largely ended his participation in public affairs. In August 1966 he began to show symptoms of cholecystitis, for which he underwent surgery on December 12, 1966, when his gallbladder was removed, containing 16 gallstones. After Eisenhower's death in 1969 (see below), an autopsy unexpectedly revealed an adrenal pheochromocytoma, a benign adrenalin-secreting tumor that may have made the President more vulnerable to heart disease. Eisenhower suffered seven heart attacks from 1955 until his death.\nEnd of presidency.\nThe 22nd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was ratified in 1951, and it set a two-term limit on the presidency. The amendment exempted the incumbent president (Truman) at the time of its ratification, making Eisenhower the first president constitutionally prevented from serving a third term.\nEisenhower was also the first outgoing President to come under the protection of the Former Presidents Act; two living former Presidents, Herbert Hoover and Harry S. Truman, left office before the Act was passed. Under the act, Eisenhower was entitled to receive a lifetime pension, state-provided staff and a Secret Service detail.\nIn the 1960 election to choose his successor, Eisenhower endorsed Nixon over Democrat John F. Kennedy. He told friends, \"I will do almost anything to avoid turning my chair and country over to Kennedy.\" He actively campaigned for Nixon in the final days, although he may have done Nixon some harm. When asked by reporters at the end of a televised press conference to list one of Nixon's policy ideas he had adopted, Eisenhower joked, \"If you give me a week, I might think of one. I don't remember.\" Kennedy's campaign used the quote in one of its campaign commercials. Nixon narrowly lost to Kennedy. Eisenhower, who was the oldest president in history at that time (then 70), was succeeded by the youngest elected president, as Kennedy was 43.\nIt was originally intended for President Eisenhower to have a more active role in the campaign as he wanted to respond to attacks Kennedy made on his administration. However, First Lady Mamie Eisenhower expressed concern to Second Lady Pat Nixon about the strain campaigning would put on his heart and wanted the President to back out of it without letting him know of her intervention. Vice President Nixon himself also received concern from White House physician Major General Howard Snyder, who informed him that he could not approve a heavy campaign schedule for the President and his health problems had been exacerbated by Kennedy's attacks. Nixon then convinced Eisenhower not to go ahead with the expanded campaign schedule and limit himself to the original schedule. Nixon reflected that if Eisenhower had carried out his expanded campaign schedule he might have had a decisive impact on the outcome of the election, especially in states that Kennedy won with razor-thin margins. It was years later before Mamie told Dwight why Nixon changed his mind on Dwight's campaigning.\nOn January 17, 1961, Eisenhower gave his final televised Address to the Nation from the Oval Office. In his farewell speech, Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the U.S. armed forces. He described the Cold War: \"We face a hostile ideology global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose and insidious in method\u00a0...\" and warned about what he saw as unjustified government spending proposals and continued with a warning that \"we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military\u2013industrial complex.\"\nHe elaborated, \"we recognize the imperative need for this development\u00a0... the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist\u00a0... Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together.\"\nBecause of legal issues related to holding a military rank while in a civilian office, Eisenhower had resigned his permanent commission as General of the Army before entering the office of President of the United States. Upon completion of his presidential term, his commission was reactivated by Congress and Eisenhower again was commissioned a five-star general in the United States Army.\nPost-presidency, death and funeral (1961\u20131969).\nFollowing the presidency, Eisenhower moved to the place where he and Mamie had spent much of their post-war time. The home was a working farm adjacent to the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, 70 miles from his ancestral home in Elizabethville, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania. They also maintained a retirement home in Palm Desert, California. In 1967 the Eisenhowers donated the Gettysburg farm to the National Park Service.\nAfter leaving office, Eisenhower did not completely retreat from political life. He flew to San Antonio, where he had been stationed years earlier, to support John W. Goode, the unsuccessful Republican candidate against the Democrat Henry B. Gonzalez for Texas' 20th congressional district seat. He addressed the 1964 Republican National Convention, in San Francisco, and appeared with party nominee Barry Goldwater in a campaign commercial from his Gettysburg retreat. That endorsement came somewhat reluctantly because Goldwater had in the late 1950s criticized Eisenhower's administration as \"a dime-store New Deal\". On January 20, 1969, the day Nixon was inaugurated as President, Eisenhower issued a statement praising his former vice president and calling it a \"day for rejoicing\".\nOn the morning of March 28, 1969, Eisenhower died in Washington, D.C., of congestive heart failure at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, at age 78. The following day, his body was moved to the Washington National Cathedral's Bethlehem Chapel, where he lay in repose for 28 hours. He was then transported to the United States Capitol, where he lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda March 30\u201331. A state funeral service was conducted at the Washington National Cathedral on March 31. The president and First Lady, Richard and Pat Nixon, attended, as did former president Lyndon Johnson. Also among the 2,000 invited guests were U.N. Secretary General U Thant and 191 foreign delegates from 78 countries, including 10 foreign heads of state and government. Notable guests included President Charles de Gaulle of France, who was in the United States for the first time since the state funeral of John F. Kennedy, Chancellor Kurt-Georg Kiesinger of West Germany, King Baudouin of Belgium and Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran.\nThe service included the singing of Faure's \"The Palms\", and the playing of Onward, Christian Soldiers.\nThat evening, Eisenhower's body was placed onto a special funeral train for its journey from the nation's capital through seven states to his hometown of Abilene, Kansas. First incorporated into President Abraham Lincoln's funeral in 1865, a funeral train would not be part of a U.S. state funeral again until 2018. Eisenhower is buried inside the Place of Meditation, the chapel on the grounds of the Eisenhower Presidential Center in Abeline. As requested, he was buried in a Government Issue casket, and wearing his World War II uniform, decorated with: Army Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters, Navy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Legion of Merit. Buried alongside Eisenhower are his son Doud, who died at age 3 in 1921, and wife Mamie, who died in 1979.\nPresident Richard Nixon eulogized Eisenhower in 1969, saying:\nLegacy and memory.\nEisenhower's reputation declined in the immediate years after he left office. During his presidency, he was widely seen by critics as an inactive, uninspiring, golf-playing president. This was in stark contrast to his vigorous young successor, John F. Kennedy, who was 26 years his junior. Despite his unprecedented use of Army troops to enforce a federal desegregation order at Central High School in Little Rock, Eisenhower was criticized for his reluctance to support the civil rights movement to the degree that activists wanted. Eisenhower also attracted criticism for his handling of the 1960 U-2 incident and the associated international embarrassment, for the Soviet Union's perceived leadership in the nuclear arms race and the Space Race, and for his failure to publicly oppose McCarthyism.\nIn particular, Eisenhower was criticized for failing to defend George Marshall from attacks by Joseph McCarthy, though he privately deplored McCarthy's tactics and claims.\nHistorian John Lewis Gaddis has summarized a more recent turnaround in evaluations by historians:\nHistorians long ago abandoned the view that Eisenhower's was a failed presidency. He did, after all, end the Korean War without getting into any others. He stabilized, and did not escalate, the Soviet\u2013American rivalry. He strengthened European alliances while withdrawing support from European colonialism. He rescued the Republican Party from isolationism and McCarthyism. He maintained prosperity, balanced the budget, promoted technological innovation, facilitated (if reluctantly) the civil rights movement and warned, in the most memorable farewell address since Washington's, of a \"military\u2013industrial complex\" that could endanger the nation's liberties. Not until Reagan would another president leave office with so strong a sense of having accomplished what he set out to do.\nAlthough conservatism in politics was strong during the 1950s, and Eisenhower generally espoused conservative sentiments, his administration concerned itself mostly with foreign affairs (an area in which the career-military president had more knowledge) and pursued a hands-off domestic policy. Eisenhower looked to moderation and cooperation as a means of governance.\nAlthough he sought to slow or contain the New Deal and other federal programs, he did not attempt to repeal them outright. In doing so, Eisenhower was popular among the liberal wing of the Republican Party. Conservative critics of his administration thought that he did not do enough to advance the goals of the right; according to Hans Morgenthau, \"Eisenhower's victories were but accidents without consequence in the history of the Republican party.\"\nSince the 19th century, many if not all presidents were assisted by a central figure or \"gatekeeper\", sometimes described as the president's private secretary, sometimes with no official title at all. Eisenhower formalized this role, introducing the office of White House Chief of Staff\u00a0\u2013 an idea he borrowed from the United States Army. Every president after Lyndon Johnson has also appointed staff to this position. Initially, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter tried to operate without a chief of staff, but each eventually appointed one.\nAs president, Eisenhower also initiated the \"up or out\" policy that still prevails in the U.S. military. Officers who are passed over for promotion twice, are then usually honorably but quickly discharged, in order to make way for younger, and more able officers. (As an army officer, Eisenhower had been stuck at the rank of major for 16 years in the interwar period.)\nOn December 20, 1944, Eisenhower was appointed to the rank of General of the Army, placing him in the company of George Marshall, Henry \"Hap\" Arnold, and Douglas MacArthur, the only four men to achieve the rank in World War II. Along with Omar Bradley, they were the only five men to achieve the rank since the August 5, 1888 death of Philip Sheridan, and the only five men to hold the rank of five-star general. The rank was created by an Act of Congress on a temporary basis, when Public Law was passed on December 14, 1944, as a temporary rank, subject to reversion to permanent rank six months after the end of the war. The temporary rank was then declared permanent on March 23, 1946 by Public Law 333 of the 79th Congress, which also awarded full pay and allowances in the grade to those on the retired list. It was created to give the most senior American commanders parity of rank with their British counterparts holding the ranks of field marshal and admiral of the fleet. This second General of the Army rank is not the same as the post-Civil War era version because of its purpose and five stars.\nEisenhower founded People to People International in 1956, based on his belief that citizen interaction would promote cultural interaction and world peace. The program includes a student ambassador component, which sends American youth on educational trips to other countries.\nDuring his second term as president, Eisenhower distinctively preserved his presidential gratitude by awarding individuals a special memento. This memento was a series of specially designed U.S. Mint presidential appreciation medals. Eisenhower presented the medal as an expression of his appreciation and the medal is a keepsake reminder for the recipient.\nThe development of the appreciation medals was initiated by the White House and executed by the United States Mint, through the Philadelphia Mint. The medals were struck from September 1958 through October 1960. A total of twenty designs are cataloged with a total mintage of 9,858. Each of the designs incorporates the text \"with appreciation\" or \"with personal and official gratitude\" accompanied with Eisenhower's initials \"D.D.E.\" or facsimile signature. The design also incorporates location, date, and/or significant event. Prior to the end of his second term as president, 1,451 medals were turned in to the Bureau of the Mint and destroyed. The Eisenhower appreciation medals are part of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medal Series.\nTributes and memorials.\nThe Interstate Highway System is officially known as the \"Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways\" in his honor. It was inspired in part by Eisenhower's own Army experiences in World War II, where he recognized the advantages of the autobahn system in Germany. Commemorative signs reading \"Eisenhower Interstate System\" and bearing Eisenhower's permanent 5-star rank insignia were introduced in 1993 and now are displayed throughout the Interstate System. Several highways are also named for him, including the Eisenhower Expressway (Interstate 290) near Chicago. the Eisenhower Tunnel on Interstate 70 west of Denver, and Interstate 80 in California.\nDwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy is a senior war college of the Department of Defense's National Defense University in Washington, DC. Eisenhower graduated from this school when it was previously known as the Army Industrial College. The school's building on Fort Lesley J. McNair, when it was known as the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, was dedicated as Eisenhower Hall in 1960.\nEisenhower was honored on a US one dollar coin, minted from 1971 to 1978. His centenary was honored on a commemorative dollar coin issued in 1990.\nIn 1969 four major record companies\u00a0\u2013 ABC Records, MGM Records, Buddha Records and Caedmon Audio\u00a0\u2013 released tribute albums in Eisenhower's honor.\nIn 1999 the United States Congress created the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission, to create an enduring national memorial in Washington, D.C.. In 2009 the commission chose the architect Frank Gehry to design the memorial. The memorial will stand on a four-acre site near the National Mall on Maryland Avenue, SW across the street from the National Air and Space Museum.\nIn December 1999 he was listed on Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th century. In 2009 he was named to the World Golf Hall of Fame in the Lifetime Achievement category for his contributions to the sport. In 1973, he was inducted into the Hall of Great Westerners of the National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum.\nFreedom of the City.\nEisenhower received the Freedom honor from several locations, including:\nPromotions.\nNote\u00a0\u2013 Eisenhower relinquished his active duty status when he became president on January 20, 1953. He was returned to active duty when he left office eight years later.\nSee also.\nGeneral:"}
{"id": "8183", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8183", "title": "Dwight Eisenhower", "text": ""}
{"id": "8185", "revid": "7716227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8185", "title": "Dejima", "text": " was a Portuguese and subsequently Dutch trading post at Nagasaki, Japan from 1634 to 1854. Dejima was also the location for trade with the Chinese at the time, and thus the only place designated for foreign trade and exchange during the historical Japanese Edo period. \nDejima was a small fan-shaped artificial island in the bay of Nagasaki covering an area of or , and is listed in old Western documents Latinised as \"Deshima\", \"Decima\", \"Decuma\", \"Desjima\", \"Dezima\", \"Disma\", or \"Disima\". Dejima was built in 1634 to house Portuguese traders and separate them from Japanese society by digging a canal through a small peninsula. The Dutch were moved to Dejima in 1641 and during most of the Edo period the island was the single place of direct trade and exchange between Japan and the outside world. Dejima was abolished after the Treaty of Kanagawa in 1854 and the island was later integrated into Nagasaki city through land reclamation. In 1922, the \"Dejima Dutch Trading Post\" was designated a Japanese national historic site.\nHistory.\nIn 1543, the history of direct contacts between Japan and Europe began with the arrival of storm-blown Portuguese merchants on Tanegashima. Six years later the Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier landed in Kagoshima. At first Portuguese traders were based in Hirado, but they moved in search of a better port. In 1570 \"daimy\u014d\" \u014cmura Sumitada converted to Catholicism (choosing Bartolomeu as his Christian name) and made a deal with the Portuguese to develop Nagasaki; soon the port was open for trade. In 1580 Sumitada gave the jurisdiction of Nagasaki to the Jesuits, and the Portuguese obtained the \"de facto\" monopoly on the silk trade with China through Macau.\nThe \"sh\u014dgun\" Iemitsu ordered the construction of the artificial island in 1634, to accommodate the Portuguese traders living in Nagasaki and prevent the propagation of their religion. This was one of the many edicts put forth by Iemitsu between 1633 and 1639 moderating contact between Japan and other countries. However, in response to the uprising of the predominantly Christian population in the Shimabara-Amakusa region, the Tokugawa government decided to expel the Portuguese in 1639.\nSince 1609, the Dutch East India Company had run a trading post on the island of Hirado. The departure of the Portuguese left the Dutch employees of the \"Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie\" (\"VOC\") as the sole Westerners with trade access to Japan. For 33 years they were allowed to trade relatively freely. At its maximum the Hirado trading post covered a large area.\nIn 1637 and 1639 stone warehouses were constructed within the ambit of this Hirado trading post. Christian-era year dates were used on the stonework of the new warehouses and these were used in 1640 as a pretext to demolish the buildings and relocate the trading post to Nagasaki.\nWith the expulsion of the last Portuguese in 1639, Dejima became a failed commercial post and without the annual trading with Portuguese ships from Macau, the economy of Nagasaki suffered greatly. The Dutch were forced by government officials to move from Hirado to Dejima in Nagasaki. From 1641 on, only Chinese and Dutch ships were allowed to come to Japan, and Nagasaki harbor was the only harbor they were allowed to enter.\nRegulated prostitution.\nDutch men and Chinese men visiting Edo period Tokugawa shogunate Japan patronized Japanese sex workers in brothels who were designated for them. Japanese women designated for Chinese male customers were known as Kara-yuki while Japanese women designated for Dutch men at Dejima were known as Oranda-yuki while Japanese women servicing Japanese men were called Nihon-yuki. Karayuki-san was then used for all Japanese women serving foreigners in sexual capacities during the Meiji period. The Japanese women were offered to Japanese and Chinese customers at a low fee but the price of Japanese women for Dutch customers was expensive and higher. Dutch traders were confined to the designated post at Dejima where Oranda-yuki prostitutes were sent. Initially Chinese men were much less restricted than the Dutch were at Dejimi, Chinese men could live all over Nagasaki and besides having sex with the kara-yuki Japanese prostitutes, the Chinese men were permitted to have sex with Japanese women who weren't prostitutes since 1635, unlike Dutch men who were only permitted to have sex with prostitutes. Later the rules that applied to Dutch were applied to Chinese and Chinese were put in J\u016bzenji-mura into T\u014djun-yashiki, a Chinese settlement in 1688 so they would have sex with the Kara-yuki Japanese prostitutes sent to them. Chinese men developed long term romances with the Japanese women like the Chinese Suzhou (Su-chou) merchant Chen Renxie (Ch\u2019\u00ean J\u00ean-hsieh) \u9673\u4ec1\u8b1d with the Japanese Azuyama girl Renzan \u9023\u5c71 who both committed suicide in a lover's pact in 1789, and the Chinese He Minde (Ho Min-t\u00ea) \u4f55\u65fb\u5fb7 who pledged eternal love in Yoriai-machi with the Chikugoya Japanese women Towa \u767b\u502d. She killed herself to join him in death when he was executed for forgery in 1690. The Chinese men were generous with their expensive presents to the Japanese sex workers and were praised by them for it. The Japanese sex workers violated Japan's laws which only permitted each to spend one night in the Chinese settlement by retracing their steps after reporting to the guards when they left the gate open in the morning. The Japanese issued laws and regulations considering the mixed children born to Japanese women from Maruyama and the foreigner Dutch and Chinese men in the Sh\u014dtoku era (1711\u20131716). The mixed children had to stay in Japan and could not be taken back to China or the Dutch country but their fathers could fund the children's education. The boy Kimpachi \u91d1\u516b was born to the Iwataya Japanese woman Yakumo \u516b and the Nanking Chinese captain Huang Zheqing \u9ec3\u54f2\u537f (Huang Ch\u00ea-ch\u2019ing). He requested a permit from the Chief Administrator's Office of Nagasaki to trade goods to create a fund his son could live on for all his life, after coming back to Nagasaki at age 71 in 1723. A Hiketaya Japanese woman in Sodesaki \u8896\u7b11 gave birth to a son fathered by the Chinese Jiang Yunge \u6c5f\u82b8\u95a3 (Chiang Y\u00fcn-ko) (Xinyi, Hsin-i \u8f9b\u5937), a poet, painter and sea captain. Yanagawa Seigan and Rai Sanyu were his friends. Chinese dishes, delicacies, sweets and candies were introduced to Japan by Chinese men teaching the Japanese prostitutes they visited how to make them. In the Genroku era (1688\u20131704) a Chinese man taught the Japanese prostitute Ume how to make a plum blossom shaped sugar and rice flour soft sweet called k\u014dsak\u014d. Her name also meant plum blossom. The songs were sung in the T\u014ds\u014d-on The Kagetsu Entertainment (Kagetsu yoky\u014d) booklet contained information about songs the Chinese men taught to their Japanese prostitute lovers showing that they were sang in T\u014ds\u014d-on with instruments like hu-kung (two-stringed violin), ch\u2019i-hsien-ch\u2019in (seven-stringed dulcimer) and y\u00fceh-ch\u2019in (lute). The Japanese prostitutes of Maruyama who served the Chinese men in Nagasaki were taught dance, songs and music of Chinese origin. The gekkin (y\u00fceh-ch\u2019in) were used to play these Ky\u016brenhwan songs. The Kankan-odori dance accompanied one of these songs which spread in Edo and Ky\u014dto as it gained fame. Exhibitions of the original Chinese style dance were performed in Edo by arranging for the sending of Nagasaki officials managing Chinese affairs and geisha to be sent there by Takahashi Sakuzaemon (1785\u20131829) who was the court astronomer of the Shogunate. He became famous due to the Siebold Incident. Later on the prostitutes were sent to service the Dutch at Dejima after they serviced Chinese at Maruyama being paid for by the Commissioners for Victualing.\nOrganization.\nOn the administrative level, the island of Dejima was part of the city of Nagasaki. The 25 local Japanese families who owned the land received an annual rent from the Dutch. Dejima was a small island, by , linked to the mainland by a small bridge, guarded on both sides, and with a gate on the Dutch side. It contained houses for about twenty Dutchmen, warehouses, and accommodation for Japanese officials. The Dutch were watched by a number of Japanese officials, gatekeepers, night watchmen, and a supervisor (\"otona\" \u4e59\u540d) with about fifty subordinates. Numerous merchants supplied goods and catering, and about 150 interpreters (\"ts\u016bji\" \u901a\u8a5e) served. They all had to be paid by the \"VOC\". As the city of Nagasaki, Dejima was under the direct supervision of Edo through a governor (\"Nagasaki bugy\u014d\").\nEvery ship that arrived in Dejima was inspected. Its sails were held by the Japanese until they released the ship to leave. They confiscated religious books and weapons. The Dutch were not allowed to hold any religious services on the island.\nDespite the financial burden of maintaining the isolated outpost on Dejima, the trade with Japan was very profitable for the Dutch, initially yielding profits of 50% or more. Trade declined in the 18th century, as only two ships per year were allowed to dock at Dejima. After the bankruptcy of the East-India Company in 1795, the Dutch government took over the exchange with Japan. Times were especially hard when the Netherlands (then called the Batavian Republic) was under French Napoleonic rule. All ties with the homeland were severed at Dejima, and for a while, it was the only place in the world where the Dutch flag was flown.\nThe chief VOC trading post official in Japan was called the \"Opperhoofd\" by the Dutch, or \"Kapitan\" (from Portuguese \"capit\u00e3o\") by the Japanese. This descriptive title did not change when the VOC went bankrupt and trade with Japan was continued by the Dutch Indies government at Batavia. According to the Sakoku rules of the Tokugawa shogunate, the VOC had to transfer and replace the opperhoofd every year with a new one. And each opperhoofd was expected to travel to Edo to offer tribute to the shogun.\nTrade.\nOriginally, the Dutch mainly traded in silk, cotton, and \"materia medica\" from China and India, but sugar became more important later. Also, deer pelts and shark skin were transported to Japan from Taiwan, as well as books, scientific instruments and many other rarities from Europe. In return, the Dutch traders bought Japanese copper, silver, camphor, porcelain, lacquer ware, and rice.\nTo this was added the personal trade of VOC employees on Dejima, which was an important source of income for them and their Japanese counterparts. They sold more than 10,000 foreign books on various scientific subjects to the Japanese from the end of the 18th to the early 19th century. These became the basis of knowledge and a factor in the \"Rangaku\" movement or Dutch studies.\nShips.\nIn all, 606 Dutch ships arrived at Dejima during its two centuries of settlement, from 1641 to 1847.\nTrade policy.\nFor two hundred years, foreign merchants were generally not allowed to cross from Dejima to Nagasaki. Japanese civilians were likewise banned from entering Dejima, except interpreters, cooks, carpenters, clerks and 'Women of Pleasure' from the Maruyama teahouses. These \"y\u016bjo\" were handpicked from 1642 by the Japanese, often against their will. From the 18th century, there were some exceptions to this rule, especially following Tokugawa Yoshimune's doctrine of promoting European practical sciences. A few \"Oranda-yuki\" (\"those who stay with the Dutch\") were allowed to stay for longer periods, but they had to report regularly to the Japanese guard post. Once a year the Europeans were allowed to attend the festivities at the Suwa-Shrine under escort. Sometimes physicians such as Engelbert Kaempfer, Carl Peter Thunberg, and Philipp Franz von Siebold were called to high-ranking Japanese patients with the permission of the authorities. Starting in the 18th century, Dejima became known throughout Japan as a center of medicine, military science, and astronomy. Many samurai traveled there for \"Dutch studies\" (Rangaku).\nIn addition, the \"Opperhoofd\" was treated like the representative of a tributary state, which meant that he had to pay a visit of homage to the \"sh\u014dgun\" in Edo. The Dutch delegation traveled to Edo yearly between 1660 and 1790, and once every four years thereafter. This prerogative was denied to the Chinese traders. The lengthy travel to the shogunal court broke the boredom of the Dutch stay, but it was a costly affair. Government officials told them in advance and in detail which (expensive) gifts were expected at the court, such as astrolabes, a pair of glasses, telescopes, globes, medical instruments, medical books, or exotic animals and tropical birds. In return, the Dutch delegation received some gifts from the \"sh\u014dgun\". On arrival in Edo, the \"Opperhoofd\" and his retinue (usually his scribe and the factory physician) had to wait in the \"Nagasakiya\" (), their mandatory residence, until they were summoned at the court. During the reign of the somewhat eccentric \"sh\u014dgun\" Tokugawa Tsunayoshi, they were expected to perform Dutch dances and songs for the amusement of the \"sh\u014dgun\" after their official audience, according to Engelbert Kaempfer. But they also used the opportunity of their stay of about two to three weeks in the capital to exchange knowledge with learned Japanese and, under escort, to visit the town.\nNagasaki Naval Training Center.\nFollowing the forced opening of Japan by US Navy Commodore Perry in 1854, the Bakufu suddenly increased its interactions with Dejima in an effort to build up knowledge of Western shipping methods. The , a naval training institute, was established in 1855 by the government of the \"sh\u014dgun\" at the entrance of Dejima, to enable maximum interaction with Dutch naval know-how. The center was equipped with Japan's first steamship, the \"Kank\u014d Maru\", given by the government of the Netherlands the same year. The future Admiral Enomoto Takeaki was one of the students of the Training Center.\nReconstruction.\nThe Dutch East India Company's trading post at Dejima was abolished when Japan concluded the Treaty of Kanagawa with the US in 1858. This ended Dejima's role as Japan's only window on the Western world during the era of national isolation. Since then, the island was expanded by reclaimed land and merged into Nagasaki. Extensive redesigning of Nagasaki Harbor in 1904 obscured its original location. The original footprint of Dejima Island has been marked by rivets; but as restoration progresses, the ambit of the island will be easier to see at a glance.\nDejima today is a work in progress. The island was designated a national historic site in 1922, but further steps were slow to follow. Restoration work was started in 1953, but that project languished. In 1996, restoration of Dejima began with plans for reconstructing 25 buildings in their early 19th-century state. To better display Dejima's fan-shaped form, the project anticipated rebuilding only parts of the surrounding embankment wall that had once enclosed the island. Buildings that remained from the Meiji period were to be used.\nIn 2000, five buildings including the Deputy Factor's Quarters were completed and opened to the public. In the spring of 2006, the finishing touches were put on the Chief Factor's Residence, the Japanese Officials' Office, the Head Clerk's Quarters, the No. 3 Warehouse, and the Sea Gate. Currently, some 10 buildings throughout the area have been restored.\nIn 2017, six new buildings, as well as the 'Omotemon-Bashi Bridge' (the old bridge to the mainland), were restored. The bridge was officially opened in attendance of members of the Japanese and Dutch royal families.\nThe long-term planning intends that Dejima will be surrounded by water on all four sides; its characteristic fan-shaped form and all of its embankment walls will be fully restored. This long-term plan will include large-scale urban redevelopment in the area. To make Dejima an island again will require rerouting the Nakashima River and moving a part of Route 499.\nTrading post chiefs (\"Opperhoofden\").\n\"Opperhoofd\" is a Dutch word (plural \"opperhoofden\") which literally means 'supreme head'. The Japanese used to call the trading post chiefs \"kapitan\" which is derived from Portuguese \"capit\u00e3o\" (cf. Latin \"caput\", head). In its historical usage, the word is a gubernatorial title, comparable to the English Chief factor, for the chief executive officer of a Dutch \"factory\" in the sense of trading post, as led by a Factor, i.e. agent."}
{"id": "8187", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8187", "title": "Descriptive statistics", "text": "A descriptive statistic (in the count noun sense) is a summary statistic that quantitatively describes or summarizes features from a collection of information, while descriptive statistics (in the mass noun sense) is the process of using and analysing those statistics. Descriptive statistics is distinguished from inferential statistics (or inductive statistics) by its aim to summarize a sample, rather than use the data to learn about the population that the sample of data is thought to represent. This generally means that descriptive statistics, unlike inferential statistics, is not developed on the basis of probability theory, and are frequently non-parametric statistics. Even when a data analysis draws its main conclusions using inferential statistics, descriptive statistics are generally also presented. For example, in papers reporting on human subjects, typically a table is included giving the overall sample size, sample sizes in important subgroups (e.g., for each treatment or exposure group), and demographic or clinical characteristics such as the average age, the proportion of subjects of each sex, the proportion of subjects with related co-morbidities, etc.\nSome measures that are commonly used to describe a data set are measures of central tendency and measures of variability or dispersion. Measures of central tendency include the mean, median and mode, while measures of variability include the standard deviation (or variance), the minimum and maximum values of the variables, kurtosis and skewness.\nUse in statistical analysis.\nDescriptive statistics provide simple summaries about the sample and about the observations that have been made. Such summaries may be either quantitative, i.e. summary statistics, or visual, i.e. simple-to-understand graphs. These summaries may either form the basis of the initial description of the data as part of a more extensive statistical analysis, or they may be sufficient in and of themselves for a particular investigation.\nFor example, the shooting percentage in basketball is a descriptive statistic that summarizes the performance of a player or a team. This number is the number of shots made divided by the number of shots taken. For example, a player who shoots 33% is making approximately one shot in every three. The percentage summarizes or describes multiple discrete events. Consider also the grade point average. This single number describes the general performance of a student across the range of their course experiences.\nThe use of descriptive and summary statistics has an extensive history and, indeed, the simple tabulation of populations and of economic data was the first way the topic of statistics appeared. More recently, a collection of summarisation techniques has been formulated under the heading of exploratory data analysis: an example of such a technique is the box plot.\nIn the business world, descriptive statistics provides a useful summary of many types of data. For example, investors and brokers may use a historical account of return behaviour by performing empirical and analytical analyses on their investments in order to make better investing decisions in the future.\nUnivariate analysis.\nUnivariate analysis involves describing the distribution of a single variable, including its central tendency (including the mean, median, and mode) and dispersion (including the range and quartiles of the data-set, and measures of spread such as the variance and standard deviation). The shape of the distribution may also be described via indices such as skewness and kurtosis. Characteristics of a variable's distribution may also be depicted in graphical or tabular format, including histograms and stem-and-leaf display.\nBivariate and multivariate analysis.\nWhen a sample consists of more than one variable, descriptive statistics may be used to describe the relationship between pairs of variables. In this case, descriptive statistics include:\nThe main reason for differentiating univariate and bivariate analysis is that bivariate analysis is not only simple descriptive analysis, but also it describes the relationship between two different variables. Quantitative measures of dependence include correlation (such as Pearson's r when both variables are continuous, or Spearman's rho if one or both are not) and covariance (which reflects the scale variables are measured on). The slope, in regression analysis, also reflects the relationship between variables. The unstandardised slope indicates the unit change in the criterion variable for a one unit change in the predictor. The standardised slope indicates this change in standardised (z-score) units. Highly skewed data are often transformed by taking logarithms. Use of logarithms makes graphs more symmetrical and look more similar to the normal distribution, making them easier to interpret intuitively."}
{"id": "8189", "revid": "21715360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8189", "title": "Demographic statistics", "text": "Demographic statistics are measures of the characteristics of, or changes to, a population. Records of births, deaths, marriages, immigration and emigration and a regular census of population provide information that is key to making sound decisions about national policy.\nA useful summary of such data is the population pyramid. It provides data about the sex and age distribution of the population in an accessible graphical format.\nAnother summary is called the life table. For a \"cohort\" of persons born in the same year, it traces and projects their life experiences from birth to death. For a given cohort, the proportion expected to survive each year (or decade in an \"abridged life table\") is presented in tabular or graphical form.\nThe ratio of males to females by age indicates the consequences of differing mortality rates on the sexes. Thus, while values above one are common for newborns, the ratio dwindles until it is well below one for the older population.\nCollection.\nNational population statistics are usually collected by conducting a census. However, because these are usually huge logistical exercises, countries normally conduct censuses only once every five to 10 years. Even when a census is conducted it may miss counting everyone (known as undercount). Also, some people counted in the census may be recorded in a different place than where they usually live, because they are travelling, for example (this may result in overcounting). Consequently, raw census numbers are often adjusted to produce \"census estimates\" that identify such statistics as \"resident population\", \"residents, tourists and other visitors\", \"nationals and aliens (non-nationals)\". For privacy reasons, particularly when there are small counts, some census results may be rounded, often to the nearest ten, hundred, thousand and sometimes randomly up, down or to another small number such as within 3 of the actual count.\nBetween censuses, administrative data collected by various agencies about population events such as births, deaths, and cross-border migration may be used to produce intercensal estimates.\nPopulation estimates and projections.\nPopulation estimates are usually derived from census and other administrative data. Population estimates are normally produced after the date the estimate is for.\nSome estimates, such as the \"Usually resident population\" estimate who usually lives in a locality as at the census date, even though the census did not count them within that locality. Census questions usually include a questions about where a person usually lives, whether they are a resident or visitor, or also live somewhere else, to allow these estimates to be made.\nOther estimates are concerned with estimating population on a particular date that is different from the census date, for example the middle or end of a calendar or financial year. These estimates often use birth and death records and migration data to adjust census counts for the changes that have happened since the census.\nPopulation projections are produced in advance of the date they are for. They use time series analysis of existing census data and other sources of population information to forecast the size of future populations. Because there are unknown factors that may affect future population changes, population projections often incorporate high and low as well as expected values for future populations. Population projections are often recomputed after a census has been conducted. It depends on how the area is adjusted in a particular demarcation.\nHistory.\nWhile many censuses were conducted in antiquity, there are few population statistics that survive. One example though can be found in the Bible, in chapter 1 of the Book of Numbers. Not only are the statistics given, but the method used to compile those statistics is also described. In modern-day terms, this metadata about the census is probably of as much value as the statistics themselves as it allows researchers to determine not only what was being counted but how and why it was done.\nMetadata.\nModern population statistics are normally accompanied by metadata that explains how the statistics have been compiled and adjusted to compensate for any collection issues.\nStatistical sources.\nMost countries have a census bureau or government agency responsible for conducting censuses. Many of these agencies publish their country's census results and other population statistics on their agency's website."}
{"id": "8192", "revid": "40903659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8192", "title": "Detective fiction", "text": "Detective fiction is a subgenre of crime fiction and mystery fiction in which an investigator or a detective\u2014either professional, amateur or retired\u2014investigates a crime, often murder. The detective genre began around the same time as speculative fiction and other genre fiction in the mid-nineteenth century and has remained extremely popular, particularly in novels. Some of the most famous heroes of detective fiction include C. Auguste Dupin, Sherlock Holmes, and Hercule Poirot. Juvenile stories featuring The Hardy Boys, Nancy Drew, and The Boxcar Children have also remained in print for several decades.\nBeginnings of detective fiction.\nIn ancient literature.\nSome scholars, such as R. H. Pfeiffer, have suggested that certain ancient and religious texts bear similarities to what would later be called detective fiction. In the Old Testament story of (the Protestant Bible locates this story within the apocrypha), the account told by two witnesses broke down when Daniel cross-examines them. In response, author Julian Symons has argued that \"those who search for fragments of detection in the Bible and Herodotus are looking only for puzzles\" and that these puzzles are not detective stories. In the play \"Oedipus Rex\" by Ancient Greek playwright Sophocles, Oedipus investigates the unsolved murder of King Laius and discovers the truth after questioning various witnesses that he himself is the culprit. Although \"Oedipus's enquiry is based on supernatural, pre-rational methods that are evident in most narratives of crime until the development of Enlightenment thought in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries\", this narrative has \"all of the central characteristics and formal elements of the detective story, including a mystery surrounding a murder, a closed circle of suspects, and the gradual uncovering of a hidden past.\"\nEarly Arabic detective fiction.\nThe \"One Thousand and One Nights\" contains several of the earliest detective stories, anticipating modern detective fiction. The oldest known example of a detective story was \"The Three Apples\", one of the tales narrated by Scheherazade in the \"One Thousand and One Nights\" (\"Arabian Nights\"). In this story, a fisherman discovers a heavy, locked chest along the Tigris river, which he then sells to the Abbasid Caliph, Harun al-Rashid. When Harun breaks open the chest, he discovers the body of a young woman who has been cut into pieces. Harun then orders his vizier, Ja'far ibn Yahya, to solve the crime and to find the murderer within three days, or be executed if he fails in his assignment. Suspense is generated through multiple plot twists that occur as the story progressed. With these characteristics this may be considered an archetype for detective fiction. It anticipates the use of reverse chronology in modern detective fiction, where the story begins with a crime before presenting a gradual reconstruction of the past.\nThe main difference between Ja'far (\"The Three Apples\") and later fictional detectives, such as Sherlock Holmes and Hercule Poirot, is that Ja'far has no actual desire to solve the case. The whodunit mystery is solved when the murderer himself confessed his crime. This in turn leads to another assignment in which Ja'far has to find the culprit who instigated the murder within three days or else be executed. Ja'far again fails to find the culprit before the deadline, but owing to chance, he discovers a key item. In the end, he manages to solve the case through reasoning in order to prevent his own execution.\nOn the other hand, two other \"Arabian Nights\" stories, \"The Merchant and the Thief\" and \"Ali Khwaja\", contain two of the earliest fictional detectives, who uncover clues and present evidence to catch or convict a criminal known to the audience, with the story unfolding in normal chronology and the criminal already known to the audience. The latter involves a climax where the titular detective protagonist Ali Khwaja presents evidence from expert witnesses in a court.\nEarly Chinese detective fiction.\nGong'an fiction (, literally\uff1a\"case records of a public law court\") is the earliest known genre of Chinese detective fiction.\nSome well-known stories include the Yuan Dynasty story \"Circle of Chalk\" (Chinese: \u7070\u95cc\u8a18), the Ming Dynasty story collection \"Bao Gong An\" (Chinese: \u5305\u516c\u6848) and the 18th century \"Di Gong An\" (Chinese: \u72c4\u516c\u6848) story collection. The latter was translated into English as \"Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee\" by Dutch sinologist Robert Van Gulik, who then used the style and characters to write the original Judge Dee series.\nThe hero/detective of these novels was typically a traditional judge or similar official based on historical personages such as Judge Bao (Bao Qingtian) or Judge Dee (Di Renjie). Although the historical characters may have lived in an earlier period (such as the Song or Tang dynasty) most stories are written in the later Ming or Qing Dynasty period.\nThese novels differ from the Western style tradition in several points as described by Van Gulik:\nVan Gulik chose \"Di Gong An\" to translate because in his view it was closer to the Western literary style and more likely to appeal to non-Chinese readers.\nOne notable fact is that a number of Gong An works may have been lost or destroyed during the Literary Inquisitions and the wars in ancient China. Moreover, in the traditional Chinese culture, this genre was low-prestige, and therefore was less worthy of preservation than works such as philosophy or poetry. Only little or incomplete case volumes can be found; for example, the only copy of Di Gong An was found at a second-hand book store in Tokyo, Japan.\nEarly Western detective fiction.\nOne of the earliest examples of detective fiction in Western Literature is Voltaire's \"Zadig\" (1748), which features a main character who performs feats of analysis. \"Things as They Are; or, The Adventures of Caleb Williams\" (1794) by William Godwin portrays the law as protecting the murderer and destroying the innocent. Thomas Skinner Sturr's anonymous \"Richmond, or stories in the life of a Bow Street officer\" was published in London in 1827; the Danish crime story \"The Rector of Veilbye\" by Steen Steensen Blicher was written in 1829; and the Norwegian crime novel \"Mordet paa Maskinbygger Roolfsen\" (\"The Murder of Engine Maker Roolfsen\") by Maurits Hansen was published in December 1839.\n\"Das Fr\u00e4ulein von Scuderi\" is an 1819 short story by E. T. A. Hoffmann, in which Mlle de Scudery establishes the innocence of the police's favorite suspect in the murder of a jeweller. This story is sometimes cited as the first detective story and as a direct influence on Edgar Allan Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\" (1841). Also suggested as a possible influence on Poe is \u2018The Secret Cell\u2019, a short story published in September 1837 by William Evans Burton. It has been suggested that this story may have been known to Poe, who in 1839 worked for Burton. The story was about a London policeman who solves the mystery of a kidnapped girl. Burton's fictional detective relied on practical methods such as dogged legwork, knowledge of the underworld and undercover surveillance, rather than brilliance of imagination or intellect.\nEstablishment of the genre.\nDetective fiction in the English-speaking world is considered to have begun in 1841 with the publication of Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\", featuring \"the first fictional detective, the eccentric and brilliant C. Auguste Dupin\". When the character first appeared, the word \"detective\" had not yet been used in English; however, the character's name, \"Dupin\", originated from the English word dupe or deception. Poe devised a \"plot formula that's been successful ever since, give or take a few shifting variables.\" Poe followed with further Auguste Dupin tales: \"The Mystery of Marie Rog\u00eat\" in 1842 and \"The Purloined Letter\" in 1844.\nPoe referred to his stories as \"tales of ratiocination\". In stories such as these, the primary concern of the plot is ascertaining truth, and the usual means of obtaining the truth is a complex and mysterious process combining intuitive logic, astute observation, and perspicacious inference. \"Early detective stories tended to follow an investigating protagonist from the first scene to the last, making the unravelling a practical rather than emotional matter.\" \"The Mystery of Marie Rog\u00eat\" is particularly interesting because it is a barely fictionalized account based on Poe's theory of what happened to the real-life Mary Cecilia Rogers.\nLiterary critic Catherine Ross Nickerson credits Louisa May Alcott with creating the second-oldest work of modern detective fiction, after only Poe's Dupin stories themselves, with the 1865 thriller \"V.V., or Plots and Counterplots.\" A short story published anonymously by Alcott, the story concerns a Scottish aristocrat who tries to prove that a mysterious woman has killed his fianc\u00e9e and cousin. The detective on the case, Antoine Dupres, is a parody of Auguste Dupin who is less concerned with solving the crime as he is in setting up a way to reveal the solution with a dramatic flourish. Ross Nickerson notes that many of the American writers who experimented with Poe's established rules of the genre were women, inventing a subgenre of domestic detective fiction that flourished in its own right for several generations. These included Metta Fuller Victor's two detective novels \"The Dead Letter\" (1867) and \"The Figure Eight\" (1869). \"The Dead Letter\" is noteworthy as the first full-length work of American crime fiction.\n\u00c9mile Gaboriau was a pioneer of the detective fiction genre in France. In \"Monsieur Lecoq\" (1868), the title character is adept at disguise, a key characteristic of detectives. Gaboriau's writing is also considered to contain the first example of a detective minutely examining a crime scene for clues.\nAnother early example of a whodunit is a subplot in the novel \"Bleak House\" (1853) by Charles Dickens. The conniving lawyer Tulkinghorn is killed in his office late one night, and the crime is investigated by Inspector Bucket of the Metropolitan police force. Numerous characters appeared on the staircase leading to Tulkinghorn's office that night, some of them in disguise, and Inspector Bucket must penetrate these mysteries to identify the murderer. Dickens also left a novel unfinished at his death, \"The Mystery of Edwin Drood\".\nDickens's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Wilkie Collins (1824\u20131889)\u2014sometimes called the \"grandfather of English detective fiction\"\u2014is credited with the first great mystery novel, \"The Woman in White\". T. S. Eliot called Collins's novel \"The Moonstone\" (1868) \"the first, the longest, and the best of modern English detective novels... in a genre invented by Collins and not by Poe\", and Dorothy L. Sayers called it \"probably the very finest detective story ever written\". \"The Moonstone\" contains a number of ideas that have established in the genre several classic features of the 20th century detective story:\nAlthough \"The Moonstone\" is usually seen as the first detective novel, there are other contenders for the honor. A number of critics suggest that the lesser known \"Notting Hill Mystery\" (1862\u201363), written by the pseudonymous \"Charles Felix\" (later identified as Charles Warren Adams), preceded it by a number of years and first used techniques that would come to define the genre.\nLiterary critics Chris Willis and Kate Watson consider Mary Elizabeth Braddon's first book, the even earlier \"The Trail of the Serpent\" (1861), the first British detective novel. The novel \"features an unusual and innovative detective figure, Mr. Peters, who is lower class and mute, and who is initially dismissed both by the text and its characters.\" Braddon's later and better-remembered work, \"Aurora Floyd\" (printed in 1863 novel form, but serialized in 1862\u201363), also features a compelling detective in the person of Detective Grimstone of Scotland Yard.\nTom Taylor's melodrama \"The Ticket-of-Leave Man\", an adaptation of \"L\u00e9onard\" by \u00c9douard Brisbarre and Eug\u00e8ne Nus, appeared in 1863, introducing Hawkshaw the Detective. In short, it is difficult to establish who was the first to write the English-language detective novel, as various authors were exploring the theme simultaneously.\nAnna Katharine Green, in her 1878 debut \"The Leavenworth Case\" and other works, popularized the genre among middle-class readers and helped to shape the genre into its classic form as well as developed the concept of the series detective.\nIn 1887, Arthur Conan Doyle created Sherlock Holmes, arguably the most famous of all fictional detectives. Although Sherlock Holmes is not the original fictional detective (he was influenced by Poe's Dupin and Gaboriau's Lecoq), his name has become a byword for the part. Conan Doyle stated that the character of Holmes was inspired by Dr. Joseph Bell, for whom Doyle had worked as a clerk at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. Like Holmes, Bell was noted for drawing large conclusions from the smallest observations. A brilliant London-based \"consulting detective\" residing at 221B Baker Street, Holmes is famous for his intellectual prowess and is renowned for his skillful use of astute observation, deductive reasoning, and forensic skills to solve difficult cases. Conan Doyle wrote four novels and fifty-six short stories featuring Holmes, and all but four stories are narrated by Holmes's friend, assistant, and biographer, Dr. John H. Watson.\nGolden Age detective novels.\nThe period between World War I and World War II (the 1920s and 1930s) is generally referred to as the Golden Age of Detective Fiction. During this period, a number of very popular writers emerged, including mostly British but also a notable subset of American and New Zealand writers. Female writers constituted a major portion of notable Golden Age writers. Agatha Christie, Dorothy L. Sayers, Josephine Tey, Margery Allingham, and Ngaio Marsh were particularly famous female writers of this time. Apart from Ngaio Marsh (a New Zealander), they were all British.\nVarious conventions of the detective genre were standardized during the Golden Age, and in 1929, some of them were codified by the English Catholic priest and author of detective stories Ronald Knox in his 'Decalogue' of rules for detective fiction. One of his rules was to avoid supernatural elements so that the focus remained on the mystery itself. Knox has contended that a detective story \"must have as its main interest the unravelling of a mystery; a mystery whose elements are clearly presented to the reader at an early stage in the proceedings, and whose nature is such as to arouse curiosity, a curiosity which is gratified at the end.\" Another common convention in Golden Age detective stories involved an outsider \u2014 sometimes a salaried investigator or a police officer, but often a gifted amateur \u2014 investigating a murder committed in a closed environment by one of a limited number of suspects.\nThe most widespread subgenre of the detective novel became the whodunit (or whodunnit, short for \"who done it?\"). In this subgenre, great ingenuity may be exercised in narrating the crime, usually a homicide, and the subsequent investigation. This objective was to conceal the identity of the criminal from the reader until the end of the book, when the method and culprit are both revealed. According to scholars Carole Kismaric and Marvin Heiferman, \"The golden age of detective fiction began with high-class amateur detectives sniffing out murderers lurking in rose gardens, down country lanes, and in picturesque villages. Many conventions of the detective-fiction genre evolved in this era, as numerous writers \u2014 from populist entertainers to respected poets \u2014 tried their hands at mystery stories.\"\nJohn Dickson Carr \u2014 who also wrote as Carter Dickson \u2014 used the \u201cpuzzle\u201d approach in his writing which was characterized by including a complex puzzle for the reader to try to unravel. He created ingenious and seemingly impossible plots and is regarded as the master of the \"locked room mystery\". Two of Carr's most famous works are \"The Case of Constant Suicides\" (1941) and \"The Hollow Man\" (1935). Another author, Cecil Street \u2014 who also wrote as John Rhode \u2014 wrote of a detective, Dr. Priestley, who specialised in elaborate technical devices. In the United States, the whodunit subgenre was adopted and extended by Rex Stout and Ellery Queen, along with others. The emphasis on formal rules during the Golden Age produced great works, albeit with highly standardized form. The most successful novels of this time included \u201can original and exciting plot; distinction in the writing, a vivid sense of place, a memorable and compelling hero and the ability to draw the reader into their comforting and highly individual world.\u201d\n'Whodunit'.\nA whodunit or whodunnit (a colloquial elision of \"Who [has] done it?\" or \"Who did it?\") is a complex, plot-driven variety of the detective story in which the audience is given the opportunity to engage in the same process of deduction as the protagonist throughout the investigation of a crime. The reader or viewer is provided with the clues from which the identity of the perpetrator may be deduced before the story provides the revelation itself at its climax. The \"whodunit\" flourished during the so-called \"Golden Age\" of detective fiction, between 1920 and 1950, when it was the predominant mode of crime writing.\nAgatha Christie.\nAgatha Christie is not only the most famous Golden Age writer, but also considered one of the most famous authors of all genres of all time. At the time of her death in 1976, \u201cshe was the best-selling novelist in history.\u201d\nMany of the most popular books of the Golden Age were written by Agatha Christie. She produced long series of books featuring detective characters like Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple, amongst others. Her use of basing her stories on complex puzzles, \u201ccombined with her stereotyped characters and picturesque middle-class settings\u201d, is credited for her success. Christie's works include \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1934), \"Death on the Nile\" (1937), Three Blind Mice (1950) and \"And Then There Were None\" (1939).\nModern regional detective fiction.\nJapanese detective fiction.\nEdogawa Rampo is the first Japanese modern mystery writer and the founder of the Detective Story Club in Japan. Rampo was an admirer of western mystery writers. He gained his fame in the early 1920s, when he began to bring to the genre many bizarre, erotic and even fantastic elements. This is partly because of the social tension before World War II. In 1957, Seicho Matsumoto received the Mystery Writers of Japan Award for his short story \"The Face\" (\"\u9854\" \"kao\"). \"The Face\" and Matsumoto's subsequent works began the \"social school\" (\u793e\u4f1a\u6d3e \"shakai ha\") within the genre, which emphasized social realism, described crimes in an ordinary setting and sets motives within a wider context of social injustice and political corruption. Since the 1980s, a \"new orthodox school\" (\u65b0\u672c\u683c\u6d3e \"shin honkaku ha\") has surfaced. It demands restoration of the classic rules of detective fiction and the use of more self-reflective elements. Famous authors of this movement include Soji Shimada, Yukito Ayatsuji, Rintaro Norizuki, Alice Arisugawa, Kaoru Kitamura and Taku Ashibe.\nChinese detective fiction.\nThrough China's Golden Age of crime fiction (1900\u20131949), translations of Western classics, and native Chinese detective fictions circulated within the country.\nCheng Xiaoqing had first encountered Conan Doyle's highly popular stories as an adolescent. In the ensuing years, he played a major role in rendering them first into classical and later into vernacular Chinese. Cheng Xiaoqing's translated works from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle introduced China to a new type of narrative style. Western detective fiction that was translated often emphasized \u201cindividuality, equality, and the importance of knowledge\u201d , appealing to China that it was the time for opening their eyes to the rest of the world.\nThis style began China's interest in popular crime fiction, and is what drove Cheng Xiaoqing to write his own crime fiction novel, \"Sherlock in Shanghai\". In the late 1910s, Cheng began writing detective fiction very much in Conan Doyle's style, with Bao as the Watson-like narrator; a rare instance of such a direct appropriation from foreign fiction. Famed as the \u201cOriental Sherlock Holmes\u201d, the duo Huo Sang and Bao Lang become counterparts to Doyle's Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson characters.\nOther regional and ethnic subcultures.\nEspecially in the United States, detective fiction emerged in the 1960s, and gained prominence in later decades, as a way for authors to bring stories about various subcultures to mainstream audiences. One scholar wrote about the detective novels of Tony Hillerman, set among the Native American population around New Mexico, \"many American readers have probably gotten more insight into traditional Navajo culture from his detective stories than from any other recent books.\" Other notable writers who have explored regional and ethnic communities in their detective novels are Harry Kemelman, whose Rabbi Small series were set in the Conservative Jewish community of Massachusetts; Walter Mosley, whose Easy Rawlins books are set in the African American community of 1950s Los Angeles; and Sara Paretsky, whose V. I. Warshawski books have explored the various subcultures of Chicago.\nStories about robbers and detectives were very popular in Russia since old times. The most famous hero in XVIII cent. was Ivan Osipov (1718 \u2014 after 1756), nicknamed Ivan Kain. Another examples of early Russian detective stories are: \"Bitter Fate\" (1789) by M. D. Chulkov (1743\u20141792), \"The Finger Ring\" (1831) by Yevgeny Baratynsky, \"The White Ghost\" (1834) by Mikhail Zagoskin, \"Crime and Punishment \" (1866) and \"The Brothers Karamazov\" (1880) by Fyodor Dostoevsky. Detective fictions in modern Russian literature with clear detective plots started with \"The Garin Death Ray\" (1926\u20131927) and \"The Black Gold\" (1931) by Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy, \"Mess-Mend\" by Marietta Shaginyan, \"The Investigator's Notes\" by Lev Sheinin. Boris Akunin is a famous Russian writer of historical detective fiction in modern-day Russia.\nSubgenres.\nStandard private eye, or \"hardboiled\".\nMartin Hewitt, created by British author Arthur Morrison in 1894, is one of the first examples of the modern style of fictional private detective. This character is described as an \"'Everyman' detective meant to challenge the detective-as-superman that Holmes represented.\"\nBy the late 1920s, Al Capone and the Mob were inspiring not only fear, but piquing mainstream curiosity about the American crime underworld. Popular pulp fiction magazines like \"Black Mask\" capitalized on this, as authors such as Carrol John Daly published violent stories that focused on the mayhem and injustice surrounding the criminals, not the circumstances behind the crime. Very often, no actual mystery even existed: the books simply revolved around justice being served to those who deserved harsh treatment, which was described in explicit detail.\" The overall theme these writers portrayed reflected \"the changing face of America itself.\"\nIn the 1930s, the private eye genre was adopted wholeheartedly by American writers. One of the primary contributors to this style was Dashiell Hammett with his famous private investigator character, Sam Spade. His style of crime fiction came to be known as \"hardboiled\", which is described as a genre that \"usually deals with criminal activity in a modern urban environment, a world of disconnected signs and anonymous strangers.\" \"Told in stark and sometimes elegant language through the unemotional eyes of new hero-detectives, these stories were an American phenomenon.\"\nIn the late 1930s, Raymond Chandler updated the form with his private detective Philip Marlowe, who brought a more intimate voice to the detective than the more distanced \"operative's report\" style of Hammett's Continental Op stories. Despite struggling through the task of plotting a story, his cadenced dialogue and cryptic narrations were musical, evoking the dark alleys and tough thugs, rich women and powerful men about whom he wrote. Several feature and television movies have been made about the Philip Marlowe character. James Hadley Chase wrote a few novels with private eyes as the main heroes, including \"Blonde's Requiem\" (1945), \"Lay Her Among the Lilies\" (1950), and \"Figure It Out for Yourself\" (1950). The heroes of these novels are typical private eyes, very similar to or plagiarizing Raymond Chandler's work.\nRoss Macdonald, pseudonym of Kenneth Millar, updated the form again with his detective Lew Archer. Archer, like Hammett's fictional heroes, was a camera eye, with hardly any known past. \"Turn Archer sideways, and he disappears,\" one reviewer wrote. Two of Macdonald's strengths were his use of psychology and his beautiful prose, which was full of imagery. Like other 'hardboiled' writers, Macdonald aimed to give an impression of realism in his work through violence, sex and confrontation. The 1966 movie \"Harper\" starring Paul Newman was based on the first Lew Archer story \"The Moving Target\" (1949). Newman reprised the role in \"The Drowning Pool\" in 1976.\nMichael Collins, pseudonym of Dennis Lynds, is generally considered the author who led the form into the Modern Age. His PI, Dan Fortune, was consistently involved in the same sort of David-and-Goliath stories that Hammett, Chandler, and Macdonald wrote, but Collins took a sociological bent, exploring the meaning of his characters' places in society and the impact society had on people. Full of commentary and clipped prose, his books were more intimate than those of his predecessors, dramatizing that crime can happen in one's own living room.\nThe PI novel was a male-dominated field in which female authors seldom found publication until Marcia Muller, Sara Paretsky, and Sue Grafton were finally published in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Each author's detective, also female, was brainy and physical and could hold her own. Their acceptance, and success, caused publishers to seek out other female authors.\nInverted detective.\nAn inverted detective story, also known as a \"howcatchem\", is a murder mystery fiction structure in which the commission of the crime is shown or described at the beginning, usually including the identity of the perpetrator. The story then describes the detective's attempt to solve the mystery. There may also be subsidiary puzzles, such as why the crime was committed, and they are explained or resolved during the story. This format is the opposite of the more typical \"whodunit\", where all of the details of the perpetrator of the crime are not revealed until the story's climax.\nPolice procedural.\nMany detective stories have police officers as the main characters. These stories may take a variety of forms, but many authors try to realistically depict the routine activities of a group of police officers who are frequently working on more than one case simultaneously. Some of these stories are whodunits; in others, the criminal is well known, and it is a case of getting enough evidence.\nIn the 1940s the police procedural evolved as a new style of detective fiction. Unlike the heroes of Christie, Chandler, and Spillane, the police detective was subject to error and was constrained by rules and regulations. As Gary Huasladen says in \"Places for Dead Bodies\", \"not all the clients were insatiable bombshells, and invariably there was life outside the job.\" The detective in the police procedural does the things police officers do to catch a criminal. Writers include Ed McBain, P. D. James, and Bartholomew Gill.\nHistorical mystery.\nThese works are set in a time period considered historical from the author's perspective, and the central plot involves the solving of a mystery or crime (usually murder). Though works combining these genres have existed since at least the early 20th century, many credit Ellis Peters's \"Cadfael Chronicles\" (1977\u20131994) for popularizing what would become known as the historical mystery.\nA variation on this is Josephine Tey's The Daughter of Time. In it, Scotland Yard Inspector Alan Grant -- who considers himself a good judge of faces -- is surprised to find that what he considers to be the portrait of a sensitive man is in reality a portrait of Richard III, who murdered his brother's children in order to become king. The story details his attempt to get to the historical truth of whether Richard III is the villain he has been made out to be by history. The novel was awarded the top spot in the Top 100 Crime Novels of All Time by the UK Crime Writers' Association and the number 4 spot in The Top 100 Mystery Novels of All Time Mystery Writers of America\nCozy mysteries.\n\"Cozy mysteries\" began in the late 20th century as a reinvention of the Golden Age whodunit; these novels generally shy away from violence and suspense and frequently feature female amateur detectives. Modern cozy mysteries are frequently, though not necessarily in either case, humorous and thematic (culinary mystery, animal mystery, quilting mystery, etc.)\nThis style features minimal violence, sex, and social relevance; a solution achieved by intellect or intuition rather than police procedure, with order restored in the end; honorable and well bred characters; and a setting in a closed community. Writers include Agatha Christie, Dorothy L. Sayers, and Elizabeth Daly.\nSerial killer mystery.\nAnother subgenre of detective fiction is the serial killer mystery, which might be thought of as an outcropping of the police procedural. There are early mystery novels in which a police force attempts to contend with the type of criminal known in the 1920s as a homicidal maniac, such as a few of the early novels of Philip Macdonald and Ellery Queen's \"Cat of Many Tails\". However, this sort of story became much more popular after the coining of the phrase \"serial killer\" in the 1970s and the publication of \"The Silence of the Lambs\" in 1988. These stories frequently show the activities of many members of a police force or government agency in their efforts to apprehend a killer who is selecting victims on some obscure basis. They are also often much more violent and suspenseful than other mysteries.\nLegal thriller or courtroom.\nThe legal thriller or courtroom novel is also related to detective fiction. The system of justice itself is always a major part of these works, at times almost functioning as one of the characters. In this way, the legal system provides the framework for the legal thriller as much as the system of modern police work does for the police procedural. The legal thriller usually starts its business with the court proceedings following the closure of an investigation, often resulting in a new angle on the investigation, so as to bring about a final outcome different from the one originally devised by the investigators. In the legal thriller, court proceedings play a very active, if not to say decisive part in a case reaching its ultimate solution. Erle Stanley Gardner popularized the courtroom novel in the 20th century with his Perry Mason series. Contemporary authors of legal thrillers include Michael Connelly, Linda Fairstein, John Grisham, John Lescroart, Paul Levine, Lisa Scottoline, and Scott Turow.\nLocked-room mystery.\nThe locked-room mystery is a subgenre of detective fiction in which a crime\u2014almost always murder\u2014is committed under circumstances which it was seemingly impossible for the perpetrator to commit the crime and/or evade detection in the course of getting in and out of the crime scene. The genre was established in the 19th century. Edgar Allen Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\" (1841) is considered the first locked-room mystery; since then, other authors have used the scheme. The crime in question typically involves a crime scene with no indication as to how the intruder could have entered or left, i.e., a locked room. Following other conventions of classic detective fiction, the reader is normally presented with the puzzle and all of the clues, and is encouraged to solve the mystery before the solution is revealed in a dramatic climax.\nOccult detective fiction.\nOccult detective fiction is a subgenre of detective fiction that combines the tropes of detective fiction with those of supernatural horror fiction. Unlike the traditional detective, the occult detective is employed in cases involving ghosts, demons, curses, magic, monsters and other supernatural elements. Some occult detectives are portrayed as knowing magic or being themselves psychic or in possession of other paranormal powers.\nModern criticism of detective fiction.\nPreserving the story's secrets.\nEven if they do not mean to, advertisers, reviewers, scholars and aficionados sometimes give away details or parts of the plot, and sometimes\u2014for example in the case of Mickey Spillane's novel \"I, the Jury\"\u2014even the solution. After the credits of Billy Wilder's film \"Witness for the Prosecution\", the cinemagoers are asked not to talk to anyone about the plot so that future viewers will also be able to fully enjoy the unravelling of the mystery.\nPlausibility and coincidence.\nFor series involving amateur detectives, their frequent encounters with crime often test the limits of plausibility. The character Miss Marple, for instance, dealt with an estimated two murders a year; De Andrea has described Marple's home town, the quiet little village of St. Mary Mead, as having \"put on a pageant of human depravity rivaled only by that of Sodom and Gomorrah\". Similarly, TV heroine Jessica Fletcher of \"Murder, She Wrote\" was confronted with bodies wherever she went, but most notably in her small hometown of Cabot Cove, Maine; \"The New York Times\" estimated that, by the end of the series' 12-year run, nearly 2% of the town's residents had been killed. It is arguably more convincing if police, forensic experts or similar professionals are made the protagonist of a series of crime novels.\nThe television series \"Monk\" has often made fun of this implausible frequency. The main character, Adrian Monk, is frequently accused of being a \"bad luck charm\" and a \"murder magnet\" as the result of the frequency with which murder happens in his vicinity.\nLikewise Kogoro Mori of the manga series \"Detective Conan\" got that kind of unflattering reputation. Although Mori is actually a private investigator with his own agency, the police never intentionally consult him as he stumbles from one crime scene to another.\nThe role and legitimacy of coincidence has frequently been the topic of heated arguments ever since Ronald A. Knox categorically stated that \"no accident must ever help the detective\" (Commandment No. 6 in his \"Decalogue\").\nEffects of technology.\nTechnological progress has also rendered many plots implausible and antiquated. For example, the predominance of mobile phones, pagers, and PDAs has significantly altered the previously dangerous situations in which investigators traditionally might have found themselves.\nOne tactic that avoids the issue of technology altogether is the historical detective genre. As global interconnectedness makes legitimate suspense more difficult to achieve, several writers\u2014including Elizabeth Peters, P. C. Doherty, Steven Saylor, and Lindsey Davis\u2014have eschewed fabricating convoluted plots in order to manufacture tension, instead opting to set their characters in some former period. Such a strategy forces the protagonist to rely on more inventive means of investigation, lacking as they do the technological tools available to modern detectives.\nConversely, some detective fiction embraces networked computer technology and deals in cybercrime, like the \"Daemon\" novel series by Daniel Suarez.\nDetective Commandments.\nSeveral authors have attempted to set forth a sort of list of \u201cDetective Commandments\u201d for prospective authors of the genre.\nAccording to \"Twenty Rules for Writing Detective Stories,\" by Van Dine in 1928: \"The detective story is a kind of intellectual game. It is more\u2014it is a sporting event. And for the writing of detective stories there are very definite laws\u2014unwritten, perhaps, but nonetheless binding; and every respectable and self-respecting concocter of literary mysteries lives up to them. Herewith, then, is a sort of credo, based partly on the practice of all the great writers of detective stories, and partly on the promptings of the honest author's inner conscience.\" Ronald Knox wrote a set of \"Ten Commandments\" or \"Decalogue\" in 1929, see article on the Golden Age of Detective Fiction.\nA general consensus among crime fiction authors is there is a specific set of rules that must be applied for a novel to truly be considered part of the detective fiction genre. As noted in \"Introduction to the Analysis of Crime Fiction\", crime fiction from the past 100 years has generally contained 8 key rules to be a detective novel:\nInfluential fictional detectives.\nSherlock Holmes.\nSherlock Holmes is the British fictional detective created by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. After first appearing in \u201cA Study in Scarlet, the Sherlock Holmes stories were not an immediate success. However, after being published in \u201cStrand Magazine\u201d in 1891, the detective became unquestionably popular. Following the success of Sherlock Holmes, many mystery writers imitated Doyle's structure in their own detective stories and copied Sherlock Holmes's characteristics in their own detectives.\nSherlock Holmes as a series is perhaps the most popular form of detective fiction. Doyle attempted to kill the character off after twenty-three stories, but after popular request, he continued to write Sherlock Holmes stories. The popularity of Sherlock Holmes extends beyond the written medium. For example, the BBC-produced TV series Sherlock gained a very large following after first airing in 2010, imbuing a renewed interest in the character in the general public. Because of the popularity of Holmes, Conan Doyle was often regarded as being \u201cas well-known as Queen Victoria\u201d.\nHercule Poirot.\nHercule Poirot is a fictional Belgian private detective, created by Agatha Christie. As one of Christie's most famous and long-lived characters, Poirot appeared in 33 novels, one play (\"Black Coffee\"), and more than 50 short stories, published between 1920 and 1975. Hercule Poirot first appeared in \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles,\" published in 1920, and died in \"Curtain\", published in 1975, which is Agatha Christie's last work. On August 6, 1975, The New York Times published the obituary of Poirot's death with the cover of the newly published novel on their front page.\nC. Auguste Dupin.\n\"Le Chevalier\" C. Auguste Dupin is a fictional character created by Edgar Allan Poe. Dupin made his first appearance in Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\" (1841), widely considered the first detective fiction story. He reappears in \"The Mystery of Marie Rog\u00eat\" (1842) and \"The Purloined Letter\" (1844).\nC. Auguste Dupin is generally acknowledged as the prototype for many fictional detectives that were created later, including Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle and Hercule Poirot by Agatha Christie. Conan Doyle once wrote, \"Each [of Poe's detective stories] is a root from which a whole literature has developed... Where was the detective story until Poe breathed the breath of life into it?\"\nEllery Queen.\nEllery Queen is a fictional detective created by American writers Manfred Bennington Lee and Frederic Dannay, as well as the joint pseudonym for the cousins Dannay and Lee. He first appeared in \"The Roman Hat Mystery\" (1929), and starred in more than 30 novels and several short story collections. During the 1930s and much of the 1940s, Ellery Queen was possibly the best known American fictional detective.\nDetective debuts and swansongs.\nMany detectives appear in more than one novel or story. Here is a list of a few debut stories and final appearances."}
{"id": "8193", "revid": "1739907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8193", "title": "Daniel Defoe", "text": "Daniel Defoe (; born Daniel Foe; c. 1660 \u2013 24 April 1731) was an English trader, writer, journalist, pamphleteer and spy. He is most famous for his novel \"Robinson Crusoe\", published in 1719, which is claimed to be second only to the Bible in its number of translations. He has been seen as one of the earliest proponents of the English novel, and helped to popularise the form in Britain with others such as Aphra Behn and Samuel Richardson. Defoe wrote many political tracts and was often in trouble with the authorities, and spent a period in prison. Intellectuals and political leaders paid attention to his fresh ideas and sometimes consulted with him.\nDefoe was a prolific and versatile writer, producing more than three hundred works\u2014books, pamphlets, and journals\u2014on diverse topics, including politics, crime, religion, marriage, psychology, and the supernatural. He was also a pioneer of business journalism and economic journalism.\nEarly life.\nDaniel Foe (his original name) was probably born in Fore Street in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, London. Defoe later added the aristocratic-sounding \"De\" to his name, and on occasion claimed descent from the family of De Beau Faux. His birthdate and birthplace are uncertain, and sources offer dates from 1659 to 1662, with the summer or early autumn of 1660 considered the most likely. His father, James Foe, was a prosperous tallow chandler and a member of the Worshipful Company of Butchers. In Defoe's early childhood, he experienced some of the most unusual occurrences in English history: in 1665, 70,000 were killed by the Great Plague of London, and the next year, the Great Fire of London left standing only Defoe's and two other houses in his neighbourhood. In 1667, when he was probably about seven, a Dutch fleet sailed up the Medway via the River Thames and attacked the town of Chatham in the raid on the Medway. His mother, Alice, had died by the time he was about ten.\nEducation.\nDefoe was educated at the Rev. James Fisher's boarding school in Pixham Lane in Dorking, Surrey. His parents were Presbyterian dissenters, and around the age of 14, he was sent to Charles Morton's dissenting academy at Newington Green, then a village just north of London, where he is believed to have attended the Dissenting church there. He lived on Church Street, Stoke Newington, at what is now nos. 95\u2013103. During this period, the English government persecuted those who chose to worship outside the Church of England.\nBusiness career.\nDefoe entered the world of business as a general merchant, dealing at different times in hosiery, general woollen goods, and wine. His ambitions were great and he was able to buy a country estate and a ship (as well as civets to make perfume), though he was rarely out of debt. He was forced to declare bankruptcy in 1692. On 1 January 1684, Defoe married Mary Tuffley at St Botolph's Aldgate. She was the daughter of a London merchant, receiving a dowry of \u00a33,700\u2014a huge amount by the standards of the day. With his debts and political difficulties, the marriage may have been troubled, but it lasted 47 years and produced eight children.\nIn 1685, Defoe joined the ill-fated Monmouth Rebellion but gained a pardon, by which he escaped the Bloody Assizes of Judge George Jeffreys. Queen Mary and her husband William III were jointly crowned in 1689, and Defoe became one of William's close allies and a secret agent. Some of the new policies led to conflict with France, thus damaging prosperous trade relationships for Defoe, who had established himself as a merchant. In 1692, Defoe was arrested for debts of \u00a3700, though his total debts may have amounted to \u00a317,000. He died with little wealth and evidence of lawsuits with the royal treasury.\nFollowing his release from debtors\u2019 prison, he probably travelled in Europe and Scotland, and it may have been at this time that he traded wine to Cadiz, Porto and Lisbon. By 1695, he was back in England, now formally using the name \"Defoe\" and serving as a \"commissioner of the glass duty\", responsible for collecting taxes on bottles. In 1696, he ran a tile and brick factory in what is now Tilbury in Essex and lived in the parish of Chadwell St Mary.\nWriting.\nAs many as 545 titles have been to Defoe, ranging from satirical poems, political and religious pamphlets, and volumes.\nPamphleteering and prison.\nDefoe's first notable publication was \"An Essay Upon Projects\", a series of proposals for social and economic improvement, published in 1697. From 1697 to 1698, he defended the right of King William III to a standing army during disarmament, after the Treaty of Ryswick (1697) had ended the Nine Years' War (1688\u20131697). His most successful poem, \"The True-Born Englishman\" (1701), defended the king against the perceived xenophobia of his enemies, satirising the English claim to racial purity. In 1701, Defoe presented the \"Legion's Memorial\" to Robert Harley, then Speaker of the House of Commons\u2014and his subsequent employer\u2014while flanked by a guard of sixteen gentlemen of quality. It demanded the release of the Kentish petitioners, who had asked Parliament to support the king in an imminent war against France.\nThe death of William III in 1702 once again created a political upheaval, as the king was replaced by Queen Anne who immediately began her offensive against Nonconformists. Defoe was a natural target, and his pamphleteering and political activities resulted in his arrest and placement in a pillory on 31 July 1703, principally on account of his December 1702 pamphlet entitled \"The Shortest-Way with the Dissenters; Or, Proposals for the Establishment of the Church\", purporting to argue for their extermination. In it, he ruthlessly satirised both the high church Tories and those Dissenters who hypocritically practised so-called \"occasional conformity\", such as his Stoke Newington neighbour Sir Thomas Abney. It was published anonymously, but the true authorship was quickly discovered and Defoe was arrested. He was charged with seditious libel and found guilty in a trial at the Old Bailey in front of the notoriously sadistic judge Salathiel Lovell. Lovell sentenced him to a punitive fine of 200 marks, to public humiliation in a pillory, and to an indeterminate length of imprisonment which would only end upon the discharge of the punitive fine. According to legend, the publication of his poem \"Hymn to the Pillory\" caused his audience at the pillory to throw flowers instead of the customary harmful and noxious objects and to drink to his health. The truth of this story is questioned by most scholars, although John Robert Moore later said that \"no man in England but Defoe ever stood in the pillory and later rose to eminence among his fellow men\".\nAfter his three days in the pillory, Defoe went into Newgate Prison. Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer, brokered his release in exchange for Defoe's co-operation as an intelligence agent for the Tories. In exchange for such co-operation with the rival political side, Harley paid some of Defoe's outstanding debts, improving his financial situation considerably.\nWithin a week of his release from prison, Defoe witnessed the Great Storm of 1703, which raged through the night of 26/27 November. It caused severe damage to London and Bristol, uprooted millions of trees, and killed more than 8,000 people, mostly at sea. The event became the subject of Defoe's \"The Storm\" (1704), which includes a collection of witness accounts of the tempest. Many regard it as one of the world's first examples of modern journalism.\nIn the same year, he set up his periodical \"A Review of the Affairs of France\", which supported the Harley Ministry, chronicling the events of the War of the Spanish Succession (1702\u20131714). The \"Review\" ran three times a week without interruption until 1713. Defoe was amazed that a man as gifted as Harley left vital state papers lying in the open, and warned that he was almost inviting an unscrupulous clerk to commit treason; his warnings were fully justified by the William Gregg affair.\nWhen Harley was ousted from the ministry in 1708, Defoe continued writing the \"Review\" to support Godolphin, then again to support Harley and the Tories in the Tory ministry of 1710\u20131714. The Tories fell from power with the death of Queen Anne, but Defoe continued doing intelligence work for the Whig government, writing \"Tory\" pamphlets that undermined the Tory point of view.\nNot all of Defoe's pamphlet writing was political. One pamphlet was originally published anonymously, entitled \"A True Relation of the Apparition of One Mrs. Veal the Next Day after her Death to One Mrs. Bargrave at Canterbury the 8th of September, 1705\". It deals with interaction between the spiritual realm and the physical realm and was most likely written in support of Charles Drelincourt's \"The Christian Defense against the Fears of Death\" (1651). It describes Mrs. Bargrave's encounter with her old friend Mrs. Veal after she had died. It is clear from this piece and other writings that the political portion of Defoe's life was by no means his only focus.\nAnglo-Scottish Union of 1707.\nIn despair during his imprisonment for the seditious libel case, Defoe wrote to William Paterson, the London Scot and founder of the Bank of England and part instigator of the Darien scheme, who was in the confidence of Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer, leading minister and spymaster in the English Government. Harley accepted Defoe's services and released him in 1703. He immediately published \"The Review\", which appeared weekly, then three times a week, written mostly by himself. This was the main mouthpiece of the English Government promoting the Act of Union 1707.\nDefoe began his campaign in \"The Review\" and other pamphlets aimed at English opinion, claiming that it would end the threat from the north, gaining for the Treasury an \"inexhaustible treasury of men\", a valuable new market increasing the power of England. By September 1706, Harley ordered Defoe to Edinburgh as a secret agent to do everything possible to help secure acquiescence in the Treaty of Union. He was conscious of the risk to himself. Thanks to books such as \"The Letters of Daniel Defoe\" (edited by G. H. Healey, Oxford 1955), far more is known about his activities than is usual with such agents.\nHis first reports included vivid descriptions of violent demonstrations against the Union. \"A Scots rabble is the worst of its kind\", he reported. Years later John Clerk of Penicuik, a leading Unionist, wrote in his memoirs that it was not known at the time that Defoe had been sent by Godolphin : \nDefoe was a Presbyterian who had suffered in England for his convictions, and as such he was accepted as an adviser to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland and committees of the Parliament of Scotland. He told Harley that he was \"privy to all their folly\" but \"Perfectly unsuspected as with corresponding with anybody in England\". He was then able to influence the proposals that were put to Parliament and reported,\nFor Scotland, he used different arguments, even the opposite of those which he used in England, usually ignoring the English doctrine of the Sovereignty of Parliament, for example, telling the Scots that they could have complete confidence in the guarantees in the Treaty. Some of his pamphlets were purported to be written by Scots, misleading even reputable historians into quoting them as evidence of Scottish opinion of the time. The same is true of a massive history of the Union which Defoe published in 1709 and which some historians still treat as a valuable contemporary source for their own works. Defoe took pains to give his history an air of objectivity by giving some space to arguments against the Union but always having the last word for himself.\nHe disposed of the main Union opponent, Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, by ignoring him. Nor does he account for the deviousness of the Duke of Hamilton, the official leader of the various factions opposed to the Union, who seemingly betrayed his former colleagues when he switched to the Unionist/Government side in the decisive final stages of the debate.\nAftermath.\nIn 1709, Defoe authored a rather lengthy book entitled \"The History of the Union of Great Britain\", an Edinburgh publication printed by the Heirs of Anderson. The book was not published anonymously and cites Defoe twice as being its author. The book attempts to explain the facts leading up to the Act of Union 1707, dating all the way back to 6 December 1604 when King James I was presented with a proposal for unification. This so-called \"first draft\" for unification took place 100 years before the signing of the 1707 accord, which respectively preceded the commencement of \"Robinson Crusoe\" by another ten years.\nDefoe made no attempt to explain why the same Parliament of Scotland which was so vehement for its independence from 1703 to 1705 became so supine in 1706. He received very little reward from his paymasters and of course no recognition for his services by the government. He made use of his Scottish experience to write his \"Tour thro' the whole Island of Great Britain\", published in 1726, where he admitted that the increase of trade and population in Scotland which he had predicted as a consequence of the Union was \"not the case, but rather the contrary\".\nDefoe's description of Glasgow (Glaschu) as a \"Dear Green Place\" has often been misquoted as a Gaelic translation for the town's name. The Gaelic \"Glas\" could mean grey or green, while \"chu\" means dog or hollow. \"Glaschu\" probably means \"Green Hollow\". The \"Dear Green Place\", like much of Scotland, was a hotbed of unrest against the Union. The local Tron minister urged his congregation \"to up and anent for the City of God\".\nThe \"Dear Green Place\" and \"City of God\" required government troops to put down the rioters tearing up copies of the Treaty at almost every mercat cross in Scotland. When Defoe visited in the mid-1720s, he claimed that the hostility towards his party was \"because they were English and because of the Union, which they were almost universally exclaimed against\".\nLate writing.\nThe extent and particulars are widely contested concerning Defoe's writing in the period from the Tory fall in 1714 to the publication of \"Robinson Crusoe\" in 1719. Defoe comments on the tendency to attribute tracts of uncertain authorship to him in his apologia \"Appeal to Honour and Justice\" (1715), a defence of his part in Harley's Tory ministry (1710\u20131714). Other works that anticipate his novelistic career include \"The Family Instructor\" (1715), a conduct manual on religious duty; \"Minutes of the Negotiations of Monsr. Mesnager\" (1717), in which he impersonates Nicolas Mesnager, the French plenipotentiary who negotiated the Treaty of Utrecht (1713); and \"A Continuation of the Letters Writ by a Turkish Spy\" (1718), a satire of European politics and religion, ostensibly written by a Muslim in Paris.\nFrom 1719 to 1724, Defoe published the novels for which he is famous (see below). In the final decade of his life, he also wrote conduct manuals, including \"Religious Courtship\" (1722), \"The Complete English Tradesman\" (1726) and \"The New Family Instructor\" (1727). He published a number of books decrying the breakdown of the social order, such as \"The Great Law of Subordination Considered\" (1724) and \"Everybody's Business is Nobody's Business\" (1725) and works on the supernatural, like \"The Political History of the Devil\" (1726), \"A System of Magick\" (1727) and \"An Essay on the History and Reality of Apparitions\" (1727). His works on foreign travel and trade include \"A General History of Discoveries and Improvements\" (1727) and \"Atlas Maritimus and Commercialis\" (1728). Perhaps his greatest achievement, apart from the novels, is the magisterial \"A tour thro' the whole island of Great Britain\" (1724\u20131727), which provided a panoramic survey of British trade on the eve of the Industrial Revolution.\n\"The Complete English Tradesman\".\nPublished in 1726, \"The Complete English Tradesman\" is an example of Defoe's political works. He discusses the role of the tradesman in England in comparison to tradesmen internationally, arguing that the British system of trade is far superior. He also implies that trade is the backbone of the British economy: \"estate's a pond, but trade's a spring.\" He praises the practicality of trade not only within the economy but the social stratification as well. Most of the British gentry, he argues is at one time or another inextricably linked with the institution of trade, either through personal experience, marriage or genealogy. Oftentimes younger members of noble families entered into trade. Marriage to a tradesman's daughter by a nobleman was also common. Overall Defoe demonstrated a high respect for tradesmen, being one himself.\nNot only does Defoe elevate individual British tradesmen to the level of gentleman, but he praises the entirety of British trade as a superior system. Trade, Defoe argues is a much better catalyst for social and economic change than war. He states that through imperialism and trade expansion the British empire is able to \"increase commerce at home\" through job creation and increased consumption. He states that increased consumption, by laws of supply and demand, increases production and in turn raises wages for the poor therefore lifting part of British society further out of poverty.\nNovels.\n\"Robinson Crusoe\".\nPublished in his late fifties, \"Robinson Crusoe\" relates the story of a man's shipwreck on a desert island for twenty-eight years and his subsequent adventures. Throughout its episodic narrative, Crusoe's struggles with faith are apparent as he bargains with God in times of life-threatening crises, but time and again he turns his back after his deliverances. He is finally content with his lot in life, separated from society, following a more genuine conversion experience.\nIn the opening pages of \"The Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe\", the author describes how Crusoe settled in Bedfordshire, married and produced a family, and that when his wife died, he went off on these further adventures. Bedford is also the place where the brother of \"H. F.\" in \"A Journal of the Plague Year\" retired to avoid the danger of the plague, so that by implication, if these works were not fiction, Defoe's family met Crusoe in Bedford, from whence the information in these books was gathered. Defoe went to school Newington Green with a friend named Caruso.\nThe novel has been assumed to be based in part on the story of the Scottish castaway Alexander Selkirk, who spent four years stranded in the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands, but his experience is inconsistent with the details of the narrative. The island Selkirk lived on, M\u00e1s a Tierra (Closer to Land) was renamed Robinson Crusoe Island in 1966. It has been supposed that Defoe may have also been inspired by a translation of a book by the Andalusian-Arab Muslim polymath Ibn Tufail, who was known as \"Abubacer\" in Europe. The Latin edition was entitled \"Philosophus Autodidactus\"; Simon Ockley published an English translation in 1708, entitled \"The improvement of human reason, exhibited in the life of Hai ebn Yokdhan\".\n\"Captain Singleton\".\nDefoe's next novel was \"Captain Singleton\" (1720), an adventure story whose first half covers a traversal of Africa which anticipated subsequent discoveries by David Livingstone and whose second half taps into the contemporary fascination with piracy. The novel has been commended for its sensitive depiction of the close relationship between the hero and his religious mentor, Quaker William Walters. Its description of the geography of Africa and some of its fauna does not use the language or knowledge of a fiction writer and suggests an eyewitness experience.\n\"Memoirs of a Cavalier\".\n\"Memoirs of a Cavalier\" (1720) is set during the Thirty Years' War and the English Civil War.\n\"A Journal of the Plague Year\".\n\"A Journal of the Plague Year\" can be read both as novel and as non-fiction. It is an account of the Great Plague of London in 1665, which is undersigned by the initials \"H. F.\", suggesting the author's uncle Henry Foe as its primary source. It is a historical account of the events based on extensive research and seen through an eyewitness experience, published in 1722.\n\"Colonel Jack\".\n\"Colonel Jack\" (1722) follows an orphaned boy from a life of poverty and crime to colonial prosperity, military and marital imbroglios, and religious conversion, driven by a problematic notion of becoming a \"gentleman.\"\n\"Moll Flanders\".\nAlso in 1722, Defoe wrote \"Moll Flanders\", another first-person picaresque novel of the fall and eventual redemption, both material and spiritual, of a lone woman in 17th-century England. The titular heroine appears as a whore, bigamist, and thief, lives in The Mint, commits adultery and incest, and yet manages to retain the reader's sympathy. Her savvy manipulation of both men and wealth earns her a life of trials but ultimately an ending in reward. Although Moll struggles with the morality of some of her actions and decisions, religion seems to be far from her concerns throughout most of her story. However, like Robinson Crusoe, she finally repents. \"Moll Flanders\" is an important work in the development of the novel, as it challenged the common perception of femininity and gender roles in 18th-century British society. More recently it has come to be misunderstood as an example of erotica.\n\"Roxana\".\nDefoe's final novel, \"\" (1724), which narrates the moral and spiritual decline of a high society courtesan, differs from other Defoe works because the main character does not exhibit a conversion experience, even though she claims to be a penitent later in her life, at the time that she is relaying her story.\nPatterns.\nIn Defoe's writings, especially in his fiction, there are a number of traits that can be seen across his works. Defoe was well known for his didacticism, with most of his works aiming to convey a message of some kind to the readers (typically a moral one, stemming from his religious background). Connected to Defoe's use of didacticism is his use of the genre of spiritual autobiography, particularly in \"Robinson Crusoe\". Another common feature of Defoe's fictional works is that he claimed them to be the true stories of their subjects.\nAttribution and de-attribution.\nDefoe is known to have used at least 198 pen names. It was a very common practice in eighteenth-century novel publishing to initially publish works under a pen name, with most other authors at the time publishing their works anonymously. As a result of the anonymous ways in which most of his works were published, it has been a challenge for scholars over the years to properly credit Defoe for all of the works that he wrote in his lifetime. If only counting works that Defoe published under his own name, or his known pen name \"the author of the True-Born Englishman,\" there would be about 75 works that could be attributed to him. Beyond these 75 works, scholars have used a variety of strategies to determine what other works should be attributed to Defoe. George Chalmers was the first to begin the work of attributing anonymously published works to Defoe. In \"History of the Union\", he created an expanded list with over a hundred titles that he attributed to Defoe, alongside twenty additional works that he designated as \"Books which are supposed to be De Foe's.\" Chalmers included works in his canon of Defoe that were particularly in line with his style and way of thinking, and ultimately attributed 174 works to Defoe. P N. Furbank and W. R. Owens built upon this canon, also relying on what they believed could be Defoe's work, without a means to be absolutely certain. In the \"Cambridge History of English Literature\", the section on Defoe by William P. Trent attributes 370 works to Defoe. J.R. Moore generated the largest list of Defoe's work, with approximately five hundred and fifty works that he attributed to Defoe.\nDeath.\nDefoe died on 24 April 1731, probably while in hiding from his creditors. He was often in debtors' prison. The cause of his death was labelled as lethargy, but he probably experienced a stroke. He was interred in Bunhill Fields (today Bunhill Fields Burial and Gardens), just outside the medieval boundaries of the City of London, in what is now the Borough of Islington, where a monument was erected to his memory in 1870."}
{"id": "8194", "revid": "13080272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8194", "title": "December 8", "text": ""}
{"id": "8196", "revid": "24619723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8196", "title": "Dr Who", "text": ""}
{"id": "8197", "revid": "9929111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8197", "title": "Desmond Morris", "text": "Desmond John Morris FLS \"hon. caus.\" (born 24 January 1928) is an English zoologist, ethologist and surrealist painter, as well as a popular author in human sociobiology. He is known for his 1967 book \"The Naked Ape\", and for his television programmes such as \"Zoo Time\".\nEarly life.\nMorris was born in Purton, Wiltshire, to Marjorie (n\u00e9e Hunt) and children's fiction author Harry Morris. In 1933, the Morrises moved to Swindon where Desmond developed an interest in natural history and writing. He was educated at Dauntsey's School, a boarding school in Wiltshire.\nIn 1946, he joined the British Army for two years of national service, becoming a lecturer in fine arts at the Chiseldon Army College. After being demobilised in 1948, he held his first one-man show of his own paintings at the Swindon Arts Centre, and studied zoology at the University of Birmingham. In 1950 he held a surrealist art exhibition with Joan Mir\u00f3 at the London Gallery. He held many other exhibitions in later years. Also in 1950, Desmond Morris wrote and directed two surrealist films, \"Time Flower\" and \"The Butterfly and the Pin\". In 1951 he began a doctorate at the Department of Zoology, University of Oxford in animal behaviour. In 1954, he earned a Doctor of Philosophy for his work on the reproductive behaviour of the ten-spined stickleback\nCareer.\nMorris stayed at Oxford, researching the reproductive behaviour of birds. In 1956 he moved to London as Head of the Granada TV and Film Unit for the Zoological Society of London, and studied the picture-making abilities of apes. The work included creating programmes for film and television on animal behaviour and other zoology topics. He hosted Granada TV's weekly \"Zoo Time\" programme until 1959, scripting and hosting 500 programmes, and 100 episodes of the show \"Life in the Animal World\" for BBC2. In 1957 he organised an exhibition at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London, showing paintings and drawings composed by common chimpanzees. In 1958 he co-organised an exhibition, \"The Lost Image\", which compared pictures by infants, human adults, and apes, at the Royal Festival Hall in London. In 1959 he left \"Zoo Time\" to become the Zoological Society's Curator of Mammals. In 1964, he delivered the Royal Institution Christmas Lecture on \"Animal Behaviour\". In 1967 he spent a year as executive director of the London Institute of Contemporary Arts.\nMorris's books include \"The Naked Ape: A Zoologist's Study of the Human Animal\", published in 1967. The book sold well enough for Morris to move to Malta in 1968 to write a sequel and other books. In 1973 he returned to Oxford to work for the ethologist Niko Tinbergen. From 1973 to 1981, Morris was a Research Fellow at Wolfson College, Oxford. In 1979 he undertook a television series for Thames TV, \"The Human Race\", followed in 1982 by \"Man Watching in Japan\", \"The Animals Road Show\" in 1986 and then several other series. National Life Stories conducted an oral history interview (C1672/16) with Desmond Morris in 2015 for its Science and Religion collection held by the British Library.\nPersonal life.\nWhen Morris was 14, his father was killed whilst serving in the armed forces, causing Morris to drift towards surrealism. His grandfather William Morris, an enthusiastic Victorian naturalist and founder of the Swindon local newspaper, greatly influenced him during his time living in Swindon.\nIn July 1952, Morris married Ramona Baulch; they had one son, Jason. In 1978, Morris was elected Vice-Chairman of Oxford United F.C..\nMorris lived in the same house in North Oxford as the 19th-century lexicographer James Murray who worked on the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". He has exhibited at the Taurus Gallery in North Parade, Oxford, close to where he lived. Since the death of his wife in 2018 he lives with his son and family in Ireland.\nCriticism.\nSome of Morris's theories have been criticized as untestable. For instance, geneticist Adam Rutherford writes that Morris commits \"the scientific sin of the 'just-so' story -- speculation that sounds appealing but cannot be tested or is devoid of evidence\". However, this is also a criticism of adaptationism in evolutionary biology, not just of Morris.\nMorris is also criticised for stating that gender roles have a deep evolutionary rather than cultural background."}
{"id": "8198", "revid": "886257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8198", "title": "December 28", "text": ""}
{"id": "8199", "revid": "1653549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8199", "title": "Denis Diderot", "text": "Denis Diderot (; 5 October 171331 July 1784) was a French philosopher, art critic, and writer, best known for serving as co-founder, chief editor, and contributor to the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" along with Jean le Rond d'Alembert. He was a prominent figure during the Age of Enlightenment.\nDiderot initially studied philosophy at a Jesuit college, then considered working in the church clergy before briefly studying law. When he decided to become a writer in 1734, his father disowned him. He lived a bohemian existence for the next decade. In the 1740s he wrote many of his best-known works in both fiction and non-fiction, including the 1748 novel \"The Indiscreet Jewels\".\nIn 1751, Diderot co-created the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" with Jean le Rond d'Alembert. It was the first encyclopedia to include contributions from many named contributors and the first to describe the mechanical arts. Its secular tone, which included articles skeptical about Biblical miracles, angered both religious and government authorities; in 1758 it was banned by the Catholic Church and in 1759 the French government banned it as well, although this ban was not strictly enforced. Many of the initial contributors to the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" left the project as a result of its controversies and some were even jailed. d'Alembert left in 1759, making Diderot the sole editor. Diderot also became the main contributor, writing around 7,000 articles. He continued working on the project until 1765. He was increasingly despondent about the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" by the end of his involvement in it and felt that the entire project may have been a waste. Nevertheless, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" is considered one of the forerunners of the French Revolution.\nDiderot struggled financially throughout most of his career and received very little official recognition of his merit, including being passed over for membership in the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise. His fortunes improved significantly in 1766, when Empress Catherine the Great, who heard of his financial troubles, paid him 50,000 francs to serve as her librarian. He remained in this position for the rest of his life, and stayed a few months at her court in Saint Petersburg in 1773 and 1774.\nDiderot's literary reputation during his life rested primarily on his plays and his contributions to the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\"; many of his most important works, including \"Jacques the Fatalist, Rameau's Nephew\", \"Paradox of the Actor\", and \"D'Alembert's Dream\", were published only after his death.\nEarly life.\nDenis Diderot was born in Langres, Champagne. His parents were Didier Diderot (1685\u20131759), a cutler, \"ma\u00eetre coutelier\", and Ang\u00e9lique Vigneron (1677\u20131748). Three of five siblings survived to adulthood, Denise Diderot (1715\u20131797) and their youngest brother Pierre-Didier Diderot (1722\u20131787), and finally their sister Ang\u00e9lique Diderot (1720\u20131749). According to Arthur McCandless Wilson, Denis Diderot greatly admired his sister Denise, sometimes referring to her as \"a female Socrates\".\nDiderot began his formal education at a Jesuit college in Langres, earning a Master of Arts degree in philosophy in 1732. He then entered the Coll\u00e8ge d'Harcourt of the University of Paris. He abandoned the idea of entering the clergy in 1735, and instead decided to study at the Paris Law Faculty. His study of law was short-lived however and in the early 1740s, he decided to become a writer and translator. Because of his refusal to enter one of the learned professions, he was disowned by his father, and for the next ten years he lived a bohemian existence.\nIn 1742, he befriended Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whom he met while watching games of chess and drinking coffee at the Caf\u00e9 de la R\u00e9gence. In 1743, he further alienated his father by marrying Antoinette Champion (1710\u20131796), a devout Roman Catholic. The match was considered inappropriate due to Champion's low social standing, poor education, fatherless status, and lack of a dowry. She was about three years older than Diderot. The marriage, in October 1743, produced one surviving child, a girl. Her name was Ang\u00e9lique, named after both Diderot's dead mother and sister. The death of his sister, a nun, in her convent may have affected Diderot's opinion of religion. She is assumed to have been the inspiration for his novel about a nun, \"La Religieuse\", in which he depicts a woman who is forced to enter a convent where she suffers at the hands of the other nuns in the community.\nDiderot had affairs with Mlle. Babuti (who would marry Greuze), Madeleine de Puisieux, Sophie Volland and Mme de Maux. His letters to Sophie Volland are known for their candor and are regarded to be \"among the literary treasures of the eighteenth century\".\nEarly works.\nDiderot's earliest works included a translation of Temple Stanyan's \"History of Greece\" (1743); with two colleagues, Fran\u00e7ois-Vincent Toussaint and Marc-Antoine Eidous, he produced a translation of Robert James's \"Medicinal Dictionary\" (1746\u20131748). In 1745, he published a translation of Shaftesbury's \"Inquiry Concerning Virtue and Merit\", to which he had added his own \"reflections\".\n\"Philosophical Thoughts\".\nIn 1746, Diderot wrote his first original work: the \"Philosophical Thoughts\" (French:\"Pens\u00e9es philosophiques\"). In this book, Diderot argued for a reconciliation of reason with feeling so as to establish harmony. According to Diderot, without feeling there is a detrimental effect on virtue, and no possibility of creating sublime work. However, since feeling without discipline can be destructive, reason is necessary to control feeling.\nAt the time Diderot wrote this book he was a deist. Hence there is a defense of deism in this book, and some arguments against atheism. The book also contains criticism of Christianity.\n\"The Skeptic's Walk\".\nIn 1747, Diderot wrote \"The Skeptic's Walk\" (French:\"Promenade du sceptique\") in which a deist, an atheist, and a pantheist have a dialogue on the nature of divinity. The deist gives the argument from design. The atheist says that the universe is better explained by physics, chemistry, matter, and motion. The pantheist says that the cosmic unity of mind and matter, which are co-eternal and comprise the universe, is God. This work remained unpublished till 1830. The local police\u2014warned by the priests of another attack on Christianity\u2014either seized the manuscript, or authorities forced Diderot give an undertaking that he would not publish this work, according to different versions of what happened.\n\"The Indiscreet Jewels\".\nIn 1748, Diderot needed to raise money on short notice. He had become a father through his wife, and his mistress Mme. de Puisieux was making financial demands from him. At this time, Diderot had stated to Mme. de Puisieux that writing a novel was a trivial task, whereupon she challenged him to write a novel. In response, Diderot wrote his novel \"The Indiscreet Jewels\" (French: \"Les bijoux indiscrets\"). The book is about the magical ring of a Sultan which induces any woman's \"discreet jewels\" to confess their sexual experiences when the ring is pointed at them. In all, the ring is pointed at thirty different women in the book\u2014usually at a dinner or a social meeting\u2014with the Sultan typically being visible to the woman. However, since the ring has the additional property of making its owner invisible when required, a few of the sexual experiences recounted are through direct observation with the Sultan making himself invisible and placing his person in the unsuspecting woman's boudoir.\nBesides the bawdiness there are several digressions into philosophy, music, and literature in the book. In one such philosophical digression, the Sultan has a dream in which he sees a child named \"Experiment\" growing bigger and stronger till it demolishes an ancient temple named \"Hypothesis\". The book proved to be lucrative for Diderot even though it could only be sold clandestinely. It is Diderot's most published work.\nThe book is believed to be an imitation of .\nScientific work.\nDiderot would keep writing on science in a desultory way all his life. The scientific work of which he was most proud was \"Memoires sur differents sujets de mathematique\" (1748). This work contains original ideas on acoustics, tension, air resistance, and \"a project for a new organ\" which could be played by all. Some of Diderot's scientific works were applauded by contemporary publications of his time like \"The Gentleman's Magazine\", the \"Journal des savants\"; and the Jesuit publication \"Journal de Trevoux,\" which invited more such work: \"on the part of a man as clever and able as M. Diderot seems to be, of whom we should also observe that his style is as elegant, trenchant, and unaffected as it is lively and ingenious.\"\nOn the unity of nature, Diderot wrote, \"Without the idea of the whole, philosophy is no more,\" and, \"Everything changes; everything passes; nothing remains but the whole.\" He wrote of the temporal nature of molecules, and rejected \"embo\u00eetement\", the view that organisms are pre-formed in an infinite regression of non-changing germs. He saw minerals and species as part of a spectrum, and was fascinated with hermaphroditism. His answer to the universal attraction in corpuscular physics models was universal elasticity. His view of nature's flexibility foreshadows the discovery of evolution, but it is not Darwinistic in a strict sense.\n\"Letter on the Blind\".\nDiderot's celebrated \"Letter on the Blind\" (\"Lettre sur les aveugles \u00e0 l'usage de ceux qui voient\") (1749) introduced him to the world as an original thinker. The subject is a discussion of the relation between reasoning and the knowledge acquired through perception (the five senses). The title of his book also evoked some ironic doubt about who exactly were \"the blind\" under discussion. In the essay, blind English mathematician Nicholas Saunderson argues that, since knowledge derives from the senses, mathematics is the only form of knowledge that both he and a sighted person can agree on. It is suggested that the blind could be taught to read through their sense of touch. (A later essay, \"Lettre sur les sourds et muets\", considered the case of a similar deprivation in the deaf and mute.) According to Jonathan Israel, what makes the \"Lettre sur les aveugles\" so remarkable, however, is its distinct, if undeveloped, presentation of the theory of variation and natural selection.\nThis powerful essay, for which La Mettrie expressed warm appreciation in 1751, revolves around a remarkable deathbed scene in which a dying blind philosopher, Saunderson, rejects the arguments of a deist clergyman who endeavours to win him round to a belief in a providential God during his last hours. Saunderson's arguments are those of a neo-Spinozist Naturalist and fatalist, using a sophisticated notion of the self-generation and natural evolution of species without Creation or supernatural intervention. The notion of \"thinking matter\" is upheld and the \"argument from design\" discarded (following La Mettrie) as hollow and unconvincing. The work appeared anonymously in Paris in June 1749, and was vigorously suppressed by the authorities. Diderot, who had been under police surveillance since 1747, was swiftly identified as the author, had his manuscripts confiscated, and was imprisoned for some months, under a \"lettre de cachet\", on the outskirts of Paris, in the dungeons at Vincennes where he was visited almost daily by Rousseau, at the time his closest and most assiduous ally.\nVoltaire wrote an enthusiastic letter to Diderot commending the \"Lettre\" and stating that he had held Diderot in high regard for a long time to which Diderot had sent a warm response. Soon after this, Diderot was arrested.\nScience historian Conway Zirkle has written that Diderot was an early evolutionary thinker and noted that his passage that described natural selection was \"so clear and accurate that it almost seems that we would be forced to accept his conclusions as a logical necessity even in the absence of the evidence collected since his time.\"\nIncarceration and release.\nAngered by public resentment over the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, the government started incarcerating many of its critics. It was decided at this time to rein in Diderot. On 23 July 1749, the governor of the Vincennes fortress instructed the police to incarcerate Diderot, and the next day he was arrested and placed in solitary confinement in the Vincennes. It is during this time that Jean-Jacques Rousseau came to visit Diderot in prison and came out a changed man, with newfound ideas about the downsides of knowledge, civilization and Enlightenment \u2013 the so-called \"illumination de Vincennes\".\nDiderot had been permitted to retain one book that he had in his possession at the time of his arrest, \"Paradise Lost\", which he read during his incarceration. He wrote notes and annotations on the book, using a toothpick as a pen, and ink that he made by scraping slate from the walls and mixing it with wine.\nIn August 1749, Mme du Chatelet, presumably at Voltaire's behest, wrote to the governor of Vincennes, who was her relative, pleading that Diderot be lodged more comfortably while jailed. The governor then offered Diderot access to the great halls of the Vincennes castle and the freedom to receive books and visitors providing he would write a document of submission. On 13 August 1749, Diderot wrote to the governor:\nOn 20 August, Diderot was lodged in a comfortable room in the Vincennes, allowed to meet visitors, and to walk in the gardens of the Vincennes. On 23 August, Diderot signed another letter promising to never leave the Vincennes without permission. On 3 November 1749, Diderot was released from the Vincennes. Subsequently, in 1750, he released the prospectus for the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\".\nEncyclop\u00e9die.\nGenesis.\nAndr\u00e9 le Breton, a bookseller and printer, approached Diderot with a project for the publication of a translation of Ephraim Chambers' \"Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences\" into French, first undertaken by the Englishman John Mills, and followed by the German Gottfried Sellius. Diderot accepted the proposal, and transformed it. He persuaded Le Breton to publish a new work, which would consolidate ideas and knowledge from the Republic of Letters. The publishers found capital for a larger enterprise than they had first planned. Jean le Rond d'Alembert was persuaded to become Diderot's colleague, and permission was procured from the government.\nIn 1750 an elaborate prospectus announced the project, and in 1751 the first volume was published. This work was unorthodox and advanced for the time. Diderot stated that \"An encyclopedia ought to make good the failure to execute such a project hitherto, and should encompass not only the fields already covered by the academies, but each and every branch of human knowledge.\" Comprehensive knowledge will give \"the power to change men's common way of thinking.\" The work combined scholarship with information on trades. Diderot emphasized the abundance of knowledge within each subject area. Everyone would benefit from these insights.\nControversies.\nDiderot's work, however, was mired in controversy from the beginning; the project was suspended by the courts in 1752. Just as the second volume was completed accusations arose regarding seditious content, concerning the editor's entries on religion and natural law. Diderot was detained and his house was searched for manuscripts for subsequent articles: but the search proved fruitless as no manuscripts could be found. They were hidden in the house of an unlikely confederate\u2014Chretien de Lamoignon Malesherbes, who originally ordered the search. Although Malesherbes was a staunch absolutist, and loyal to the monarchy\u2014he was sympathetic to the literary project. Along with his support, and that of other well-placed influential confederates, the project resumed. Diderot returned to his efforts only to be constantly embroiled in controversy.\nThese twenty years were to Diderot not merely a time of incessant drudgery, but harassing persecution and desertion of friends. The ecclesiastical party detested the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", in which they saw a rising stronghold for their philosophic enemies. By 1757 they could endure it no longer\u2014the subscribers had grown from 2,000 to 4,000, a measure of the growth of the work in popular influence and power. Diderot wanted the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" to give all the knowledge of the world to the people of France. However, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" threatened the governing social classes of France (aristocracy) because it took for granted the justice of religious tolerance, freedom of thought, and the value of science and industry. It asserted the doctrine that the main concern of the nation's government ought to be the nation's common people. It was believed that the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" was the work of an organized band of conspirators against society, and that the dangerous ideas they held were made truly formidable by their open publication. In 1759, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" was formally suppressed. The decree did not stop the work, which went on, but its difficulties increased by the necessity of being clandestine. Jean le Rond d'Alembert withdrew from the enterprise and other powerful colleagues, including Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune, declined to contribute further to a book which had acquired a bad reputation.\nDiderot's contribution.\nDiderot was left to finish the task as best he could. He wrote about 7,000 articles, some very slight, but many of them laborious, comprehensive, and long. He damaged his eyesight correcting proofs and editing the manuscripts of less competent contributors. He spent his days at workshops, mastering manufacturing processes, and his nights writing what he had learned during the day. He was incessantly harassed by threats of police raids. The last copies of the first volume were issued in 1765.\nIn 1764, when his immense work was drawing to an end, he encountered a crowning mortification: he discovered that the bookseller, Le Breton, fearing the government's displeasure, had struck out from the proof sheets, after they had left Diderot's hands, all passages that he considered too dangerous. \"He and his printing-house overseer,\" writes Furbank, \"had worked in complete secrecy, and had moreover deliberately destroyed the author's original manuscript so that the damage could not be repaired.\" The monument to which Diderot had given the labor of twenty long and oppressive years was irreparably mutilated and defaced. It was 12 years, in 1772, before the subscribers received the final 28 folio volumes of the \"Encyclop\u00e9die, ou dictionnaire raisonn\u00e9 des sciences, des arts et des m\u00e9tiers\" since the first volume had been published.\nWhen Diderot's work on the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" project came to an end in 1765, he expressed concerns to his friends that the twenty-five years he had spent on the project had been wasted.\nMature works.\nAlthough the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" was Diderot's most monumental product, he was the author of many other works that sowed nearly every intellectual field with new and creative ideas. Diderot's writing ranges from a graceful trifle like the \"Regrets sur ma vieille robe de chambre\" (\"Regrets for my Old Dressing Gown\") up to the heady \"D'Alembert's Dream\" (\"Le R\u00eave de d'Alembert\") (composed 1769), a philosophical dialogue in which he plunges into the depths of the controversy as to the ultimate constitution of matter and the meaning of life. \"Jacques le fataliste\" (written in 1773, but not published until 1792 in German and 1796 in French) is similar to \"Tristram Shandy\" and \"The Sentimental Journey\" in its challenge to the conventional novel's structure and content.\n\"La Religieuse\" (\"The Nun\" or \"Memoirs of a Nun\").\n\"La Religieuse\" was a novel that claimed to show the corruption of the Catholic Church's institutions.\nPlot.\nThe novel began not as a work for literary consumption, but as an elaborate practical joke aimed at luring the Marquis de Croismare, a companion of Diderot's, back to Paris. \"The Nun\" is set in the Eighteenth century, that is, contemporary France. Suzanne Simonin is an intelligent and sensitive sixteen-year-old French girl who is forced against her will into a Catholic convent by her parents. Suzanne's parents initially inform her that she is being sent to the convent for financial reasons. However, while in the convent, she learns that she is actually there because she is an illegitimate child, as her mother committed adultery. By sending Suzanne to the convent, her mother thought she could make amends for her sins by using her daughter as a sacrificial offering.\nAt the convent, Suzanne suffers humiliation, harassment and violence because she refuses to make the vows of the religious community. She eventually finds companionship with the Mother Superior, Sister de Moni, who pities Suzanne's anguish. After Sister de Moni's death, the new Mother Superior, Sister Sainte-Christine, does not share the same empathy for Suzanne that her predecessor had, blaming Suzanne for the death of Sister de Moni. Suzanne is physically and mentally harassed by Sister Sainte-Christine, almost to the point of death.\nSuzanne contacts her lawyer, Monsieur Manouri, who attempts to legally free her from her vows. Manouri manages to have Suzanne transferred to another convent, Sainte-Eutrope. At the new convent, the Mother Superior is revealed to be a lesbian, and she grows affectionate towards Suzanne. The Mother Superior attempts to seduce Suzanne, but her innocence and chaste eventually drives the Mother Superior into insanity, leading to her death.\nSuzanne escapes the Sainte-Eutrope convent using the help of a priest. Following her liberation, she lives in fear of being captured and taken back to the convent as she awaits the help from Diderot's friend the Marquis de Croismare.\nAnalysis.\nDiderot did not use the novel as an outlet to condemn Christianity, but as a way to criticize cloistered life. In Diderot's telling, the Church fostered a hierarchical society, prevalent in the power dynamic between the Mother Superior and the girls in the convent. Girls were forced against their will to take their vows and endure the intolerable life of the convent. Diderot highlighted the victimization of women by the Catholic Church. Their subjection to the convent dehumanized them and represses their sexuality. Furthermore, the novel took place during a time in France when religious vows were regulated and enforced by the government. Through his cross-identification writing style, Diderot manifested the demeaning Catholic standards towards women that forced them to obey their determined fate under the hierarchical society.\nPosthumous publication.\nAlthough \"The Nun\" was completed in about 1780, the work was not published until 1796, after Diderot's death.\n\"Rameau's Nephew\".\nThe dialogue \"Rameau's Nephew\" (French: \"Le Neveu de Rameau\") is a \"farce-tragedy\" reminiscent of the \"Satires\" of Horace, a favorite classical author of Diderot's whose lines \"Vertumnis, quotquot sunt, natus iniquis\" (\"Born under (the influence of) the unfavorable (gods) Vertumnuses, however many they are\") appear as epigraph. According to Nicholas Cronk, \"Rameau's Nephew\" is \"arguably the greatest work of the French Enlightenment's greatest writer.\"\nSynopsis.\nThe narrator in the book recounts a conversation with , nephew of the famous Jean-Philippe Rameau. The nephew composes and teaches music with some success but feels disadvantaged by his name and is jealous of his uncle. Eventually he sinks into an indolent and debauched state. After his wife's death, he loses all self-esteem and his brusque manners result in him being ostracized by former friends. A character profile of the nephew is now sketched by Diderot: a man who was once wealthy and comfortable with a pretty wife, who is now living in poverty and decadence, shunned by his friends. And yet this man retains enough of his past to analyze his despondency philosophically and maintains his sense of humor. Essentially he believes in nothing\u2014not in religion, nor in morality; nor in the Roussean view about nature being better than civilization since in his opinion every species in nature consumes one another. He views the same process at work in the economic world where men consume each other through the legal system. The wise man, according to the nephew, will consequently practice hedonism:\nThe dialogue ends with Diderot calling the nephew a wastrel, a coward, and a glutton devoid of spiritual values to which the nephew replies: \"I believe you are right.\"\nAnalysis.\nDiderot's intention in writing the dialogue\u2014whether as a satire on contemporary manners, a reduction of the theory of self-interest to an absurdity, the application of irony to the ethics of ordinary convention, a mere setting for a discussion about music, or a vigorous dramatic sketch of a parasite and a human original\u2014is disputed. In political terms it explores \"the bipolarisation of the social classes under absolute monarchy,\" and insofar as its protagonist demonstrates how the servant often manipulates the master, \"Le Neveu de Rameau\" can be seen to anticipate Hegel's master\u2013slave dialectic.\nPosthumous publication.\nThe publication history of the \"Nephew\" is circuitous. Written in 1761, Diderot never saw the work through to publication during his lifetime, and apparently did not even share it with his friends. After Diderot's death, a copy of the text reached Schiller, who gave it to Goethe, who, in 1805, translated the work into German. Goethe's translation entered France, and was retranslated into French in 1821. Another copy of the text was published in 1823, but it had been expurgated by Diderot's daughter prior to publication. The original manuscript was only found in 1891.\nVisual arts.\nDiderot's most intimate friend was the philologist Friedrich Melchior Grimm. They were brought together by their common friend at that time, Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In 1753, Grimm began writing a newsletter, the \"La Correspondance litt\u00e9raire, philosophique et critique\", which he would send to various high personages in Europe.\nIn 1759, Grimm asked Diderot to report on the biennial art exhibitions in the Louvre for the \"Correspondance\". Diderot reported on the Salons between 1759 and 1771 and again in 1775 and 1781. Diderot's reports would become \"the most celebrated contributions to La Correspondance.\"\nAccording to Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve, Diderot's reports initiated the French into a new way of laughing, and introduced people to the mystery and purport of colour by ideas. \"Before Diderot\", Anne Louise Germaine de Sta\u00ebl wrote, \"I had never seen anything in pictures except dull and lifeless colours; it was his imagination that gave them relief and life, and it is almost a new sense for which I am indebted to his genius\".\nDiderot had appended an \"Essai sur la peinture\" to his report on the 1765 Salon in which he expressed his views on artistic beauty. Goethe described the \"Essai sur la peinture\" as \"a magnificent work; it speaks even more usefully to the poet than to the painter, though for the painter too it is a torch of blazing illumination\".\nJean-Baptiste Greuze (1725\u20131805) was Diderot's favorite contemporary artist. Diderot appreciated Greuze's sentimentality, and more particularly Greuze's portrayals of his wife who had once been Diderot's mistress.\nTheatre.\nDiderot wrote sentimental plays, \"Le Fils naturel\" (1757) and \"Le P\u00e8re de famille\" (1758), accompanying them with essays on theatrical theory and practice, including \"Les Entretiens sur \"Le Fils Naturel\"\" (Conversations on \"The Natural Son\"), in which he announced the principles of a new drama: the 'serious genre', a realistic midpoint between comedy and tragedy that stood in opposition to the stilted conventions of the classical French stage. In 1758, Diderot introduced the concept of the fourth wall, the imaginary \"wall\" at the front of the stage in a traditional three-walled box set in a proscenium theatre, through which the audience sees the action in the world of the play. He also wrote \"Paradoxe sur le com\u00e9dien\" (\"Paradox of the Actor\"), written between 1770 and 1778 but first published after his death in 1830, which is a dramatic essay elucidating a theory of acting in which it is argued that great actors do not experience the emotions they are displaying. That essay is also of note for being where the term \"l'esprit de l'escalier\" (or \"l'esprit d'escalier\") comes from. It is a French term used in English for the predicament of thinking of the perfect reply too late.\nDiderot and Catherine the Great.\nJourney to Russia.\nWhen the Russian Empress Catherine the Great heard that Diderot was in need of money, she arranged to buy his library and appoint him caretaker of it until his death, at a salary of 1,000 livres per year. She even paid him 50 years salary in advance. Although Diderot hated traveling, he was obliged to visit her.\nOn 9 October 1773, he reached St. Petersburg, met Catherine the next day and they had several discussions on various subjects. During his five-month stay at her court, he met her almost every day. During these conversations, he would later state, they spoke 'man to man'.\nHe would occasionally make his point by slapping her thighs. In a letter to Madame Geoffrin, Catherine wrote:\nOne of the topics discussed was Diderot's ideas about how to transform Russia into a utopia. In a letter to Comte de S\u00e9gur, the Empress wrote that if she followed Diderot's advice, chaos would ensue in her kingdom.\nBack in France.\nWhen returning, Diderot asked the Empress for 1,500 rubles as reimbursement for his trip. She gave him 3,000 rubles, an expensive ring, and an officer to escort him back to Paris. He wrote a eulogy in her honor upon reaching Paris.\nIn 1766, when Catherine heard that Diderot had not received his annual fee for editing the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" (an important source of income for the philosopher), she arranged for him to receive a massive sum of 50,000 livres as an advance for his services as her librarian.\nIn July 1784, upon hearing that Diderot was in poor health, Catherine arranged for him to move into a luxurious suite in the \"Rue de Richelieu\". Diderot died two weeks after moving there\u2014on 31 July 1784.\nAmong Diderot's last works were notes \"On the Instructions of her Imperial Majesty...for the Drawing up of Laws\". This commentary on Russia included replies to some arguments Catherine had made in the Nakaz. Diderot wrote that Catherine was certainly despotic, due to circumstances and training, but was not inherently tyrannical. Thus, if she wished to destroy despotism in Russia, she should abdicate her throne and destroy anyone who tries to revive the monarchy. She should publicly declare that \"there is no true sovereign other than the nation, and there can be no true legislator other than the people.\" She should create a new Russian legal code establishing an independent legal framework and starting with the text: \"We the people, and we the sovereign of this people, swear conjointly these laws, by which we are judged equally.\" In the \"Nakaz\", Catherine had written: \"It is for legislation to follow the spirit of the nation.\" Diderot's rebuttal stated that it is for legislation to \"make\" the spirit of the nation. For instance, he argued, it is not appropriate to make public executions unnecessarily horrific.\nUltimately, Diderot decided not to send these notes to Catherine; however, they were delivered to her with his other papers after he died. When she read them, she was furious and commented that they were an incoherent gibberish devoid of prudence, insight, and verisimilitude.\nPhilosophy.\nIn his youth, Diderot was originally a follower of Voltaire and his deist \"Anglomanie\", but gradually moved away from this line of thought towards materialism and atheism, a move which was finally realised in 1747 in the philosophical debate in the second part of his \"The Skeptic's Walk\" (1747). Diderot opposed mysticism and occultism, which were highly prevalent in France at the time he wrote, and believed religious truth claims must fall under the domain of reason, not mystical experience or esoteric secrets. However, Diderot showed some interest in the work of Paracelsus. He was \"a philosopher in whom all the contradictions of the time struggle with one another\" (Rosenkranz).\nIn his 1754 book \"On the interpretation of Nature\", Diderot expounded on his views about nature, evolution, materialism, mathematics, and experimental science. It is speculated that Diderot may have contributed to his friend Baron d'Holbach's 1770 book \"The System of Nature\". Diderot had enthusiastically endorsed the book stating that: \nIn conceiving the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", Diderot had thought of the work as a fight on behalf of posterity and had expressed confidence that posterity would be grateful for his effort. According to Diderot, \"posterity is for the philosopher what the 'other world' is for the man of religion.\"\nAccording to Andrew S. Curran, the main questions of Diderot's thought are the following :\nDeath and burial.\nDiderot died of pulmonary thrombosis in Paris on 31 July 1784, and was buried in the city's \u00c9glise Saint-Roch. His heirs sent his vast library to Catherine II, who had it deposited at the National Library of Russia. He has several times been denied burial in the Panth\u00e9on with other French notables.\nDiderot's remains were unearthed by grave robbers in 1793, leaving his corpse on the church's floor. His remains were then presumably transferred to a mass grave by the authorities.\nThe French government considered memorializing him on the 300th anniversary of his birth, but this did not come to pass.\nAppreciation and influence.\nMarmontel and commented on the great pleasure of having intellectual conversations with Diderot. Morellet, a regular attendee at D'Holbach's salon, wrote: \"It is there that I heard...Diderot treat questions of philosophy, art, or literature, and by his wealth of expression, fluency, and inspired appearance, hold our attention for a long stretch of time.\" Diderot's contemporary, and rival, Jean Jacques Rousseau wrote in his \"Confessions\" that after a few centuries Diderot would be accorded as much respect by posterity as was given to Plato and Aristotle. In Germany, Goethe, Schiller, and Lessing expressed admiration for Diderot's writings, Goethe pronouncing Diderot's \"Rameau's Nephew\" to be \"the classical work of an outstanding man\" and that \"Diderot is Diderot, a unique individual; whoever carps at him and his affairs is a philistine.\"\nAs atheism fell out of favor during the French Revolution, Diderot was vilified and considered responsible for the excessive persecution of the clergy.\nIn the next century, Diderot was admired by Balzac, Delacroix, Stendhal, Zola, and Schopenhauer. According to Comte, Diderot was the foremost intellectual in an exciting age. Historian Michelet described him as \"the true Prometheus\" and stated that Diderot's ideas would continue to remain influential long into the future. Marx chose Diderot as his \"favourite prose-writer.\"\nContemporary tributes.\nOtis Fellows and Norman Torrey have described Diderot as \"the most interesting and provocative figure of the French eighteenth century.\"\nIn 1993, American writer Cathleen Schine published \"Rameau's Niece\", a satire of academic life in New York that took as its premise a woman's research into an (imagined) 18th-century pornographic parody of Diderot's \"Rameau's Nephew\". The book was praised by Michiko Kakutani in the \"New York Times\" as \"a nimble philosophical satire of the academic mind\" and \"an enchanting comedy of modern manners.\"\nFrench author Eric-Emmanuel Schmitt wrote a play titled \"Le Libertin\" (\"The Libertine\") which imagines a day in Diderot's life including a fictional sitting for a woman painter which becomes sexually charged but is interrupted by the demands of editing the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". It was first staged at Paris' Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Montparnasse in 1997 starring Bernard Giraudeau as Diderot and Christiane Cohendy as Madame Therbouche and was well received by critics.\nIn 2013, the tricentennial of Diderot's birth, his hometown of Langres held a series of events in his honor and produced an audio tour of the town highlighting places that were part of Diderot's past, including the remains of the convent where his sister Ang\u00e9lique took her vows. On 6 October 2013, a museum of the Enlightenment focusing on Diderot's contributions to the movement, the Maison des Lumi\u00e8res Denis Diderot, was inaugurated in Langres."}
{"id": "8200", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8200", "title": "Timeline of chemical element discoveries", "text": "The discovery of the 118 chemical elements known to exist as of 2021 is presented in chronological order. The elements are listed generally in the order in which each was first defined as the pure element, as the exact date of discovery of most elements cannot be accurately determined. There are plans to synthesize more elements, and it is not known how many elements are possible.\nEach element's name, atomic number, year of first report, name of the discoverer, and notes related to the discovery are listed."}
{"id": "8202", "revid": "749357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8202", "title": "Diatonic scale", "text": "In music theory, a diatonic scale is any heptatonic scale that includes five whole steps (whole tones) and two half steps (semitones) in each octave, in which the two half steps are separated from each other by either two or three whole steps, depending on their position in the scale. This pattern ensures that, in a diatonic scale spanning more than one octave, all the half steps are maximally separated from each other (i.e. separated by at least two whole steps).\nThe seven pitches of any diatonic scale can also be obtained by using a chain of six perfect fifths. For instance, the seven natural pitch classes that form the C-major scale can be obtained from a stack of perfect fifths starting from F:\nAny sequence of seven successive natural notes, such as C\u2013D\u2013E\u2013F\u2013G\u2013A\u2013B, and any transposition thereof, is a diatonic scale. Modern musical keyboards are designed so that the white notes form a diatonic scale, though transpositions of this diatonic scale require one or more black keys. A diatonic scale can be also described as two tetrachords separated by a whole tone.\nThe term \"diatonic\" originally referred to the diatonic genus, one of the three genera of the ancient Greeks. In musical set theory, Allen Forte classifies diatonic scales as set form 7\u201335.\nThis article does not concern alternative seven-note scales such as the harmonic minor or the melodic minor which, although sometimes called \"diatonic\", do not fulfill the condition of maximal separation of the semitones indicated above.\nHistory.\nThe word \"diatonic\" comes from the Greek word \" diatonik\u00f3s\" (\u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2), which essentially means \"through tones\", from \"diatonos\" (\u03b4\u03b9\u03ac\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2), \"stretched to the uttermost\", probably referring to the tension of the strings of musical instruments.\nWestern music from the Middle Ages until the late 19th century (see common practice period) is based on the diatonic scale and the unique hierarchical relationships created by this system of organizing seven notes.\nPrehistory.\nThere is a claim that the 45,000-year-old Divje Babe Flute used a diatonic scale, but there is no proof or consensus of it even being a musical instrument.\nThere is evidence that the Sumerians and Babylonians used a version of the diatonic scale. This derives from surviving inscriptions that contain a tuning system and musical composition. Despite the conjectural nature of reconstructions of the piece known as the Hurrian songs from the surviving score, the evidence that it used the diatonic scale is much more soundly based. This is because instructions for tuning the scale involve tuning a chain of six fifths, so that the corresponding circle of seven major and minor thirds are all consonant, and this is a recipe for tuning a diatonic scale.\nThe 9,000-year-old flutes found in Jiahu, China, indicate the evolution over 1,200 years of flutes having 4, 5 and 6 holes to having 7 and 8 holes, the latter exhibiting striking similarity to diatonic hole spacings and sounds.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe scales corresponding to the medieval church modes were diatonic. Depending on which of the seven notes of the diatonic scale you use as the beginning, the positions of the intervals fall at different distances from the starting tone (the \"reference note\"), producing seven different scales. One of these, the one starting on B, has no pure fifth above its reference note (B\u2013F is a diminished fifth): it is probably for this reason that it was not used. Of the six remaining scales, two were described as corresponding to two others with a B instead of a B:\nAs a result, medieval theory described the church modes as corresponding to four diatonic scales only (two of which had the variable B/). They were the modern Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian, and Mixolydian modes of C major, plus the Ionian and Aeolian modes of F major when B was substituted into the Lydian and Dorian.\nRenaissance.\nHeinrich Glarean considered that the modal scales including a B had to be the result of a transposition. In his \"Dodecachordon\", he not only described six \"natural\" diatonic scales (still neglecting the seventh one with a diminished fifth above the reference note), but also six \"transposed\" ones, each including a B, resulting in the total of twelve scales that justified the title of his treatise. These were the 6 non-Locrian modes of C major and F major.\nModern.\nBy the beginning of the Baroque period, the notion of the musical key was established, describing additional possible transpositions of the diatonic scale. Major and minor scales came to dominate until at least the start of the 20th century, partly because their intervallic patterns are suited to the reinforcement of a central triad. Some church modes survived into the early 18th century, as well as appearing in classical and 20th-century music, and jazz (see chord-scale system).\nTheory.\nOf Glarean's six natural scales, three are major scales (those with a major third/triad: Ionian, Lydian, and Mixolydian), and three are minor (those with a minor third/triad: Dorian, Phrygian, and Aeolian). To these may be added the seventh diatonic scale, with a diminished fifth above the reference note, the Locrian scale. These could be transposed not only to include one flat in the signature (as described by Glarean), but to all twelve notes of the chromatic scale, resulting in a total of eighty-four diatonic scales.\nThe modern musical keyboard originated as a diatonic keyboard with only white keys. The black keys were progressively added for several purposes:\nThe pattern of elementary intervals forming the diatonic scale can be represented either by the letters T (Tone) and S (Semitone) respectively. With this abbreviation, major scale, for instance, can be represented as\nMajor scale.\nThe major scale or Ionian mode is one of the diatonic scales. It is made up of seven distinct notes, plus an eighth that duplicates the first an octave higher. The pattern of seven intervals separating the eight notes is T\u2013T\u2013S\u2013T\u2013T\u2013T\u2013S. In solfege, the syllables used to name each degree of the scale are \"Do\u2013Re\u2013Mi\u2013Fa\u2013Sol\u2013La\u2013Ti\u2013Do\". A sequence of successive natural notes starting from C is an example of major scale, called C-major scale.\nThe eight degrees of the scale are also known by traditional names, especially when used in a tonal context:\nNatural minor scale.\nFor each major scale, there is a corresponding natural minor scale, sometimes called its relative minor. It uses the same sequence of notes as the corresponding major scale but starts from a different note. That is, it begins on the sixth degree of the major scale and proceeds step-by-step to the first octave of the sixth degree. A sequence of successive natural notes starting from A is an example of a natural minor scale, called the A natural minor scale.\nThe degrees of the natural minor scale, especially in a tonal context, have the same names as those of the major scale, except the seventh degree, which is known as the subtonic because it is a whole step below the tonic. The term leading tone is generally reserved for seventh degrees that are a \"half step\" (semitone) below the tonic, as is the case in the major scale.\nBesides the natural minor scale, five other kinds of scales can be obtained from the notes of a major scale, by simply choosing a different note as the starting note. All these scales meet the definition of diatonic scale.\nModes.\nThe whole collection of diatonic scales as defined above can be divided into seven different scales.\nAs explained above, all major scales use the same interval sequence T\u2013T\u2013S\u2013T\u2013T\u2013T\u2013S. This interval sequence was called the \"Ionian mode\" by Glarean. It is one of the seven modern modes. From any major scale, a new scale is obtained by taking a different degree as the tonic. With this method it is possible to generate six other scales or modes from each major scale. Another way to describe the same result would be to consider that, behind the diatonic scales, there exists an underlying \"diatonic system\" which is the series of diatonic notes without a reference note; assigning the reference note in turn to each of the seven notes in each octave of the system produces seven diatonic scales, each characterized by a different interval sequence:\nFor the sake of simplicity, the examples shown above are formed by natural notes (i.e. neither sharps nor flats, also called \"white-notes\", as they can be played using the white keys of a piano keyboard). However, any transposition of each of these scales (or of the system underlying them) is a valid example of the corresponding mode. In other words, transposition preserves mode.\nThe whole set of diatonic scales is commonly defined as the set composed of these seven natural-note scales, together with all of their possible transpositions. As discussed elsewhere, different definitions of this set are sometimes adopted in the literature.\nDiatonic scales and tetrachords.\nA diatonic scale can be also described as two tetrachords separated by a whole tone. For example, under this view the two tetrachord structures of C\u00a0major would be:\neach tetrachord being formed of two tones and a semitone, T T S,\nand the natural minor of A would be:\nformed two different tetrachords, the first consisting in a semitone between two tones, T S T, and the second of a semitone and two tones, S T T.\nThe medieval conception of the tetrachordal structure, however, was based on one single tetrachord, that of the D scale,\neach formed of a semitone between tones, T S T. It viewed other diatonic scales as differently overlapping disjunct and conjunct tetrachords:\n(where G | A indicates the disjunction of tetrachords, always between G and A, and D = D indicates their conjunction, always on the common note D).\nTuning.\nDiatonic scales can be tuned variously, either by iteration of a perfect or tempered fifth, or by a combination of perfect fifths and perfect thirds (Just intonation), or possibly by a combination of fifths and thirds of various sizes, as in well temperament.\nIteration of the fifth.\nIf the scale is produced by the iteration of six perfect fifths, for instance F\u2013C\u2013G\u2013D\u2013A\u2013E\u2013B, the result is Pythagorean tuning:\nSix of the \"fifth\" intervals (C\u2013G, D\u2013A, E\u2013B, F\u2013C\u2032, G\u2013D\u2032, A\u2013E\u2032) are all = 1.5 (702 cents), but B\u2013F\u2032 is the discordant tritone, here = 1.423828125 (673.5 cents). Tones are each = 1.125 (204 cents) and diatonic semitones are \u2248 1.0535 (90 cents).\nExtending the series of fifths to eleven fifths would result into the Pythagorean chromatic scale.\nEqual temperament.\nEqual temperament is the division of the octave in twelve equal semitones. The frequency ratio of the semitone then becomes the twelfth root of two ( \u2248 1.059463, 100 cents). The tone is the sum of two semitone. Its ratio is the sixth root of two ( \u2248 1.122462, 200 cents). Equal temperament can be produced by a succession of tempered fifths, each of them with the ratio of 2 \u2248 1.498307, 700 cents.\nMeantone temperament.\nThe fifths could be tempered more than in equal temperament, in order to produce better thirds. See quarter-comma meantone for a meantone temperament commonly used in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and sometimes after, which produces perfect major thirds.\nJust intonation.\nJust intonation often is represented using Euler's Tonnetz, with the horizontal axis showing the perfect fifths and the vertical axis the perfect major thirds. In the Tonnetz, the diatonic scale in just intonation appears as follows:\nF\u2013A, C\u2013E and G\u2013B, aligned vertically, are perfect major thirds; A\u2013E\u2013B and F\u2013C\u2013G\u2013D are two series of perfect fifths. The notes of the top line, A, E and B, are lowered by the syntonic comma, , and the \"wolf\" fifth D\u2013A is too narrow by the same amount. The tritone F\u2013B is \u2248 1.40625.\nThis tuning has been first described by Ptolemy and is known as Ptolemy's intense diatonic scale. It was also mentioned by Zarlino in the 16th century and has been described by theorists in the 17th and 18th centuries as the \"natural\" scale.\nSince the frequency ratios are based on simple powers of the prime numbers 2, 3, and 5, this is also known as five-limit tuning."}
{"id": "8203", "revid": "800198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8203", "title": "Deutschlandlied", "text": "The \"'\" (; \"Song of Germany\"), officially titled \"'\" (\"The Song of the Germans\"), or part of it, has been the national anthem of Germany since 1922. In East Germany, the national anthem was \"Auferstanden aus Ruinen\" (\"Risen from Ruins\") between 1949 and 1990.\nAfter World War II and the fall of Nazi Germany, only the third stanza has been used as the national anthem. That stanza's incipit \"\" (\"Unity and Justice and Freedom\") is considered the unofficial national motto of Germany, and is inscribed on modern German Army belt buckles and the rims of some German coins.\nThe music is the hymn \"Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser\", written in 1797 by the Austrian composer Joseph Haydn as an anthem for the birthday of Francis II, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire and later of Austria. In 1841, the German linguist and poet August Heinrich Hoffmann von Fallersleben wrote the lyrics of \"\" as a new text for that music, counterposing the national unification of Germany to the eulogy of a monarch, lyrics that were considered revolutionary at the time. Along with the flag of Germany, which first appeared in its essentially \"modern\" form in 1778; it was one of the symbols of the March Revolution of 1848.\nIn order to endorse its republican and liberal tradition, the song was chosen as the national anthem of Germany in 1922, during the Weimar Republic. West Germany adopted the \" as its official national anthem in 1952 for similar reasons, with only the third stanza sung on official occasions. Upon German reunification in 1990, only the third stanza was confirmed as the national anthem.\nTitle.\nThe song is also well known by the beginning and refrain of the first stanza, \" (\"Germany, Germany above all\"), but this has never been its title. The line \"Germany, Germany above all\" originally meant that the most important goal of 19th-century German liberal revolutionaries should be a unified Germany which would overcome loyalties to the local kingdoms, principalities, duchies and palatines (\"Kleinstaaterei\") of then-fragmented Germany.\nMelody.\nThe melody of the \"\" was written by Joseph Haydn in 1797 to provide music to the poem \"Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser\" (\"God save Francis the Emperor\") by Lorenz Leopold Haschka. The song was a birthday anthem honouring Francis II (1768\u20131835), Habsburg emperor, and was intended as a parallel to Great Britain's \"God Save the King\". Haydn's work is sometimes called the \"Emperor's Hymn\". It is often used as the musical basis for the hymn \"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken\".\nIt has been conjectured that Haydn took the first four measures of the melody from a Croatian folk song. This hypothesis has never achieved unanimous agreement; the alternative theory reverses the direction of transmission, positing that Haydn's melody was adapted as a folk tune. For further discussion see Haydn and folk music.\nHaydn later used the hymn as the basis for the second movement (\"poco adagio cantabile\") of his Opus 76 No. 3, a string quartet, often called the \"Emperor\" or \"Kaiser\" quartet.\nHistorical background.\nThe Holy Roman Empire, stemming from the Middle Ages, was already disintegrating when the French Revolution and the ensuing Napoleonic Wars altered the political map of Central Europe. However, hopes for human rights and republican government after Napoleon's defeat in 1815 were dashed when the Congress of Vienna reinstated many small German principalities. In addition, with the Carlsbad Decrees of 1819, Austrian Chancellor Klemens von Metternich and his secret police enforced censorship, mainly in universities, to keep a watch on the activities of teachers and students, whom he held responsible for the spread of radical liberalist ideas. Since reactionaries among the monarchs were the main adversaries, demands for freedom of the press and other liberal rights were most often uttered in connection with the demand for a united Germany, even though many revolutionaries-to-be had different opinions about whether a republic or a constitutional monarchy would be the best solution for Germany.\nThe German Confederation \"(Deutscher Bund\" 1815\u20131866) was a loose federation of 35 monarchical states and four republican free cities, with a Federal Assembly in Frankfurt. They began to remove internal customs barriers during the Industrial Revolution, and the German Customs Union (\"Zollverein\") was formed among the majority of the states in 1834. In 1840 Hoffmann wrote a song about the \"Zollverein\", also to Haydn's melody, in which he praised the free trade of German goods which brought Germans and Germany closer.\nAfter the 1848 March Revolution, the German Confederation handed over its authority to the Frankfurt Parliament. For a short period in the late 1840s, Germany was economically united with the borders described in the anthem, and a democratic constitution was being drafted, and with the black-red-gold flag representing it. However, after 1849 the two largest German monarchies, Prussia and Austria, put an end to this liberal movement toward national unification.\nHoffmann's lyrics.\nAugust Heinrich Hoffmann von Fallersleben wrote the text in 1841 on holiday on the North Sea island of Heligoland, then a possession of the United Kingdom (now part of Germany).\nHoffmann von Fallersleben intended \" to be sung to Haydn's tune, as the first publication of the poem included the music. The first line, \" (usually translated into English as \"Germany, Germany above all, above all in the world\"), was an appeal to the various German monarchs to give the creation of a united Germany a higher priority than the independence of their small states. In the third stanza, with a call for \"\" (unity and justice and freedom), Hoffmann expressed his desire for a united and free Germany where the rule of law, not monarchical arbitrariness, would prevail.\nIn the era after the Congress of Vienna, influenced by Metternich and his secret police, Hoffmann's text had a distinctly revolutionary and at the same time liberal connotation, since the appeal for a united Germany was most often made in connection with demands for freedom of the press and other civil rights. Its implication that loyalty to a larger Germany should replace loyalty to one's local sovereign was then a revolutionary idea.\nThe year after he wrote \"Das Deutschlandlied\", Hoffmann lost his job as a librarian and professor in Breslau, Prussia (now Wroc\u0142aw, Poland), because of this and other revolutionary works, and was forced into hiding until being pardoned after the revolutions of 1848 in the German states.\nUse before 1922.\nThe melody of the \"Deutschlandlied\" was originally written by Joseph Haydn in 1797 to provide music to the poem \"Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser\" (\"God save Franz the Emperor\") by Lorenz Leopold Haschka. The song was a birthday anthem to Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor of the House of Habsburg, and was intended to rival in merit the British \"God Save the King\".\nAfter the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, \"\" became the official anthem of the emperor of the Austrian Empire. After the death of Francis II new lyrics were composed in 1854, \"Gott erhalte, Gott besch\u00fctze\", that mentioned the Emperor, but not by name. With those new lyrics, the song continued to be the anthem of Imperial Austria and later of Austria-Hungary. Austrian monarchists continued to use this anthem after 1918 in the hope of restoring the monarchy. The adoption of the Austrian anthem's melody by Germany in 1922 was not opposed by Austria.\n\"\" was not played at an official ceremony until Germany and the United Kingdom had agreed on the Heligoland\u2013Zanzibar Treaty in 1890, when it appeared only appropriate to sing it at the ceremony on the now officially German island of Heligoland. During the time of the German Empire it became one of the most widely known patriotic songs.\nThe song became very popular after the 1914 Battle of Langemarck during World War I, when, supposedly, several German regiments, consisting mostly of students no older than 20, attacked the British lines on the Western front singing the song, suffering heavy casualties. They are buried in the Langemark German war cemetery in Belgium.\nOfficial adoption.\nThe melody used by the \"Deutschlandlied\" was still in use as the anthem of the Austro-Hungarian Empire until its demise in 1918. On 11 August 1922, German President Friedrich Ebert, a Social Democrat, made the \"Deutschlandlied\" the official German national anthem. In 1919 the black, red and gold tricolour, the colours of the 19th century liberal revolutionaries advocated by the political left and centre, was adopted (rather than the previous black, white and red of Imperial Germany). Thus, in a political trade-off, the conservative right was granted a nationalistic composition \u2013 though Ebert advocated using only the lyrics' third stanza (which was done after World War II).\nDuring the Nazi era only the first stanza was used, followed by the SA song \"Horst-Wessel-Lied\". It was played at occasions of great national significance such as the opening of the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin when Hitler and his entourage, along with Olympic officials, walked into the stadium amid a chorus of three thousand Germans singing \"\". In this way, the first verse became closely identified with the Nazi regime.\nUse after World War II.\nAfter its founding in 1949, West Germany did not have a national anthem for official events for some years, despite a growing need to have one for the purpose of diplomatic procedures. In lieu of an official national anthem, popular German songs such as the \"Trizonesien-Song\", a carnival song mocking the occupying Allied powers, were used at some sporting events. Different musical compositions were discussed or used, such as the fourth movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, which is a musical setting of Friedrich Schiller's poem \"An die Freude\" (\"Ode to Joy\"). Though the black, red and gold colours of the national flag had been incorporated into Article 22 of the (West) German constitution, a national anthem was not specified. On 29 April 1952, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer asked President Theodor Heuss in a letter to accept \" as the national anthem, with only the third stanza being sung on official occasions. However, the first and second verses were not outlawed, contrary to popular belief. President Heuss agreed to this on 2 May 1952. This exchange of letters was published in the Bulletin of the Federal Government. Since it was viewed as the traditional right of the President as head of state to set the symbols of the state, the \" thus became the national anthem.\nMeanwhile, East Germany adopted its own national anthem, \"Auferstanden aus Ruinen\" (\"Risen from Ruins\"). As the lyrics of this anthem called for \"Germany, united Fatherland\", they were no longer officially used from about 1972, after the DDR abandoned its goal of uniting Germany under communism. With slight adaptations, the lyrics of \" can be sung to the melody of the \" and vice versa.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, efforts were made by conservatives in Germany to reclaim all three stanzas for the national anthem. The Christian Democratic Union of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, for instance, attempted twice (in 1985 and 1986) to require German high school students to study all three stanzas, and in 1989 CDU politician Christean Wagner decreed that all high school students in Hesse were to memorise the three stanzas.\nOn 7 March 1990, months before reunification, the Federal Constitutional Court declared only the third stanza of Hoffmann's poem to be legally protected as a national anthem under German criminal law; Section 90a of the Criminal Code (\"Strafgesetzbuch\") makes defamation of the national anthem a crime \u2013 but does not specify what the national anthem is. This did not mean that stanzas one and two were not \u2013 at that time \u2013 part of the national anthem at all, but that their peculiar status as \"part of the [national] anthem but unsung\" disqualified them for penal law protection because the penal law must be interpreted in the narrowest manner possible, and was not explicit in their regard.\nIn November 1991, President Richard von Weizs\u00e4cker and Chancellor Helmut Kohl agreed in an exchange of letters to declare the third stanza alone to be the national anthem of the reunified republic. Hence, effective since then, the national anthem of Germany is unmistakably the third stanza of the Deutschlandlied, and only this stanza, with Haydn's music.\nThe opening line of the third stanza, \"\" (\"Unity and Justice and Freedom\"), is widely considered to be the national motto of Germany, although it was never officially proclaimed as such. It appears on Bundeswehr soldiers' belt buckles (replacing the earlier \"Gott mit uns\" (\"God with Us\") of the Imperial German Army and the Nazi-era Wehrmacht). \"\" appeared on the rim of 2 and 5 Deutsche Mark coins and is present on 2 euro coins minted in Germany.\nCriticisms.\nGeographical.\nThe first verse, which is no longer part of the national anthem and is not sung on official occasions, names three rivers and one strait \u2013 the Meuse (\"Maas\" in German), Adige (\"Etsch\") and Neman (\"Memel\") Rivers and the Little Belt strait \u2013 as the boundaries of the German \"Sprachbund\". As the song was written before German unification, there was never an intention to delineate borders of Germany as a nation-state. Nevertheless, these geographical references have been variously criticized as irredentist or misleading. Of these the Meuse and the Adige were parts of the German Confederation during the time when the song was composed. The Belt (strait) and the Neman later became actual boundaries of Germany (the Belt until 1920, the Neman between 1920 and 1939), whereas the Meuse and Adige were not parts of the German Reich as of 1871. Today, no part of any of the four places mentioned in the \"\" lies in Germany.\nIn an ethnic sense, none of these places formed a distinct ethnic border. The Duchy of Schleswig (to which the Belt refers) was inhabited by both Germans and Danes, with the Danes forming a clear majority near the strait. Around the Adige there was a mix of German, Venetian and Gallo-Italian speakers, and the area around the Neman was not homogeneously German, but also accommodated Prussian Lithuanians. The Meuse (if taken as referencing the Duchy of Limburg, nominally part of the German Confederation for 28 years due to the political consequences of the Belgian Revolution) was ethnically Dutch with few Germans.\nNevertheless, such nationalistic rhetoric was relatively common in 19th-century public discourse. For example: Georg Herwegh in his poem \"The German Fleet\" (1841), gives the Germans as the people \"between the Po and the Sund\" (\u00d8resund), and in 1832 Philipp Jakob Siebenpfeiffer, a noted journalist, declared at the Hambach Festival that he considered all \"between the Alps and the North Sea\" to be \"Deutschtum\".\nTextual.\nThe song has frequently been criticised for its generally nationalistic tone, the immodest geographic definition of Germany given in the first stanza, and the alleged male-chauvinistic attitude in the second stanza. A relatively early critic was Friedrich Nietzsche, who called the grandiose claim in the first stanza (\"\" (the most idiotic slogan in the world), and in \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\" said, \" \u2013 I fear that was the end of German philosophy.\" The pacifist Kurt Tucholsky was also negative about the song, and in 1929 published a photo book sarcastically titled \"Deutschland, Deutschland \u00fcber alles\", criticising right-wing groups in Germany.\nGerman grammar distinguishes between , i.e. above all else, and , meaning \"above everyone else\". However, for propaganda purposes, the latter translation was chosen by the Allies during World War I.\nModern use of the first stanza.\nIn 1977, German pop singer Heino produced a record of the song, including all three verses, for use in primary schools in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. The inclusion of the first two verses was met with criticism at the time.\nIn 2009, Pete Doherty started to sing the German national anthem live on radio at Bayerischer Rundfunk in Munich. As he sang the first verse, he was booed by the audience. Three days later, Doherty's spokesperson declared that the singer was \"not aware of the historical background and regrets the misunderstanding\". A spokesperson for Bayerischer Rundfunk welcomed the response, stating that further cooperation with Doherty would not have been possible otherwise.\nWhen the first verse was played as the German national anthem at the canoe sprint world championships in Hungary in August 2011, German athletes were reportedly \"appalled\". Eurosport, under the headline of \"Nazi anthem\", erroneously reported that \"the first stanza of the piece [was] banned in 1952.\"\nSimilarly, in 2017, the first verse was mistakenly sung by Will Kimble, an American soloist, during the welcome ceremony of the Fed Cup tennis match between Andrea Petkovic (Germany) and Alison Riske (U.S.) at the Center Court in Lahaina, Hawaii. In an unsuccessful attempt to drown out the soloist, German tennis players and fans started to sing the third verse instead.\nVariants and additions.\nAdditional or alternative stanzas.\nHoffmann von Fallersleben also intended the text to be used as a drinking song; the second stanza's toast to German wine, women and song are typical of this genre. The original Heligoland manuscript included a variant ending of the third stanza for such occasions:\n&lt;poem lang=\"de\" style=\"float:left;\"&gt;...\nSind des Gl\u00fcckes Unterpfand;\n\u00a0\ud834\udd06 Sto\u00dfet an und ruft einstimmig,\n\u00a0Hoch, das deutsche Vaterland. \ud834\udd07&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em; float:left;\"&gt;...\nAre the pledge of fortune.\n\u00a0\ud834\udd06 Lift your glasses and shout together,\n\u00a0Prosper, German fatherland. \ud834\udd07&lt;/poem&gt;\nAn alternative version called \"\" (Children's Hymn) was written by Bertolt Brecht shortly after his return from exile in the U.S. to a war-ravaged, bankrupt and geographically smaller Germany at the end of World War II and set to music by Hanns Eisler in the same year. It gained some currency after the 1990 unification of Germany, with a number of prominent Germans opting for his \"antihymn\" to be made official:\nNotable performances and recordings.\nMax Reger quotes the tune in the final section of his organ pieces \"Sieben St\u00fccke\", Op. 145, composed in 1915/16 when it was a patriotic song but not yet a national anthem.\nThe German musician Nico sometimes performed the national anthem at concerts and dedicated it to militant Andreas Baader, leader of the Red Army Faction. She included a version of \"\" on her 1974 album \"The End...\". In 2006, the Slovenian \"industrial\" band Laibach incorporated Hoffmann's lyrics in a song titled \"Germania\", on the album \"Volk\", which contains fourteen songs with adaptations of national anthems.\nReferences.\nSources"}
{"id": "8204", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8204", "title": "December 31", "text": " It is known by a collection of names including: Saint Sylvester's Day, New Year's Eve or Old Years Day/Night, as the following day is New Year's Day. It is the last day of the year; the following day is January 1, the first day of the following year."}
{"id": "8205", "revid": "1012183653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8205", "title": "Deng Xiaoping", "text": "Deng Xiaoping (, ; ; Wade\u2013Giles: Teng Hsiao-ping; born Xiansheng (); courtesy name Xixian (); 22 August 1904 \u2013 19 February 1997) was a Chinese revolutionary and statesman who served as the paramount leader of the People's Republic of China (PRC) from December 1978 to November 1989. After Mao Zedong's death in 1976, Deng gradually rose to supreme power and led his country through a series of far-reaching market-economy reforms, resulting in his characterization as the \"Architect of Modern China\". Despite never holding office as either the PRC's head of state or head of government, or as the head of the ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP), he is generally viewed as the \"core leader\" of the CCP's second-generation leadership, a status enshrined within the party's constitution.\nBorn into an educated land-owning family in the province of Sichuan in the Qing dynasty, Deng studied and worked in France in the 1920s, where he became a follower of Marxism\u2013Leninism, and lifelong friends with Zhou Enlai as well as many other future CCP leaders. There, he joined the CCP in 1924 while changing between menial jobs, including working at a Schneider factory and a Renault plant. In early 1926, Deng travelled to Moscow to study Communist doctrines. Upon returning to China in 1927, Deng changed his name to \"Deng Xiaoping\" at the age of 23 and joined the party organization in Shanghai, becoming a political commissar for the Red Army in rural regions. In late 1929, Deng led local Red Army uprisings in Guangxi province. In 1931, he was criticized and demoted within the party due to his support of Mao, but was promoted again during the Zunyi Conference in which Mao emerged as the party's leader. By the late 1930s, Deng was considered a \"revolutionary veteran\" as he participated in the Long March (1934\u20131935).\nDuring the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945), Deng quickly rose in prominence within the CCP military. At the height of the Chinese Civil War (1945\u20131949), Deng served as political commissar of the Central Plains Field Army in the Huaihai campaign, one of the three decisive battles that led to the defeat of the ruling Kuomintang party. Marshal Liu Bocheng and Deng led the Communist troops to cross the Yangtze River and capture Nanjing (the capital of the Nationalist government) and Shanghai (the largest city of China) in mid-1949. Following the founding of the PRC on 1 October 1949, Deng worked in Tibet as well as in southwest China as the regional party chief to consolidate CCP control until 1952, when he returned to Beijing to serve in the newly formed central government. As the party's Secretary-General under Chairman Mao and Vice Premier under Premier Zhou in the 1950s, Deng presided over the Anti-Rightist Campaign launched by Mao and became instrumental in China's economic reconstruction following the disastrous Great Leap Forward (1958\u20131960). However, his right-leaning political stance and economic policies eventually caused him to fall out of favor with Mao, and he was purged twice during the Cultural Revolution (1966\u20131976). Deng was publicly disgraced and criticized nationwide alongside then President Liu Shaoqi and was sent to work in a tractor factory in rural Jiangxi from 1969 to 1973. Deng briefly came back to power until the Tiananmen Incident in 1976, after which he was again stripped of all official titles and only kept his party membership.\nFollowing Mao's death in September 1976, Deng outmaneuvered the late chairman's chosen successor Hua Guofeng and became the \"de facto\" leader of China in December 1978 at the 3rd Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee. Having inherited a country beset with extreme poverty, deep social conflict, disenchantment with Communism and institutional disorder resulting from the chaotic political movements of the Mao era, Deng started the \"Boluan Fanzheng\" (\"\u62e8\u4e71\u53cd\u6b63\") program, reversing most of the Cultural Revolution policies, which brought the country back to order by the early 1980s. From 1977 to early 1979, he resumed the National College Entrance Examination program that had been interrupted by the Cultural Revolution for ten years, initiated the historic Reform and Opening-up of China (), designated special economic zones including Shenzhen, and started a one-month Sino-Vietnamese War. On 1 January 1979, the PRC established diplomatic relations with the United States, less than two weeks after Deng became the paramount leader. By January 1979, Deng became the first Chinese paramount leader to visit the United States.\nIn August 1980, Deng embarked on a series of radical political reforms by setting constitutional term limits for state officials, including the President, and other systematic revisions which became incorporated in China's third Constitution. On Deng's initiative, the CCP revoked the position of Chairman and made the General Secretary the \"ex officio\" leader of the party. In the 1980s, Deng supported the one-child policy to cope with China's overpopulation crisis, helped establish China's nine-year compulsory education, and launched the 863 Program for science and technology. Deng also proposed the One Country, Two Systems () principle for the governance of Hong Kong and Macau, as well as the future unification with Taiwan.\nAlthough Deng never held the highest office in the CCP leadership, he nonetheless held supreme authority in China from 1978 through the late 1980s in his dual capacity as Chairman of the Central Advisory Commission (an \"ad hoc\" body comprising the most senior members of the party elite) and commander-in-chief of the Chinese armed forces. Even after retiring from the Politburo Standing Committee in 1987 and the Central Military Commission in 1989, Deng continued to exert influence over the regime's policies until his death in 1997.\nDeng's policies gradually led China away from a planned economy and Maoist ideologies, opened it up to foreign investment and technology, and introduced its vast labor force to the global market. Such reforms are credited with developing China into one of the fastest-growing economies in the world for several generations and raising the standard of living of a fourth of humanity. Deng was the \"Time\" Person of the Year for 1978 and 1985, the third Chinese leader and the fourth time for a communist leader to be selected. In the 1990s, Deng was criticized for ordering the crackdown on the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, but was praised for his reaffirmation of the reform program in his Southern Tour of 1992 as well as the reversion of Hong Kong to Chinese control in 1997 and the return of Macau in 1999.\nThroughout his leadership, Deng was renowned for his pragmatism and support of a market economy, and often compared to contemporary leaders such as Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. He was eventually characterized as the \"architect\" of a new brand of thinking combining socialist ideology with free enterprise, dubbed \"socialism with Chinese characteristics\". This ideology now known as Deng Xiaoping Theory was\nultimately incorporated into the party's constitution in 1997 and remains the guiding principle of Chinese policy to this day.\nEarly life and family.\nDeng's ancestors can be traced back to Jiaying County (now renamed to Meixian), Guangdong, a prominent ancestral area for the Hakka people, and had settled in Sichuan for several generations. Deng's daughter Deng Rong wrote in the book \"My father Deng Xiaoping\" () that his ancestry was probably, but not definitely, Hakka. Sichuan was originally the origin of the Deng lineage until one of them was hired as an official in Guangdong during the Ming Dynasty, but when the Qing planned to increase the population in 1671, they moved back to Sichuan. Deng was born on 22 August 1904 in Sichuan.\nDeng's father, Deng Wenming, was a mid-level landowner who had studied at the University of Law and Political Science in Chengdu. He was locally prominent. His mother, surnamed Dan, died early in Deng's life, leaving Deng, his three brothers, and three sisters. At the age of five, Deng was sent to a traditional Chinese-style private primary school, followed by a more modern primary school at the age of seven.\nDeng's first wife, one of his schoolmates from Moscow, died aged 24 a few days after giving birth to Deng's first child, a baby girl who also died. His second wife, Jin Weiying, left him after Deng came under political attack in 1933. His third wife, Zhuo Lin, was the daughter of an industrialist in Yunnan. She became a member of the Communist Party in 1938, and married Deng a year later in front of Mao's cave dwelling in Yan'an. They had five children: three daughters (Deng Lin, Deng Nan and Deng Rong) and two sons (Deng Pufang and Deng Zhifang).\nEducation and early career.\nWhen Deng first attended school, his tutor objected to his having the given name \"Xi\u0101nsh\u00e8ng\" (), calling him \"X\u012bxi\u00e1n\" (), which includes the characters \"to aspire to\" and \"goodness\", with overtones of wisdom.\nIn the summer of 1919, Deng graduated from the Chongqing School. He and 80 schoolmates travelled by ship to France (travelling steerage) to participate in the Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement, a work-study program in which 4,001 Chinese would participate by 1927. Deng, the youngest of all the Chinese students in the group, had just turned 15. Wu Yuzhang, the local leader of the Movement in Chongqing, enrolled Deng and his paternal uncle, Deng Shaosheng, in the program. Deng's father strongly supported his son's participation in the work-study abroad program. The night before his departure, Deng's father took his son aside and asked him what he hoped to learn in France. He repeated the words he had learned from his teachers: \"To learn knowledge and truth from the West in order to save China.\" Deng was aware that China was suffering greatly, and that the Chinese people must have a modern education to save their country.\nIn December 1920 a French packet ship, the \"Andr\u00e9 Lyon\", sailed into Marseille with 210 Chinese students aboard including Deng. The sixteen-year-old Deng briefly attended middle schools in Bayeux and Ch\u00e2tillon, but he spent most of his time in France working. His first job was as a fitter at the Le Creusot Iron and Steel Plant in La Garenne-Colombes, a south-western suburb of Paris where he moved in April 1921. Coincidentally, when Deng's later political fortunes were down and he was sent to work in a tractor factory in 1969 during the Cultural Revolution he found himself a fitter again and proved to still be a master of the skill.\nIn La Garenne-Colombes Deng met future CCP leaders Zhou Enlai, Chen Yi, Nie Rongzhen, Li Fuchun, Li Lisan and Li Weihan. In June 1923 he joined the Chinese Communist Youth League in Europe. In the second half of 1924, he joined the Chinese Communist Party and became one of the leading members of the General Branch of the Youth League in Europe. In 1926 Deng traveled to the Soviet Union and studied at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University, where one of his classmates was Chiang Ching-kuo, the son of Chiang Kai-shek.\nReturn to China.\nIn late 1927, Deng left Moscow to return to China, where he joined the army of Feng Yuxiang, a military leader in northwest China, who had requested assistance from the Soviet Union in his struggle with other local leaders in the region. At that time, the Soviet Union, through the Comintern, an international organization supporting the Communist movements, supported the Communists' alliance with the Nationalists of the Kuomintang (KMT) party founded by Sun Yat-sen.\nHe arrived in Xi'an, the stronghold of Feng Yuxiang, in March 1927. He was part of the Fengtian clique's attempt to prevent the break of the alliance between the KMT and the Communists. This split resulted in part from Chiang Kai-shek's forcing them to flee areas controlled by the KMT. After the breakup of the alliance between communists and nationalists, Feng Yuxiang stood on the side of Chiang Kai-shek, and the Communists who participated in their army, such as Deng Xiaoping, were forced to flee. In 1929 Deng led the Baise Uprising in Guangxi province against the Kuomintang (KMT) government. The uprising failed and Deng went to the Central Soviet Area in Jiangxi.\nPolitical rise.\nAlthough Deng got involved in the Marxist revolutionary movement in China, the historian Mobo Gao has argued that \"Deng Xiaoping and many like him [in the Chinese Communist Party] were not really Marxists, but basically revolutionary nationalists who wanted to see China standing on equal terms with the great global powers. They were primarily nationalists and they participated in the Communist revolution because that was the only viable route they could find to Chinese nationalism.\"\nActivism in Shanghai and Wuhan.\nAfter leaving the army of Feng Yuxiang in the northwest, Deng ended up in the city of Wuhan, where the Communists at that time had their headquarters. At that time, he began using the nickname \"Xiaoping\" and occupied prominent positions in the party apparatus. He participated in the historic emergency session on 7 August 1927 in which, by Soviet instruction, the Party dismissed its founder Chen Duxiu, and Qu Qiubai became the general secretary. In Wuhan, Deng first established contact with Mao Zedong, who was then little valued by militant pro-Soviet leaders of the party.\nBetween 1927 and 1929, Deng lived in Shanghai, where he helped organize protests that would be harshly persecuted by the Kuomintang authorities. The death of many Communist militants in those years led to a decrease in the number of members of the Communist Party, which enabled Deng to quickly move up the ranks. During this stage in Shanghai, Deng married a woman he met in Moscow, Zhang Xiyuan.\nMilitary campaign in Guangxi.\nBeginning in 1929, he participated in the military struggle against the Kuomintang in Guangxi. The superiority of the forces of Chiang Kai-shek caused a huge number of casualties in the Communist ranks. The confrontational strategy of the Communist Party of China (CCP) leadership was a failure that killed many militants against a stronger opponent. The response to this defeat catalyzed one of the most confusing episodes in the biography of Deng: in March 1931, he left the Communist Army seventh battalion to appear sometime later in Shanghai.\nHis official biography states that Deng had been charged by his superiors with deserting from the battle zone before fleeing to Shanghai, where there were leaders of the underground Communist Party. Although he was not punished in Shanghai, this episode in his biography remains unclear and would be used against him to question his devotion to the Communist Party during the Cultural Revolution era.\nAt the Jiangxi Soviet.\nThe campaigns against the Communists in the cities represented a setback for the party and in particular to the Comintern Soviet advisers, who saw the mobilization of the urban proletariat as the force for the advancement of communism. Contrary to the urban vision of the revolution, based on the Soviet experience, the Communist leader Mao Zedong saw the rural peasants as the revolutionary force in China. In a mountainous area of Jiangxi province, where Mao went to establish a communist system, there developed the embryo of a future state of China under communism, which adopted the official name of the Chinese Soviet Republic, but was better known as the \"Jiangxi Soviet\".\nIn one of the most important cities in the Soviet zone, Ruijin, Deng took over as secretary of the Party Committee in the summer of 1931. In the winter of 1932, Deng went on to play the same position in the nearby district of Huichang. In 1933 he became director of the propaganda department of the Provincial Party Committee in Jiangxi. It was then that he married a young woman he had met in Shanghai named Jin Weiying.\nThe successes of the Soviet in Jiangxi made the party leaders decide to move to Jiangxi from Shanghai. The confrontation among Mao, the party leaders, and their Soviet advisers was increasingly tense and the struggle for power between the two factions led to the removal of Deng, who favored the ideas of Mao, from his position in the propaganda department. Despite the strife within the party, the Jiangxi Soviet became the first successful experiment of communist rule in rural China. It even issued stamps and paper money under the letterhead of the Soviet Republic of China, and the army of Chiang Kai-shek finally decided to attack the communist area.\nLong March.\nSurrounded by the more powerful army of the Republic of China, the Communists fled Jiangxi in October 1934. Thus began the epic movement that would mark a turning point in the development of Chinese communism. The evacuation was difficult because the Army of the Republic had taken positions in all areas occupied by the Communists. Advancing through remote and mountainous terrain, some 100,000 men managed to escape Jiangxi, starting a long strategic retreat through the interior of China, which ended one year later when between 8,000 and 9,000 survivors reached the northern province of Shaanxi.\nDuring the Zunyi Conference at the beginning of the Long March, the so-called 28 Bolsheviks, led by Bo Gu and Wang Ming, were ousted from power and Mao Zedong, to the dismay of the Soviet Union, became the new leader of the Communist Party of China. The pro-Soviet Communist Party of China had ended and a new rural-inspired party emerged under the leadership of Mao. Deng had once again become a leading figure in the party when the north ended up winning the civil war against the Kuomintang.\nThe confrontation between the two parties was temporarily interrupted, however, by the Japanese invasion, forcing the Kuomintang to form an alliance for the second time with the Communists to defend the nation against external aggression.\nJapanese invasion.\nThe invasion of Japanese troops in 1937 marked the beginning of the Second Sino-Japanese War. During the invasion, Deng remained in the area controlled by the Communists in the north, where he assumed the role of deputy political director of the three divisions of the restructured Communist army. From September 1937 until January 1938, he lived in Buddhist monasteries and temples in the Wutai Mountains. In January 1938, he was appointed as Political Commissar of the 129th division of the Eighth Route Army commanded by Liu Bocheng, starting a long-lasting partnership with Liu.\nDeng stayed for most of the conflict with the Japanese in the war front in the area bordering the provinces of Shanxi, Henan and Hebei, then traveled several times to the city of Yan'an, where Mao had established the basis for Communist Party leadership. In one of his trips to Yan'an in 1939, he married, for the third and last time in his life, Zhuo Lin, a young native of Kunming, who, like other young idealists of the time, had traveled to Yan'an to join the Communists.\nDeng was considered a \"revolutionary veteran\" because his participation in the Long March. He took a leading role in the Hundred Regiments Offensive which boosted his standing among his comrades.\nResumed war against the Nationalists.\nAfter Japan's defeat in World War II, Deng traveled to Chongqing, the city in which Chiang Kai-shek established his government during the Japanese invasion, to participate in peace talks between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. The results of those negotiations were not positive and military confrontation between the two antagonistic parties resumed shortly after the meeting in Chongqing.\nWhile Chiang Kai-shek re-established the government in Nanjing, the capital of the Republic of China, the Communists were fighting for control in the field. Following up with guerrilla tactics from their positions in rural areas against cities under the control of the government of Chiang and their supply lines, the Communists were increasing the territory under their control, and incorporating more and more soldiers who had deserted the Nationalist army.\nDeng played a major part in the Huaihai Campaign against the nationalists.\nIn the final phase of the war, Deng again exercised a key role as political leader and propaganda master as Political Commissar of the 2nd Field Army commanded by Liu Bocheng. He also participated in disseminating the ideas of Mao Zedong, which turned into the ideological foundation of the Communist Party. His political and ideological work, along with his status as a veteran of the Long March, placed him in a privileged position within the party to occupy positions of power after the Communist Party managed to defeat Chiang Kai-shek and founded the People's Republic of China.\nPolitical career under Mao.\nMayor of Chongqing.\nOn 1 October 1949, Deng attended the proclamation of the People's Republic of China in Beijing. At that time, the Communist Party controlled the entire north, but there were still parts of the south held by the Kuomintang regime. He became responsible for leading the pacification of southwest China, in his capacity as the first secretary of the Department of the Southwest. This organization had the task of managing the final takeover of that part of the country still held by the Kuomintang; Tibet remained independent for another year.\nThe Kuomintang government was being forced to leave Guangzhou (Canton), and established Chongqing (Chungking) as a new provisional capital. There, Chiang Kai-shek and his son Chiang Ching-kuo, a former classmate of Deng in Moscow, wanted to stop the advance of the Communist Party forces.\nUnder the political control of Deng, the Communist army took over Chongqing in late November 1949 and entered Chengdu, the last bastion of power of Chiang Kai-shek, a few days later. At that time Deng became mayor of Chongqing, while he simultaneously was the leader of the Communist Party in the southwest, where the Communist army, now proclaiming itself the People's Liberation Army, suppressed resistance loyal to the old Kuomintang regime. In 1950, the Communist Party-ruled state also seized control over Tibet.\nDeng Xiaoping would spend three years in Chongqing, the city where he had studied in his teenage years before going to France. In 1952 he moved to Beijing, where he occupied different positions in the central government.\nPolitical rise in Beijing.\nIn July 1952, Deng came to Beijing to assume the posts of Vice Premier and Deputy Chair of the Committee on Finance. Soon after, he took the posts of Minister of Finance and Director of the Office of Communications. In 1954, he was removed from all these positions, holding only the post of Deputy Premier. In 1956, he became Head of the Communist Party's Organization Department and member of the Central Military Commission.\nAfter officially supporting Mao Zedong in his Anti-Rightist Movement of 1957, Deng acted as General Secretary of the Secretariat and ran the country's daily affairs with President Liu Shaoqi and Premier Zhou Enlai. Deng and Liu's policies emphasized economics over ideological dogma, an implicit departure from the mass fervor of the Great Leap Forward.\nBoth Liu and Deng supported Mao in the mass campaigns of the 1950s, in which they attacked the bourgeois and capitalists, and promoted Mao's ideology. However, the economic failure of the Great Leap Forward was seen as an indictment on the ability of Mao to manage the economy. Peng Dehuai openly criticized Mao, while Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping, though more cautious, began to take charge of economic policy, leaving Mao out of day-to-day affairs of the party and state. Mao agreed to cede the presidency of the People's Republic of China (China's \"de jure\" head of state position) to Liu Shaoqi, while retaining his positions as leader of the party and the army.\nAt the 8th National Congress of the Communist Party of China in 1956, Deng supported removing all references to \"Mao Zedong Thought\" from the party statutes.\nIn 1963, Deng traveled to Moscow to lead a meeting of the Chinese delegation with Stalin's successor, Nikita Khrushchev. Relations between the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union had worsened since the death of Stalin. After this meeting, no agreement was reached and the Sino\u2013Soviet split was consummated; there was an almost total suspension of relations between the two major communist powers of the time.\nAfter the \"Seven Thousand Cadres Conference\" in 1962, Liu and Deng's economic reforms of the early 1960s were generally popular and restored many of the economic institutions previously dismantled during the Great Leap Forward. Mao, sensing his loss of prestige, took action to regain control of the state. Appealing to his revolutionary spirit, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution, which encouraged the masses to root out the right-wing capitalists who had \"infiltrated the party\". Deng was ridiculed as the \"number two capitalist roader\".\nTarget of two purges.\nCultural Revolution.\nMao feared that the reformist economic policies of Deng and Liu could lead to restoration of capitalism and end the Chinese Revolution. For this and other reasons, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution in 1966, during which Deng fell out of favor and was forced to retire from all his positions.\nDuring the Cultural Revolution, he and his family were targeted by Red Guards, who imprisoned Deng's eldest son, Deng Pufang. Deng Pufang was tortured and jumped out, or was thrown out, of the window of a four-story building in 1968, becoming a paraplegic. In October 1969 Deng Xiaoping was sent to the Xinjian County Tractor Factory in rural Jiangxi province to work as a regular worker. In his four years there, Deng spent his spare time writing. He was purged nationally, but to a lesser scale than President Liu Shaoqi.\nAfter Mao's second official successor, the sole Vice Chairman of the party Lin Biao, was killed in an air crash in 1971 (according to official reports he was trying to flee from China after unsuccessfully trying to stage a coup against Mao), Deng Xiaoping (who had been political commissar of the 2nd Field Army during the civil war) became the most influential of the remaining army leaders. When Premier Zhou Enlai, who, had he lived long enough, should have been Mao's third successor, fell ill with cancer, Deng became Zhou's choice as successor, meaning that he could in theory also have succeeded Mao. Zhou was able to convince Mao to bring Deng back into politics in 1974 as First Vice-Premier, in practice running daily affairs. Deng focused on reconstructing the country's economy and stressed unity as the first step by raising production. He remained careful, however, to avoid contradicting Maoist ideology on paper. In January 1975, he was additionally elected Vice Chairman of the party by the 10th Central Committee for the first time in his party career; Li Desheng had to resign in his favour. Deng was one of five Vice Chairmen, with Zhou being the First Vice Chairman.\nDuring his brief ascendency, Deng established the Political Research Office, headed by intellectuals Hu Qiaomu, Yu Guangyuan and Hu Sheng, delegated to explore approaches to political and economic reforms. He led the group himself and managed the project within the State Council, in order to avoid rousing the suspicions of the Gang of Four.\nThe Cultural Revolution was not yet over, and a radical leftist political group known as the Gang of Four, led by Mao's wife Jiang Qing, competed for power within the Party. The Gang saw Deng as their greatest challenge to power. Mao, too, was suspicious that Deng would destroy the positive reputation of the Cultural Revolution, which Mao considered one of his greatest policy initiatives. Beginning in late 1975, Deng was asked to draw up a series of self-criticisms. Although he admitted to having taken an \"inappropriate ideological perspective\" while dealing with state and party affairs, he was reluctant to admit that his policies were wrong in essence. His antagonism with the Gang of Four became increasingly clear, and Mao seemed to lean in the Gang's favour. Mao refused to accept Deng's self-criticisms and asked the party's Central Committee to \"discuss Deng's mistakes thoroughly\".\n\"Criticize Deng\" campaign.\nZhou Enlai died in January 1976, to an outpouring of national grief. Zhou was a very important figure in Deng's political life, and his death eroded his remaining support within the Party's Central Committee. After Deng delivered Zhou's official eulogy at the state funeral, the Gang of Four, with Mao's permission, began the so-called \"Criticize Deng and Oppose the Rehabilitation of Right-leaning Elements\" campaign. Hua Guofeng, not Deng, was selected to become Zhou's successor as Premier on 4 February 1976.\nOn 2 February 1976, the Central Committee issued a Top-Priority Directive, officially transferring Deng to work on \"external affairs\" and thus removing Deng from the party's power apparatus. Deng stayed at home for several months, awaiting his fate. The Political Research Office was promptly dissolved, and Deng's advisers such as Yu Guangyuan suspended. As a result, the political turmoil halted the economic progress Deng had laboured for in the past year. On 3 March, Mao issued a directive reaffirming the legitimacy of the Cultural Revolution and specifically pointed to Deng as an internal, rather than external, problem. This was followed by a Central Committee directive issued to all local party organs to study Mao's directive and criticize Deng.\nDeng's reputation as a reformer suffered a severe blow when the Qingming Festival, after the mass public mourning of Zhou on a traditional Chinese holiday, culminated in the Tiananmen Incident on 5 April 1976, an event the Gang of Four branded as counter-revolutionary and threatening to their power. Furthermore, the Gang deemed Deng the mastermind behind the incident, and Mao himself wrote that \"the nature of things has changed\". This prompted Mao to remove Deng from all leadership positions, although he retained his party membership. As a result, on 6 April 1976 Premier Hua Guofeng was also appointed to Deng's position as Vice Chairman and at the same time received the vacant position of First Vice Chairman, which Zhou had held, making him Mao's fourth official successor.\nTakes power and rule 1977\u20131989.\nParamount leader of China.\nFollowing Mao's death on 9 September 1976 and the purge of the Gang of Four in October 1976, Deng gradually emerged as the \"de facto\" leader of China. Prior to Mao's death, the only governmental position he held was that of First Vice Premier of the State Council, but Hua Guofeng wanted to rid the Party of extremists and successfully marginalised the Gang of Four. On 22 July 1977, Deng was restored to the posts of Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee, Vice-Chairman of the Military Commission and Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.\nBy carefully mobilizing his supporters within the party, Deng outmaneuvered Hua, who had pardoned him, then ousted Hua from his top leadership positions by 1980. In contrast to previous leadership changes, Deng allowed Hua to retain membership in the Central Committee and quietly retire, helping to set the precedent that losing a high-level leadership struggle would not result in physical harm.\nDuring his paramount leadership, his official state positions were Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference from 1978 to 1983 and Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the People's Republic of China from 1983 to 1990, while his official party positions were Vice Chairman of the Communist Party of China from 1977 to 1982, Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the Communist Party of China from 1981 to 1989 and Chairman of the Central Advisory Commission from 1982 to 1987.\nImportant decisions were always taken in Deng's home in Zhongnanhai with a caucus of eight senior party cadres, called \"Eight Elders\", especially with Chen Yun and Li Xiannian. Deng ruled as \"paramount leader\" although he never held the top title of the party, and was able to successively remove three party leaders, including Hu Yaobang. Deng stepped down from the Central Committee and its Politburo Standing Committee. However, he remained as the chairman of the State and Party's Central Military Commission and still being seen as the Paramount Leader of China rather than the then General Secretary Zhao Ziyang and then President Li Xiannian and Yang Shangkun\nBoluan Fanzheng.\nDeng repudiated the Cultural Revolution and, in 1977, launched the \"Beijing Spring\", which allowed open criticism of the excesses and suffering that had occurred during the period, and restored the National College Entrance Examination (Gao Kao) which was cancelled for ten years during the Cultural Revolution. Meanwhile, he was the impetus for the abolition of the class background system. Under this system, the CCP removed employment barriers to Chinese deemed to be associated with the former landlord class; its removal allowed a faction favoring the restoration of the private market to enter the Communist Party.\nDeng gradually outmaneuvered his political opponents. By encouraging public criticism of the Cultural Revolution, he weakened the position of those who owed their political positions to that event, while strengthening the position of those like himself who had been purged during that time. Deng also received a great deal of popular support. As Deng gradually consolidated control over the CCP, Hua was replaced by Zhao Ziyang as premier in 1980, and by Hu Yaobang as party chief in 1981, despite the fact that Hua was Mao Zedong's designated successor as the \"paramount leader\" of the Communist Party of China and the People's Republic of China. During the \"Boluan Fanzheng\" period, the Cultural Revolution was invalidated, and victims of more than 3\u00a0million \"unjust, false, wrongful cases\" by 1976 were officially rehabilitated.\nDeng's elevation to China's new number-one figure meant that the historical and ideological questions around Mao Zedong had to be addressed properly. Because Deng wished to pursue deep reforms, it was not possible for him to continue Mao's hard-line \"class struggle\" policies and mass public campaigns. In 1982 the Central Committee of the Communist Party released a document entitled \"On the Various Historical Issues since the Founding of the People's Republic of China\". Mao retained his status as a \"great Marxist, proletarian revolutionary, militarist, and general\", and the undisputed founder and pioneer of the country and the People's Liberation Army. \"His accomplishments must be considered before his mistakes\", the document declared. Deng personally commented that Mao was \"seven parts good, three parts bad.\" The document also steered the prime responsibility of the Cultural Revolution away from Mao (although it did state that \"Mao mistakenly began the Cultural Revolution\") to the \"counter-revolutionary cliques\" of the Gang of Four and Lin Biao.\nInternational affairs.\nIn November 1978, after the country had stabilized following political turmoil, Deng visited Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore and met with Singapore's Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. Deng was very impressed with Singapore's economic development, greenery and housing, and later sent tens of thousands of Chinese to Singapore and countries around the world to learn from their experiences and bring back their knowledge. Lee Kuan Yew, on the other hand, advised Deng to stop exporting Communist ideologies to Southeast Asia, advice that Deng later followed.\nThanks to the support of other party leaders who had already recovered their official positions, in 1978 the rise to power of Deng was inevitable. Even though Hua Guofeng formally monopolized the top positions in the People's Republic, his position, with little support, was becoming increasingly difficult. In December 1978, during the Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee Congress of the Communist Party of China, Deng took over the reins of power.\nBeginning in 1979, the economic reforms accelerated the market model, while the leaders maintained old Communist-style rhetoric. The commune system was gradually dismantled and the peasants began to have more freedom to manage the land they cultivated and sell their products on the market. At the same time, China's economy opened up to foreign trade. On 1 January 1979, the United States recognized the People's Republic of China, leaving the (Taiwan) Republic of China's nationalist government to one side, and business contacts between China and the West began to grow. In late 1978, the aerospace company Boeing announced the sale of 747 aircraft to various airlines in the PRC, and the beverage company Coca-Cola made public their intention to open a production plant in Shanghai.\nIn early 1979, Deng undertook an official visit to the United States, meeting President Jimmy Carter in Washington as well as several Congressmen. The Chinese insisted that former President Richard Nixon be invited to the formal White House reception, a symbolic indication of their assertiveness on the one hand, and their desire to continue with the Nixon initiatives on the other. During the visit, Deng visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston, as well as the headquarters of Coca-Cola and Boeing in Atlanta and Seattle, respectively. With these visits so significant, Deng made it clear that the new Chinese regime's priorities were economic and technological development.\nSino-Japanese relations also improved significantly. Deng used Japan as an example of a rapidly progressing power that set a good example for China economically.\nReform and Opening-up.\nFour modernizations.\nDeng quoted the old proverb \"it doesn't matter whether a cat is black or white, if it catches mice it is a good cat.\" The point was that capitalistic methods worked. Deng worked with his team, especially as Zhao Ziyang, who in 1980 replaced Hua Guofeng as premier, and Hu Yaobang, who in 1981 did the same with the post of party chairman. Deng thus took the reins of power and began to emphasize the goals of \"four modernizations\" (economy, agriculture, scientific and technological development and national defense). He announced an ambitious plan of opening and liberalizing the economy. In just a few years they worked wonders as the world watched in amazement.\nThe last position of power retained by Hua Guofeng, chairman of the Central Military Commission, was taken by Deng in 1981. However, progress toward military modernization went slowly. An actual border war underway with Vietnam in 1977\u201379 made major changes unwise. The war puzzled outside observers, but Xiaoming Zhang argues that Deng had multiple goals: stopping Soviet expansion in the region, obtain American support for his four modernizations, and mobilizing China for reform and integration into the world economy. Deng also sought to strengthen his control of the PLA, and demonstrate to the world that China was capable of fighting a real war. Zhang thinks punishment of Vietnam for its invasion of Cambodia was a minor factor. In the event, the Chinese forces did poorly, in terms of equipment, strategy, leadership, and battlefield performance. China's main military threat came from the Soviet Union, which was much more powerful even though it had fewer soldiers, because it was far advanced in all sorts of weapons technology. In March 1981, Deng deemed a military exercise necessary for the PLA, and in September, the North China Military Exercise took place, becoming the largest exercise conducted by the PLA since the founding of the People's Republic. Moreover, Deng initiated the modernization of the PLA and decided that China first had to develop an advanced civilian scientific infrastructure before it could hope to build modern weapons. He therefore concentrated on downsizing the Army, cutting 1\u00a0million troops in 1985 (\u767e\u4e07\u5927\u88c1\u519b), retiring the elderly and corrupt senior officers and their cronies. He emphasized the recruitment of much better educated young men who would be able to handle the advanced technology when it finally arrived. Instead of patronage and corruption in the officer corps, he imposed strict discipline in all ranks. In 1982 he established a new Commission for Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense to plan for using technology developed in the civilian sector.\nDeng did little to improve poor relations with Brezhnev and the Kremlin during his early rule. He continued to adhere to the Maoist line of the Sino\u2013Soviet split era that the Soviet Union was a superpower as \"hegemonic\" as the United States, but even more threatening to China because of its close proximity. Relations with the Soviet Union improved after Mikhail Gorbachev took over the Kremlin in 1985, and formal relations between the two countries were finally restored at the 1989 Sino-Soviet Summit.\nThree steps to economic development.\nIn October 1987, at the Plenary Session of the National People's Congress, Deng was re-elected as Chairman of the Central Military Commission, but he resigned as Chairman of the Central Advisory Commission and was succeeded by Chen Yun. Deng continued to chair and develop the reform and opening up as the main policy, and he advanced the three steps suitable for China's economic development strategy within seventy years: the first step, to double the 1980 GNP and ensure that the people have enough food and clothing, was attained by the end of the 1980s; the second step, to quadruple the 1980 GNP by the end of the 20th century, was achieved in 1995 ahead of schedule; the third step, to increase per capita GNP to the level of the medium-developed countries by 2050, at which point, the Chinese people will be fairly well-off and modernization will be basically realized.\nFurther reforms.\nImproving relations with the outside world was the second of two important philosophical shifts outlined in Deng's program of reform termed \"Gaige Kaifang\" (\"lit.\" Reforms and Openness). China's domestic social, political, and most notably, economic systems would undergo significant changes during Deng's time. The goals of Deng's reforms were summed up by the Four Modernizations, those of agriculture, industry, science and technology, and the military.\nThe strategy for achieving these aims of becoming a modern, industrial nation was the socialist market economy. Deng argued that China was in the primary stage of socialism and that the duty of the party was to perfect so-called \"socialism with Chinese characteristics\", and \"seek truth from facts\". (This somewhat resembles the Leninist theoretical justification of the New Economic Policy (NEP) in the 1920s, which argued that the Soviet Union had not gone deeply enough into the capitalist phase and therefore needed limited capitalism in order to fully evolve its means of production.) The \"socialism with Chinese characteristics\" settles a benign structure for the implementation of ethnic policy and forming a unique method of ethnic theory.\nThis interpretation of Maoism reduced the role of ideology in economic decision-making. Downgrading communitarian values, but not necessarily criticising the ideology of Marxism-Leninism, Deng emphasized that \"socialism does not mean shared poverty\". His theoretical justification for allowing market forces was given as such:\nUnlike Hua Guofeng, Deng believed that no policy should be rejected outright simply because it was not associated with Mao. Unlike more conservative leaders such as Chen Yun, Deng did not object to policies on the grounds that they were similar to ones that were found in capitalist nations.\nThis political flexibility towards the foundations of socialism is strongly supported by quotes such as:\nAlthough Deng provided the theoretical background and the political support to allow economic reform to occur, the general consensus amongst historians is that few of the economic reforms that Deng introduced were originated by Deng himself. Premier Zhou Enlai, for example, pioneered the Four Modernizations years before Deng. In addition, many reforms would be introduced by local leaders, often not sanctioned by central government directives. If successful and promising, these reforms would be adopted by larger and larger areas and ultimately introduced nationally. An often cited example is the household responsibility system, which was first secretly implemented by a poor rural village at the risk of being convicted as \"counter-revolutionary.\" This experiment proved very successful. Deng openly supported it and it was later adopted nationally. Many other reforms were influenced by the experiences of the East Asian Tigers.\nThis was in sharp contrast to the pattern of \"perestroika\" undertaken by Mikhail Gorbachev, in which most major reforms originated with Gorbachev himself. The bottom-up approach of Deng's reforms, in contrast to the top-down approach of \"perestroika\", was likely a key factor in the success of the former.\nDeng's reforms actually included the introduction of planned, centralized management of the macro-economy by technically proficient bureaucrats, abandoning Mao's mass campaign style of economic construction. However, unlike the Soviet model, management was indirect through market mechanisms. Deng sustained Mao's legacy to the extent that he stressed the primacy of agricultural output and encouraged a significant decentralization of decision making in the rural economy teams and individual peasant households. At the local level, material incentives, rather than political appeals, were to be used to motivate the labor force, including allowing peasants to earn extra income by selling the produce of their private plots at free market value.\nExport focus.\nIn the move toward market allocation, local municipalities and provinces were allowed to invest in industries that they considered most profitable, which encouraged investment in light manufacturing. Thus, Deng's reforms shifted China's development strategy to an emphasis on light industry and export-led growth. Light industrial output was vital for a developing country coming from a low capital base. With the short gestation period, low capital requirements, and high foreign-exchange export earnings, revenues generated by light manufacturing were able to be reinvested in technologically more advanced production and further capital expenditures and investments.\nHowever, in sharp contrast to the similar, but much less successful reforms in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the People's Republic of Hungary, these investments were not government mandated. The capital invested in heavy industry largely came from the banking system, and most of that capital came from consumer deposits. One of the first items of the Deng reforms was to prevent reallocation of profits except through taxation or through the banking system; hence, the reallocation in state-owned industries was somewhat indirect, thus making them more or less independent from government interference. In short, Deng's reforms sparked an industrial revolution in China.\nThese reforms were a reversal of the Maoist policy of economic self-reliance. China decided to accelerate the modernization process by stepping up the volume of foreign trade, especially the purchase of machinery from Japan and the West. By participating in such export-led growth, China was able to step up the Four Modernizations by attaining certain foreign funds, market, advanced technologies and management experiences, thus accelerating its economic development. From 1980, Deng attracted foreign companies to a series of Special Economic Zones, where foreign investment and market liberalization were encouraged.\nThe reforms sought to improve labor productivity. New material incentives and bonus systems were introduced. Rural markets selling peasants' homegrown products and the surplus products of communes were revived. Not only did rural markets increase agricultural output, they stimulated industrial development as well. With peasants able to sell surplus agricultural yields on the open market, domestic consumption stimulated industrialization as well and also created political support for more difficult economic reforms.\nThere are some parallels between Deng's market socialism especially in the early stages, and Vladimir Lenin's NEP as well as those of Nikolai Bukharin's economic policies, in that both foresaw a role for private entrepreneurs and markets based on trade and pricing rather than central planning. An interesting anecdote on this note is the first meeting between Deng and Armand Hammer. Deng pressed the industrialist and former investor in Lenin's Soviet Union for as much information on the NEP as possible.\nReturn of Hong Kong and Macau.\nFrom 1980 onwards, Deng led the expansion of the economy, and in political terms took over negotiations with the United Kingdom to return the territory of Hong Kong, meeting personally with then-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. Thatcher had participated in the meetings with the hopes of keeping British rule over Hong Kong Island and Kowloon\u2014two of the three constituent territories of the colony\u2014but this was firmly rejected by Deng. The result of these negotiations was the Sino-British Joint Declaration, signed on 19 December 1984, which formally outlined the United Kingdom's return of the whole Hong Kong colony to China by 1997. The Chinese government pledged to respect the economic system and civil liberties of the British colony for fifty years after the handover.\nUnder pressure from China, Portugal agreed in 1987 to the return of Macau by 1999, with an agreement roughly equal to that of Hong Kong. The return of these two territories was based on a political principle formulated by Deng himself called \"one country, two systems\", which refers to the co-existence under one political authority of areas with different economic systems of communism and capitalism. Although this theory was applied to Hong Kong and Macau, Deng apparently intended to also present it as an attractive option to the people of Taiwan for eventual incorporation of that island, where sovereignty over the territory is still disputed.\nPopulation control and crime control.\nChina's rapid economic growth presented several problems. The 1982 census revealed the extraordinary growth of the population, which already exceeded a billion people. Deng continued the plans initiated by Hua Guofeng to restrict birth to only one child, limiting women to one child under pain of administrative penalty. The policy applied to urban areas, and included forced abortions.\nIn August 1983, Deng launched the \"Strike hard\" Anti-crime Campaign due to the worsening public safety after the Cultural Revolution. It was reported that the government set quotas for 5,000 executions by mid-November, and sources in Taiwan claimed that as many as 60,000 people were executed in that time, although more recent estimates have placed the number at 24,000 who were sentenced to death (mostly in the first \"battle\" of the campaign). A number of people arrested (some even received death penalty) were children or relatives of government officials at various levels, including the grandson of Zhu De, demonstrating the principle of \"all are equal before the law\". The campaign had an immediate positive effect on public safety, while controversies also arose such as whether some of the legal punishments were too harsh and whether the campaign had long-term positive effect on public safety.\nIncreasing economic freedom was being translated into a greater freedom of opinion, and critics began to arise within the system, including the famous dissident Wei Jingsheng, who coined the term \"fifth modernization\" in reference to democracy as a missing element in the renewal plans of Deng Xiaoping. In the late 1980s, dissatisfaction with the authoritarian regime and growing inequalities caused the biggest crisis to Deng's leadership.\nCrackdown of Tiananmen Square protests.\nThe 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, culminating in the June Fourth Massacre, were a series of demonstrations in and near Tiananmen Square in the People's Republic of China (PRC) between 15 April and 5 June 1989, a year in which many other communist governments collapsed.\nThe protests were sparked by the death of Hu Yaobang, a reformist official backed by Deng but ousted by the Eight Elders and the conservative wing of the politburo. Many people were dissatisfied with the party's slow response and relatively subdued funeral arrangements. Public mourning began on the streets of Beijing and universities in the surrounding areas. In Beijing this was centered on the Monument to the People's Heroes in Tiananmen Square. The mourning became a public conduit for anger against perceived nepotism in the government, the unfair dismissal and early death of Hu, and the behind-the-scenes role of the \"old men\". By the eve of Hu's funeral, the demonstration had reached 100,000 people on Tiananmen Square. While the protests lacked a unified cause or leadership, participants raised the issue of corruption within the government and some voiced calls for economic liberalization and democratic reform within the structure of the government while others called for a less authoritarian and less centralized form of socialism.\nDuring the demonstrations, Deng's pro-market ally general secretary Zhao Ziyang supported the demonstrators and distanced himself from the Politburo. Martial law was declared on 20 May by the socialist hardliner Li Peng, but the initial military advance on the city was blocked by residents. The movement lasted seven weeks. On 3\u20134 June, over two hundred thousand soldiers in tanks and helicopters were sent into the city to quell the protests by force, resulting in hundreds to thousands of casualties. Many ordinary people in Beijing believed that Deng had ordered the intervention, but political analysts do not know who was actually behind the order. However, Deng's daughter defends the actions that occurred as a collective decision by the party leadership.\nTo purge sympathizers of Tiananmen demonstrators, the Communist Party initiated a one-and-a-half-year-long program similar to the Anti-Rightist Movement. Old-timers like Deng Fei aimed to deal \"strictly with those inside the party with serious tendencies toward bourgeois liberalization\", and more than 30,000 communist officers were deployed to the task.\nZhao was placed under house arrest by hardliners and Deng himself was forced to make concessions to them. He soon declared that \"the entire imperialist Western world plans to make all socialist countries discard the socialist road and then bring them under the monopoly of international capital and onto the capitalist road\". A few months later he said that the \"United States was too deeply involved\" in the student movement, referring to foreign reporters who had given financial aid to the student leaders and later helped them escape to various Western countries, primarily the United States through Hong Kong and Taiwan.\nAlthough Deng initially made concessions to the socialist hardliners, he soon resumed his reforms after his 1992 southern tour. After his tour, he was able to stop the attacks of the socialist hardliners on the reforms through their \"named capitalist or socialist?\" campaign.\nDeng privately told Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau that factions of the Communist Party could have grabbed army units and the country had risked a civil war. Two years later, Deng endorsed Zhu Rongji, a Shanghai Mayor, as a vice-premier candidate. Zhu Rongji had refused to declare martial law in Shanghai during the demonstrations even though socialist hardliners had pressured him.\nResignation and 1992 southern tour.\nOfficially, Deng decided to retire from top positions when he stepped down as Chairman of the Central Military Commission in November 1989 and his successor Jiang Zemin became the new Chairman of Central Military Commission. China, however, was still in the \"era of Deng Xiaoping\". He continued to be widely regarded as the \"paramount leader\" of the country, believed to have backroom control, and appointed Hu Jintao as Jiang's successor on 14th Party Congress in 1992. Deng was recognized officially as \"the chief architect of China's economic reforms and China's socialist modernization\". To the Communist Party, he was believed to have set a good example for communist cadres who refused to retire at old age. He broke earlier conventions of holding offices for life, a tradition that would remain until 2018 with Xi Jinping's elimination of term limits. He was often referred to as simply \"Comrade Xiaoping\", with no title attached.\nBecause of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, Deng's power had been significantly weakened and there was a growing formalist faction opposed to Deng's reforms within the Communist Party. To reassert his economic agenda, in the spring of 1992, Deng made his famous southern tour of China, visiting Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Zhuhai and spending the New Year in Shanghai, using his travels as a method of reasserting his economic policy after his retirement from office. The 1992 Southern Tour is widely regarded as a critical point in the modern history of China, as it saved the Chinese economic reform and preserved the stability of the society.\nDeath and reaction.\nDeng died on 19 February 1997, aged 92 from a lung infection and Parkinson's disease. Even though his successor Jiang Zemin was in firm control, government policies maintained Deng's political and economic philosophies. Officially, Deng was eulogized as a \"great Marxist, great Proletarian Revolutionary, statesman, military strategist, and diplomat; one of the main leaders of the Communist Party of China, the People's Liberation Army of China, and the People's Republic of China; the great architect of China's socialist opening-up and modernized construction; the founder of Deng Xiaoping Theory\".\nThe public was largely prepared for Deng's death, as rumors had been circulating for a long time that his health was deteriorating. At 10:00 on the morning of 24 February, people were asked by Premier Li Peng to pause in silence for three minutes. The nation's flags flew at half-mast for over a week. The nationally televised funeral, which was a simple and relatively private affair attended by the country's leaders and Deng's family, was broadcast on all cable channels.\nAfter the funeral, his organs were donated to medical research, the remains were cremated, and his ashes were subsequently scattered at sea, according to his wishes. For the next two weeks, Chinese state media ran news stories and documentaries related to Deng's life and death, with the regular 19:00 \"National News\" program in the evening lasting almost two hours over the regular broadcast time.\nCertain segments of the Chinese population, notably the modern Maoists and radical reformers (the far left and the far right), had negative views on Deng. In the year that followed, songs like \"Story of Spring\" by Dong Wenhua, which were created in Deng's honour shortly after Deng's southern tour in 1992, once again were widely played.\nThere was a significant amount of international reaction to Deng's death: UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan said Deng was to be remembered \"in the international community at large as a primary architect of China's modernization and dramatic economic development\". French President Jacques Chirac said \"In the course of this century, few men have, as much as Deng, led a vast human community through such profound and determining changes\"; British Prime Minister John Major commented about Deng's key role in the return of Hong Kong to Chinese control; Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chr\u00e9tien called Deng a \"pivotal figure\" in Chinese history. The Kuomintang chair in Taiwan also sent its condolences, saying it longed for peace, cooperation, and prosperity. The Dalai Lama voiced regret that Deng died without resolving questions over Tibet.\nMemorials.\nWhen compared to the memorials of other CCP leaders, those dedicated to Deng have been low profile, in keeping with Deng's image of pragmatism. Moreover, he was cremated and his ashes were scattered at sea, as opposed to being embalmed like Mao.\nThere are a few public displays of Deng in the country. A bronze statue of Deng was erected on 14 November 2000, at the grand plaza of Lianhua Mountain Park in Shenzhen. This statue is dedicated to Deng's role as a planner and contributor to the development of the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, starting in 1979. The statue is high, with an additional 3.68-meter base. The statue shows Deng striding forward confidently. Many CCP high level leaders visit the statue. In addition, in coastal areas and on the island province of Hainan, Deng is seen on roadside billboards with messages emphasizing economic reform or his policy of one country, two systems.\nAnother bronze statue of Deng was dedicated 13 August 2004 in the city of Guang'an, Deng's hometown, in southwest China's Sichuan. The statue was erected to commemorate Deng's 100th birthday. The statue shows Deng, dressed casually, sitting on a chair and smiling. The Chinese characters for \"Statue of Deng Xiaoping\" are inscribed on the pedestal. The original calligraphy was written by Jiang, then Chairman of the Central Military Commission.\nDeng Xiaoping's Former Residence in his hometown of Paifang Village in Sichuan has been preserved as a museum telling Deng's life story.\nIn Bishkek, capital of Kyrgyzstan, there is a six-lane boulevard, wide and long, the Deng Xiaoping Prospekt, which was dedicated on 18 June 1997. A two-meter high red granite monument stands at the east end of this route. The epigraph in memory of Deng is written in Chinese, Russian and Kirghiz.\nA documentary on Deng entitled \"Deng Xiaoping\" was released by CCTV in January 1997 that chronicles his life from his days as a student in France to his \"Southern Tour\" of 1993. In 2014, a TV series commemorating Deng entitled \"Deng Xiaoping at History's Crossroads\" was released by CCTV in anticipation of the 110th anniversary of his birth.\nLegacy.\nDeng has been called the \"architect of contemporary China\" and is widely considered to be one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. He was the \"Time\" Person of the Year in 1978 and 1985, the third Chinese leader (after Chiang Kai-shek and his wife Soong Mei-ling) and the fourth time for a communist leader (after Joseph Stalin, picked twice; and Nikita Khrushchev) to be selected.\nDeng is remembered primarily for the economic reforms he initiated while paramount leader of the People's Republic of China, which pivoted China towards a market economy, led to high economic growth, increased standards of living of hundreds of millions, expanded personal and cultural freedoms, and substantially integrated the country into the world economy. More people were lifted out of poverty during his leadership than during any other time in human history, attributed largely to his reforms. For this reason, some have suggested that Deng should have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Deng is also credited with reducing the cult of Mao Zedong and with bringing an end to the chaotic era of the Cultural Revolution. Furthermore, his strong-handed tactics have been credited with keeping the People's Republic of China unified, in contrast to the other major Communist power of the time, the Soviet Union, which collapsed in 1991.\nHowever, Deng is also remembered for leaving in place a communist government that continues to exist, for human rights, and for numerous instances of political violence. As paramount leader, he oversaw the Tiananmen Square incident; afterwards, he was influential in the Communist Party's domestic cover-up of the event. Furthermore, he is associated with some of the worst purges during Mao Zedong's rule; for instance, he ordered an army crackdown on a Muslim village in Yunnan which resulted in the deaths of 1,600 people, including 300 children.\nAs paramount leader, Deng also negotiated an end to the British colonial rule of Hong Kong and normalized relations with the United States and the Soviet Union. In August 1980, he started China's political reforms by setting term limits for officials and proposing a systematic revision of China's third Constitution which was made during the Cultural Revolution; the new Constitution embodied Chinese-style constitutionalism and was passed by the National People's Congress in December 1982, with most of its content still being effective as of today. He helped establish China's nine-year compulsory education, and revived China's political reforms."}
{"id": "8206", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8206", "title": "HM Prison Dartmoor", "text": "HM Prison Dartmoor is a Category C men's prison, located in Princetown, high on Dartmoor in the English county of Devon. Its high granite walls dominate this area of the moor. The prison is owned by the Duchy of Cornwall, and is operated by Her Majesty's Prison Service.\nHistory.\nIn 1805, the United Kingdom was at war with Napoleonic France, a conflict during which thousands of prisoners were taken and confined in prison \"hulks\" or derelict ships. This was considered unsafe, partially due to the proximity of the Royal Naval dockyard at Devonport (then called Plymouth Dock), and as living conditions were appalling in the extreme, a prisoner of war depot was planned in the remote isolation of Dartmoor. Construction started in 1806, taking three years to complete. In 1809, the first French prisoners arrived and were joined by American POWs taken in the War of 1812. At one time, the prison population numbered almost 6,000. By July 1815 at least 270 Americans and 1,200 French prisoners had died. Both French and North American wars were concluded in 1815, and repatriations began. The prison then lay empty until 1850, when it was largely rebuilt and commissioned as a convict gaol. After originally being buried on the moor, due to the establishment of the prison farm in about 1852, all the prisoners' remains were exhumed and re-interred in two cemeteries behind the prison.\nEarly history.\nDesigned by Daniel Asher Alexander and constructed originally between 1806 and 1809 by local labour, to hold prisoners of the Napoleonic Wars, it was also used to hold American prisoners from the War of 1812. Although the war ended with the Treaty of Ghent in December 1814, many American prisoners of war still remained in Dartmoor.\nFrom the spring of 1813 until March 1815, about 6,500 American sailors were imprisoned at Dartmoor. These were either naval prisoners or impressed American seamen discharged from British vessels. Whilst the British were in overall charge of the prison, the prisoners created their own governance and culture. They had courts which meted out punishments, a market, a theatre and a gambling room. About 1,000 of the prisoners were Black.\nAfter the prisoners heard of the Treaty of Ghent, signed on 24 December 1814, they expected immediate release, but the British government refused to let them go on parole or take any steps until the treaty was ratified by the United States Senate, 17 February 1815. It took several weeks for the American agent to secure ships for their transportation home, and the men grew very impatient. On 4 April, a food contractor attempted to work off some damaged hardtack on them in place of soft bread and was forced to yield by their insurrection. The commandant, Captain T. G. Shortland, suspected them of a design to break out of the gaol. This was the reverse of the truth in general, as they would lose their chance of going on the ships, but a few had made threats of the sort, and the commandant was very uneasy.\nAt about 6:00 pm on 6 April, Shortland discovered a hole from one of the five prisons to the barrack yard near the gun racks. Some prisoners were outside the fence, noisily pelting each other with turf, and many more were near the breach (and the gambling tables), though the signal for return to prisons had sounded. Shortland was convinced of a plot and rang the alarm bell to collect the officers and have the guards ready. This precaution brought back a crowd just going to quarters. Just then a prisoner broke a gate chain with an iron bar and a number of the prisoners pressed through to the prison market square. After attempts at persuasion, Shortland ordered a charge which drove some of the prisoners in. Those near the gate, however, hooted at and taunted the soldiery, who fired a volley over their heads. The crowd yelled louder and threw stones, and the soldiers, probably without orders, fired a direct volley which killed and wounded a large number. Then they continued firing at the prisoners, many of whom were now struggling to get back inside the blocks.\nFinally the captain, a lieutenant and the hospital surgeon (the other officers being at dinner) succeeded in stopping the shooting and caring for the wounded \u2013 about 60, 30 seriously, besides seven killed outright. The affair was examined by a joint commission, Charles King for the United States and F. S. Larpent for Great Britain, which exonerated Shortland, justified the initial shooting and blamed the subsequent deaths on unknown culprits. The British government provided for the families of the killed, pensioned the disabled and promoted Shortland.\nA memorial has been erected to the 271 POWs (mostly seamen) who are buried in the prison grounds.\nDartmoor was re-opened in 1851 as a civilian prison, but closed again in 1917, when it was converted into a Home Office Work Centre for certain conscientious objectors granted release from prison; cells were kept unlocked, inmates wore their own clothes and could visit the village in their off-duty time. It was re-opened as a prison in 1920 and has contained some of Britain's most serious offenders.\nDartmoor mutiny.\nOn 24 January 1932, there was a major disturbance at the prison. The cause of the riots is generally attributed to prisoners' perceptions of poor quality of the food, not generally but on specific days prior to the disturbance when it was suspected it had been tampered with. There had also been other instances of disobedience prior to this, according to the official du Parcq report into the incident, such as a model prisoner attacking a popular guard with a razor blade and rough treatment by prisoners of a prisoner being removed to solitary. At the parade later that day, 50 prisoners refused orders, and the rest were marched back to their cells but refused to enter. At this point, the prison governor and his staff fled to an unused part of the prison and secured themselves there. The prisoners then released those held in solitary. There was extensive damage to property, and a prisoner was shot by one of the staff, but no prison staff were injured. According to Fitzgerald (1977), \"Reinforcements arrived, and within fifteen minutes these 'vicious brutes', who for some two hours had terrorized well-armed prison staff, and effectively controlled the prison, had surrendered and been locked up again\".\nPost-2000 history.\nDartmoor Prison received a Grade II heritage listing in 1987.\nIn 2001, a Board of Visitors report condemned sanitation, as well as highlighting a list of urgent repairs needed. A year later, the prison was converted to a Category C prison for less violent offenders.\nIn 2002, the Prison Reform Trust warned that the prison may be breaching the Human Rights Act 1998 due to severe overcrowding at the jail. A year later, however, the Chief Inspector of Prisons declared that the prison had made substantial improvements to its management and regime.\nIn March 2008, staff at the prison passed a vote of no confidence in the governor Serena Watts, claiming they felt bullied by managers and unsafe.\nThe previous governor, Tony Corcoran, took up the post of governor of HMP Haverigg in early 2013.\nThe prison today.\nDartmoor still has a misplaced reputation as being a high-security prison that is escape-proof. Now a Category C prison, Dartmoor houses mainly non-violent offenders and white-collar criminals. It also holds sex offenders and offers sex offender treatment programmes intended to make the offender realise their behaviour is unacceptable. Some subsequently volunteer for behaviour-changing treatment with medication under a scheme being piloted at HMP Whatton, which has had encouraging results.\nDartmoor offers cell accommodation on six wings. Education is available at the prison (full and part-time), and ranges from basic educational skills to Open University courses. Vocational training includes electronics, brickwork and carpentry courses up to City &amp; Guilds and NVQ level, Painting and Decorating courses, industrial cleaning and desktop publishing. Full-time employment is also available in catering, farming, gardening, laundry, textiles, Braille, contract services, furniture manufacturing and polishing. Employment is supported with NVQ or City &amp; Guilds vocational qualifications. All courses and qualifications at Dartmoor are operated by South Gloucestershire and Stroud College and Cornwall College.\nThe \"Dartmoor Jailbreak\" is a yearly event, in which members of the public \"escape\" from the prison and must travel as far as possible in four days, without directly paying for transport. By doing so they raise money for charity.\nFuture.\nIn September 2013, it was announced that discussions would commence with the Duchy of Cornwall about the long-term future of HMP Dartmoor. In January 2014 it was stated on the BBC news website that the notice period with the Duchy for closing is 10 years. In November 2015 the Ministry of Justice confirmed that, as part of a major programme to replace older prisons, it would not renew its lease on the prison.\nIt was announced on 25 October 2019 that HMP Dartmoor will close in 2023.\nDartmoor Prison Museum.\nThe Dartmoor Prison Museum, located in the old dairy buildings, focuses on the history of HMP Dartmoor. Exhibits include the prison's role in housing prisoners of war from the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812, manacles and weapons, memorabilia, clothing and uniforms, famous prisoners, and the changed focus of the prison. It also sells (2015) garden ornaments and other items made in the prison concrete and carpentry shops by prisoners engaged in educational courses.\nThere are also displays and information on less well known aspects of the prison such as the incarceration of conscientious objectors during world war one."}
{"id": "8207", "revid": "137678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8207", "title": "Dilation and curettage", "text": "Dilation (or dilatation) and curettage (D&amp;C) refers to the dilation (widening/opening) of the cervix and surgical removal of part of the lining of the uterus and/or contents of the uterus by scraping and scooping (curettage). It is a gynecologic procedure used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, and is the most commonly used method for first trimester miscarriage or abortion.\nD&amp;C normally refers to a procedure involving a curette, also called \"sharp curettage\". However, some sources use the term D&amp;C to refer to any procedure that involves the processes of dilation and removal of uterine contents, which includes the more common \"suction curettage\" procedures of manual and electric vacuum aspiration.\nClinical uses.\nD&amp;Cs may be performed in pregnant and non-pregnant patients, for different clinical indications.\nDuring pregnancy or postpartum.\nA D&amp;C may be performed early in pregnancy to remove pregnancy tissue, either in the case of a non-viable pregnancy, such as a missed or incomplete miscarriage, or an undesired pregnancy, as in a surgical abortion. Medical management of miscarriage and medical abortion using drugs such as misoprostol and mifepristone are safe, non-invasive and potentially less expensive alternatives to D&amp;C.\nBecause medication-based non-invasive methods of abortion now exist, dilation and curettage has been declining as a method of abortion, although suction curettage is still the most common method used for termination of a first trimester pregnancy. The World Health Organization recommends D&amp;C with a sharp curette as a method of surgical abortion only when manual vacuum aspiration with a suction curette is unavailable.\nFor patients who have recently given birth, a D&amp;C may be indicated to remove retained placental tissue that does not pass spontaneously or for postpartum hemorrhage.\nNon-pregnant patients.\nD&amp;Cs for non-pregnant patients are commonly performed for the diagnosis of gynecological conditions leading to abnormal uterine bleeding; to remove the excess uterine lining in women who have conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome; to remove tissue in the uterus that may be causing abnormal uterine bleeding, such as endometrial polyps or uterine fibroids; or to diagnose the cause of post-menopausal bleeding, such as in the case of endometrial cancer.\nHysteroscopy is a valid alternative or addition to D&amp;C for many surgical indications, from diagnosis of uterine pathology to the removal of fibroids and even retained products of conception. It allows direct visualization of the inside of the uterus and may allow targeted sampling and removal of tissue inside the uterus.\nProcedure.\n Depending on the anticipated duration and difficulty expected with the procedure, as well as the clinical indication and patient preferences, a D&amp;C may be performed with local anesthesia, moderate sedation, deep sedation, or general anesthesia. The first step in a D&amp;C is to place a speculum in the vagina so as to see the cervix. Often, a tenaculum is placed to steady the cervix. Next, the provider will dilate the cervix. This can be done with Hegar or similar dilators. The amount of dilation depends on the amount of tissue to be removed as well as the size of the instruments to be used. After sufficient dilation, a curette, a metal rod with a handle on one end and a loop on the other, is then inserted into the uterus through the dilated cervix. The curette is used to gently scrape the lining of the uterus and remove the tissue in the uterus. If a suction curette is used, as in a vacuum aspiration, a plastic tubular curette will be introduced into the uterus and connected to suction to remove all tissue in the uterus. This tissue is examined for completeness (in the case of abortion or miscarriage treatment) or by pathology for abnormalities (in the case of treatment for abnormal bleeding).\nComplications.\nThe most common complications associated with D&amp;C are infection, bleeding, or damage to nearby organs, including through uterine perforation. Aside from the surgery itself, complications related to anesthesia administration may also occur.\nInfection is uncommon after D&amp;C for a non-pregnant patient, and society practice guidelines do not recommend routine prophylactic antibiotics to patients. However, for curettage of a pregnant patient, the risk of infection is higher, and patients should receive antibiotics that cover the bacteria commonly found in the vagina and gastrointestinal tract; doxycycline is a common recommendation, though azithromycin may also be used.\nAnother risk of D&amp;C is uterine perforation. The highest rate of uterine perforation appears to be in the setting of postpartum hemorrhage (5.1%) compared with a lower rate in diagnostic curettage in non-pregnant patients (0.3% in the premenopausal patient and 2.6% in the postmenopausal patient). Perforation may cause excessive bleeding or damage to organs outside the uterus. If the provider is concerned about ongoing bleeding or the possibility of injury to organs outside the uterus, a laparoscopy may be done to verify that there has been no undiagnosed injury.\nAnother risk is intrauterine adhesions, or Asherman's syndrome. One study found that in women who had one or two sharp curettage procedures for miscarriage, 14-16% developed some adhesions. Women who underwent three sharp curettage procedures for miscarriage had a 32% risk of developing adhesions. The risk of Asherman's syndrome was found to be 30.9% in women who had D&amp;C following a missed miscarriage, and 25% in those who had a D&amp;C 1\u20134 weeks postpartum. Untreated Asherman's syndrome, especially if severe, also increases the risk of complications in future pregnancies, such as ectopic pregnancy, miscarriage, and abnormal placentation (such as placenta previa and placenta accreta). According to recent case reports, use of vacuum aspiration can also lead to intrauterine adhesions. A systematic review in 2013 came to the conclusion that recurrent miscarriage and D&amp;C are the main risk factors for intrauterine adhesions. However, that review also found no studies reporting a link between intrauterine adhesions and long-term reproductive outcome, and that similar pregnancy outcomes were reported subsequent to surgical management (including D&amp;C), medical management or conservative management (that is, watchful waiting)."}
{"id": "8209", "revid": "38849640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8209", "title": "Doctor Who", "text": "Doctor Who is a British science fiction television programme produced by the BBC since 1963. The programme depicts the adventures of a Time Lord called \"the Doctor\", an extraterrestrial being who appears to be human. The Doctor explores the universe in a time-travelling space ship called the TARDIS. Its exterior appears as a blue British police box, which was a common sight in Britain in 1963 when the series first aired. With various companions, the Doctor combats foes, works to save civilisations and helps people in need.\nBeginning with William Hartnell, thirteen actors have headlined the series as the Doctor, and in 2017 Jodie Whittaker became the first woman to play the role. The transition from one actor to another is written into the plot of the show with the concept of regeneration into a new incarnation, a plot device in which a Time Lord \"transforms\" into a new body when the current one is too badly harmed to heal normally. Each actor's portrayal is unique, but all represent stages in the life of the same character, and together, they form a single lifetime with a single narrative. The time-travelling feature of the plot means that different incarnations of the Doctor occasionally meet.\nThe show is a significant part of British popular culture, and elsewhere it has gained a cult following. It has influenced generations of British television professionals, many of whom grew up watching the series. The programme originally ran from 1963 to 1989. There was an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot, in the form of a television film titled \"Doctor Who\". The programme was relaunched in 2005, and since then has been produced in-house by BBC Wales in Cardiff. \"Doctor Who\" has also spawned numerous spin-offs, including comic books, films, novels, audio dramas, and the television series \"Torchwood\" (2006\u20132011), \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\" (2007\u20132011), \"K-9\" (2009\u20132010), and \"Class\" (2016), and has been the subject of many parodies and references in popular culture.\nPremise.\n\"Doctor Who\" follows the adventures of the title character, a rogue Time Lord with somewhat unknown origins who goes by the name \"the Doctor\". The Doctor fled Gallifrey, the planet of the Time Lords, in a stolen TARDIS (\"Time and Relative Dimension in Space\"), a time machine that travels by materialising into, and dematerialising out of, the time vortex. The TARDIS has a vast interior but appears smaller on the outside, and is equipped with a \"chameleon circuit\" intended to make the machine take on the appearance of local objects as a disguise; due to a malfunction, the Doctor's TARDIS remains fixed as a blue British police box.\nAcross time and space, the Doctor's many incarnations often find events that pique their curiosity, and try to prevent evil forces from harming innocent people or changing history, using only ingenuity and minimal resources, such as the versatile sonic screwdriver. The Doctor rarely travels alone and is often joined by one or more companions on these adventures; these companions are usually humans, owing to the Doctor's fascination with planet Earth, which also leads to frequent collaborations with the international military task force UNIT when Earth is threatened. The Doctor is centuries old and, as a Time Lord, has the ability to regenerate in case of mortal damage to the body, taking on a new appearance, personality and (from 2017 onwards) gender identity. The Doctor's various incarnations have gained numerous recurring enemies during their travels, including the Daleks, their creator Davros, the Cybermen, and the Master, another renegade Time Lord.\nHistory.\n\"Doctor Who\" first appeared on BBC TV at 17:16:20 GMT on Saturday, 23 November 1963; this was eighty seconds later than the scheduled programme time, because of the assassination of John F. Kennedy the previous day. It was to be a regular weekly programme, each episode 25 minutes of transmission length. Discussions and plans for the programme had been in progress for a year. The head of drama Sydney Newman was mainly responsible for developing the programme, with the first format document for the series being written by Newman along with the head of the script department (later head of serials) Donald Wilson and staff writer C. E. Webber. Writer Anthony Coburn, story editor David Whitaker and initial producer Verity Lambert also heavily contributed to the development of the series.\nThe programme was originally intended to appeal to a family audience as an educational programme using time travel as a means to explore scientific ideas and famous moments in history. On 31 July 1963, Whitaker commissioned Terry Nation to write a story under the title \"The Mutants\". As originally written, the Daleks and Thals were the victims of an alien neutron bomb attack but Nation later dropped the aliens and made the Daleks the aggressors. When the script was presented to Newman and Wilson it was immediately rejected as the programme was not permitted to contain any \"bug-eyed monsters\". According to producer Verity Lambert; \"We didn't have a lot of choice\u00a0\u2014 we only had the Dalek serial to go\u00a0... We had a bit of a crisis of confidence because Donald [Wilson] was so adamant that we shouldn't make it. Had we had anything else ready we would have made that.\" Nation's script became the second \"Doctor Who\" serial\u00a0\u2013 \"The Daleks\" (also known as \"The Mutants\"). The serial introduced the eponymous aliens that would become the series' most popular monsters, and was responsible for the BBC's first merchandising boom.\nThe BBC drama department's serials division produced the programme for 26 seasons, broadcast on BBC 1. Due to his increasingly poor health, the first actor to play the Doctor, William Hartnell, was replaced by the younger Patrick Troughton in 1966. In 1970 Jon Pertwee replaced Troughton and the series at that point moved from black and white to colour. In 1974 Tom Baker was cast as the Doctor. His eccentric style of dress and quirky personality became hugely popular, with viewing figures for the show returning to a level not seen since the height of \"Dalekmania\" a decade earlier. In 1981, after a record seven years in the role, Baker was replaced by Peter Davison, at 29 by far the youngest actor to be cast as the character in the series' first run, and in 1984 Colin Baker replaced Davison. In 1985 the channel's controller Michael Grade attempted to cancel the series, but this became an 18-month hiatus instead. He also had Colin Baker removed from the starring role in 1986. The role was recast with Sylvester McCoy, but falling viewing numbers, a decline in the public perception of the show and a less-prominent transmission slot saw production ended in 1989 by Peter Cregeen, the BBC's new head of series. Although it was effectively cancelled with the decision not to commission a planned 27th season, which would have been broadcast in 1990, the BBC repeatedly affirmed, over several years, that the series would return.\nWhile in-house production had ceased, the BBC hoped to find an independent production company to relaunch the show. Philip Segal, a British expatriate who worked for Columbia Pictures' television arm in the United States, had approached the BBC about such a venture as early as July 1989, while the 26th season was still in production. Segal's negotiations eventually led to a \"Doctor Who\" television film, broadcast on the Fox Network in 1996 as an international co-production between Fox, Universal Pictures, the BBC and BBC Worldwide. Starring Paul McGann as the Doctor, the film was successful in the UK (with 9.1\u00a0million viewers), but was less so in the United States and did not lead to a series.\nLicensed media such as novels and audio plays provided new stories, but as a television programme \"Doctor Who\" remained dormant until 2003. In September of that year, BBC Television announced the in-house production of a new series after several years of attempts by BBC Worldwide to find backing for a feature film version. The executive producers of the new incarnation of the series were writer Russell T Davies and BBC Cymru Wales head of drama Julie Gardner.\nStarring Christopher Eccleston as the Doctor, \"Doctor Who\" finally returned with the episode \"Rose\" on BBC One on 26 March 2005. Eccleston left after one series and was replaced by David Tennant. There have since been eleven further series in 2006\u20132008, 2010\u20132015, 2017\u20132018, 2020, and Christmas/New Year's Day specials every year since 2005, with the exception of 2018. No full series was broadcast in 2009, although four additional specials starring Tennant were made. Davies left the show in 2010 after the end of series 4 and the David Tennant specials were completed. Steven Moffat, a writer under Davies, was announced as his successor, along with Matt Smith as the new Doctor. Smith decided to leave the role of the Doctor in the 50th anniversary year. He was replaced by Peter Capaldi.\nIn January 2016, Moffat announced that he would step down after the 2017 finale, to be replaced by Chris Chibnall in 2018. The tenth series debuted in April 2017, with a Christmas special preceding it in 2016. Jodie Whittaker was announced as the first female Doctor, and has appeared in two series and is scheduled to reprise her role in a third, shorter series due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe 2005 version of \"Doctor Who\" is a direct plot continuation of the original 1963\u20131989 series and the 1996 telefilm. This is similar to the 1988 continuation of ', but differs from most other series relaunches which have either been reboots (for example, \"Battlestar Galactica\" and \"Bionic Woman\") or set in the same universe as the original but in a different time period and with different characters (for example, ' and spin-offs).\nThe programme has been sold to many other countries worldwide (see Viewership).\nPublic consciousness.\nIt has been claimed that the transmission of the first episode was delayed by ten minutes due to extended news coverage of the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy the previous day; in fact it went out after a delay of eighty seconds. The BBC believed that coverage of the assassination, as well as a series of power blackouts across the country, had caused many viewers to miss this introduction to a new series, and it was broadcast again on 30 November 1963, just before episode two.\nThe programme soon became a national institution in the United Kingdom, with a large following among the general viewing audience. With popularity came controversy over the show's suitability for children. Morality campaigner Mary Whitehouse repeatedly complained to the BBC over what she saw as the show's violent, frightening and gory content. According to \"Radio Times\", the series \"never had a more implacable foe than Mary Whitehouse\".\nA BBC audience research survey conducted in 1972 found that, by their own definition of violence (\"any act[s] which may cause physical and/or psychological injury, hurt or death to persons, animals or property, whether intentional or accidental\") \"Doctor Who\" was the most violent of the drama programmes the corporation produced at the time. The same report found that 3% of the surveyed audience regarded the show as \"very unsuitable\" for family viewing. Responding to the findings of the survey in \"The Times\" newspaper, journalist Philip Howard maintained that, \"to compare the violence of \"Dr Who\", sired by a horse-laugh out of a nightmare, with the more realistic violence of other television series, where actors who look like human beings bleed paint that looks like blood, is like comparing Monopoly with the property market in London: both are fantasies, but one is meant to be taken seriously.\"\nDuring Jon Pertwee's second season as the Doctor, in the serial \"Terror of the Autons\" (1971), images of murderous plastic dolls, daffodils killing unsuspecting victims, and blank-featured policemen marked the apex of the show's ability to frighten children. Other notable moments in that decade include a disembodied brain falling to the floor in \"The Brain of Morbius\" and the Doctor apparently being drowned by a villain in \"The Deadly Assassin\" (both 1976). Mary Whitehouse's complaint about the latter incident prompted a change in BBC policy towards the series, with much tighter controls imposed on the production team, and the series' next producer, Graham Williams, was under a directive to take out \"anything graphic in the depiction of violence\". John Nathan-Turner produced the series during the 1980s and said in the documentary \"\" that he looked forward to Whitehouse's comments because the show's ratings would increase soon after she had made them. Nevertheless, Nathan-Turner also got into trouble with BBC executives over the violence he allowed to be depicted for season 22 of the series in 1985, which was publicly criticised by controller Michael Grade and given as one of his reasons for suspending the series for 18 months.\nThe phrase \"Hiding behind (or 'watching from behind') the sofa\" entered British pop culture, signifying in humour the stereotypical early-series behaviour of children who wanted to avoid seeing frightening parts of a television programme while remaining in the room to watch the remainder of it. The phrase retains this association with \"Doctor Who\", to the point that in 1991 the Museum of the Moving Image in London named their exhibition celebrating the programme \"Behind the Sofa\". The electronic theme music too was perceived as eerie, novel, and frightening, at the time. A 2012 article placed this childhood juxtaposition of fear and thrill \"at the center of many people's relationship with the show\", and a 2011 online vote at Digital Spy deemed the series the \"scariest TV show of all time\".\nThe image of the TARDIS has become firmly linked to the show in the public's consciousness; BBC scriptwriter Anthony Coburn, who lived in the resort of Herne Bay, Kent, was one of the people who conceived the idea of a police box as a time machine. In 1996, the BBC applied for a trademark to use the TARDIS' blue police box design in merchandising associated with \"Doctor Who\". In 1998, the Metropolitan Police Authority filed an objection to the trademark claim; but in 2002, the Patent Office ruled in favour of the BBC.\nThe 21st century revival of the programme became the centrepiece of BBC One's Saturday schedule and \"defined the channel\". Many renowned actors asked for or were offered guest-starring roles in various stories. According to an article in \"The Daily Telegraph\" in 2009, the revival of \"Doctor Who\" had consistently received high ratings, both in number of viewers and as measured by the Appreciation Index. In 2007, Caitlin Moran, television reviewer for \"The Times\", wrote that \"Doctor Who\" is \"quintessential to being British\". According to Steven Moffat, the American film director Steven Spielberg has commented that \"the world would be a poorer place without \"Doctor Who\"\".\nOn 4 August 2013, a live programme titled \"Doctor Who Live: The Next Doctor\" was broadcast on BBC One, during which the actor who was going to play the Twelfth Doctor was revealed. The live show was watched by an average of 6.27\u00a0million in the UK, and was also simulcast in the United States, Canada and Australia.\nEpisodes.\n\"Doctor Who\" originally ran for 26 seasons on BBC One, from 23 November 1963 until 6 December 1989. During the original run, each weekly episode formed part of a story (or \"serial\")\u00a0\u2014 usually of four to six parts in earlier years and three to four in later years. Some notable exceptions were: \"The Daleks' Master Plan\", which aired twelve episodes (plus an earlier one-episode teaser, \"Mission to the Unknown\", featuring none of the regular cast); almost an entire season of seven-episode serials (season 7); the ten-episode serial \"The War Games\"; and \"The Trial of a Time Lord\", which ran for fourteen episodes (albeit divided into three production codes and four narrative segments) during season 23. Occasionally serials were loosely connected by a story-line, such as season 8 focusing on the Doctor battling a rogue Time Lord called the Master, season 16's quest for the Key to Time, season 18's journey through E-Space and the theme of entropy, and season 20's Black Guardian trilogy.\nThe programme was intended to be educational and for family viewing on the early Saturday evening schedule. It initially alternated stories set in the past, which taught younger audience members about history, and with those in the future or outer space, focusing on science. This was also reflected in the Doctor's original companions, one of whom was a science teacher and another a history teacher.\nHowever, science fiction stories came to dominate the programme, and the history-orientated episodes, which were not popular with the production team, were dropped after \"The Highlanders\" (1967). While the show continued to use historical settings, they were generally used as a backdrop for science fiction tales, with one exception: \"Black Orchid\" (1982), set in 1920s England.\nThe early stories were serialised in nature, with the narrative of one story flowing into the next, and each episode having its own title, although produced as distinct stories with their own production codes. Following \"The Gunfighters\" (1966), however, each serial was given its own title, and the individual parts were simply assigned episode numbers.\nOf the programme's many writers, Robert Holmes was the most prolific, while Douglas Adams became the most well known outside \"Doctor Who\" itself, due to the popularity of his \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" works.\nThe serial format changed for the 2005 revival, with a series usually consisting of thirteen 45-minute, self-contained episodes (60 minutes with adverts, on overseas commercial channels), and an extended 60-minute episode broadcast on Christmas Day. This system was shortened to twelve episodes and one Christmas special following the revival's eighth series, and ten episodes from the eleventh series. Each series includes both standalone and multiple episodic stories, often linked with a loose story arc that is resolved in the series finale. As in the early \"classic\" era, each episode, whether standalone or part of a larger story, has its own title. Occasionally, regular-series episodes will exceed the 45-minute run time; notably, the episodes \"Journey's End\" from 2008 and \"The Eleventh Hour\" from 2010 exceeded an hour in length.\n \"Doctor Who\" instalments have been televised since 1963, ranging between 25-minute episodes (the most common format for the classic era), 45/50-minute episodes (for \"Resurrection of the Daleks\" in the 1984 series, a single season in 1985, and the most common format for the revival era since 2005), two feature-length productions (1983's \"The Five Doctors\" and the 1996 television film), twelve Christmas specials (most of 60 minutes' duration, one of 72 minutes), and four additional specials ranging from 60 to 75 minutes in 2009, 2010 and 2013. Four mini-episodes, running about eight minutes each, were also produced for the 1993, 2005 and 2007 Children in Need charity appeals, while another mini-episode was produced in 2008 for a \"Doctor Who\"-themed edition of The Proms. The 1993 2-part story, entitled \"Dimensions in Time\", was made in collaboration with the cast of the BBC soap-opera \"EastEnders\" and was filmed partly on the \"EastEnders\" set. A two-part mini-episode was also produced for the 2011 edition of Comic Relief. Starting with the 2009 special \"Planet of the Dead\", the series was filmed in 1080i for HDTV, and broadcast simultaneously on BBC One and BBC HD.\nTo celebrate the 50th anniversary of the show, a special 3D episode, \"The Day of the Doctor\", was broadcast in 2013. In March 2013, it was announced that Tennant and Piper would be returning, and that the episode would have a limited cinematic release worldwide.\nIn June 2017, it was announced that due to the terms of a deal between BBC Worldwide and SMG Pictures in China, the company has first right of refusal on the purchase for the Chinese market of future series of the programme until and including Series 15.\nMissing episodes.\nBetween about 1967 and 1978, large amounts of older material stored in the BBC's various video tape and film libraries were either destroyed, wiped, or suffered from poor storage which led to severe deterioration from broadcast quality. This included many old episodes of \"Doctor Who\", mostly stories featuring the first two Doctors: William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton. In all, 97 of 253 episodes produced during the first six years of the programme are not held in the BBC's archives (most notably seasons 3, 4, 5, from which 79 episodes are missing). In 1972, almost all episodes then made were known to exist at the BBC, while by 1978 the practice of wiping tapes and destroying \"spare\" film copies had been brought to a stop.\nNo 1960s episodes exist on their original videotapes (all surviving prints being film transfers), though some were transferred to film for editing before transmission, and exist in their broadcast form.\nSome episodes have been returned to the BBC from the archives of other countries who bought prints for broadcast, or by private individuals who acquired them by various means. Early colour videotape recordings made off-air by fans have also been retrieved, as well as excerpts filmed from the television screen onto 8\u00a0mm cine film and clips that were shown on other programmes. Audio versions of all of the lost episodes exist from home viewers who made tape recordings of the show. Short clips from every story with the exception of \"Marco Polo\" (1964), \"Mission to the Unknown\" (1965) and \"The Massacre of St Bartholomew's Eve\" (1966) also exist.\nIn addition to these, there are off-screen photographs made by photographer John Cura, who was hired by various production personnel to document many of their programmes during the 1950s and 1960s, including \"Doctor Who\". These have been used in fan reconstructions of the serials. These amateur reconstructions have been tolerated by the BBC, provided they are not sold for profit and are distributed as low-quality copies.\nOne of the most sought-after lost episodes is part four of the last William Hartnell serial, \"The Tenth Planet\" (1966), which ends with the First Doctor transforming into the Second. The only portion of this in existence, barring a few poor-quality silent 8\u00a0mm clips, is the few seconds of the regeneration scene, as it was shown on the children's magazine show \"Blue Peter\". With the approval of the BBC, efforts are now under way to restore as many of the episodes as possible from the extant material.\n\"Official\" reconstructions have also been released by the BBC on VHS, on MP3 CD-ROM, and as special features on DVD. The BBC, in conjunction with animation studio Cosgrove Hall, reconstructed the missing episodes 1 and 4 of \"The Invasion\" (1968), using remastered audio tracks and the comprehensive stage notes for the original filming, for the serial's DVD release in November 2006. The missing episodes of \"The Reign of Terror\" were animated by animation company Theta-Sigma, in collaboration with Big Finish, and became available for purchase in May 2013 through Amazon.com. Subsequent animations made in 2013 include \"The Tenth Planet\", \"The Ice Warriors\" (1967) and \"The Moonbase\" (1967).\nIn April 2006, \"Blue Peter\" launched a challenge to find missing \"Doctor Who\" episodes with the promise of a full-scale Dalek model as a reward. In December 2011, it was announced that part 3 of \"Galaxy 4\" (1965) and part 2 of \"The Underwater Menace\" (1967) had been returned to the BBC by a fan who had purchased them in the mid-1980s without realising that the BBC did not hold copies of them.\nOn 10 October 2013, the BBC announced that films of eleven episodes, including nine missing episodes, had been found in a Nigerian television relay station in Jos. Six of the eleven films discovered were the six-part serial \"The Enemy of the World\" (1968), from which all but the third episode had been missing. The remaining films were from another six-part serial, \"The Web of Fear\" (1968), and included the previously missing episodes 2, 4, 5, and 6. Episode 3 of \"The Web of Fear\" is still missing.\nCharacters.\nThe Doctor.\nThe Doctor was initially shrouded in mystery. In the programme's early days, the character was an eccentric alien traveller of great intelligence who battled injustice while exploring time and space in an unreliable time machine, the \"TARDIS\" (an acronym for Time and Relative Dimension in Space), which notably appears much larger on the inside than on the outside (a quality referred to as \"dimensionally transcendental\").\nThe initially irascible and slightly sinister Doctor quickly mellowed into a more compassionate figure and was eventually revealed to be a Time Lord, whose race are from the planet Gallifrey, which the Doctor fled by stealing the TARDIS.\nChanges of appearance.\nProducers introduced the concept of regeneration to permit the recasting of the main character. This was prompted by the poor health of the original star, William Hartnell. The term \"regeneration\" was not conceived until the Doctor's third on-screen regeneration; Hartnell's Doctor merely described undergoing a \"renewal\", and the Second Doctor underwent a \"change of appearance\". The device has allowed for the recasting of the actor various times in the show's history, as well as the depiction of alternative Doctors either from the Doctor's relative past or future.\nThe serials \"The Deadly Assassin\" (1976) and \"Mawdryn Undead\" (1983) established that a Time Lord can only regenerate 12 times, for a total of 13 incarnations. This line became stuck in the public consciousness despite not often being repeated, and was recognised by producers of the show as a plot obstacle for when the show finally had to regenerate the Doctor a thirteenth time. The episode \"The Time of the Doctor\" (2013) depicted the Doctor acquiring a new cycle of regenerations, starting from the Twelfth Doctor, due to the Eleventh Doctor being the product of the Doctor's twelfth regeneration from his original set.\nAlthough the idea of casting a woman as the Doctor had been suggested by the show's writers several times, including by Newman in 1986 and Davies in 2008, until 2017, all official depictions were played by men. Jodie Whittaker took over the role as the Thirteenth Doctor at the end of the 2017 Christmas special, and is the first woman to be cast as the character. Whittaker had previously starred in television series such as \"Return to Cranford\", \"Broadchurch\" alongside David Tennant (Tenth Doctor) and the dystopian anthology \"Black Mirror\". The show introduced the Time Lords' ability to change gender on regeneration in earlier episodes, first in dialogue, then with Michelle Gomez's version of The Master.\nIn addition to those actors who have headlined the series, others have portrayed versions of the Doctor in guest roles. Notably, in 2013, John Hurt guest-starred as a hitherto unknown incarnation of the Doctor known as the War Doctor in the run-up to the show's 50th anniversary special \"The Day of the Doctor\". He is shown in mini-episode \"The Night of the Doctor\" retroactively inserted into the show's fictional chronology between McGann and Eccleston's Doctors, although his introduction was written so as not to disturb the established numerical naming of the Doctors. Another example is from the 1986 serial \"The Trial of a Time Lord\", where Michael Jayston portrayed the Valeyard, who is described as an amalgamation of the darker sides of the Doctor's nature, somewhere between the twelfth and final incarnation.\nOn rare occasions, other actors have stood in for the lead. In \"The Five Doctors\", Richard Hurndall played the First Doctor due to William Hartnell's death in 1975; 34 years later David Bradley similarly replaced Hartnell in \"Twice Upon a Time\". In \"Time and the Rani\", Sylvester McCoy briefly played the Sixth Doctor during the regeneration sequence, carrying on as the Seventh. For more information, see the list of actors who have played the Doctor. In other media, the Doctor has been played by various other actors, including Peter Cushing in two films.\nThe casting of a new Doctor has often inspired debate and speculation. Common topics of focus include the Doctor's gender (prior to the casting of Whittaker, all official incarnations were male), race (all Doctors were white prior to the casting of Jo Martin in \"Fugitive of the Judoon\") and age (the youngest actor to be cast is Smith at 26, and the oldest are Capaldi and Hartnell, both 55).\nMeetings of different incarnations.\nThere have been instances of actors returning at later dates to reprise the role of their specific Doctor. In 1973's \"The Three Doctors\", William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton returned alongside Jon Pertwee. For 1983's \"The Five Doctors\", Troughton and Pertwee returned to star with Peter Davison, and Tom Baker appeared in previously unseen footage from the uncompleted \"Shada\" serial. For this episode, Richard Hurndall replaced William Hartnell. Patrick Troughton again returned in 1985's \"The Two Doctors\" with Colin Baker. In 2007, Peter Davison returned in the Children in Need short \"Time Crash\" alongside David Tennant. In \"The Name of the Doctor\" (2013), the Eleventh Doctor meets a previously unseen incarnation of himself, subsequently revealed to be the War Doctor. In the following episode, \"The Day of the Doctor\", David Tennant's Tenth Doctor appeared alongside Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor and John Hurt as the War Doctor, as well as brief footage from all of the previous actors. Additionally, multiple incarnations of the Doctor have met in various audio dramas and novels based on the television show. In 2017, the First Doctor (this time portrayed by David Bradley) returned alongside Peter Capaldi in \"The Doctor Falls\" and \"Twice Upon a Time\". In 2020\u2019s \u201cFugitive of the Judoon\u201d, Jodie Whittaker as the Thirteenth Doctor meets Jo Martin\u2019s incarnation of the Doctor, subsequently known as the Fugitive Doctor. They met later, albeit briefly, in \u201cThe Timeless Children\u201d later that year.\nRevelations about the Doctor.\nThroughout the programme's long history, there have been revelations about the Doctor that have raised additional questions. In \"The Brain of Morbius\" (1976), it was hinted that the First Doctor might not have been the first incarnation (although the other faces depicted might have been incarnations of the Time Lord Morbius). In subsequent stories the First Doctor was depicted as the earliest incarnation of the Doctor. In \"Mawdryn Undead\" (1983), the Fifth Doctor explicitly confirmed that he was then currently in his fifth incarnation. Later that same year, during 1983's 20th Anniversary special \"The Five Doctors\", the First Doctor enquires as to the Fifth Doctor's regeneration; when the Fifth Doctor confirms \"Fourth\", the First Doctor excitedly replies \"Goodness me. So there are five of me now.\" In 2010, the Eleventh Doctor similarly calls himself \"the Eleventh\" in \"The Lodger\". In the 2013 episode \"The Time of the Doctor,\" the Eleventh Doctor clarified he was the product of the twelfth regeneration, due to a previous incarnation which he chose not to count and one other aborted regeneration. The name Eleventh is still used for this incarnation; the same episode depicts the prophesied \"Fall of the Eleventh\" which had been trailed throughout the series. While the Doctor was early on described as from the planet Gallifrey, as first mentioned in \"The Time Warrior\" (1973), these origins were retconned in \"The Timeless Children\" (2020), and the Doctor was shown as from another unknown dimension or universe. In the same story, it was revealed that First Doctor was not actually the earliest incarnation of the Doctor.\nDuring the Seventh Doctor's era, it was hinted that the Doctor was more than just an ordinary Time Lord. In the 1996 television film, the Eighth Doctor describes himself as being \"half human\". The BBC's FAQ for the programme notes that \"purists tend to disregard this\", instead focusing on his Gallifreyan heritage.\nThe programme's first serial, \"An Unearthly Child\", shows that the Doctor has a granddaughter, Susan Foreman. In the 1967 serial, \"Tomb of the Cybermen\", when Victoria Waterfield doubts the Doctor can remember his family because of, \"being so ancient\", the Doctor says that he can when he really wants to\u2014\"The rest of the time they sleep in my mind\". The 2005 series reveals that the Ninth Doctor thought he was the last surviving Time Lord, and that his home planet had been destroyed; in \"The Empty Child\" (2005), Dr. Constantine states that, \"Before the war even began, I was a father and a grandfather. Now I am neither.\" The Doctor remarks in response, \"Yeah, I know the feeling.\" In \"Smith and Jones\" (2007), when asked if he had a brother, he replied, \"No, not any more.\" In both \"Fear Her\" (2006) and \"The Doctor's Daughter\" (2008), he states that he had, in the past, been a father.\nIn \"The Wedding of River Song\" (2011), it is implied that the Doctor's true name is a secret that must never be revealed; this is explored further in \"The Name of the Doctor\" (2013), when River Song speaking his name allows the Great Intelligence to enter his tomb, and in \"The Time of the Doctor\" (2013) where speaking his true name becomes the signal by which the Time Lords would know they can safely return to the universe.\nCompanions.\nThe companion figure\u00a0\u2013 generally a human\u00a0\u2013 has been a constant feature in \"Doctor Who\" since the programme's inception in 1963. One of the roles of the companion is to be a reminder for the Doctor's \"moral duty\". The Doctor's first companions seen on screen were his granddaughter Susan Foreman (Carole Ann Ford) and her teachers Barbara Wright (Jacqueline Hill) and Ian Chesterton (William Russell). These characters were intended to act as audience surrogates, through which the audience would discover information about the Doctor who was to act as a mysterious father figure. The only story from the original series in which the Doctor travels alone is \"The Deadly Assassin\" (1976). Notable companions from the earlier series included Romana (Mary Tamm and Lalla Ward), a Time Lady; Sarah Jane Smith (Elisabeth Sladen); and Jo Grant (Katy Manning). Dramatically, these characters provide a figure with whom the audience can identify, and serve to further the story by requesting exposition from the Doctor and manufacturing peril for the Doctor to resolve. The Doctor regularly gains new companions and loses old ones; sometimes they return home or find new causes\u00a0\u2014 or loves\u00a0\u2014 on worlds they have visited. Some have died during the course of the series. Companions are usually human, or humanoid aliens.\nSince the 2005 revival, the Doctor generally travels with a primary female companion, who occupies a larger narrative role. Steven Moffat described the companion as the main character of the show, as the story begins anew with each companion and she undergoes more change than the Doctor. The primary companions of the Ninth and Tenth Doctors were Rose Tyler (Billie Piper), Martha Jones (Freema Agyeman), and Donna Noble (Catherine Tate) with Mickey Smith (Noel Clarke) and Jack Harkness (John Barrowman) recurring as secondary companion figures. The Eleventh Doctor became the first to travel with a married couple, Amy Pond (Karen Gillan) and Rory Williams (Arthur Darvill), whilst out-of-sync meetings with River Song (Alex Kingston) and Clara Oswald (Jenna Coleman) provided ongoing story arcs. The tenth series introduced Pearl Mackie as Bill Potts, the Doctor's first openly gay companion. Pearl Mackie said that the increased representation for LGBTQ people is important on a mainstream show.\nSome companions have gone on to re-appear, either in the main series or in spin-offs. Sarah Jane Smith became the central character in \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\" (2007\u201311) following a return to \"Doctor Who\" in 2006. Guest stars in the series included former companions Jo Grant, K9, and Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart (Nicholas Courtney). The character of Jack Harkness also served to launch a spin-off, \"Torchwood\", (2006\u20132011) in which Martha Jones also appeared.\nAdversaries.\nWhen Sydney Newman commissioned the series, he specifically did not want to perpetuate the clich\u00e9 of the \"bug-eyed monster\" of science fiction. However, monsters were popular with audiences and so became a staple of \"Doctor Who\" almost from the beginning.\nWith the show's 2005 revival, executive producer Russell T Davies stated his intention to reintroduce classic icons of \"Doctor Who\". The Autons with the Nestene Consciousness and Daleks returned in series 1, Cybermen in series 2, the Macra and the Master in series 3, the Sontarans and Davros in series 4, and the Time Lords including Rassilon in the 2009\u201310 Specials. Davies' successor, Steven Moffat, has continued the trend by reviving the Silurians in series 5, Cybermats in series 6, the Great Intelligence and the Ice Warriors in Series 7, and Zygons in the 50th Anniversary Special. Since its 2005 return, the series has also introduced new recurring aliens: Slitheen (Raxacoricofallapatorians), Ood, Judoon, Weeping Angels and the Silence.\nBesides infrequent appearances by enemies such as the Ice Warriors, Ogrons, the Rani, and Black Guardian, three adversaries have become particularly iconic: the Daleks, the Cybermen, and the Master.\nDaleks.\nThe Dalek race, which first appeared in the show's second serial in 1963, are \"Doctor Who\"s oldest villains. The Daleks are Kaleds from the planet Skaro, mutated by the scientist Davros and housed in mechanical armour shells for mobility. The actual creatures resemble octopuses with large, pronounced brains. Their armour shells have a single eye-stalk, a sink-plunger-like device that serves the purpose of a hand, and a directed-energy weapon. Their main weakness is their eyestalk; attacks upon them using various weapons can blind a Dalek, making it go mad. Their chief role in the series plot, as they frequently remark in their instantly recognisable metallic voices, is to \"exterminate\" all non-Dalek beings. They even attack the Time Lords in the Time War, as shown during the 50th Anniversary of the show. They continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the Doctor Who franchise, their most recent appearance being the 2021 episode \"Revolution of the Daleks\". Davros has also been a recurring figure since his debut in \"Genesis of the Daleks\", although played by several different actors.\nThe Daleks were created by writer Terry Nation (who intended them to be an allegory of the Nazis) and BBC designer Raymond Cusick. The Daleks' d\u00e9but in the programme's second serial, \"The Daleks\" (1963\u201364), made both the Daleks and \"Doctor Who\" very popular. A Dalek appeared on a postage stamp celebrating British popular culture in 1999, photographed by Lord Snowdon. In \"Victory of the Daleks\" a new set of Daleks were introduced that come in a range of colours; the colour denoting its role within the species.\nCybermen.\nCybermen were originally a wholly organic species of humanoids originating on Earth's twin planet Mondas that began to implant more and more artificial parts into their bodies. This led to the race becoming coldly logical and calculating cyborgs, with emotions usually only shown when naked aggression was called for. With the demise of Mondas, they acquired Telos as their new home planet. They continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the \"Doctor Who\" franchise.\nThe 2006 series introduced a totally new variation of Cybermen. These Cybus Cybermen were created in a parallel universe by the mad inventor John Lumic; he was attempting to preserve the humans by transplanting their brains into powerful metal bodies, sending them orders using a mobile phone network and inhibiting their emotions with an electronic chip.\nThe Master.\nThe Master is the Doctor's archenemy, a renegade Time Lord who desires to rule the universe. Conceived as \"Professor Moriarty to the Doctor's Sherlock Holmes\", the character first appeared in 1971. As with the Doctor, the role has been portrayed by several actors, since the Master is a Time Lord as well and able to regenerate; the first of these actors was Roger Delgado, who continued in the role until his death in 1973. The Master was briefly played by Peter Pratt and Geoffrey Beevers until Anthony Ainley took over and continued to play the character until Doctor Who's hiatus in 1989. The Master returned in the 1996 television movie of \"Doctor Who\", and was played by American actor Eric Roberts.\nFollowing the series revival in 2005, Derek Jacobi provided the character's re-introduction in the 2007 episode \"Utopia\". During that story, the role was then assumed by John Simm who returned to the role multiple times through the Tenth Doctor's tenure. As of the 2014 episode \"Dark Water\", it was revealed that the Master had become a female incarnation or \"Time Lady\", going by the name of \"Missy\" (short for Mistress, the feminine equivalent of \"Master\"). This incarnation is played by Michelle Gomez.\nJohn Simm returned in his role as the Master in the tenth series.\nMusic.\nTheme music.\nThe \"Doctor Who\" theme music was one of the first electronic music signature tunes for television, and after more than a half century remains one of the most easily recognised. The original theme was composed by Ron Grainer and realised by Delia Derbyshire of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop, with assistance from Dick Mills and was released as a single on Decca F 11837 in 1964. The various parts were built up using musique concr\u00e8te techniques, by creating tape loops of an individually struck piano string and individual test oscillators and filters. The Derbyshire arrangement served, with minor edits, as the theme tune up to the end of season 17 (1979\u201380). It is regarded as a significant and innovative piece of electronic music, recorded well before the availability of commercial synthesisers or multitrack mixers. Each note was individually created by cutting, splicing, speeding up and slowing down segments of analogue tape containing recordings of a single plucked string, white noise, and the simple harmonic waveforms of test-tone oscillators, intended for calibrating equipment and rooms, not creating music. New techniques were invented to allow mixing of the music, as this was before the era of multitrack tape machines. On hearing the finished result, Grainer asked, \"Jeez, Delia, did I write that?\" Although Grainer was willing to give Derbyshire the co-composer credit, it was against BBC policy at the time.\nA different arrangement was recorded by Peter Howell for season 18 (1980), which was in turn replaced by Dominic Glynn's arrangement for the season-long serial \"The Trial of a Time Lord\" in season 23 (1986). Keff McCulloch provided the new arrangement for the Seventh Doctor's era which lasted from season 24 (1987) until the series' suspension in 1989. American composer John Debney created a new arrangement of Ron Grainer's original theme for \"Doctor Who\" in 1996. For the return of the series in 2005, Murray Gold provided a new arrangement which featured samples from the 1963 original with further elements added; in the 2005 Christmas episode \"The Christmas Invasion\".\nA new arrangement of the theme, once again by Gold, was introduced in the 2007 Christmas special episode, \"Voyage of the Damned\"; Gold returned as composer for the 2010 series. He was responsible for a new version of the theme which was reported to have had a hostile reception from some viewers. In 2011, the theme tune charted at number 228 of radio station Classic FM's Hall of Fame, a survey of classical music tastes. A revised version of Gold's 2010 arrangement had its debut over the opening titles of the 2012 Christmas special \"The Snowmen\", and a further revision of the arrangement was made for the 50th Anniversary special \"The Day of the Doctor\" in November 2013.\nVersions of the \"Doctor Who Theme\" have also been released as pop music over the years. In the early 1970s, Jon Pertwee, who had played the Third Doctor, recorded a version of the Doctor Who theme with spoken lyrics, titled, \"Who Is the Doctor\". In 1978 a disco version of the theme was released in the UK, Denmark and Australia by the group Mankind, which reached number 24 in the UK charts. In 1988 the band The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu (later known as The KLF) released the single \"Doctorin' the Tardis\" under the name The Timelords, which reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 2 in Australia; this version incorporated several other songs, including \"Rock and Roll Part 2\" by Gary Glitter (who recorded vocals for some of the CD-single remix versions of \"Doctorin' the Tardis\"). Others who have covered or reinterpreted the theme include Orbital, Pink Floyd, the Australian string ensemble Fourplay, New Zealand punk band Blam Blam Blam, The Pogues, Thin Lizzy, Dub Syndicate, and the comedians Bill Bailey and Mitch Benn. Both the theme and obsessive fans were satirised on \"The Chaser's War on Everything\". The theme tune has also appeared on many compilation CDs, and has made its way into mobile-phone ringtones. Fans have also produced and distributed their own remixes of the theme. In January 2011 the Mankind version was released as a digital download on the album \"Gallifrey And Beyond\".\nOn 26 June 2018, producer Chris Chibnall announced that the musical score for series 11 would be provided by Royal Birmingham Conservatoire alumnus Segun Akinola.\nIncidental music.\nMost of the innovative incidental music for \"Doctor Who\" has been specially commissioned from freelance composers, although in the early years some episodes also used stock music, as well as occasional excerpts from original recordings or cover versions of songs by popular music acts such as The Beatles and The Beach Boys. Since its 2005 return, the series has featured occasional use of excerpts of pop music from the 1970s to the 2000s.\nThe incidental music for the first \"Doctor Who\" adventure, \"An Unearthly Child\", was written by Norman Kay. Many of the stories of the William Hartnell period were scored by electronic music pioneer Tristram Cary, whose \"Doctor Who\" credits include \"The Daleks\", \"Marco Polo\", \"The Daleks' Master Plan\", \"The Gunfighters\" and \"The Mutants\". Other composers in this early period included Richard Rodney Bennett, Carey Blyton and Geoffrey Burgon.\nThe most frequent musical contributor during the first 15 years was Dudley Simpson, who is also well known for his theme and incidental music for \"Blake's 7\", and for his haunting theme music and score for the original 1970s version of \"The Tomorrow People\". Simpson's first \"Doctor Who\" score was \"Planet of Giants\" (1964) and he went on to write music for many adventures of the 1960s and 1970s, including most of the stories of the Jon Pertwee/Tom Baker periods, ending with \"The Horns of Nimon\" (1979). He also made a cameo appearance in \"The Talons of Weng-Chiang\" (as a Music hall conductor).\nIn 1980 starting with the serial \"The Leisure Hive\" the task of creating incidental music was assigned to the Radiophonic Workshop. Paddy Kingsland and Peter Howell contributed many scores in this period and other contributors included Roger Limb, Malcolm Clarke and Jonathan Gibbs.\nThe Radiophonic Workshop was dropped after 1986's \"The Trial of a Time Lord\" series, and Keff McCulloch took over as the series' main composer until the end of its run, with Dominic Glynn and Mark Ayres also contributing scores.\nFrom the 2005 revival to the 2017 Christmas episode \"Twice Upon a Time\", all incidental music for the series was composed by Murray Gold and Ben Foster, and has been performed by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales from the 2005 Christmas episode \"The Christmas Invasion\" onwards. A concert featuring the orchestra performing music from the first two series took place on 19 November 2006 to raise money for Children in Need. David Tennant hosted the event, introducing the different sections of the concert. Murray Gold and Russell T Davies answered questions during the interval and Daleks and Cybermen appeared whilst music from their stories was played. The concert aired on BBCi on Christmas Day 2006. A Doctor Who Prom was celebrated on 27 July 2008 in the Royal Albert Hall as part of the annual BBC Proms. The BBC Philharmonic and the London Philharmonic Choir performed Murray Gold's compositions for the series, conducted by Ben Foster, as well as a selection of classics based on the theme of space and time. The event was presented by Freema Agyeman and guest-presented by various other stars of the show with numerous monsters participating in the proceedings. It also featured the specially filmed mini-episode \"Music of the Spheres\", written by Russell T Davies and starring David Tennant.\nOn 26 June 2018, producer Chris Chibnall announced that the musical score for the eleventh series would be provided by Royal Birmingham Conservatoire alumnus Segun Akinola.\nSix soundtrack releases have been released since 2005. The featured tracks from the first two series, the and featured music from the third and fourth series respectively. The was released on 4 October 2010 as a two disc special edition and contained music from the 2008\u20132010 specials (\"The Next Doctor\" to \"End of Time Part 2\"). The was released on 8 November 2010. In February 2011, a soundtrack was released for the 2010 Christmas special: \"A Christmas Carol\", and in December 2011 the was released, both by Silva Screen Records.\nIn 2013, a 50th-anniversary boxed set of audio CDs was released featuring music and sound effects from Doctor Who's 50-year history. The celebration continued in 2016 with the release of Doctor Who: The 50th Anniversary Collection Four LP Box Set by New York City-based Spacelab9. The company pressed 1,000 copies of the set on \"Metallic Silver\" vinyl, dubbed the \"Cyberman Edition\".\nViewership.\nUnited Kingdom.\nPremiering the day after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the first episode of \"Doctor Who\" was repeated with the second episode the following week. \"Doctor Who\" has always appeared initially on the BBC's mainstream BBC One channel, where it is regarded as a family show, drawing audiences of many millions of viewers; episodes were also repeated on BBC Three, before its transition to an online-only channel. The programme's popularity has waxed and waned over the decades, with three notable periods of high ratings. The first of these was the \"Dalekmania\" period (circa 1964\u20131965), when the popularity of the Daleks regularly brought \"Doctor Who\" ratings of between 9 and 14\u00a0million, even for stories which did not feature them. The second was the mid to late 1970s, when Tom Baker occasionally drew audiences of over 12\u00a0million.\nDuring the ITV network strike of 1979, viewership peaked at 16\u00a0million. Figures remained respectable into the 1980s, but fell noticeably after the programme's 23rd series was postponed in 1985 and the show was off the air for 18 months.\nIts late 1980s performance of three to five million viewers was seen as poor at the time and was, according to the BBC Board of Control, a leading cause of the programme's 1989 suspension. Some fans considered this disingenuous, since the programme was scheduled against the soap opera \"Coronation Street\", the most popular show at the time. During Tennant's run (the third notable period of high ratings), the show had consistently high viewership; with the Christmas specials regularly attracting over 10\u00a0million.\nThe BBC One broadcast of \"Rose\", the first episode of the 2005 revival, drew an average audience of 10.81\u00a0million, third highest for BBC One that week and seventh across all channels. The current revival also garners the highest audience Appreciation Index of any drama on television.\nInternational.\n\"Doctor Who\" has been broadcast internationally outside of the United Kingdom since 1964, a year after the show first aired. , the modern series has been broadcast in more than 50 countries. The 50th anniversary was broadcast In 94 countries and screened to more than half a million people in cinemas across Australia, Latin America, North America and Europe. The scope of the broadcast was a world record, according to \"Guinness World Records\".\n\"Doctor Who\" is one of the five top-grossing titles for BBC Worldwide, the BBC's commercial arm. BBC Worldwide CEO John Smith has said that \"Doctor Who\" is one of a small number of \"Superbrands\" which Worldwide will promote heavily.\nOnly four episodes have ever had their premiere showings on channels other than BBC One. The 1983 20th anniversary special \"The Five Doctors\" had its d\u00e9but on 23 November (the actual date of the anniversary) on a number of PBS stations two days prior to its BBC One broadcast. The 1988 story \"Silver Nemesis\" was broadcast with all three episodes airing back to back on TVNZ in New Zealand in November, after the first episode had been shown in the UK but before the final two instalments had aired there.\nOceania.\nNew Zealand was the first country outside the United Kingdom to screen \"Doctor Who\", beginning in September 1964, and continued to screen the series for many years, including the new series from 2005. In 2018, the series is aired on Fridays on TVNZ 2, and on TVNZ On Demand on the same episode as the UK. The series moved to TVNZ 1 in 2021.\nIn Australia, the show has had a strong fan base since its inception, having been exclusively first run by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) since January 1965. (See Doctor Who in Australia) The ABC has periodically repeated episodes; of note were the weekly screenings of all available classic episodes starting in 2003, for the show's 40th anniversary, and the weekdaily screenings of all available revived episodes in 2013 for the show's 50th anniversary. The ABC broadcasts the modern series first run on ABC1 and ABC ME, with repeats on ABC2 and streaming available on ABC iview.\nAmericas.\nThe series also has a fan base in the United States, where it was shown in syndication from the 1970s to the 1990s, particularly on PBS stations.\nTVOntario picked up the show in 1976 beginning with \"The Three Doctors\" and aired each series (several years late) through to series 24 in 1991. From 1979 to 1981, TVO airings were bookended by science-fiction writer Judith Merril who introduced the episode and then, after the episode concluded, tried to place it in an educational context in keeping with TVO's status as an educational channel. Its airing of \"The Talons of Weng-Chiang\" was cancelled as a result of accusations that the story was racist; the story was later broadcast in the 1990s on cable station YTV. CBC began showing the series again in 2005. The series moved to the Canadian cable channel Space in 2009.\nSeries three began broadcasting on CBC on 18 June 2007 followed by the second Christmas special, \"The Runaway Bride\" at midnight, and the Sci Fi Channel began on 6 July 2007 starting with the second Christmas special at 8:00\u00a0pm E/P followed by the first episode.\nSeries four aired in the United States on the Sci Fi Channel (now known as Syfy), beginning in April 2008. It aired on CBC beginning 19 September 2008, although the CBC did not air the \"Voyage of the Damned\" special. The Canadian cable network Space (now known as CTV Sci-Fi Channel) broadcast \"The Next Doctor\" (in March 2009) and all subsequent series and specials.\nAsia.\nSeries 1 through 3 of Doctor Who were broadcast on various NHK channels from 2006 to 2008 with Japanese subtitles. Beginning in 2 August 2009, upon the launch of Disney XD in Japan, the series has been broadcast with Japanese dubbing.\nHome media.\nA wide selection of serials are available from BBC Video on DVD, on sale in the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and the United States. Every fully extant serial has been released on VHS, and BBC Worldwide continues to regularly release serials on DVD. The 2005 series is also available in its entirety on UMD for the PlayStation Portable. Eight original series serials have been released on Laserdisc and many have also been released on Betamax tape and Video 2000. One episode of Doctor Who (The Infinite Quest) was released on VCD. Only the series from 2005 onwards are also available on Blu-ray, except for the 1970 story \"Spearhead from Space\", released in July 2013 and the 1996 TV film \"Doctor Who\" released in September 2016.\nOver 600 episodes of the classic series (the first 8 Doctors, from 1963 to 1996) are available to stream on BritBox (launched in 2017) and Pluto TV. From 2020, the revival series is available for streaming on HBO Max.\nAdaptations and other appearances.\nDr. Who films.\nThere are two Dr. Who feature films: \"Dr. Who and the Daleks\", released in 1965 and \"Daleks' Invasion Earth 2150 A.D.\" in 1966. Both are retellings of existing television stories (specifically, the first two Dalek serials, \"The Daleks\" and \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\" respectively) with a larger budget and alterations to the series concept.\nIn these films, Peter Cushing plays a human scientist named \"Dr. Who\", who travels with his granddaughter, niece and other companions in a time machine he has invented. The Cushing version of the character reappears in both comic strips and a short story, the latter attempting to reconcile the film continuity with that of the series.\nIn addition, several planned films were proposed, including a sequel, \"The Chase\", loosely based on the original series story, for the Cushing Doctor, plus many attempted television movie and big screen productions to revive the original \"Doctor Who\", after the original series was cancelled.\nPaul McGann starred in the only television film as the eighth incarnation of the Doctor. After the film, he continued the role in audio books and was confirmed as the eighth incarnation through flashback footage and a mini episode in the 2005 revival, effectively linking the two series and the television movie.\nIn 2011, David Yates announced that he had started work with the BBC on a \"Doctor Who\" film, a project that would take three or more years to complete. Yates indicated that the film would take a different approach to \"Doctor Who\", although then \"Doctor Who\" showrunner Steven Moffat stated later that any such film would not be a reboot of the series and a film should be made by the BBC team and star the current TV Doctor.\nSpin-offs.\n\"Doctor Who\" has appeared on stage numerous times. In the early 1970s, Trevor Martin played the role in \"Doctor Who and the Daleks in the Seven Keys to Doomsday\". In the late 1980s, Jon Pertwee and Colin Baker both played the Doctor at different times during the run of a play titled \"Doctor Who\u00a0\u2013 The Ultimate Adventure\". For two performances, while Pertwee was ill, David Banks (better known for playing Cybermen) played the Doctor. Other original plays have been staged as amateur productions, with other actors playing the Doctor, while Terry Nation wrote \"The Curse of the Daleks\", a stage play mounted in the late 1960s, but without the Doctor.\nA pilot episode (\"A Girl's Best Friend\") for a potential spinoff series, \"K-9 and Company\", was aired in 1981 with Elisabeth Sladen reprising her role as companion Sarah Jane Smith and John Leeson as the voice of K9, but was not picked up as a regular series. Concept art for an animated \"Doctor Who\" series was produced by animation company Nelvana in the 1980s, but the series was not produced.\nFollowing the success of the 2005 series produced by Russell T Davies, the BBC commissioned Davies to produce a 13-part spin-off series titled \"Torchwood\" (an anagram of \"Doctor Who\"), set in modern-day Cardiff and investigating alien activities and crime. The series debuted on BBC Three on 22 October 2006. John Barrowman reprised his role of Jack Harkness from the 2005 series of \"Doctor Who\". Two other actresses who appeared in Doctor Who also star in the series; Eve Myles as Gwen Cooper, who also played the similarly named servant girl Gwyneth in the 2005 \"Doctor Who\" episode \"The Unquiet Dead\", and Naoko Mori who reprised her role as Toshiko Sato first seen in \"Aliens of London\". A second series of \"Torchwood\" aired in 2008; for three episodes, the cast was joined by Freema Agyeman reprising her \"Doctor Who\" role of Martha Jones. A third series was broadcast from 6 to 10 July 2009, and consisted of a single five-part story called \"Children of Earth\" which was set largely in London. A fourth series, \"\" jointly produced by BBC Wales, BBC Worldwide and the American entertainment company Starz debuted in 2011. The series was predominantly set in the United States, though Wales remained part of the show's setting.\n\"The Sarah Jane Adventures\", starring Elisabeth Sladen who reprised her role as investigative journalist Sarah Jane Smith, was developed by CBBC; a special aired on New Year's Day 2007 and a full series began on 24 September 2007. A second series followed in 2008, notable for (as noted above) featuring the return of Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart. A third in 2009 featured a crossover appearance from the main show by David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor. In 2010, a further such appearance featured Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor alongside former companion actress Katy Manning reprising her role as Jo Grant. A final, three-story fifth series was transmitted in autumn 2011\u00a0\u2013 uncompleted due to the death of Elisabeth Sladen in early 2011.\nAn animated serial, \"The Infinite Quest\", aired alongside the 2007 series of \"Doctor Who\" as part of the children's television series \"Totally Doctor Who\". The serial featured the voices of series regulars David Tennant and Freema Agyeman but is not considered part of the 2007 series. A second animated serial, \"Dreamland\", aired in six parts on the BBC Red Button service, and the official \"Doctor Who\" website in 2009.\n\"Class\", featuring students of Coal Hill School, was first aired on-line on BBC Three from 22 October 2016, as a series of eight 45 minute episodes, written by Patrick Ness. Peter Capaldi as the Twelfth Doctor appears in the show's first episode. The series was picked up by BBC America on 8 January 2016 and by BBC One a day later. On 7 September 2017, BBC Three controller Damian Kavanagh confirmed that the series had officially been cancelled.\nNumerous other spin-off series have been created not by the BBC but by the respective owners of the characters and concepts. Such spin-offs include the novel and audio drama series \"Faction Paradox\", \"Iris Wildthyme\" and \"Bernice Summerfield\"; as well as the made-for-video series \"P.R.O.B.E.\"; the Australian-produced television series \"K-9\", which aired a 26-episode first season on Disney XD; and the audio spin-off \"Counter-Measures\".\nAftershows.\nWhen the revived series of \"Doctor Who\" was brought back, an aftershow series was created by the BBC, titled \"Doctor Who Confidential\". There have been three aftershow series created, with the latest one titled \"\", which began airing from the tenth series. Each series follows behind-the-scenes footage on the making of \"Doctor Who\" through clips and interviews with the cast, production crew and other people, including those who have participated in the television series in some manner. Each episode deals with a different topic, and in most cases refers to the \"Doctor Who\" episode that preceded it.\nCharity episodes.\nIn 1983, coinciding with the series' 20th anniversary, \"The Five Doctors\" was shown as part of the annual BBC Children in Need Appeal, however it was not a charity-based production, simply scheduled within the line-up of Friday 25 November 1983. This was the programme's first co-production with Australian broadcaster ABC. At 90 minutes long it was the longest single episode of \"Doctor Who\" produced to date. Featuring three of the first five Doctors, a new actor to replace the deceased William Hartnell, and unused footage to represent Tom Baker.\nIn 1993, for the franchise's 30th anniversary, another charity special, titled \"Dimensions in Time\" was produced for Children in Need, featuring all of the surviving actors who played the Doctor and a number of previous companions. It also featured a crossover with the soap opera \"EastEnders\", the action taking place in the latter's Albert Square location and around Greenwich. The special was one of several special 3D programmes the BBC produced at the time, using a 3D system that made use of the Pulfrich effect requiring glasses with one darkened lens; the picture would look normal to those viewers who watched without the glasses.\nIn 1999, another special, \"\", was made for Comic Relief and later released on VHS. An affectionate parody of the television series, it was split into four segments, mimicking the traditional serial format, complete with cliffhangers, and running down the same corridor several times when being chased (the version released on video was split into only two episodes). In the story, the Doctor (Rowan Atkinson) encounters both the Master (Jonathan Pryce) and the Daleks. During the special the Doctor is forced to regenerate several times, with his subsequent incarnations played by, in order, Richard E. Grant, Jim Broadbent, Hugh Grant and Joanna Lumley. The script was written by Steven Moffat, later to be head writer and executive producer to the revived series.\nSince the return of \"Doctor Who\" in 2005, the franchise has produced two original \"mini-episodes\" to support Children in Need. The first, aired in November 2005, was an which introduced David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor. It was followed in November 2007 by \"Time Crash\", a 7-minute scene which featured the Tenth Doctor meeting the Fifth Doctor Peter Davison.\nA set of two mini-episodes, titled \"Space\" and \"Time\" respectively, were produced to support Comic Relief. They were aired during the Comic Relief 2011 event. During \"Children in Need 2011\", an exclusively filmed segment showed the Doctor addressing the viewer, attempting to persuade them to purchase items of his clothing, which were going up for auction for Children in Need. \"Children in Need 2012\" featured the mini-episode \"The Great Detective\".\nSpoofs and cultural references.\n\"Doctor Who\" has been satirised and spoofed on many occasions by comedians including Spike Milligan (a Dalek invades his bathroom\u00a0\u2014 Milligan, naked, hurls a soap sponge at it) and Lenny Henry. Jon Culshaw frequently impersonates the Fourth Doctor in the BBC \"Dead Ringers\" series. \"Doctor Who\" fandom has also been lampooned on programs such as \"Saturday Night Live\", \"The Chaser's War on Everything\", \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\", \"Family Guy\", \"American Dad!\", \"Futurama\", \"South Park\",\n\"Community\" as Inspector Spacetime, \"The Simpsons\" and \"The Big Bang Theory\". As part of the 50th anniversary programmes, former Fifth Doctor Peter Davison directed, wrote and co-starred in the parody \"The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot\", which also starred two other former Doctors, Colin Baker and Sylvester McCoy, and cameo appearances from cast and crew involved in the programme, including showrunner Steven Moffat and Doctors Paul McGann, David Tennant and Matt Smith.\nThe Doctor in his fourth incarnation has been represented on several episodes of \"The Simpsons\" and Matt Groening's other animated series \"Futurama\". A fan of \"Doctor Who\" since childhood, Groening favours Tom Baker\u2019s fourth Doctor, with \"Simpsons\" writer Ron Hauge stating, \"There are several \"Doctor Who\" actors but Tom Baker is the one we always go with.\"\nThere have also been many references to \"Doctor Who\" in popular culture and other science fiction, including \" (\") and \"Leverage\". In the Channel 4 series \"Queer as Folk\" (created by later \"Doctor Who\" executive producer Russell T. Davies), the character of Vince was portrayed as an avid \"Doctor Who\" fan, with references appearing many times throughout in the form of clips from the programme. In a similar manner, the character of Oliver on \"Coupling\" (created and written by Steven Moffat) is portrayed as a \"Doctor Who\" collector and enthusiast.\nReferences to \"Doctor Who\" have also appeared in the young adult fantasy novels \"Brisingr\" and \"High Wizardry\", the video game \"Rock Band\", the Adult Swim comedy show \"Robot Chicken\", the \"Family Guy\" episodes \"Blue Harvest\" and \"420\", and the game \"RuneScape\". It has also be referenced in \"Destroy All Humans! 2\", by civilians in the game's variation of England, and multiple times throughout the \"Ace Attorney\" series.\n\"Doctor Who\" has been a reference in several political cartoons, from a 1964 cartoon in the \"Daily Mail\" depicting Charles de Gaulle as a Dalek to a 2008 edition of \"This Modern World\" by Tom Tomorrow in which the Tenth Doctor informs an incredulous character from 2003 that the Democratic Party will nominate an African-American as its presidential candidate.\nThe word \"TARDIS\" is an entry in the \"Shorter Oxford English Dictionary\", and the iOS dictionary.\nMuseums and exhibitions.\nThere have been various exhibitions of \"Doctor Who\" in the United Kingdom, including the now closed exhibitions at:\nThe exhibition closed down on 9 September 2017\nMerchandise.\nSince its beginnings, \"Doctor Who\" has generated hundreds of products related to the show, from toys and games to collectible picture cards and postage stamps. These include board games, card games, gamebooks, computer games, roleplaying games, action figures and a pinball game. Many games have been released that feature the Daleks, including Dalek computer games.\nAudios.\nThe earliest \"Doctor Who\"-related audio release was a 21-minute narrated abridgement of the First Doctor television story \"The Chase\" released in 1966. Ten years later, the first original Doctor Who audio was released on LP record; \"Doctor Who and the Pescatons\" featuring the Fourth Doctor. The first commercially available audiobook was an abridged reading of the Fourth Doctor story \"State of Decay\" in 1981. In 1988, during a hiatus in the television show, \"Slipback\", the first radio drama, was transmitted.\nSince 1999, Big Finish Productions has released several different series of Doctor Who audios on CD. The earliest of these featured the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Doctors, with Paul McGann's Eight Doctor joining the line in 2001. Tom Baker's Fourth Doctor began appearing for Big Finish in 2012. Along with the main range, adventures of the First, Second and Third Doctors have been produced in both limited cast and full cast formats, as well as audiobooks. The 2013 series \"\", produced as part of the series' 50th Anniversary celebrations, marked the first time Big Finish created stories (in this case audiobooks) featuring the Doctors from the revived show. Along with this, in May 2016 the Tenth Doctor, David Tennant, appeared alongside Catherine Tate in a collection of three audio adventures. In August 2020, Big Finish announced a new series of audios beginning release in May 2021, featuring Christopher Eccleston reprising his role as the Ninth Doctor.\nIn addition to these main lines, both the BBC and Big Finish have produced original audio dramas and audiobooks based on spin-off material, such as \"Torchwood\" and \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\" series.\nBooks.\n\"Doctor Who\" books have been published from the mid-sixties through to the present day. From 1965 to 1991 the books published were primarily novelised adaptations of broadcast episodes; beginning in 1991 an extensive line of original fiction was launched, the Virgin New Adventures and Virgin Missing Adventures. Since the relaunch of the programme in 2005, a new range of novels have been published by BBC Books. Numerous non-fiction books about the series, including guidebooks and critical studies, have also been published, and a dedicated \"Doctor Who Magazine\" with newsstand circulation has been published regularly since 1979. This is published by Panini, as is the \"Doctor Who Adventures\" magazine for younger fans.\nSee also:\nVideo games.\nNumerous \"Doctor Who\" video games have been created from the mid-80s through to the present day. A \"Doctor Who\" game was planned for the Sega Mega Drive but never released. One of the recent ones is a match-3 game released in November 2013 for iOS, Android, Amazon App Store and Facebook called \"\". It has been constantly updated since its release and features all of the Doctors as playable characters as well as over 100 companions.\nAnother video game instalment is LEGO Dimensions\u00a0\u2013 in which Doctor Who is one of the many \"Level Packs\" in the game. At the moment, the pack contains the Twelfth Doctor (who can reincarnate into the others), K9, the TARDIS and a Victorian London adventure level area. The game and pack released in November 2015.\nAnother recent game is called \"Doctor Who Infinity\", which was released on Steam on 7 August 2018. It was nominated for \"Best Start-up\" at The Independent Game Developers' Association Awards 2018.\nChronology and canonicity.\nSince the creation of the \"Doctor Who\" character by BBC Television in the early 1960s, a myriad of stories have been published about \"Doctor Who\", in different media: apart from the actual television episodes that continue to be produced by the BBC, there have also been novels, comics, short stories, audio books, radio plays, interactive video games, game books, webcasts, DVD extras, and stage performances. The BBC takes no position on the canonicity of any of such stories, and producers of the show have expressed distaste for the idea of canonicity.\nAwards.\nThe show has received recognition as one of Britain's finest television programmes, winning the 2006 British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series and five consecutive (2005\u20132010) awards at the National Television Awards during Russell T Davies' tenure as executive producer. In 2011, Matt Smith became the first Doctor to be nominated for a BAFTA Television Award for Best Actor and in 2016, Michelle Gomez became the first female to receive a BAFTA nomination for the series, getting a Best Supporting Actress nomination for her work as Missy.\nIn 2013, the Peabody Awards honoured \"Doctor Who\" with an Institutional Peabody \"for evolving with technology and the times like nothing else in the known television universe.\" The programme is listed in \"Guinness World Records\" as the longest-running science fiction television show in the world, the \"most successful\" science fiction series of all time\u2014based on its overall broadcast ratings, DVD and book sales, and iTunes traffic\u2014 and for the largest ever simulcast of a TV drama with its 50th anniversary special. During its original run, it was recognised for its imaginative stories, creative low-budget special effects, and pioneering use of electronic music (originally produced by the BBC Radiophonic Workshop).\nIn 1975, Season 11 of the series won a Writers' Guild of Great Britain award for Best Writing in a Children's Serial. In 1996, BBC television held the \"Auntie Awards\" as the culmination of their \"TV60\" series, celebrating 60 years of BBC television broadcasting, where \"Doctor Who\" was voted as the \"Best Popular Drama\" the corporation had ever produced, ahead of such ratings heavyweights as \"EastEnders\" and \"Casualty\". In 2000, \"Doctor Who\" was ranked third in a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes of the 20th century, produced by the British Film Institute and voted on by industry professionals. In 2005, the series came first in a survey by \"SFX\" magazine of \"The Greatest UK Science Fiction and Fantasy Television Series Ever\". In Channel 4\u2018s 2001 list of the 100 Greatest Kids' TV shows, \"Doctor Who\" was placed at number nine. In 2004 and 2007, \"Doctor Who\" was ranked number 18 and number 22 on TV Guide's Top Cult Shows Ever. In 2013, TV Guide ranked it as the number 6 sci-fi show.\nThe revived series has received recognition from critics and the public, across various awards ceremonies. It won five BAFTA TV Awards, including Best Drama Series, the highest-profile and most prestigious British television award for which the series has ever been nominated. It was very popular at the BAFTA Cymru Awards, with 25 wins overall including Best Drama Series (twice), Best Screenplay/Screenwriter (thrice) and Best Actor. It was also nominated for 7 Saturn Awards, winning the only Best International Series in the ceremony's history. In 2009, \"Doctor Who\" was voted the 3rd greatest show of the 2000s by Channel 4, behind \"Top Gear\" and \"The Apprentice\". The episode \"Vincent and the Doctor\" was shortlisted for a Mind Award at the 2010 Mind Mental Health Media Awards for its \"touching\" portrayal of Vincent van Gogh.\nIt has won the Short Form of the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, the oldest science fiction/fantasy award for films and series, six times since 2006. The winning episodes were \"The Empty Child\"/\"The Doctor Dances\" (2006), \"The Girl in the Fireplace\" (2007), \"Blink\" (2008), \"The Waters of Mars\" (2010), \"The Pandorica Opens\"/\"The Big Bang\" (2011), and \"The Doctor's Wife\" (2012). The 2016 Christmas special \"The Return of Doctor Mysterio\" is also a finalists for the 2017 Hugo Awards. Doctor Who star Matt Smith won Best Actor in the 2012 National Television awards alongside Karen Gillan who won Best Actress. \"Doctor Who\" has been nominated for over 200 awards and has won over a hundred of them.\nAs a British series, the majority of its nominations and awards have been for national competitions such as the BAFTAs, but it has occasionally received nominations in mainstream American awards, most notably a nomination for \"Favorite Sci-Fi Show\" in the 2008 People's Choice Awards and the series has been nominated multiple times in the Spike Scream Awards, with Smith winning Best Science Fiction Actor in 2011. The Canadian Constellation Awards have also recognised the series."}
{"id": "8211", "revid": "40774701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8211", "title": "Democritus", "text": "Democritus (; , \"D\u0113m\u00f3kritos\", meaning \"chosen of the people\"; \u2013 ) was an Ancient Greek pre-Socratic philosopher primarily remembered today for his formulation of an atomic theory of the universe.\nDemocritus was born in Abdera, Thrace, around 460 BC, although there are disagreements about the exact year. His exact contributions are difficult to disentangle from those of his mentor Leucippus, as they are often mentioned together in texts. Their speculation on atoms, taken from Leucippus, bears a passing and partial resemblance to the 19th-century understanding of atomic structure that has led some to regard Democritus as more of a scientist than other Greek philosophers; however, their ideas rested on very different bases.\nLargely ignored in ancient Athens, Democritus is said to have been disliked so much by Plato that the latter wished all of his books burned. He was nevertheless well known to his fellow northern-born philosopher Aristotle, and was the teacher of Protagoras.\nMany consider Democritus to be the \"father of modern science\". None of his writings have survived; only fragments are known from his vast body of work.\nLife.\nDemocritus was said to be born in the city of Abdera in Thrace, an Ionian colony of Teos, although some called him a Milesian.\nHe was born in the 80th Olympiad (460\u2013457\u00a0BC) according to Apollodorus of Athens, and although Thrasyllus placed his birth in 470 BC, the later date is probably more likely.\nJohn Burnet has argued that the date of 460 is \"too early\" since, according to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius ix.41, Democritus said that he was a \"young man (\"neos\")\" during Anaxagoras's old age ().\nIt was said that Democritus's father was from a noble family and so wealthy that he received Xerxes on his march through Abdera. Democritus spent the inheritance which his father left him on travels into distant countries, to satisfy his thirst for knowledge. He traveled to Asia, and was even said to have reached India and Ethiopia.\nIt is known that he wrote on Babylon and Meroe; he visited Egypt, and Diodorus Siculus states that he lived there for five years. He himself declared that among his contemporaries none had made greater journeys, seen more countries, and met more scholars than himself. He particularly mentions the Egyptian mathematicians, whose knowledge he praises. Theophrastus, too, spoke of him as a man who had seen many countries. During his travels, according to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, he became acquainted with the Chaldean magi. \"Ostanes\", one of the magi accompanying Xerxes, was said to have taught him. It was also said he learned with the gymnosophists in his journey to India.\nAfter returning to his native land he occupied himself with natural philosophy. He traveled throughout Greece to acquire a better knowledge of its cultures. He mentions many Greek philosophers in his writings, and his wealth enabled him to purchase their writings. Leucippus, the founder of atomism, was the greatest influence upon him. He also praises Anaxagoras. Diogenes Laertius says that he was friends with Hippocrates, and he quotes Demetrius saying: \"It would seem that he also went to Athens and was not anxious to be recognized, because he despised fame, and that while he knew of Socrates, he was not known to Socrates, his words being, `I came to Athens and no one knew me.'\" Aristotle placed him among the pre-Socratic natural philosophers.\nThe many anecdotes about Democritus, especially in Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, attest to his disinterest, modesty, and simplicity, and show that he lived exclusively for his studies. One story has him deliberately blinding himself in order to be less disturbed in his pursuits; it may well be true that he lost his sight in old age. He was cheerful, and was always ready to see the comical side of life, which later writers took to mean that he always laughed at the foolishness of people.\nHe was highly esteemed by his fellow citizens, because as Diogenes La\u00ebrtius says, \"he had foretold them some things which events proved to be true,\" which may refer to his knowledge of natural phenomena. According to Diodorus Siculus,\nDemocritus died at the age of 90, which would put his death around 370\u00a0BC, but other writers have him living to 104, or even 109.\nPopularly known as the Laughing Philosopher (for laughing at human follies), the terms \"Abderitan laughter\", which means scoffing, incessant laughter, and Abderite, which means a scoffer, are derived from Democritus.\nTo his fellow citizens he was also known as \"The Mocker\".\nPhilosophy and science.\nMost sources say that Democritus followed in the tradition of Leucippus and that they carried on the scientific rationalist philosophy associated with Miletus. Both were thoroughly materialist, believing everything to be the result of natural laws. Unlike Aristotle or Plato, the atomists attempted to explain the world without reasoning as to \"purpose\", \"prime mover\", or \"final cause\". For the atomists questions of physics should be answered with a mechanistic explanation (\"What earlier circumstances caused this event?\"), while their opponents search for explanations which, in addition to the material and mechanistic, also included the formal and teleological (\"What purpose did this event serve?\"). Eusebius quoting Aristocles of Messene places Democritus in a line of philosophy that began with Xenophanes and culminated in Pyrrhonism.\nQuote by Democritus: \"If you seek tranquility, do less.\" From Meditations by Marcus Aurelius according to Gregory Hayes, IV:24 (ref. G. Hayes' Notes) \nAesthetics.\nLater Greek historians consider Democritus to have established aesthetics as a subject of investigation and study, as he wrote theoretically on poetry and fine art long before authors such as Aristotle. Specifically, Thrasyllus identified six works in the philosopher's oeuvre which had belonged to aesthetics as a discipline, but only fragments of the relevant works are extant; hence of all Democritus's writings on these matters, only a small percentage of his thoughts and ideas can be known.\nAtomic hypothesis.\nThe theory of Democritus held that everything is composed of \"atoms,\" which are physically, but not geometrically, indivisible; that between atoms, there lies empty space; that atoms are indestructible, and have always been and always will be in motion; that there is an infinite number of atoms and of kinds of atoms, which differ in shape and size. Of the mass of atoms, Democritus said, \"The more any indivisible exceeds, the heavier it is.\" However, his exact position on atomic weight is disputed.\nLeucippus is widely credited with having been the first to develop the theory of atomism, although Isaac Newton preferred to credit the obscure Mochus the Phoenician (whom he believed to be the biblical Moses) as the inventor of the idea on the authority of Posidonius and Strabo. The \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" notes, \"This theologically motivated view does not seem to claim much historical evidence, however\".\nDemocritus, along with Leucippus and Epicurus, proposed the earliest views on the shapes and connectivity of atoms. They reasoned that the solidness of the material corresponded to the shape of the atoms involved. Thus, iron atoms are solid and strong with hooks that lock them into a solid; water atoms are smooth and slippery; salt atoms, because of their taste, are sharp and pointed; and air atoms are light and whirling, pervading all other materials.\nUsing analogies from humans' sense experiences, he gave a picture or an image of an atom that distinguished them from each other by their shape, their size, and the arrangement of their parts. Moreover, connections were explained by material links in which single atoms were supplied with attachments: some with hooks and eyes, others with balls and sockets.\nThe Democritean atom is an inert solid (merely excluding other bodies from its volume) that interacts with other atoms mechanically. In contrast, modern, quantum-mechanical atoms interact via electric and magnetic force fields and are far from inert.\nThe theory of the atomists appears to be more nearly aligned with that of modern science than any other theory of antiquity. However, the similarity with modern concepts of science can be confusing when trying to understand where the hypothesis came from. Classical atomists could not have had an empirical basis for modern concepts of atoms and molecules.\nHowever, Lucretius, describing atomism in his \"De rerum natura\", gives very clear and compelling empirical arguments for the original atomist theory. He observes that any material is subject to irreversible decay. Through time, even hard rocks are slowly worn down by drops of water. Things have the tendency to get mixed up: Mix water with soil and mud will result, seldom disintegrating by itself. Wood decays. However, there are mechanisms in nature and technology to recreate \"pure\" materials like water, air, and metals. The seed of an oak will grow out into an oak tree, made of similar wood as historical oak trees, the wood of which has already decayed. The conclusion is that many properties of materials must derive from something inside, that will itself never decay, something that stores for eternity the same inherent, indivisible properties. The basic question is: Why has everything in the world not yet decayed, and how can exactly some of the same materials, plants, and animals be recreated again and again? One obvious solution to explain how indivisible properties can be conveyed in a way not easily visible to human senses, is to hypothesize the existence of \"atoms\". These classical \"atoms\" are nearer to humans' modern concept of \"molecule\" than to the atoms of modern science. The other central point of classical atomism is that there must be considerable open space between these \"atoms\": the void. Lucretius gives reasonable arguments that the void is absolutely necessary to explain how gases and liquids can flow and change shape, while metals can be molded without their basic material properties changing.\nVoid hypothesis.\nThe atomistic void hypothesis was a response to the paradoxes of Parmenides and Zeno, the founders of metaphysical logic, who put forth difficult-to-answer arguments in favor of the idea that there can be no movement. They held that any movement would require a void\u2014which is nothing\u2014but a nothing cannot exist. The Parmenidean position was \"You say there \"is\" a void; therefore the void is not nothing; therefore there is not the void.\" The position of Parmenides appeared validated by the observation that where there seems to be nothing there is air, and indeed even where there is not matter there is \"something\", for instance light waves.\nThe atomists agreed that motion required a void, but simply ignored the argument of Parmenides on the grounds that motion was an observable fact. Therefore, they asserted, there must be a void. This idea survived in a refined version as Newton's theory of absolute space, which met the logical requirements of attributing reality to not-being. Einstein's theory of relativity provided a new answer to Parmenides and Zeno, with the insight that space by itself is relative and cannot be separated from time as part of a generally curved space-time manifold. Consequently, Newton's refinement is now considered superfluous.\nEpistemology.\nThe knowledge of truth, according to Democritus, is difficult, since the perception through the senses is subjective. As from the same senses derive different impressions for each individual, then through the sensual impressions we cannot judge the truth. We can interpret the senses' data and grasp the truth only through the intellect, because the truth is in an abyss:\nAnd:\nThere are two kinds of knowing, the one he calls \"legitimate\" (\u03b3\u03bd\u03b7\u03c3\u03af\u03b7, \"gn\u0113si\u0113\", \"genuine\") and the other \"bastard\" (\u03c3\u03ba\u03bf\u03c4\u03af\u03b7, \"skoti\u0113\", \"secret\"). The \"bastard\" knowledge is concerned with the perception through the senses; therefore it is insufficient and subjective. The reason is that the sensual perception is due to the effluences of the atoms from the objects to the senses. When these different shapes of atoms come to us, they stimulate our senses according to their shape, and our sensual impressions arise from those stimulations.\nThe second sort of knowledge, the \"legitimate\" one, can be achieved through the intellect, in other words, all the sense data from the \"bastard\" must be elaborated through reasoning. In this way one can get away from the false perception of the \"bastard\" knowledge and grasp the truth through inductive reasoning. After taking into account the sense impressions, one can examine the causes of the appearances, draw conclusions about the laws that govern the appearances, and discover the causality (\u03b1\u1f30\u03c4\u03b9\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1, \"aetiologia\") by which they are related. This is the procedure of thought from the parts to the whole or else from the apparent to nonapparent (inductive reasoning). This is one example of why Democritus is considered to be an early scientific thinker. The process is reminiscent of that by which science gathers its conclusions:\nAnd:\nAs well as:\nEthics and politics.\nThe ethics and politics of Democritus come to us mostly in the form of maxims. As such, the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy has gone as far as to say that: \"despite the large number of ethical sayings, it is difficult to construct a coherent account of Democritus's ethical views,\" noting that there is a \"difficulty of deciding which fragments are genuinely Democritean.\"\nHe says that \"Equality is everywhere noble,\" but he is not encompassing enough to include women or slaves in this sentiment. Poverty in a democracy is better than prosperity under tyrants, for the same reason one is to prefer liberty over slavery. In his History of Western Philosophy, Bertrand Russell writes that Democritus was in love with \"what the Greeks called democracy.\" Democritus said that \"the wise man belongs to all countries, for the home of a great soul is the whole world.\" Democritus wrote that those in power should \"take it upon themselves to lend to the poor and to aid them and to favor them, then is there pity and no isolation but companionship and mutual defense and concord among the citizens and other good things too many to catalogue.\" Money when used with sense leads to generosity and charity, while money used in folly leads to a common expense for the whole society\u2014excessive hoarding of money for one's children is avarice. While making money is not useless, he says, doing so as a result of wrongdoing is the \"worst of all things.\" He is on the whole ambivalent towards wealth, and values it much less than self-sufficiency. He disliked violence but was not a pacifist: he urged cities to be prepared for war, and believed that a society had the right to execute a criminal or enemy so long as this did not violate some law, treaty, or oath.\nGoodness, he believed, came more from practice and discipline than from innate human nature. He believed that one should distance oneself from the wicked, stating that such association increases disposition to vice. Anger, while difficult to control, must be mastered in order for one to be rational. Those who take pleasure from the disasters of their neighbors fail to understand that their fortunes are tied to the society in which they live, and they rob themselves of any joy of their own. Democritus believed that happiness (\"euthymia\") was a property of the soul. He advocated a life of contentment with as little grief as possible, which he said could not be achieved through either idleness or preoccupation with worldly pleasures. Contentment would be gained, he said, through moderation and a measured life; to be content one must set one's judgment on the possible and be satisfied with what one has\u2014giving little thought to envy or admiration. Democritus approved of extravagance on occasion, as he held that feasts and celebrations were necessary for joy and relaxation. He considers education to be the noblest of pursuits, but cautioned that learning without sense leads to error.\nMathematics.\nDemocritus was also a pioneer of mathematics and geometry in particular. We only know this through citations of his works (titled \"On Numbers\", \"On Geometrics\", \"On Tangencies\", \"On Mapping\", and \"On Irrationals\") in other writings, since all of Democritus's body of work did not survive the Middle Ages.\nAccording to Archimedes, Democritus was among the first to observe that a cone and pyramid with the same base area and height has one-third the volume of a cylinder or prism respectively. Archimedes pointed out that Democritus didn't provide any proof of this statement, which was instead provided by Eudoxus of Cnidus.\nMoreover Plutarch (Plut. De Comm. 39) stated that Democritus had raised the following question: if a plane parallel to the base cuts a cone, are the surfaces of the section and of the base od the cone equal or unequal? If they are equal, the cone becomes a cylinder, while if they are unequal, the cone becomes an \"irregular cone\" with indentations or steps. This question could be easily solved through calculus and it's been suggested, therefore, that Democritus may be considered a forerunner of infinitesimals and of integral calculus.\nAnthropology, biology, and cosmology.\nHis work on nature is known through citations of his books on the subjects, \"On the Nature of Man\", \"On Flesh\" (two books), \"On Mind, On the Senses\", \"On Flavors\", \"On Colors\", \"Causes concerned with Seeds and Plants and Fruits\", and \"Causes concerned with Animals\" (three books). He spent much of his life experimenting with and examining plants and minerals, and wrote at length on many scientific topics. Democritus thought that the first humans lived an anarchic and animal sort of life, going out to forage individually and living off the most palatable herbs and the fruit which grew wild on the trees. They were driven together into societies for fear of wild animals, he said. He believed that these early people had no language, but that they gradually began to articulate their expressions, establishing symbols for every sort of object, and in this manner came to understand each other. He says that the earliest men lived laboriously, having none of the utilities of life; clothing, houses, fire, domestication, and farming were unknown to them. Democritus presents the early period of mankind as one of learning by trial and error, and says that each step slowly led to more discoveries; they took refuge in the caves in winter, stored fruits that could be preserved, and through reason and keenness of mind came to build upon each new idea.\nDemocritus held that originally the universe was composed of nothing but tiny atoms churning in chaos, until they collided together to form larger units\u2014including the earth and everything on it. He surmised that there are many worlds, some growing, some decaying; some with no sun or moon, some with several. He held that every world has a beginning and an end and that a world could be destroyed by collision with another world.\nLike the other atomists, Democritus believed in a flat Earth and challenged arguments for its sphericity.\nTwentieth-century appraisals.\nAccording to Bertrand Russell, the point of view of Leucippus and Democritus \"was remarkably like that of modern science, and avoided most of the faults to which Greek speculation was prone.\"\nKarl R. Popper admired Democritus's rationalism, humanism, and love of freedom and writes that Democritus, along with fellow countryman Protagoras, \"formulated the doctrine that human institutions of language, custom, and law are not taboos but man-made, not natural but conventional, insisting, at the same time, that we are responsible for them.\"\nWorks.\nNone of Democritus's writings have survived to the present day complete; only fragments are known from his vast body of work.\nNumismatics.\nDemocritus was depicted on the following contemporary coins/banknotes:"}
{"id": "8212", "revid": "19531195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8212", "title": "Disc golf", "text": "Disc golf is a flying disc sport in which players throw a disc at a target; it is played using rules similar to golf. It is usually played on a course with 9 or 18 holes. Players complete a hole by throwing a disc from a tee pad or area toward a target, throwing again from where the previous throw landed, until the target is reached. Usually, the number of throws a player uses to reach each target is tallied (often in relation to par), and players seek to complete each hole in the lowest number of total throws.\nThe game is played in about 40 countries and, as of 2020, there are active members of the PDGA worldwide.\nOrigin and early history.\nDisc golf was first invented in the early 1900s. The first game was held in Bladworth, Saskatchewan, Canada in 1927. Ronald Franklin Gibson and a group of his Bladworth Elementary School buddies played a game of throwing tin lids into 4-foot wide circles drawn into sandy patches on their school grounds. They called the game Tin Lid Golf and played on a fairly regular basis. However, after they grew older and went their separate ways, the game came to an end. It was not until the 1970s that modern disc golf would be introduced to Canadians at the Canadian Open Frisbee Championships in Toronto and Vancouver, BC.\nModern disc golf started in the early 1960s, but there is debate over who came up with the idea first. The consensus is that multiple groups of people played independently throughout the 1960s. Students at Rice University in Houston, Texas, for example, held tournaments with trees as targets as early as 1964, and in the early 1960s, players in Pendleton King Park in Augusta, Georgia would toss Frisbees into 50-gallon barrel trash cans designated as targets. In 1968 Frisbee Golf was also played in Alameda Park in Santa Barbara, California by teenagers in the Anacapa and Sola street areas. Gazebos, water fountains, lamp posts, and trees were all part of the course. This took place for several years and an Alameda Park collectors edition disc still exists, though rare, as few were made. Clifford Towne from this group went on to hold a National Time Aloft record.\nDisc golf courses.\nMost disc golf courses have 9 or 18 holes, and exceptions most often have holes in multiples of three. Courses with 6, 12, 21, 24 or 27 holes are not uncommon. The PDGA recommends that courses average per hole, with holes no shorter than . The longest holes in the world measure more than long. Course designers use trees, bushes, elevation changes, water hazards, and distance variation, along with out-of-bounds zones and mandatory flight paths to make each hole challenging and unique. Many courses include multiple tee positions or multiple target positions to cater to players of different ability levels.\nMost disc golf courses are built in more natural and less manicured environments than golf and require minimal maintenance. Professional course designers consider safety a critical factor in course design, and are careful to minimize the danger of being hit by a flying disc while providing designs that create strategy in play and variety in shots for enjoyment. Holes are designed to require a range of different throws to challenge players with different strengths or particular skills. Many courses are central organizing points for local disc golf clubs, and some include shops selling disc golf equipment. More than 80% of the courses listed on Disc Golf Course Review are listed as public and free to play.\nList of disc golf courses by country.\nThree countries account for 85% of all disc golf courses worldwide: the United States (75%), Finland (7%) and Canada (3%). Other notable countries include Sweden, and Estonia, which has the highest density of disc golf courses per km2 of dry land of any country and the second-highest number of courses per capita, between Iceland and Finland, which have 150 and 111 courses per million inhabitants, respectively. Outside North American and European strongholds, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and South Korea have the most courses. There are disc golf courses on every continent, including 24 in Latin America, 8 in Africa, and one in Antarctica. The \u00c5land Islands have been defined as the world's largest single disc golf park, with one course in each of the 16 municipalities of \u00c5land.\nTees.\nA disc golf tee (commonly referred to as a tee box or the box) is the starting position of a hole. The PDGA recommends that the tee box be no smaller than 1.2 meters wide by 3 meters long. The tee box is usually a pad of concrete, asphalt, rubber, gravel, or artificial turf. Some courses have natural turf with only the front of the tee position marked or no tee boxes at all and players begin from a general location based on the course layout.\nSigns.\nEstablished courses have tee signs near each tee position. Signs may depict a simple map of the hole including the tee, target, expected disc flight, out-of-bounds areas, water hazards, trees, and mandatory paths. Signs typically include the distance to the hole, and par. Some courses include a unique name for the hole and may have sponsor logos. They are often supplemented with a larger sign near the course entrance which has a map of the entire course.\nTargets.\nAlthough early courses were played using trees, fence posts, or park equipment as the target, standard disc golf baskets are by far the most common type of target on modern courses. Some courses feature tone targets that are designed to make a distinctive sound when hit with a disc. Disc golf baskets are constructed with a central pole holding a basket under an assembly of hanging chains. When a disc hits the chains, it is often, but not always, deflected into the basket. Per PDGA rules, in order to complete a hole with a basket target, the disc must \"enter the target above the top of the tray and below the bottom of the chain support, and come to rest supported by the target. There are many different brands of baskets made by numerous manufacturers.\nGameplay.\nThe sport of disc golf is set up similar to a game of golf. A \"round\" is played on a disc golf course consisting of a number of \"holes\", usually 9 or 18. Each hole includes a tee position for starting play and a disc golf target some distance away, often with obstacles such as trees, hills or bodies of water in between. Players begin by throwing a disc from the tee, without crossing over the front of the tee prior to releasing the disc when throwing. This could lead to a fault similar to the foot fault in bowling. Players then navigate the hole by picking up the disc where it lands and throwing again until they reach the target. The object of the game is to get through the course with the lowest number of total throws. Play is usually in groups of five or fewer, with each player taking turn at the tee box, then progressing with the player furthest from the hole throwing first, while the other players stand aside.\u00a0\nEach course is unique, so each course requires a different combination of throws to complete, with the best players aiming to shape the flight of the disc to account for distance, terrain, obstacles and weather. In order to facilitate making different shots, players carry a variety of discs with different flight characteristics, choosing an appropriate disc for each throw. Some players also carry a mini marker disc, used to accurately mark the throwing position before each throw.\u00a0 Use of mini marker discs is particularly prevalent in formal competitive play.\nMany courses include out-of-bounds areas, commonly called \"OB zones\" or just \"OB\". If the disc lands in these areas, the player is usually required to add a penalty throw onto his or her score and continue play from near where the disc entered the out-of-bounds zone. Some courses include out-of-bounds areas with special rules requiring the player the resume play from a specified area called a drop zone, or requiring the player to restart the hole from the tee. Some courses also include Mandatories (also called \"Mandos\") which require the path of the disc to be above, below or to one side of a specific line indicated by a sign.\nBy tradition, players throw from the tee box in the order of their score on the previous hole, with the lowest scorer throwing first. Most players also follow a loose code of courtesy while playing, which includes norms such as standing out of the sight line of the throwing player and avoiding making distracting noises. Because a thrown disc could injure someone, the Professional Disc Golf Association recommends that players \"Never throw into a blind area or when spectators, pedestrians or facility users are within range.\"\nFormal competitive play is governed by the PDGA Official Rules of Disc Golf and the PDGA Competition Manual for Disc Golf events.\nDisc types.\nDisc golf discs are smaller than Ultimate flying discs or general-purpose recreational frisbees. They typically measure in diameter and weigh . All PDGA-approved discs measure in diameter and weigh no more than . Discs used for disc golf are designed and shaped for control, speed, and accuracy, while general-purpose flying discs, such as those used for playing guts or ultimate, have a more traditional shape, similar to a catch disc. There is a wide variety of discs used in disc golf and they are generally divided into three categories: drivers, mid-range discs, and putters.\nDriver.\nDrivers are recognized by their sharp, beveled edge and have most of their mass concentrated on the outer rim of the disc rather than distributed equally throughout. They are optimized for aerodynamics and designed to travel maximum distances at high speeds. They are typically thrown by experienced players during tee-off and other long distance fairway throws.\nSome disc brands further sub-divide their drivers into different categories. For example, Innova has \"Distance Drivers\" and \"Fairway Drivers\", with a fairway driver being somewhere between a distance driver and a mid-range disc. Discraft has three categories of drivers: \"Long Drivers\", \"Extra Long Drivers\", and \"Maximum Distance Drivers\". Another type of driver, used less frequently, is a roller. As the name indicates, it has an edge designed to roll rather than fly. (Although any disc can be used for a roller, some behave quite differently than others.)\nBecause the physics of a disc require \"snap\" or \"flick\", which means putting spin on the disc, new players generally find that throwing a distance driver accurately can be somewhat difficult and will require experience with golf disc response. This is why it is better for players to begin with fairway drivers, long drivers, or even mid-ranges, and incorporate maximum distance drivers as their strength and disc control increases. Most players that are starting off will be most likely throwing lighter discs.\nThe world record distance for a golf disc is , thrown by Simon Lizotte on October 25, 2014.\nMid-range.\nMid-range discs feature a dull, beveled edge and a moderate rim width. They offer more control than drivers, but they have a smaller range. Mid-range discs are typically used as approach discs. Beginner players will often use mid-ranges instead of drivers at tee-off, as they require less strength and technique to fly straight than higher speed drivers.\nPutter.\nPutters are similar to the discs used in simple games of catch, such as the Wham-O brand Frisbee. They are designed to fly straight, predictably, and very slowly compared to mid-range discs and drivers. They are typically used for tight, controlled shots that are close to the basket, although some players use them for short drives where trees or other obstacles come into play. Usually a pro carries 1\u20137 putters depending on their flight characteristics. As a beginner it is suggested that you only use a putter or mid-range while building fundamentals such as proper follow-through, disc throw positioning, and hyzer/anhyzer technique. Additionally, higher speed discs won't fly properly without a fast enough release snap, so a putter or mid-range with lower snap requirements is more forgiving and will behave in a more regular way.\nStability.\nStability is the measurement of a disc's tendency to bank laterally during its flight. A disc that is over-stable will tend to track left (for a right handed, backhand throw), whereas a disc that is under-stable will tend to track right (also for a right handed, backhand throw). The stability rating of the discs differs depending on the manufacturer of the disc. Innova Discs rate stability as \"turn\" and \"fade\". \"Turn\" references how the disc will fly at high speed during the beginning and middle of its flight, and is rated on a scale of +1 to \u22125, where +1 is the most overstable and \u22125 is the most understable. \"Fade\" references how the disc will fly at lower speeds towards the end of its flight, and is rated on a scale of 0 to 5, where 0 has the least fade, and 5 has the most fade. For example, a disc with a turn of \u22125 and fade of 0 will fly to the right for (right handed, backhand throw) the majority of its flight then curl back minimally left at the end. A disc with a turn of \u22121 and a fade of +3 will turn slightly right during the middle of its flight and turn hard left as it slows down. These ratings can be found on the discs themselves or from the manufacturer's web site. Discraft prints the stability rating on all discs and also provides this information on their web site. The stability ranges from 3 to \u22122 for Discraft discs; however Discraft's ratings are more of a combination of turn and fade with the predominance being fade.\nSpin (rotation) has little influence on lift and drag forces but impacts a disc's stability during flight. Imagine a spinning top. A gentle nudge will knock it off its axis of rotation for a second, but it will not topple over because spin adds gyroscopic stability. In the same way, a flying disc resists rolling (flipping over) because spin adds gyroscopic stability. A flying disc will maintain its spin rate even as it loses velocity. Toward the end of a disc's flight, when the spin and velocity lines cross, a flying disc will predictably begin to fade. The degree to which a disc will fade depends on its pitch angle and design.\nPlastics.\nThere are a variety of different discs, each made with a specific plastic. Plastics such as DX, J-Pro, Pro-D, X-Line, D-line, retro, and R-Pro from Innova, Latitude 64\u00b0, Discmania, and Discraft are some of the less durable, but good for beginners due to their lower prices, compared to the higher end plastics. Plastics such as Champion, Titanium, FLX, GStar, Gold Line, Tournament Plastic, Fuzion and Star, which are the best offered from the same companies, have the best quality, durability and flight compared to the other types available. There are also plastics that provide additional functionality, e.g. glow in the dark plastic and plastic that allows the disc to float in water. Most companies also offer a line of plastic that is much lighter than the maximum throwing weight (normally filled with air bubbles) which is conducive to beginners or players with less arm speed. Players might prefer bright colored discs to contrast most green flora and recover their disc easier.\nThrowing styles.\nWhile there are many different grips and styles to throwing the disc, there are two basic throwing techniques: backhand and forehand (or sidearm). These techniques vary in effectiveness under different circumstances. Their understanding and mastery can greatly improve a player's game, and offer diverse options in maneuvering the disc to the basket with greater efficacy. Many players use what is referred to as a run-up during their drive. This is practiced to build more forward disc momentum and distance. Throwing styles vary from player to player, and there is no standard throwing style.\nAll discs when thrown will naturally fall to a certain direction determined by the rotation direction of the disc when released, this direction is termed \"Hyzer\", the natural fall of the disc, or \"Anhyzer\", making the disc fall against its natural flight pattern. For a right-handed backhand throw (RHBH), the disc will naturally fall to the left. For a right-handed forehand throw (RHFH), the disc will naturally fall to the right. For a left-handed, backhand throw (LHBH), the disc will naturally fall to the right. For a left-handed, forehand throw (LHFH), the disc will naturally fall to the left.\nBackhand.\nTo perform this throw, the disc is rapidly drawn from across the front of the body, and released towards a forward aimpoint. Due to the potential snap available with this technique, one can expect greater distance than with a forehand throw. It is important to initiate momentum from the feet and allow it to travel up the body, hips and shoulders, culminating in the transfer of energy to the disc.\nForehand.\nThe forehand (sidearm) throw is performed by drawing the disc from behind and partially across the front of the body: similar to a sidearm throw in baseball. The term sidearm actually predates the term forehand, which is seemingly in use today as a simpler means to communicate the technique, equating to a tennis forehand.\nAlternative throws.\nThe following examples of throws may be used to better deliver a disc where the former common two throws would be impeded by obstacles such as bushes, trees, boulders, or artificial structures.\nCommon alternative styles\nOther alternative styles\nScoring.\nStroke play is the most common scoring method used in the sport but there are many other forms. These include match play, skins, speed golf and captain's choice, which in disc golf is referred to as \"doubles\" (not to be confused with partner or team play).\nRegardless of which form of play the participants choose, the main objectives of disc golf are conceptually the same as traditional golf in the sense that players follow the same scorekeeping technique.\nScoring terms for a single hole:\nDoubles play is a unique style of play that many local courses offer on a weekly basis. In this format, teams of two golfers are determined. Sometimes this is done by random draw, and other times it is a pro-am format. On the course, it is a \"best-disc\" scramble, meaning both players throw their tee shot; and then decide which lie they would like to play. Both players then play from the same lie, again choosing which lie is preferable. The World Amateur Doubles Format includes best shot, alternate shot, best score (players play singles and take the best result from the hole) and worst shot (both players must sink the putt).\nTournaments.\nTournaments are held nationwide and year long in the United States. Sanctioned Tournament play is communicated through the Professional Disc Golf Association Membership. The PDGA provides international, professional, and amateur disc golf tournaments as well as communicates event results, opinions and other information beneficial to the sport via electronic and printed media. In 1982 the PDGA hosted the first World Championship Tournament. Since then, the World Championships have been held in 17 different American states, as well as Toronto, Ontario.\nDisc golf tournaments are popular around the world. As with traditional golf, there are many championship tournaments. One of the largest is the United States Disc Golf Championship.\nEvery year, the largest teams tournament in the world is held in Austin, Texas, by John Houck.\nTo prove the year-round sustainability of the sport, annual winter tournaments known as Ice Bowls are held at courses around the world. Using the motto \"No Wimps, No Whiners\", Ice Bowls collectively are designed to create sport awareness, and are considered charity events that typically benefit a food bank local to a given tournament location. The official Web site reports that the 2010 Ice Bowls raised over $250,000 and donated over 67,000 pounds of food in the 222 tournaments for the year. Ice Bowl HQ | Other charitable tournaments include the annual St. Jude Disc Golf Tournament which first started in 2017 and has raised over $100,000 for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.\nPopularity.\nDisc golf is a rapidly growing sport worldwide, and is the 4th fastest growing sport in United States, behind mixed martial arts, roller derby, and parkour. DGCourseReview.com, which tracks courses worldwide along with opening dates, shows a rapid increase in installed permanent courses with an average of more than 400 new courses added each year between 2007 and 2017. The site lists 6800 courses worldwide (in May 2017).\nAlthough most players play on a casual, amateur level, the professional disc golf scene is also growing rapidly, with the top professionals playing full-time and earning their livings through tournament winnings and sponsorship from equipment manufacturers. Online viewership of major tournaments and events has increased rapidly, with coverage of the 2019 world championship achieving more than 3 million views on YouTube, and a clip of a single albatross by professional Philo Braithwaite boasting more than 1.4\u00a0million views.\nPost-round coverage.\nIncreased popularity of disc golf can be largely attributed to increased coverage of pro tour events, available for free on YouTube. Jomez Productions, Gatekeeper Media, and Gk Pro all film events the day of, and then air them the morning after. Often, these videos can have a reach of as many has 200,000 viewers. In the 2020 season, Jomez Productions and the Disc Golf Pro Tour reached and agreement with CBS Sports and ESPN 2 to air post production coverage of a tournament on each network. The Dynamic Discs Open was shown on CBS Sports, and the Disc Golf Pro Tour championship was re-aired on ESPN2 November 24th, 2020. With 225,000 viewers, it was the most-watched show on the channel that day.\nWomen in disc golf.\nWhile there are more male than female players, the Women's Disc Golf Association exists to encourage female players and arrange women's tournaments. A PDGA survey states that out of its 35,662 active members in 2016, 7.6% are female, or about 2,728.\nSeveral companies have started programs and websites to help attract women to the sport. The PDGA Women's Committee is \"Dedicated to Attract, Encourage, and Retain Female Participation in Organized Disc Golf Events\". The PDGA Women's Committee set historical records on 12 May 2012 by running the Inaugural Women's Global Event that attracted 636 female players in 24 states and 4 countries. The Women's Global Event was expected to take place every two years from 2014, with hopes of increasing the number of participants.\nThere are also disc golf companies such as Disc-Diva, that have started up with a primary, though not exclusive, focus on women in the sport, promoting accessories geared towards women and using catch phrases like \"you wish you threw like a girl\". Sassy Pants is another group that focuses on getting more involvement from women in the sport, advocating for sponsorship of women to enter tournaments.\nWomen's disc golf teams are involved in the National Collegiate Disc Golf Championship, and the Mississippi State Women's Team were the inaugural champions.\nThe Disc Golf Hall of Fame.\nInductees:"}
{"id": "8214", "revid": "12680084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8214", "title": "Decimal", "text": "The decimal numeral system (also called the base-ten positional numeral system, and occasionally called denary or decanary) is the standard system for denoting integer and non-integer numbers. It is the extension to non-integer numbers of the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system. The way of denoting numbers in the decimal system is often referred to as \"decimal notation\".\nA \"decimal numeral\" (also often just \"decimal\" or, less correctly, \"decimal number\"), refers generally to the notation of a number in the decimal numeral system. Decimals may sometimes be identified by a decimal separator (usually \".\" or \",\" as in or ). \"Decimal\" may also refer specifically to the digits after the decimal separator, such as in \" is the approximation of to \"two decimals\"\".\nThe numbers that may be represented in the decimal system are the decimal fractions. That is, fractions of the form , where is an integer, and is a non-negative integer.\nThe decimal system has been extended to \"infinite decimals\" for representing any real number, by using an infinite sequence of digits after the decimal separator (see decimal representation). In this context, the decimal numerals with a finite number of non-zero digits after the decimal separator are sometimes called \"terminating decimals\". A \"repeating decimal\" is an infinite decimal that, after some place, repeats indefinitely the same sequence of digits (e.g., ). An infinite decimal represents a rational number, the quotient of two integers, if and only if it is a repeating decimal or has a finite number of non-zero digits.\nOrigin.\nMany numeral systems of ancient civilizations use ten and its powers for representing numbers, possibly because there are ten fingers on two hands and people started counting by using their fingers. Examples are Brahmi numerals, Greek numerals, Hebrew numerals, Roman numerals, and Chinese numerals. Very large numbers were difficult to represent in these old numeral systems, and only the best mathematicians were able to multiply or divide large numbers. These difficulties were completely solved with the introduction of the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system for representing integers. This system has been extended to represent some non-integer numbers, called \"decimal fractions\" or \"decimal numbers\", for forming the \"decimal numeral system\".\nDecimal notation.\nFor writing numbers, the decimal system uses ten decimal digits, a decimal mark, and, for negative numbers, a minus sign \"\u2212\". The decimal digits are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; the decimal separator is the dot \"\" in many countries, but also a comma \"\" in other countries.\nFor representing a non-negative number, a decimal numeral consists of\nIf , that is, if the first sequence contains at least two digits, it is generally assumed that the first digit is not zero. In some circumstances it may be useful to have one or more 0's on the left; this does not change the value represented by the decimal: for example, . Similarly, if the final digit on the right of the decimal mark is zero\u2014that is, if \u2014it may be removed; conversely, trailing zeros may be added after the decimal mark without changing the represented number; for example, and .\nFor representing a negative number, a minus sign is placed before .\nThe numeral formula_2 represents the number\nThe \"integer part\" or \"integral part\" of a decimal numeral is the integer written to the left of the decimal separator (see also truncation). For a non-negative decimal numeral, it is the largest integer that is not greater than the decimal. The part from the decimal separator to the right is the \"fractional part\", which equals the difference between the numeral and its integer part.\nWhen the integral part of a numeral is zero, it may occur, typically in computing, that the integer part is not written (for example , instead of ). In normal writing, this is generally avoided, because of the risk of confusion between the decimal mark and other punctuation.\nIn brief, the contribution of each digit to the value of a number depends on its position in the numeral. That is, the decimal system is a positional numeral system.\nDecimal fractions.\nDecimal fractions (sometimes called decimal numbers, specially in contexts involving explicit fractions) are the rational numbers that may be expressed as a fraction whose denominator is a power of ten. For example, the decimals formula_5 represent the fractions , , , and , and are therefore decimal numbers. \nMore generally, a decimal with digits after the separator represents the fraction with denominator , whose numerator is the integer obtained by removing the separator. \nIt follows that a number is a decimal fraction if and only if it has a finite decimal representation.\nExpressed as a fully reduced fraction, the decimal numbers are those whose denominator is a product of a power of 2 and a power of 5. Thus the smallest denominators of decimal numbers are\nReal number approximation.\nDecimal numerals do not allow an exact representation for all real numbers, e.g. for the real number . Nevertheless, they allow approximating every real number with any desired accuracy, e.g., the decimal 3.14159 approximates the real , being less than 10\u22125 off; so decimals are widely used in science, engineering and everyday life.\nMore precisely, for every real number and every positive integer , there are two decimals and with at most \" digits after the decimal mark such that and .\nNumbers are very often obtained as the result of measurement. As measurements are subject to measurement uncertainty with a known upper bound, the result of a measurement is well-represented by a decimal with digits after the decimal mark, as soon as the absolute measurement error is bounded from above by . In practice, measurement results are often given with a certain number of digits after the decimal point, which indicate the error bounds. For example, although 0.080 and 0.08 denote the same number, the decimal numeral 0.080 suggests a measurement with an error less than 0.001, while the numeral 0.08 indicates an absolute error bounded by 0.01. In both cases, the true value of the measured quantity could be, for example, 0.0803 or 0.0796 (see also significant figures).\nInfinite decimal expansion.\nFor a real number and an integer , let denote the (finite) decimal expansion of the greatest number that is not greater than \" that has exactly digits after the decimal mark. Let denote the last digit of . It is straightforward to see that may be obtained by appending to the right of . This way one has\nand the difference of and amounts to\nwhich is either 0, if , or gets arbitrarily small as ' tends to infinity. According to the definition of a limit, ' is the limit of when \"\" tends to infinity. This is written asformula_8or\nwhich is called an infinite decimal expansion of \"\".\nConversely, for any integer and any sequence of digitsformula_9 the (infinite) expression is an \"infinite decimal expansion\" of a real number '. This expansion is unique if neither all are equal to 9 nor all are equal to 0 for ' large enough (for all \"\" greater than some natural number ).\nIf all for equal to 9 and , the limit of the sequenceformula_10 is the decimal fraction obtained by replacing the last digit that is not a 9, i.e.: , by , and replacing all subsequent 9s by 0s (see 0.999...).\nAny such decimal fraction, i.e.: for , may be converted to its equivalent infinite decimal expansion by replacing by and replacing all subsequent 0s by 9s (see 0.999...).\nIn summary, every real number that is not a decimal fraction has a unique infinite decimal expansion. Each decimal fraction has exactly two infinite decimal expansions, one containing only 0s after some place, which is obtained by the above definition of , and the other containing only 9s after some place, which is obtained by defining as the greatest number that is \"less\" than , having exactly \"\" digits after the decimal mark.\nRational numbers.\nLong division allows computing the infinite decimal expansion of a rational number. If the rational number is a decimal fraction, the division stops eventually, producing a decimal numeral, which may be prolongated into an infinite expansion by adding infinitely many zeros. If the rational number is not a decimal fraction, the division may continue indefinitely. However, as all successive remainders are less than the divisor, there are only a finite number of possible remainders, and after some place, the same sequence of digits must be repeated indefinitely in the quotient. That is, one has a \"repeating decimal\". For example,\nThe converse is also true: if, at some point in the decimal representation of a number, the same string of digits starts repeating indefinitely, the number is rational.\nor, dividing both numerator and denominator by 6, .\nDecimal computation.\nMost modern computer hardware and software systems commonly use a binary representation internally (although many early computers, such as the ENIAC or the IBM 650, used decimal representation internally).\nFor external use by computer specialists, this binary representation is sometimes presented in the related octal or hexadecimal systems.\nFor most purposes, however, binary values are converted to or from the equivalent decimal values for presentation to or input from humans; computer programs express literals in decimal by default. (123.1, for example, is written as such in a computer program, even though many computer languages are unable to encode that number precisely.)\nBoth computer hardware and software also use internal representations which are effectively decimal for storing decimal values and doing arithmetic. Often this arithmetic is done on data which are encoded using some variant of binary-coded decimal, especially in database implementations, but there are other decimal representations in use (including decimal floating point such as in newer revisions of the IEEE 754 Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic).\nDecimal arithmetic is used in computers so that decimal fractional results of adding (or subtracting) values with a fixed length of their fractional part always are computed to this same length of precision. This is especially important for financial calculations, e.g., requiring in their results integer multiples of the smallest currency unit for book keeping purposes. This is not possible in binary, because the negative powers of formula_11 have no finite binary fractional representation; and is generally impossible for multiplication (or division). See Arbitrary-precision arithmetic for exact calculations.\nHistory.\nMany ancient cultures calculated with numerals based on ten, sometimes argued due to human hands typically having ten fingers/digits. Standardized weights used in the Indus Valley Civilization () were based on the ratios: 1/20, 1/10, 1/5, 1/2, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, and 500, while their standardized ruler \u2013 the \"Mohenjo-daro ruler\" \u2013 was divided into ten equal parts. Egyptian hieroglyphs, in evidence since around 3000 BCE, used a purely decimal system, as did the Cretan hieroglyphs () of the Minoans whose numerals are closely based on the Egyptian model. The decimal system was handed down to the consecutive Bronze Age cultures of Greece, including Linear A (c. 18th century BCE\u22121450 BCE) and Linear B (c. 1375\u22121200 BCE) \u2013 the number system of classical Greece also used powers of ten, including, Roman numerals, an intermediate base of 5. Notably, the polymath Archimedes (c. 287\u2013212 BCE) invented a decimal positional system in his Sand Reckoner which was based on 108 and later led the German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss to lament what heights science would have already reached in his days if Archimedes had fully realized the potential of his ingenious discovery. Hittite hieroglyphs (since 15th century BCE) were also strictly decimal.\nSome non-mathematical ancient texts such as the Vedas, dating back to 1900\u20131700 BCE make use of decimals and mathematical decimal fractions.\nThe Egyptian hieratic numerals, the Greek alphabet numerals, the Hebrew alphabet numerals, the Roman numerals, the Chinese numerals and early Indian Brahmi numerals are all non-positional decimal systems, and required large numbers of symbols. For instance, Egyptian numerals used different symbols for 10, 20 to 90, 100, 200 to 900, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, to 10,000.\nThe world's earliest positional decimal system was the Chinese rod calculus.\nHistory of decimal fractions.\nDecimal fractions were first developed and used by the Chinese in the end of 4th century BCE, and then spread to the Middle East and from there to Europe. The written Chinese decimal fractions were non-positional. However, counting rod fractions were positional.\nQin Jiushao in his book Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections (1247) denoted 0.96644 by\nJ. Lennart Berggren notes that positional decimal fractions appear for the first time in a book by the Arab mathematician Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi written in the 10th century. The Jewish mathematician Immanuel Bonfils used decimal fractions around 1350, anticipating Simon Stevin, but did not develop any notation to represent them. The Persian mathematician Jamsh\u012bd al-K\u0101sh\u012b claimed to have discovered decimal fractions himself in the 15th century. Al Khwarizmi introduced fraction to Islamic countries in the early 9th century; a Chinese author has alleged that his fraction presentation was an exact copy of traditional Chinese mathematical fraction from Sunzi Suanjing. This form of fraction with numerator on top and denominator at bottom without a horizontal bar was also used by al-Uqlidisi and by al-K\u0101sh\u012b in his work \"Arithmetic Key\".\nA forerunner of modern European decimal notation was introduced by Simon Stevin in the 16th century.\nNatural languages.\nA method of expressing every possible natural number using a set of ten symbols emerged in India. Several Indian languages show a straightforward decimal system. Many Indo-Aryan and Dravidian languages have numbers between 10 and 20 expressed in a regular pattern of addition to 10.\nThe Hungarian language also uses a straightforward decimal system. All numbers between 10 and 20 are formed regularly (e.g. 11 is expressed as \"tizenegy\" literally \"one on ten\"), as with those between 20 and 100 (23 as \"huszonh\u00e1rom\" = \"three on twenty\").\nA straightforward decimal rank system with a word for each order (10 , 100 , 1000 , 10,000 ), and in which 11 is expressed as \"ten-one\" and 23 as \"two-ten-three\", and 89,345 is expressed as 8 (ten thousands) 9 (thousand) 3 (hundred) 4 (tens) 5 is found in Chinese, and in Vietnamese with a few irregularities. Japanese, Korean, and Thai have imported the Chinese decimal system. Many other languages with a decimal system have special words for the numbers between 10 and 20, and decades. For example, in English 11 is \"eleven\" not \"ten-one\" or \"one-teen\".\nIncan languages such as Quechua and Aymara have an almost straightforward decimal system, in which 11 is expressed as \"ten with one\" and 23 as \"two-ten with three\".\nSome psychologists suggest irregularities of the English names of numerals may hinder children's counting ability.\nOther bases.\nSome cultures do, or did, use other bases of numbers."}
{"id": "8216", "revid": "87355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8216", "title": "Dorians", "text": "The Dorians (; , \"D\u014drie\u00ees\", singular , \"D\u014drie\u00fas\") were one of the four major ethnic groups among which the Hellenes (or Greeks) of Classical Greece considered themselves divided (along with the Aeolians, Achaeans, and Ionians). They are almost always referred to as just \"the Dorians\", as they are called in the earliest literary mention of them in the \"Odyssey\", where they already can be found inhabiting the island of Crete.\nThey were diverse in way of life and social organization, varying from the populous trade center of the city of Corinth, known for its ornate style in art and architecture, to the isolationist, military state of Sparta. And yet, all Hellenes knew which localities were Dorian, and which were not. Dorian states at war could more likely, but not always, count on the assistance of other Dorian states. Dorians were distinguished by the Doric Greek dialect and by characteristic social and historical traditions.\nIn the 5th century BC, Dorians and Ionians were the two most politically important Greek \"ethnoi\", whose ultimate clash resulted in the Peloponnesian War. The degree to which fifth-century Hellenes self-identified as \"Ionian\" or \"Dorian\" has itself been disputed. At one extreme \u00c9douard Will concludes that there was no true ethnic component in fifth-century Greek culture, in spite of anti-Dorian elements in Athenian propaganda. At the other extreme John Alty reinterprets the sources to conclude that ethnicity did motivate fifth-century actions. Moderns viewing these ethnic identifications through the 5th and 4th century BC literary tradition have been profoundly influenced by their own social politics. Also, according to E.N. Tigerstedt, nineteenth-century European admirers of virtues they considered \"Dorian\" identified themselves as \"Laconophile\" and found responsive parallels in the culture of their day as well; their biases contribute to the traditional modern interpretation of \"Dorians\".\nOrigin.\nAccounts vary as to the Dorians' place of origin. One theory, widely believed in ancient times, is that they originated in the northern mountainous regions of Greece, ancient Macedonia and Epirus, and obscure circumstances brought them south into the Peloponnese, to certain Aegean islands, Magna Graecia, Lapithos and Crete. Mythology gave them a Greek origin and eponymous founder, Dorus son of Hellen, the mythological patriarch of the Hellenes.\nPeloponnesian dialect replacement.\nThe origin of the Dorians is a multifaceted concept. In modern scholarship, the term has often meant the location of the population disseminating the Doric Greek dialect within a hypothetical Proto-Greek speaking population. The dialect is known from records of classical northwestern Greece, the Peloponnesus and Crete and some of the islands. The geographic and ethnic information found in the west's earliest known literary work, the \"Iliad\", combined with the administrative records of the former Mycenaean states, prove to universal satisfaction that East Greek speakers were once dominant in the Peloponnesus but suffered a setback there and were replaced at least in official circles by West Greek speakers. An historical event is associated with the overthrow, called anciently the \"Return of the Heracleidai\" and by moderns the Dorian Invasion.\nThis theory of a return or invasion presupposes that West Greek speakers resided in northwest Greece but overran the Peloponnesus replacing the East Greek there with their own dialect. No records other than Mycenaean ones are known to have existed in the Bronze Age so a West Greek of that time and place can be neither proved nor disproved. West Greek speakers were in western Greece in classical times. Unlike the East Greeks, they are not associated with any evidence of displacement events. That provides circumstantial evidence that the Doric dialect disseminated among the Hellenes of northwest Greece, a highly-mountainous and somewhat-isolated region.\nDorian invasion.\nThe Dorian invasion is a modern historical concept attempting to account for:\nOn the whole, none of the objectives has been met, but the investigations served to rule out various speculative hypotheses. Most scholars doubt that the Dorian invasion was the main cause of the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization. The source of the West Greek speakers in the Peloponnese remains unattested by any solid evidence.\nPost-migrational distribution of the Dorians.\nThough most of the Doric invaders settled in the Peloponnese, they also settled on Rhodes and Sicily and in what is now Southern Italy. In Asia Minor existed the Dorian Hexapolis (the six great Dorian cities): Halikarnassos (Halicarnassus) and Knidos (Cnidus) in Asia Minor, Kos, and Lindos, Kameiros, and Ialyssos on the island of Rhodes. The six cities would later become rivals with the Ionian cities of Asia Minor. The Dorians also invaded Crete. The origin traditions remained strong into classical times: Thucydides saw the Peloponnesian War in part as \"Ionians fighting against Dorians\" and reported the tradition that the Syracusans in Sicily were of Dorian descent. Other such \"Dorian\" colonies, originally from Corinth, Megara, and the Dorian islands, dotted the southern coasts of Sicily from Syracuse to Selinus. Also Taras was a Spartan colony.\nIdentity.\nEthnonym.\nDorian of Bronze Age Pylos.\nA man's name, \"D\u014drieus\", occurs in the Linear B tablets at Pylos, one of the regions later invaded and subjugated by the Dorians. Pylos tablet Fn867 records it in the dative case as \"do-ri-je-we\", *D\u014dri\u0113wei, a third- or consonant-declension noun with stem ending in w. An unattested nominative plural, \"*D\u014dri\u0113wes\", would have become \"D\u014drieis\" by loss of the w and contraction. The tablet records the grain rations issued to the servants of \"religious dignitaries\" celebrating a religious festival of Potnia, the mother goddess.\nThe nominative singular, \"D\u014drieus\", remained the same in the classical period. Many Linear B names of servants were formed from their home territory or the places where they came into Mycenaean ownership. Carl Darling Buck sees the \"-eus\" suffix as very productive. One of its uses was to convert a toponym to an anthroponym; for example, Megareus, \"Megarian\", from Megara.\nA \"D\u014drieus\" would be from D\u014dris, the only classical Greek state to serve as the basis for the name of the Dorians. The state was a small one in the mountains of west central Greece. However, classical Doris may not have been the same as Mycenaean Doris.\nDorians of upland Doris.\nA number of credible etymologies by noted scholars have been proposed. Julius Pokorny derives \u0394\u03c9\u03c1\u03b9\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2, \"D\u014drieus\" from \u03b4\u03c9\u03c1\u03af\u03c2, \"d\u014dris\", \"woodland\" (which can also mean upland). The \"d\u014dri-\" segment is from the o-grade (either \"\u014d\" or \"o\") of Proto-Indo-European \"*deru-\", \"tree\", which also gives the Homeric \u0394\u03bf\u03cd\u03c1\u03b5\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f3d\u03c0\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 (\"Doureios Hippos\", \"Wooden Horse\"). This derivation has the advantage of naming the people after their wooded, mountainous country.\nLancers.\nA second popular derivation was given by the French linguist, \u00c9mile Boisacq, from the same root, but from Greek (\"doru\") 'spear-shaft' (which was made of wood); i.e., \"the people of the spear\" or \"spearmen.\" In this case the country would be named after the people, as in Saxony from the Saxons. However, R. S. P. Beekes doubted the validity of this derivation and asserted that no good etymology exists.\nChosen Greeks.\nIt sometimes happens that different derivations of an Indo-European word exploit similar-sounding Indo-European roots. Greek \"doru\", \"lance,\" is from the o-grade of Indo-European *\"deru\", \"solid,\" in the sense of wood. It is similar to an extended form, *\"d\u014d-ro-\", of \"*d\u014d-\", (give), as can be seen in the modern Greek imperative \u03b4\u03ce\u03c3\u03b5 (\"dose\", \"give [sing.]!\") appearing in Greek as \u03b4\u1ff6\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd (\"d\u014dron\", \"gift\"). This is the path taken by Jonathan Hall, relying on elements taken from the myth of the Return of the Herakleidai.\nHall cites the tradition, based on a fragment of the poet, Tyrtaeus, that \"Sparta is a divine gift granted by Zeus and Hera\" to the Heracleidae. In another version, Tyndareus gives his kingdom to Heracles in gratitude for restoring him to the throne, but Heracles \"asks the Spartan king to safeguard the gift until his descendants might claim it.\"\nHall, therefore, proposes that the Dorians are the people of the gift. They assumed the name on taking possession of Lacedaemon. Doris was subsequently named after them. Hall makes comparisons of Spartans to Hebrews as a chosen people maintaining a covenant with God and being assigned a Holy Land. To arrive at this conclusion, Hall relies on Herodotus' version of the myth (see below) that the Hellenes under Dorus did not take his name until reaching the Peloponnesus. In other versions the Heracleidae enlisted the help of their Dorian neighbors. Hall does not address the problem of the Dorians not calling Lacedaemon Doris, but assigning that name to some less holy and remoter land. Similarly, he does not mention the Dorian servant at Pylos, whose sacred gift, if such it was, was still being ruled by the Achaean Atreid family at Lacedaemon.\nA minor, and perhaps regrettably forgotten, episode in the history of scholarship was the attempt to emphasize the etymology of Doron with the meaning of 'hand'. This in turn was connected to an interpretation of the famous lambda on Spartan shields, which was to rather stand for a hand with outstanding thumb than the initial letter of Lacedaimon. Given the origin of the Spartan shield lambda legend, however, in a fragment by Eupolis, an Athenian comic poet, there has been a recent attempt to suggest that a comic confusion between the letter and the hand image may yet have been intended.\nSocial structure.\nDorian social structure was characterized by a communal social structure and separation of the sexes. The lives of free men centered around military campaigns. When not abroad, men stayed in all-male residences focusing on military training until the age of 30, regardless of marital status. \nDorian women had greater freedom and economic power than women of other Greek ethnicities. Unlike other Hellenic women, Dorian women were able to own property, manage their husbands' estate, and delegate many domestic tasks to slaves. Women in ancient Sparta possessed the greatest agency and economic power, likely due to the prolonged absences of men during military campaigns. Dorian women wore the peplos, which was once common to all Hellenes. This tunic was pinned at the shoulders by brooches and had slit skirts which bared the thighs and permitted more freedom of movement than the voluminous Ionian chiton (costume).\nDistinctions of language.\nThe Doric dialect was spoken in northwest Greece, the Peloponnese, Crete, southwest Asia Minor, the southernmost islands of the Aegean Sea, and the various Dorian colonies of Magna Graecia in Southern Italy and Sicily. After the classical period, it was mainly replaced by the Attic dialect upon which the Koine or \"common\" Greek language of the Hellenistic period was based. The main characteristic of Doric was the preservation of Proto-Indo-European , long , which in Attic-Ionic became , . A famous example is the valedictory phrase uttered by Spartan mothers to their sons before sending them off to war: \u1f22 \u03c4\u1f70\u03bd \u1f22 \u1f10\u03c0\u1f76 \u03c4\u1fb6\u03c2 (\"\u1e15 t\u00e0n \u1e15 ep\u00ec t\u00e2s\", literally \"either with it or on it\": return alive with your shield\nor dead upon it) would have been \u1f22 \u03c4\u1f74\u03bd \u1f22 \u1f10\u03c0\u1f76 \u03c4\u1fc6\u03c2 (\"\u1e15 t\u1e15n \u1e15 ep\u00ec t\u00eas\") in the Attic-Ionic dialect of an Athenian mother. Tsakonian, a descendant of Doric Greek, is still spoken in some parts of the southern Argolid coast of the Peloponnese, in the modern prefecture of Arcadia.\nOther cultural distinctions.\nCulturally, in addition to their Doric dialect of Greek, Doric colonies retained their characteristic Doric calendar that revolved round a cycle of festivals, the Hyacinthia and the Carneia being especially important.\nThe Dorian mode in music also was attributed to Doric societies and was associated by classical writers with martial qualities.\nThe Doric order of architecture in the tradition inherited by Vitruvius included the Doric column, noted for its simplicity and strength.\nThe Dorians seem to have offered the central mainland cultus for Helios. The scattering of cults of the sun god in Sicyon, Argos, Ermioni, Epidaurus and Laconia, and his holy livestock flocks at Taenarum, seem to suggest that the deity was considerably important in Dorian religion, compared to other parts of ancient Greece. Additionally, it may have been the Dorians to import his worship to Rhodes.\nAncient traditions.\nIn Greek historiography, the Dorians are mentioned by many authors. The chief classical authors to relate their origins are Herodotus, Thucydides and Pausanias. The most copious authors, however, lived in Hellenistic and Roman times, long after the main events. This apparent paradox does not necessarily discredit the later writers, who were relying on earlier works that did not survive. The customs of the Spartan state and its illustrious individuals are detailed at great length in such authors as Plutarch and Diodorus Siculus.\nHomer.\nThe \"Odyssey\" has one reference to the Dorians:\"There is a land called Crete, in the midst of the wine-dark sea, a fair, rich land, begirt with water, and therein are many men, past counting, and ninety cities. They have not all the same speech, but their tongues are mixed. There dwell Achaeans, there great-hearted native Cretans, there Cydonians, and Dorians of waving plumes, and goodly Pelasgians.\"\nThe reference is not compatible with a Dorian invasion that brought Dorians to Crete only after the fall of the Mycenaean states. In the \"Odyssey\", Odysseus and his relatives visit those states. Two solutions are possible, either the \"Odyssey\" is anachronistic or Dorians were on Crete in Mycenaean times. The uncertain nature of the Dorian invasion defers a definitive answer until more is known about it. Also, the Messenian town of Dorium is mentioned in the Catalogue of Ships. If its name comes from Dorians, it would imply there were settlements of the latter in Messenia during that time as well.\nTyrtaeus.\nTyrtaeus, a Spartan poet, became advisor of the Lacedaemonians in their mid-7th-century war to suppress a rebellion of the Messenians. The latter were a remnant of the Achaeans conquered \"two generations before,\" which suggests a rise to supremacy at the end of the Dark Age rather than during and after the fall of Mycenae. The Messenian population was reduced to serfdom.\nOnly a few fragments of Tyrtaeus' five books of martial verse survive. His is the earliest mention of the three Dorian tribes: Pamphyli, Hylleis, Dymanes. He also says: \"For Cronus' Son Himself, Zeus the husband of fair-crowned Hera, hath given this city to the children of Heracles, with whom we came into the wide isle of Pelops from windy Erineus.\"\nErineus was a village of Doris. He helped to establish the Spartan constitution, giving the kings and elders, among other powers, the power to dismiss the assembly. He established a rigorous military training program for the young including songs and poems he wrote himself, such as the \"Embateria or Songs of the Battle-Charge which are also called Enoplia or Songs-under-Arms.\" These were chants used to establish the timing of standard drills under arms. He stressed patriotism:\"For 'tis a fair thing for a good man to fall and die fighting in the van for his native land, ... let us fight with a will for this land, and die for our children and never spare our lives.\"\nHerodotus.\nHerodotus was from Halicarnassus, a Dorian colony on the southwest coast of Asia Minor; following the literary tradition of the times he wrote in Ionic Greek, being one of the last authors to do so. He described the Persian Wars, giving a thumbnail account of the histories of the antagonists, Greeks and Persians.\nHerodotus gives a general account of the events termed \"the Dorian Invasion\", presenting them as transfers of population. Their original home was in Thessaly, central Greece. He goes on to expand in mythological terms, giving some of the geographic details of the myth:1.56.2-3 And inquiring he found that the Lacedemonians and the Athenians had the pre-eminence, the first of the Dorian and the others of the Ionian race. For these were the most eminent races in ancient time, the second being a Pelasgian and the first a Hellenic race: and the one never migrated from its place in any direction, while the other was very exceedingly given to wanderings; for in the reign of Deucalion this race dwelt in Pthiotis, and in the time of Doros the son of Hellen in the land lying below Ossa and Olympos, which is called Histiaiotis; and when it was driven from Histiaiotis by the sons of Cadmos, it dwelt in Pindos and was called Makednian; and thence it moved afterwards to Dryopis, and from Dryopis it came finally to Peloponnesus, and began to be called Dorian.\n1.57.1-3 What language however the Pelasgians used to speak I am not able with certainty to say. But if one must pronounce judging by those that still remain of the Pelasgians who dwelt in the city of Creston above the Tyrsenians, and who were once neighbours of the race now called Dorian, dwelling then in the land which is now called Thessaliotis, and also by those that remain of the Pelasgians who settled at Plakia and Skylake in the region of the Hellespont, who before that had been settlers with the Athenians, and of the natives of the various other towns which are really Pelasgian, though they have lost the name,\u2014if one must pronounce judging by these, the Pelasgians used to speak a Barbarian language. If therefore all the Pelasgian race was such as these, then the Attic race, being Pelasgian, at the same time when it changed and became Hellenic, unlearnt also its language. For the people of Creston do not speak the same language with any of those who dwell about them, nor yet do the people of Phakia, but they speak the same language one as the other: and by this it is proved that they still keep unchanged the form of language which they brought with them when they migrated to these places.\n1.58 As for the Hellenic race, it has used ever the same language, as I clearly perceive, since it first took its rise; but since the time when it parted off feeble at first from the Pelasgian race, setting forth from a small beginning it has increased to that great number of races which we see, and chiefly because many Barbarian races have been added to it besides. Moreover it is true, as I think, of the Pelasgian race also, that so far as it remained Barbarian it never made any great increase. \nThus, according to Herodotus, the Dorians did not name themselves after Dorus until they had reached Peloponnesus. Herodotus does not explain the contradictions of the myth; for example, how Doris, located outside the Peloponnesus, acquired its name. However, his goal, as he relates in the beginning of the first book, is only to report what he had heard from his sources without judgement. In the myth, the Achaeans displaced from the Peloponnesus gathered at Athens under a leader Ion and became identified as \"Ionians\".\nHerodotus' list of Dorian states is as follows. From northeastern Greece were Phthia, Histiaea and Macedon. In central Greece were Doris (the former Dryopia) and in the south Peloponnesus, specifically the states of Lacedaemon, Corinth, Sicyon, Epidaurus and Troezen. Hermione was not Dorian but had joined the Dorians. Overseas were the islands of Rhodes, Cos, Nisyrus and the Anatolian cities of Cnidus, Halicarnassus, Phaselis and Calydna. Dorians also colonised Crete including founding of such towns as Lato, Dreros and Olous. The Cynurians were originally Ionians but had become Dorian under the influence of their Argive masters.\nThucydides.\nThucydides professes little of Greece before the Trojan War except to say that it was full of barbarians and that there was no distinction between barbarians and Greeks. The Hellenes came from Phthiotis. The whole country indulged in and suffered from piracy and was not settled. After the Trojan War, \"Hellas was still engaged in removing and settling.\"\nSome 60 years after the Trojan War the Boeotians were driven out of Arne by the Thessalians into Boeotia and 20 years later \"the Dorians and the Heraclids became masters of the Peloponnese.\" So the lines were drawn between the Dorians and the Aeolians (here Boeotians) with the Ionians (former Peloponnesians).\nOther than these few brief observations Thucydides names but few Dorians. He does make it clear that some Dorian states aligned or were forced to align with the Athenians while some Ionians went with the Lacedaemonians and that the motives for alignment were not always ethnic but were diverse. Among the Dorians was Lacedaemon, Corcyra, Corinth and Epidamnus, Leucadia, Ambracia, Potidaea, Rhodes, Cythera, Argos, Carystus, Syracuse, Gela, Acragas (later Agrigentum), Acrae, Casmenae.\nHe does explain with considerable dismay what happened to incite ethnic war after the unity between the Greek states during the Battle of Thermopylae. The Congress of Corinth, formed prior to it, \"split into two sections.\" Athens headed one and Lacedaemon the other:\"For a short time the league held together, till the Lacedaemonians and Athenians quarreled, and made war upon each other with their allies, a duel into which all the Hellenes sooner or later were drawn.\"\nHe adds: \"the real cause I consider to be ... the growth of the power of Athens and the alarm which this inspired in Lacedaemon...\"\nPlato.\nIn the Platonic work \"Laws\" is mentioned that the Achaeans who fought in the Trojan War, on their return from Troy were driven out from their homes and cities by the young residents, so they migrated under a leader named Dorieus and hence they were renamed \"Dorians\".\nNow during this period of ten years, while the siege lasted, the affairs of each of the besiegers at home suffered much owing to the seditious conduct of the young men. For when the soldiers returned to their own cities and homes, these young people did not receive them fittingly and justly, but in such a way that there ensued a vast number of cases of death, slaughter, and exile. So they, being again driven out, migrated by sea; and because Dorieus was the man who then banded together the exiles, they got the new name of \"Dorians\", instead of \"Achaeans\". But as to all the events that follow this, you Lacedaemonians relate them all fully in your traditions.\nPausanias.\nThe \"Description of Greece\" by Pausanias relates that the Achaeans were driven from their lands by Dorians coming from Oeta, a mountainous region bordering on Thessaly. They were led by Hyllus, a son of Heracles, but were defeated by the Achaeans. Under other leadership they managed to be victorious over the Achaeans and remain in the Peloponnesus, a mythic theme called \"the return of the Heracleidae.\" They had built ships at Naupactus in which to cross the Gulf of Corinth. This invasion is viewed by the tradition of Pausanias as a return of the Dorians to the Peloponnesus, apparently meaning a return of families ruling in Aetolia and northern Greece to a land in which they had once had a share. The return is described in detail: there were \"disturbances\" throughout the Peloponnesus except in Arcadia, and new Dorian settlers. Pausanias goes on to describe the conquest and resettlement of Laconia, Messenia, Argos and elsewhere, and the emigration from there to Crete and the coast of Asia Minor.\nDiodorus Siculus.\nDiodorus is a rich source of traditional information concerning the mythology and history of the Dorians, especially the \"Library of History\". He does not make any such distinction but the fantastic nature of the earliest material marks it as mythical or legendary. The myths do attempt to justify some Dorian operations, suggesting that they were in part political.\nDiodorus quoting from an earlier historian Hecataeus of Abdera details that during the Exodus many Israelites went into the islands of Greece and other places.\"All the foreigners were forthwith expelled, and the most valiant and noble among them, under some notable leaders, were brought to Greece and other places, as some relate; the most famous of their leaders were Danaus and Cadmus. But the majority of the people descended into a country not far from Egypt, which is now called Judaea and at that time was altogether uninhabited.\"Heracles was a Perseid, a member of the ruling family of Greece. His mother Alcmene had both Perseids and Pelopids in her ancestry. A princess of the realm, she received Zeus thinking he was Amphitryon. Zeus intended his son to rule Greece but according to the rules of succession Eurystheus, born slightly earlier, preempted the right. Attempts to kill Heracles as a child failed. On adulthood he was forced into the service of Eurystheus, who commanded him to perform 12 labors.\nHeracles became a warrior without a home, wandering from place to place assisting the local rulers with various problems. He took a retinue of Arcadians with him acquiring also over time a family of grown sons, the Heraclidae. He continued this mode of life even after completing the 12 labors. The legend has it that he became involved with Achaean Sparta when the family of king Tyndareus was unseated and driven into exile by Hippoco\u00f6n and his family, who in the process happened to kill the son of a friend of Heracles. The latter and his retinue assaulted Sparta, taking it back from Hippoco\u00f6n. He recalled Tyndareus, set him up as a guardian regent, and instructed him to turn the kingdom over to any descendants of his that should claim it. Heracles went on with the way of life to which he had become accustomed, which was by today's standards that of a mercenary, as he was being paid for his assistance. Subsequently, he founded a colony in Aetolia, then in Trachis.\nAfter displacing the Dryopes, he went to the assistance of the Dorians, who lived in a land called Hestiaeotis under king Aegimius and were campaigning against the numerically superior Lapithae. The Dorians promised him 1/3 of Doris (which they did not yet possess). He asked Aegimius to keep his share of the land \"in trust\" until it should be claimed by a descendant. He went on to further adventures but was poisoned by his jealous wife, Deianeira. He immolated himself in full armor dressed for combat and \"passed from among men into the company of the gods.\"\nStrabo.\nStrabo, who depends of course on the books available to him, goes on to elaborate:\nBeside this sole reference to Dorians in Crete, the mention of the \"Iliad\" of the Heraclid Tlepolemus, a warrior on the side of Achaeans and colonist of three important Dorian cities in Rhodes has been also regarded as a later interpolation.\nSee also.\nLanguage\nMythology\nHistory\nList of Dorian states"}
{"id": "8217", "revid": "6938183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8217", "title": "Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen", "text": "The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (), set by France's National Constituent Assembly in 1789, is a human civil rights document from the French Revolution.\nThe Declaration was drafted by the Abb\u00e9 Emmanuel Joseph Siey\u00e8s and the Marquis de Lafayette, in consultation with Thomas Jefferson. Influenced by the doctrine of \"natural right\", the rights of man are held to be universal: valid at all times and in every place. It became the basis for a nation of free individuals protected equally by the law. It is included in the beginning of the constitutions of both the Fourth French Republic (1946) and Fifth Republic (1958) and is still current. Inspired by the Enlightenment philosophers, the Declaration was a core statement of the values of the French Revolution and had a major impact on the development of popular conceptions of individual liberty and democracy in Europe and worldwide.\nThe 1789 Declaration, together with the 1215 Magna Carta, the 1689 English Bill of Rights, the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence, and the 1789 United States Bill of Rights, inspired in large part the 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nHistory.\nThe content of the document emerged largely from the ideals of the Enlightenment.\nThe principal drafts were prepared by Lafayette, working at times with his close friend Thomas Jefferson. In August 1789, Honor\u00e9 Mirabeau played a central role in conceptualizing and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.\nThe last article of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen was adopted on the 26 of August 1789 by the National Constituent Assembly, during the period of the French Revolution, as the first step toward writing a constitution for France. Inspired by the Enlightenment, the original version of the Declaration was discussed by the representatives on the basis of a 24 article draft proposed by , led by . The draft was later modified during the debates. A second and lengthier declaration, known as the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1793, was written in 1793 but never formally adopted.\nPhilosophical and theoretical context.\nThe concepts in the Declaration come from the philosophical and political duties of the Enlightenment, such as individualism, the social contract as theorized by the Genevan philosopher Rousseau, and the separation of powers espoused by the Baron de Montesquieu. As can be seen in the texts, the French declaration was heavily influenced by the political philosophy of the Enlightenment and principles of human rights as was the U.S. Declaration of Independence which preceded it (4 July 1776).\nAccording to a legal textbook published in 2007, the declaration is in the spirit of \"secular natural law\", which does not base itself on religious doctrine or authority, in contrast with traditional natural law theory, which does.\nThe declaration defines a single set of individual and collective rights for all men. Influenced by the doctrine of natural rights, these rights are held to be universal and valid in all times and places. For example, \"Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be founded only upon the general good.\" They have certain natural rights to property, to liberty, and to life. According to this theory, the role of government is to recognize and secure these rights. Furthermore, the government should be carried on by elected representatives.\nAt the time it was written, the rights contained in the declaration were only awarded to men. Furthermore, the declaration was a statement of vision rather than reality. The declaration was not deeply rooted in either the practice of the West or even France at the time. The declaration emerged in the late 18th century out of war and revolution. It encountered opposition as democracy and individual rights were frequently regarded as synonymous with anarchy and subversion. This declaration embodies ideals and aspirations towards which France pledged to struggle in the future.\nSubstance.\nThe Declaration is introduced by a preamble describing the fundamental characteristics of the rights which are qualified as being \"natural, unalienable and sacred\" and consisting of \"simple and incontestable principles\" on which citizens could base their demands. In the second article, \"the natural and imprescriptible rights of man\" are defined as \"liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression\". It called for the destruction of aristocratic privileges by proclaiming an end to feudalism and to exemptions from taxation, freedom and equal rights for all \"Men\", and access to public office based on talent. The monarchy was restricted, and all citizens were to have the right to take part in the legislative process. Freedom of speech and press were declared, and arbitrary arrests outlawed.\nThe Declaration also asserted the principles of popular sovereignty, in contrast to the divine right of kings that characterized the French monarchy, and social equality among citizens, \"All the citizens, being equal in the eyes of the law, are equally admissible to all public dignities, places, and employments, according to their capacity and without distinction other than that of their virtues and of their talents,\" eliminating the special rights of the nobility and clergy.\nArticles.\nArticle I \u2013 Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions can be founded only on the common good.\nArticle II \u2013 The goal of any political association is the conservation of the natural and imprescriptible rights of man. These rights are liberty, property, safety and resistance against oppression.\nArticle III \u2013 The principle of any sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation. No body, no individual may exercise any authority which does not proceed directly from the nation.\nArticle IV \u2013 Liberty consists of doing anything which does not harm others: thus, the exercise of the natural rights of each man has only those borders which assure other members of the society the fruition of these same rights. These borders can be determined only by the law.\nArticle V \u2013 The law has the right to forbid only actions harmful to society. Anything which is not forbidden by the law cannot be impeded, and no one can be constrained to do what it does not order.\nArticle VI \u2013 The law is the expression of the general will. All the citizens have the right of contributing personally or through their representatives to its formation. It must be the same for all, either that it protects, or that it punishes. All the citizens, being equal in its eyes, are equally admissible to all public dignities, places, and employments, according to their capacity and without distinction other than that of their virtues and of their talents.\nArticle VII \u2013 No man can be accused, arrested nor detained but in the cases determined by the law, and according to the forms which it has prescribed. Those who solicit, dispatch, carry out or cause to be carried out arbitrary orders, must be punished; but any citizen called or seized under the terms of the law must obey at once; he renders himself culpable by resistance.\nArticle VIII \u2013 The law should establish only penalties that are strictly and evidently necessary, and no one can be punished but under a law established and promulgated before the offense and legally applied.\nArticle IX \u2013 Any man being presumed innocent until he is declared culpable if it is judged indispensable to arrest him, any rigor which would not be necessary for the securing of his person must be severely reprimanded by the law.\nArticle X \u2013 No one may be disquieted for his opinions, even religious ones, provided that their manifestation does not trouble the public order established by the law.\nArticle XI \u2013 The free communication of thoughts and of opinions is one of the most precious rights of man: any citizen thus may speak, write, print freely, except to respond to the abuse of this liberty, in the cases determined by the law.\nArticle XII \u2013 The guarantee of the rights of man and of the citizen necessitates a public force: this force is thus instituted for the advantage of all and not for the particular utility of those in whom it is trusted.\nArticle XIII \u2013 For the maintenance of the public force and for the expenditures of administration, a common contribution is indispensable; it must be equally distributed to all the citizens, according to their ability to pay.\nArticle XIV \u2013 Each citizen has the right to ascertain, by himself or through his representatives, the need for a public tax, to consent to it freely, to know the uses to which it is put, and of determining the proportion, basis, collection, and duration.\nArticle XV \u2013 The society has the right of requesting an account from any public agent of its administration.\nArticle XVI \u2013 Any society in which the guarantee of rights is not assured, nor the separation of powers determined, has no Constitution.\nArticle XVII \u2013 Property being an inviolable and sacred right, no one can be deprived of private usage, if it is not when the public necessity, legally noted, evidently requires it, and under the condition of a just and prior indemnity.\nActive and passive citizenship.\nWhile the French Revolution provided rights to a larger portion of the population, there remained a distinction between those who obtained the political rights in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and those who did not. Those who were deemed to hold these political rights were called active citizens. Active citizenship was granted to men who were French, at least 25 years old, paid taxes equal to three days work, and could not be defined as servants (Thouret). This meant that at the time of the Declaration only male property owners held these rights. The deputies in the National Assembly believed that only those who held tangible interests in the nation could make informed political decisions. This distinction directly affects articles 6, 12, 14, and 15 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen as each of these rights is related to the right to vote and to participate actively in the government. With the decree of 29 October 1789, the term active citizen became embedded in French politics.\nThe concept of passive citizens was created to encompass those populations that had been excluded from political rights in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. Because of the requirements set down for active citizens, the vote was granted to approximately 4.3 million Frenchmen out of a population of around 29 million. These omitted groups included women, slaves, children, and foreigners. As these measures were voted upon by the General Assembly, they limited the rights of certain groups of citizens while implementing the democratic process of the new French Republic (1792\u20131804). This legislation, passed in 1789, was amended by the creators of the Constitution of the Year III in order to eliminate the label of active citizen. The power to vote was then, however, to be granted solely to substantial property owners.\nTensions arose between active and passive citizens throughout the Revolution. This happened when passive citizens started to call for more rights, or when they openly refused to listen to the ideals set forth by active citizens. This cartoon clearly demonstrates the difference that existed between the active and passive citizens along with the tensions associated with such differences. In the cartoon, an active citizen is holding a spade and a passive citizen (on the right) says \"Take care that my patience does not escape me\".\nWomen, in particular, were strong passive citizens who played a significant role in the Revolution. Olympe de Gouges penned her Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen in 1791 and drew attention to the need for gender equality. By supporting the ideals of the French Revolution and wishing to expand them to women, she represented herself as a revolutionary citizen. Madame Roland also established herself as an influential figure throughout the Revolution. She saw women of the French Revolution as holding three roles; \"inciting revolutionary action, formulating policy, and informing others of revolutionary events.\" By working with men, as opposed to working separate from men, she may have been able to further the fight of revolutionary women. As players in the French Revolution, women occupied a significant role in the civic sphere by forming social movements and participating in popular clubs, allowing them societal influence, despite their lack of direct political influence.\nWomen's rights.\nThe Declaration recognized many rights as belonging to citizens (who could only be male). This was despite the fact that after The March on Versailles on 5 October 1789, women presented the Women's Petition to the National Assembly in which they proposed a decree giving women equal rights. In 1790, Nicolas de Condorcet and Etta Palm d'Aelders unsuccessfully called on the National Assembly to extend civil and political rights to women. Condorcet declared that \"he who votes against the right of another, whatever the religion, color, or sex of that other, has henceforth abjured his own\". The French Revolution did not lead to a recognition of women's rights and this prompted Olympe de Gouges to publish the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen in September 1791.\nThe Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen is modeled on the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and is ironic in formulation and exposes the failure of the French Revolution, which had been devoted to equality. It states that:\nThis revolution will only take effect when all women become fully aware of their deplorable condition, and of the rights, they have lost in society.\nThe Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen follows the seventeen articles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen point for point and has been described by Camille Naish as \"almost a parody... of the original document\". The first article of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen proclaims that \"Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be based only on common utility.\" The first article of Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the Female Citizen replied: \"Woman is born free and remains equal to man in rights. Social distinctions may only be based on common utility\".\nDe Gouges also draws attention to the fact that under French law women were fully punishable, yet denied equal rights, declaring \"Women have the right to mount the scaffold, they must also have the right to mount the speaker's rostrum\".\nSlavery.\nThe declaration did not revoke the institution of slavery, as lobbied for by Jacques-Pierre Brissot's \"Les Amis des Noirs\" and defended by the group of colonial planters called the Club Massiac because they met at the H\u00f4tel Massiac. Despite the lack of explicit mention of slavery in the Declaration, slave uprisings in Saint-Domingue in the Haitian Revolution were inspired by it, as discussed in C. L. R. James' history of the Haitian Revolution, \"The Black Jacobins\".\nDeplorable conditions for the thousands of slaves in Saint-Domingue, the most profitable slave colony in the world, led to the uprisings which would be known as the first successful slave revolt in the New World. Free persons of color were part of the first wave of revolt, but later former slaves took control. In 1794 the Convention dominated by the Jacobins abolished slavery, including in the colonies of Saint-Domingue and Guadeloupe. However, Napoleon reinstated it in 1802 and attempted to regain control of Saint-Domingue by sending in thousands of troops. After suffering the losses of two-thirds of the men, many to yellow fever, the French withdrew from Saint-Domingue in 1803. Napoleon gave up on North America and agreed to the Louisiana Purchase by the United States. In 1804, the leaders of Saint-Domingue declared it as an independent state, the Republic of Haiti, the second republic of the New World.\nLegacy.\nThe Declaration has also influenced and inspired rights-based liberal democracy throughout the world. It was translated as soon as 1793\u20131794 by Colombian Antonio Nari\u00f1o, who published it despite the Inquisition. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison for doing so. In 2003, the document was listed on UNESCO's Memory of the World register.\nThe 1945 Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam references the opening line of the Declaration.\nConstitution of the French Fifth Republic.\nAccording to the preamble of the Constitution of the French Fifth Republic (adopted on 4 October 1958, and the current constitution), the principles set forth in the Declaration have constitutional value. Many laws and regulations have been cancelled because they did not comply with those principles as interpreted by the Conseil Constitutionnel (\"Constitutional Council of France\") or by the \"Conseil d'\u00c9tat\" (\"Council of State\"):"}
{"id": "8218", "revid": "32455428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8218", "title": "Dennis Ritchie", "text": "Dennis MacAlistair Ritchie (September 9, 1941 \u2013 October 12, 2011) was an American computer scientist. He created the C programming language and, with long-time colleague Ken Thompson, the Unix operating system and B programming language. Ritchie and Thompson were awarded the Turing Award from the ACM in 1983, the Hamming Medal from the IEEE in 1990 and the National Medal of Technology from President Bill Clinton in 1999. Ritchie was the head of Lucent Technologies System Software Research Department when he retired in 2007. He was the \"R\" in K&amp;R C, and commonly known by his username dmr.\nPersonal life and career.\nDennis Ritchie was born in Bronxville, New York. His father was Alistair E. Ritchie, a longtime Bell Labs scientist and co-author of \"The Design of Switching Circuits\" on switching circuit theory. As a child, Dennis moved with his family to Summit, New Jersey, where he graduated from Summit High School. He graduated from Harvard University with degrees in physics and applied mathematics.\nIn 1967, Ritchie began working at the Bell Labs Computing Sciences Research Center, and in 1968, he defended his PhD thesis on \"Computational Complexity and Program Structure\" at Harvard under the supervision of Patrick C. Fischer. However, Ritchie never officially received his PhD degree as he did not submit a bound copy of his dissertation to the Harvard library, a requirement for the degree. In 2020, the Computer History museum worked with Ritchie's family and Fischer's family and found a copy of the lost dissertation. \nDuring the 1960s, Ritchie and Ken Thompson worked on the Multics operating system at Bell Labs. Thompson then found an old PDP-7 machine and developed his own application programs and operating system from scratch, aided by Ritchie and others. In 1970, Brian Kernighan suggested the name \"Unix\", a pun on the name \"Multics\". To supplement assembly language with a system-level programming language, Thompson created B. Later, B was replaced by C, created by Ritchie, who continued to contribute to the development of Unix and C for many years.\nDuring the 1970s, Ritchie collaborated with James Reeds and Robert Morris on a ciphertext-only attack on the M-209 US cipher machine that could solve messages of at least 2000\u20132500 letters. Ritchie relates that, after discussions with the NSA, the authors decided not to publish it, as they were told that the principle was applicable to machines still in use by foreign governments.\nRitchie was also involved with the development of the Plan 9 and Inferno operating systems, and the programming language Limbo.\nAs part of an AT&amp;T restructuring in the mid-1990s, Ritchie was transferred to Lucent Technologies, where he retired in 2007 as head of System Software Research Department.\nC and Unix.\nRitchie is best known as the creator of the C programming language, a key developer of the Unix operating system, and co-author of the book \"The C Programming Language\"; he was the 'R' in \"K&amp;R\" (a common reference to the book's authors Kernighan and Ritchie). Ritchie worked together with Ken Thompson, who is credited with writing the original version of Unix; one of Ritchie's most important contributions to Unix was its porting to different machines and platforms. They were so influential on Research Unix that Doug McIlroy later wrote, \"The names of Ritchie and Thompson may safely be assumed to be attached to almost everything not otherwise attributed.\"\nRitchie liked to emphasize that he was just one member of a group. He suggested that many of the improvements he introduced simply \"looked like a good thing to do,\" and that anyone else in the same place at the same time might have done the same thing.\nNowadays, the C language is widely used in application, operating system, and embedded system development, and its influence is seen in most modern programming languages. C fundamentally changed the way computer programs were written. For the first time C enabled the same program to work on different machines. Modern software is written using one of C's more evolved dialects. Apple uses Objective-C, Microsoft uses C# and Java is the choice of Internet applications. Mr. Ritchie and Ken Thompson used C to write UNIX. Unix has been influential establishing computing concepts and principles that have been widely adopted.\nIn an interview from 1999, Ritchie clarified that he saw Linux and BSD operating systems as a continuation of the basis of the Unix operating system, and as derivatives of Unix:\nIn the same interview, he stated that he viewed both Unix and Linux as \"the continuation of ideas that were started by Ken and me and many others, many years ago.\"\nAwards.\nIn 1983, Ritchie and Thompson received the Turing Award \"for their development of generic operating systems theory and specifically for the implementation of the UNIX operating system\". Ritchie's Turing Award lecture was titled \"Reflections on Software Research\". In 1990, both Ritchie and Thompson received the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), \"for the origination of the UNIX operating system and the C programming language\".\nIn 1997, both Ritchie and Thompson were made Fellows of the Computer History Museum, \"for co-creation of the UNIX operating system, and for development of the C programming language.\"\nOn April 21, 1999, Thompson and Ritchie jointly received the National Medal of Technology of 1998 from President Bill Clinton for co-inventing the UNIX operating system and the C programming language which, according to the citation for the medal, \"led to enormous advances in computer hardware, software, and networking systems and stimulated growth of an entire industry, thereby enhancing American leadership in the Information Age\".\nIn 2005, the Industrial Research Institute awarded Ritchie its Achievement Award in recognition of his contribution to science and technology, and to society generally, with his development of the Unix operating system.\nIn 2011, Ritchie, along with Thompson, was awarded the Japan Prize for Information and Communications for his work in the development of the Unix operating system.\nDeath.\nRitchie was found dead on October 12, 2011, at the age of 70 at his home in Berkeley Heights, New Jersey, where he lived alone. First news of his death came from his former colleague, Rob Pike. The cause and exact time of death have not been disclosed. He had been in frail health for several years following treatment for prostate cancer and heart disease. News of Ritchie's death was largely overshadowed by the media coverage of the death of Apple co-founder Steve Jobs, which occurred the week before.\nLegacy.\nFollowing Ritchie's death, computer historian Paul E. Ceruzzi stated:\nIn an interview shortly after Ritchie's death, long time colleague Brian Kernighan said Ritchie never expected C to be so significant.\nKernighan told \"The New York Times\" \"The tools that Dennis built\u2014and their direct descendants\u2014run pretty much everything today.\" Kernighan reminded readers of how important a role C and Unix had played in the development of later high-profile projects, such as the iPhone. Other testimonials to his influence followed.\nReflecting upon his death, a commentator compared the relative importance of Steve Jobs and Ritchie, concluding that \"[Ritchie's] work played a key role in spawning the technological revolution of the last forty years\u2014including technology on which Apple went on to build its fortune.\" Another commentator said, \"Ritchie, on the other hand, invented and co-invented two key software technologies which make up the DNA of effectively every single computer software product we use directly or even indirectly in the modern age. It sounds like a wild claim, but it really is true.\" Another said, \"many in computer science and related fields knew of Ritchie\u2019s importance to the growth and development of, well, everything to do with computing...\"\nThe Fedora 16 Linux distribution, which was released about a month after he died, was dedicated to his memory. FreeBSD 9.0, released January 12, 2012 was also dedicated in his memory.\nAsteroid 294727 Dennisritchie, discovered by astronomers Tom Glinos and David H. Levy in 2008, was named in his memory. The official was published by the Minor Planet Center on 7 February 2012 ().\nPublications and academic papers.\nRitchie has been the author or contributor to about 50 academic papers, books and textbooks and which have had over 15,000 citations.\nHere are some of his most cited works:"}
{"id": "8219", "revid": "789177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8219", "title": "December 16", "text": ""}
{"id": "8220", "revid": "7704042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8220", "title": "Doctrine and Covenants", "text": "The Doctrine and Covenants (sometimes abbreviated and cited as D&amp;C or D. and C.) is a part of the open scriptural canon of several denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement. Originally published in 1835 as Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints: Carefully Selected from the Revelations of God, editions of the book continue to be printed mainly by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) and the Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints [RLDS Church]).\nThe book originally contained two parts: a sequence of lectures setting forth basic church doctrine, followed by a compilation of revelations, or \"covenants\" of the church: thus the name \"Doctrine and Covenants\". The \"doctrine\" portion of the book, however, has been removed by both the LDS Church and Community of Christ. The remaining portion of the book contains revelations on numerous topics, most of which were dictated by the movement's founder Joseph Smith, supplemented by materials periodically added by each denomination.\nControversy has existed between the two largest denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement over some sections added to the 1876 LDS edition, attributed to founder Smith. Whereas the LDS Church believes these sections to have been revelations to Smith, the RLDS Church traditionally disputed their authenticity.\nHistory.\nThe Doctrine and Covenants was first published in 1835 as a later version of the Book of Commandments, which had been partially printed in 1833. This earlier book contained 65 early revelations to church leaders, including Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Before many copies of the book could be printed, the printing press and most of the printed copies were destroyed by a mob in Missouri.\nOn September 24, 1834, a committee was appointed by the general assembly of the church to organize a new volume containing the most significant revelations. This committee of Presiding Elders, consisting of Smith, Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, began to review and revise numerous revelations for inclusion in the new work. The committee eventually organized the book into two parts: a \"Doctrine\" part and a \"Covenants\" part.\nThe \"Doctrine\" part of the book consisted of a theological course now called the \"Lectures on Faith\". The lectures were a series of doctrinal courses used in the School of the Prophets which had recently been completed in Kirtland, Ohio. According to the committee, these lectures were included in the compilation \"in consequence of their embracing the important doctrine of salvation.\"\nThe \"Covenants\" part of the book, labeled \"Covenants and Commandments of the Lord, to his servants of the church of the Latter Day Saints\", contained a total of 103 revelations. These 103 revelations were said to \"contain items or principles for the regulation of the church, as taken from the revelations which have been given since its organization, as well as from former ones.\" Each of the 103 revelations was assigned a \"section number\"; however, section 66 was mistakenly used twice. Thus, the sections of the original work were numbered only to 102.\nOn February 17, 1835, after the committee had selected the book's contents, the committee wrote that the resulting work represents \"our belief, and when we say this, humbly trust, the faith and principles of this society as a body.\"\nThe book was first introduced to the church body in a general conference on August 17, 1835. Smith and Williams, two of the Presiding Elders on the committee, were absent, but Cowdery and Rigdon were present. The church membership at the time had not yet seen the Doctrine and Covenants manuscript as it had been compiled and revised solely by the committee; however, various church members who were familiar with the work \"bore record\" of the book's truth. At the end of the conference, the church \"by a unanimous vote\" agreed to accept the compilation as \"the doctrine and covenants of their faith\" and to make arrangements for its printing.\nIn 1835, the book was printed and published under the title \"Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints: Carefully Selected from the Revelations of God\".\nA copy of the Doctrine and Covenants from NASA photographer M. Edward Thomas traveled to the moon and back in 1972 with astronaut John Young aboard Apollo 16.\nLDS Church editions.\nIn the LDS Church, The Doctrine and Covenants of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands alongside the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price as scripture. Together the LDS Church's scriptures are referred to as the \"standard works\". The LDS Church's version of the Doctrine and Covenants is described by the church as \"containing revelations given to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, with some additions by his successors in the Presidency of the Church.\"\nSections added to LDS edition.\nThe 138 sections and two official declarations in LDS Church's Doctrine and Covenants break down as follows:\nThe following sections are not revelations, but letters, reports, statements, and other similar documents: 102, 123, 127\u2013131, 134, 135, and Official Declarations 1 and 2.\nIn 1844, the church added eight sections not included in the 1835 edition. In the current edition, these added sections are numbered 103, 105, 112, 119, 124, 127, 128, and 135.\nIn 1876, a new LDS Church edition renumbered most of the sections in a roughly chronological order instead of the earlier topical order, and included 26 sections not included in previous editions, now numbered as sections 2, 13, 77, 85, 87, 108\u2013111, 113\u2013118, 120\u2013123, 125, 126, 129\u2013132, and 136. Previous editions had been divided into verses with the early versifications generally following the paragraph structure of the original text. It was with the 1876 edition that the currently used versification was first employed.\nDuring the 1880s, five foreign editions contained two revelations to John Taylor that were received in 1882 and 1883; these revelations \"set in order\" the priesthood, gave more clarification about the roles of priesthood offices\u2014especially the seventy\u2014and required \"men who ... preside over my priesthood\" to live plural marriage in order to qualify to hold their church positions. Due to the LDS Church's change in attitude to polygamy in 1890, these sections were not included in future English editions of the Doctrine and Covenants.\nIn 1930, a small volume edited by apostle James E. Talmage titled \"Latter-day Revelations\" was published, which was a highly edited selective version of the Doctrine and Covenants. Talmage wrote that the book's purpose was \"to make the strictly doctrinal parts of the Doctrine and Covenants of easy access and reduce its bulk\" by including only \"the sections comprising scriptures of general and enduring value\". Ninety-five of the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were completely omitted\u2014most notably section 132 on plural and celestial marriage\u2014along with parts of 21 others. Twenty complete sections were retained along with parts of 21 others. Fundamentalist Mormons were offended, particularly at the exclusion of section 132, and accused the church of \"changing the scriptures.\" As a result, church president Heber J. Grant ordered the withdrawal of the book from sale with the remaining copies shredded in order to \"avoid further conflict with the fundamentalists\".\nSections 137 and 138 were added to the LDS Church's 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, which is the edition currently in use by the church. These were accounts of two visions, one from Joseph Smith in 1837 and the other from his nephew, Joseph F. Smith, in 1918. The revelations were earlier accepted as scripture when added to the Pearl of Great Price in April 1976. No new revelatory sections have been added since 1981.\nThe LDS Church's 1981 edition contains two \"Official Declarations\" at the book's conclusion. The 1890 Official Declaration 1 ended the church-authorized practice of plural marriage, and the 1978 Official Declaration 2 announces the opening of priesthood ordination to all worthy male members without regard to race or color. The two Official Declarations are not revelations, but they serve as the formal announcements that a revelation was received. In neither case is the revelation included in the Doctrine and Covenants. The text of Official Declaration 1 has been included in every LDS Church printing of the Doctrine and Covenants since 1908.\nPortions removed from the LDS edition.\nIn 1876, section 101 from the 1835 edition (and subsequent printings) was removed. Section 101 was a \"Statement on Marriage\" as adopted by an 1835 conference of the church, and contained the following text: \nThis section was removed because it had been superseded by section 132 of the modern LDS edition, recorded in 1843, which contains a revelation received by Joseph Smith on eternal marriage and plural marriage, the origin of the principles of which the LDS Church traces to as early as 1831.\nIn 1921, the LDS Church removed the \"Lectures on Faith\" portion of the book, with an explanation that the lectures \"were never presented to nor accepted by the Church as being otherwise than theological lectures or lessons\". The lectures contain theology concerning the Godhead and emphasize the importance of faith and works.\nUntil 1981, editions of the book used code names for certain people and places in those sections that dealt with the United Order. The 1981 LDS edition replaced these with the real names, relegating the code names to footnotes. The Community of Christ edition still uses the code names.\nCommunity of Christ editions.\nOfficials of the Community of Christ (formerly known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints [RLDS Church]) first published an edition of the Doctrine and Covenants in 1864, based on the previous 1844 edition. A general conference of the church in 1878 approved a resolution that declared that the revelations of the Prophet-President Joseph Smith III had equal standing to those previously included in the work. Since that time, the church has continued to add sections to its edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, containing the revelations of succeeding Prophet-Presidents. The most recent addition was formally authorized on April 14, 2010, after being presented to the church for informal consideration on January 17, 2010. The numbers of the sections and versification differ from the edition published by the LDS Church and both modern editions differ from the original 1835 edition numeration.\nRegarding the contents of the Doctrine and Covenants, the church has stated: \"As with other books of scripture, the various passages vary in their enduring quality.\"\nSections added to the Community of Christ edition.\nThe 167 sections of the Community of Christ's Doctrine and Covenants break down as follows:\nThe following sections are not revelations, but letters, reports, statements, and other similar documents: 99, 108A, 109\u2013113, and 123.\nBased on the above, the number of revelations (accounting for sections that are not revelations) presented by each Community of Christ president, are as follows:\nPortions removed from the Community of Christ edition.\nThe Community of Christ removed the \"Lectures on Faith\" in 1897. The 1970 World Conference concluded that several sections that had been added between the 1835 and 1844 editions\u2014mainly dealing with the subjects of temple worship and baptism for the dead\u2014had been published without proper approval of a church conference. As a result, the World Conference removed sections 107, 109, 110, 113, and 123 to a historical appendix, which also includes documents that were never published as sections. Of these, only section 107 was a revelation. The World Conference of 1990 subsequently removed the entire appendix from the Doctrine and Covenants. Section 108A contained the minutes of a business meeting, which, because of its historical nature, was moved to the Introduction in the 1970s. After 1990, the Introduction was updated, and what was section 108A was removed entirely.\nDoctrinal developments in the Community of Christ edition.\nThe ongoing additions to the Community of Christ edition provide a record of the leadership changes and doctrinal developments within the denomination. When W. Grant McMurray became Prophet-President, he declared that instruction specific to leadership changes would no longer be included, so that the focus of the work could be more doctrinal in nature, and less administrative. The record of these leadership changes are still maintained in the form of published \"letters of counsel.\" Prophet-President Stephen M. Veazey has conformed to this pattern. Although these letters are not formally published in the Doctrine and Covenants, they are still deemed to be inspired, and are dealt with in the same manner that revelations are (that is, they must be deliberated and approved by the voting members of a World Conference).\nA modern revelation that resulted in some \"disaffection\" and \"led to intense conflict in scattered areas of the RLDS Church\" is contained in the Community of Christ version's section 156, presented by Prophet\u2013President Wallace B. Smith and added in 1984, which called for the ordination of women to the priesthood and set out the primary purpose of temples to be \"the pursuit of peace\". A resulting schism over the legitimacy of these change led to the formation of the Restoration Branches movement, the Restoration Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and the Remnant Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.\nWhile some of the prose in the new revelations seems designed to guide the denomination on matters of church governance and doctrine, others are seen as inspirational. One such example can be cited from section 161, presented as counsel to the church by W. Grant McMurray in 1996: \"Become a people of the Temple\u2014those who see violence but proclaim peace, who feel conflict yet extend the hand of reconciliation, who encounter broken spirits and find pathways for healing.\"\nEditions used by other denominations.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite) uses the 1846 edition that was published in Nauvoo, Illinois; this version is virtually identical to the 1844 edition. Most recently a facsimile reprint was produced for the church at Voree, Wisconsin by Richard Drew in 1993.\nThe Church of Christ (Temple Lot) contends that the thousands of changes made to the original revelations as published in the Book of Commandments (including the change of the church's name) are not doctrinal and result from Joseph Smith's fall from his original calling. As a result, the Church of Christ (Temple Lot) prefers to use reprints of the Book of Commandments text.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite) accepts the 1844 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, including the Lectures on Faith, which it insists are as much inspired as the revelations themselves.\nThe Restoration Branches generally use the older RLDS Church Doctrine and Covenants, typically sections 1\u2013144.\nThe Remnant Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints uses the older RLDS Church version of the Doctrine and Covenants up to section 144, and also 19 new revelations from their previous president, Frederick Niels Larsen.\n\"Remnant\" movement, a spiritual movement in schism with the LDS Church, published an online \"Restoration\" edition of the Doctrine and Covenants in 2017. It includes any sections authored by Joseph Smith. It also: includes a new version of D&amp;C 54, as revised by Denver Snuffer; excludes the Kirtland Temple visitation by Elijah and other angelic beings in D&amp;C 110; excludes portions based on fragmentary teachings by Smith in D&amp;C 129; includes Smith's Lectures on Faith; and includes a new appendix titled, \"A Prophet\u2019s Prerogative,\" by Jeff Savage.\nChart comparison of editions.\nThe following chart compares the current editions of the Doctrine and Covenants used by the LDS Church (LDS ed.) and Community of Christ (CofC ed.) with the 1833 Book of Commandments (BofC), the 1835 edition published in Kirtland, and the 1844 edition published in Nauvoo. Unless otherwise specified, the document is styled a \"revelation\" of the person delivering it."}
{"id": "8221", "revid": "30066256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8221", "title": "Death", "text": "Death is the permanent, irreversible cessation of all biological functions that sustain a living organism. Brain death is sometimes used as a legal definition of death. The remains of a previously living organism normally begin to decompose shortly after death. Death is an inevitable, universal process that eventually occurs in all living organisms.\nDeath is generally applied to whole organisms; the similar process seen in individual components of a living organism, such as cells or tissues, is necrosis. Something that is not considered a living organism, such as a virus, can be physically destroyed but is not said to die.\nAs of the early 21st century, over 150,000 humans die each day.\nMany cultures and religions have the idea of an afterlife, and also hold the idea of judgement of good and bad deeds (Heaven, Hell, Karma).\nDiagnosis.\nProblems of definition.\nThe concept of death is a key to human understanding of the phenomenon. There are many scientific approaches and various interpretations of the concept. Additionally, the advent of life-sustaining therapy and the numerous criteria for defining death from both a medical and legal standpoint, have made it difficult to create a single unifying definition.\nOne of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life. As a point in time, death would seem to refer to the moment at which life ends. Determining when death has occurred is difficult, as cessation of life functions is often not simultaneous across organ systems. Such determination, therefore, requires drawing precise conceptual boundaries between life and death. This is difficult, due to there being little consensus on how to define life.\nIt is possible to define life in terms of consciousness. When consciousness ceases, a living organism can be said to have died. One of the flaws in this approach is that there are many organisms that are alive but probably not conscious (for example, single-celled organisms). Another problem is in defining consciousness, which has many different definitions given by modern scientists, psychologists and philosophers. Additionally, many religious traditions, including Abrahamic and Dharmic traditions, hold that death does not (or may not) entail the end of consciousness. In certain cultures, death is more of a process than a single event. It implies a slow shift from one spiritual state to another.\nOther definitions for death focus on the character of cessation of something. More specifically, death occurs when a living entity experiences irreversible cessation of all functioning. As it pertains to human life, death is an irreversible process where someone loses their existence as a person.\nHistorically, attempts to define the exact moment of a human's death have been subjective, or imprecise. Death was once defined as the cessation of heartbeat (cardiac arrest) and of breathing, but the development of CPR and prompt defibrillation have rendered that definition inadequate because breathing and heartbeat can sometimes be restarted. This type of death where circulatory and respiratory arrest happens is known as the circulatory definition of death (DCDD). Proponents of the DCDD believe that this definition is reasonable because a person with permanent loss of circulatory and respiratory function should be considered dead. Critics of this definition state that while cessation of these functions may be permanent, it does not mean the situation is irreversible, because if CPR was applied, the person could be revived. Thus, the arguments for and against the DCDD boil down to a matter of defining the actual words \"permanent\" and \"irreversible,\" which further complicates the challenge of defining death. Furthermore, events which were causally linked to death in the past no longer kill in all circumstances; without a functioning heart or lungs, life can sometimes be sustained with a combination of life support devices, organ transplants and artificial pacemakers.\nToday, where a definition of the moment of death is required, doctors and coroners usually turn to \"brain death\" or \"biological death\" to define a person as being dead; people are considered dead when the electrical activity in their brain ceases. It is presumed that an end of electrical activity indicates the end of consciousness. Suspension of consciousness must be permanent, and not transient, as occurs during certain sleep stages, and especially a coma. In the case of sleep, EEGs can easily tell the difference.\nThe category of \"brain death\" is seen as problematic by some scholars. For instance, Dr. Franklin Miller, senior faculty member at the Department of Bioethics, National Institutes of Health, notes: \"By the late 1990s... the equation of brain death with death of the human being was increasingly challenged by scholars, based on evidence regarding the array of biological functioning displayed by patients correctly diagnosed as having this condition who were maintained on mechanical ventilation for substantial periods of time. These patients maintained the ability to sustain circulation and respiration, control temperature, excrete wastes, heal wounds, fight infections and, most dramatically, to gestate fetuses (in the case of pregnant \"brain-dead\" women).\"\nWhile \"brain death\" is viewed as problematic by some scholars, there are certainly proponents of it that believe this definition of death is the most reasonable for distinguishing life from death. The reasoning behind the support for this definition is that brain death has a set of criteria that is reliable and reproducible. Also, the brain is crucial in determining our identity or who we are as human beings. The distinction should be made that \"brain death\" cannot be equated with one who is in a vegetative state or coma, in that the former situation describes a state that is beyond recovery.\nThose people maintaining that only the neo-cortex of the brain is necessary for consciousness sometimes argue that only electrical activity should be considered when defining death. Eventually it is possible that the criterion for death will be the permanent and irreversible loss of cognitive function, as evidenced by the death of the cerebral cortex. All hope of recovering human thought and personality is then gone given current and foreseeable medical technology. At present, in most places the more conservative definition of death\u00a0\u2013 irreversible cessation of electrical activity in the whole brain, as opposed to just in the neo-cortex\u00a0\u2013 has been adopted (for example the Uniform Determination Of Death Act in the United States). In 2005, the Terri Schiavo case brought the question of brain death and artificial sustenance to the front of American politics.\nEven by whole-brain criteria, the determination of brain death can be complicated. EEGs can detect spurious electrical impulses, while certain drugs, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, or hypothermia can suppress or even stop brain activity on a temporary basis. Because of this, hospitals have protocols for determining brain death involving EEGs at widely separated intervals under defined conditions.\nIn the past, adoption of this whole-brain definition was a conclusion of the President's Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research in 1980. They concluded that this approach to defining death sufficed in reaching a uniform definition nationwide. A multitude of reasons were presented to support this definition including: uniformity of standards in law for establishing death; consumption of a family's fiscal resources for artificial life support; and legal establishment for equating brain death with death in order to proceed with organ donation.\nAside from the issue of support of or dispute against brain death, there is another inherent problem in this categorical definition: the variability of its application in medical practice. In 1995, the American Academy of Neurology (AAN), established a set of criteria that became the medical standard for diagnosing neurologic death. At that time, three clinical features had to be satisfied in order to determine \"irreversible cessation\" of the total brain including: coma with clear etiology, cessation of breathing, and lack of brainstem reflexes. This set of criteria was then updated again most recently in 2010, but substantial discrepancies still remain across hospitals and medical specialties.\nThe problem of defining death is especially imperative as it pertains to the dead donor rule, which could be understood as one of the following interpretations of the rule: there must be an official declaration of death in a person before starting organ procurement or that organ procurement cannot result in death of the donor. A great deal of controversy has surrounded the definition of death and the dead donor rule. Advocates of the rule believe the rule is legitimate in protecting organ donors while also countering against any moral or legal objection to organ procurement. Critics, on the other hand, believe that the rule does not uphold the best interests of the donors and that the rule does not effectively promote organ donation.\nSigns.\nSigns of death or strong indications that a warm-blooded animal is no longer alive are:\nThe stages that follow after death are:\nLegal.\nThe death of a person has legal consequences that may vary between different jurisdictions.\nA death certificate is issued in most jurisdictions, either by a doctor, or by an administrative office upon presentation of a doctor's declaration of death.\nMisdiagnosed.\nThere are many anecdotal references to people being declared dead by physicians and then \"coming back to life\", sometimes days later in their own coffin, or when embalming procedures are about to begin. From the mid-18th century onwards, there was an upsurge in the public's fear of being mistakenly buried alive, and much debate about the uncertainty of the signs of death. Various suggestions were made to test for signs of life before burial, ranging from pouring vinegar and pepper into the corpse's mouth to applying red hot pokers to the feet or into the rectum. Writing in 1895, the physician J.C. Ouseley claimed that as many as 2,700 people were buried prematurely each year in England and Wales, although others estimated the figure to be closer to 800.\nIn cases of electric shock, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for an hour or longer can allow stunned nerves to recover, allowing an apparently dead person to survive. People found unconscious under icy water may survive if their faces are kept continuously cold until they arrive at an emergency room. This \"diving response\", in which metabolic activity and oxygen requirements are minimal, is something humans share with cetaceans called the mammalian diving reflex.\nAs medical technologies advance, ideas about when death occurs may have to be re-evaluated in light of the ability to restore a person to vitality after longer periods of apparent death (as happened when CPR and defibrillation showed that cessation of heartbeat is inadequate as a decisive indicator of death). The lack of electrical brain activity may not be enough to consider someone scientifically dead. Therefore, the concept of information-theoretic death has been suggested as a better means of defining when true death occurs, though the concept has few practical applications outside the field of cryonics.\nThere have been some scientific attempts to bring dead organisms back to life, but with limited success. In science fiction scenarios where such technology is readily available, real death is distinguished from reversible death.\nCauses.\nThe leading cause of human death in developing countries is infectious disease. The leading causes in developed countries are atherosclerosis (heart disease and stroke), cancer, and other diseases related to obesity and aging. By an extremely wide margin, the largest unifying cause of death in the developed world is biological aging, leading to various complications known as aging-associated diseases. These conditions cause loss of homeostasis, leading to cardiac arrest, causing loss of oxygen and nutrient supply, causing irreversible deterioration of the brain and other tissues. Of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds die of age-related causes. In industrialized nations, the proportion is much higher, approaching 90%. With improved medical capability, dying has become a condition to be managed. Home deaths, once commonplace, are now rare in the developed world.\nIn developing nations, inferior sanitary conditions and lack of access to modern medical technology makes death from infectious diseases more common than in developed countries. One such disease is tuberculosis, a bacterial disease which killed 1.8M people in 2015. Malaria causes about 400\u2013900M cases of fever and 1\u20133M deaths annually. AIDS death toll in Africa may reach 90\u2013100M by 2025.\nAccording to Jean Ziegler (United Nations Special Reporter on the Right to Food, 2000 \u2013 Mar 2008), mortality due to malnutrition accounted for 58% of the total mortality rate in 2006. Ziegler says worldwide approximately 62M people died from all causes and of those deaths more than 36M died of hunger or diseases due to deficiencies in micronutrients.\nTobacco smoking killed 100\u00a0million people worldwide in the 20th century and could kill 1\u00a0billion people around the world in the 21st century, a World Health Organization report warned.\nMany leading developed world causes of death can be postponed by diet and physical activity, but the accelerating incidence of disease with age still imposes limits on human longevity. The evolutionary cause of aging is, at best, only just beginning to be understood. It has been suggested that direct intervention in the aging process may now be the most effective intervention against major causes of death.\nSelye proposed a unified non-specific approach to many causes of death. He demonstrated that stress decreases adaptability of an organism and proposed to describe the adaptability as a special resource, \"adaptation energy\". The animal dies when this resource is exhausted. Selye assumed that the adaptability is a finite supply, presented at birth. Later on, Goldstone proposed the concept of a production or income of adaptation energy which may be stored (up to a limit), as a capital reserve of adaptation. In recent works, adaptation energy is considered as an internal coordinate on the \"dominant path\" in the model of adaptation. It is demonstrated that oscillations of well-being appear when the reserve of adaptability is almost exhausted.\nIn 2012, suicide overtook car crashes for leading causes of human injury deaths in the U.S., followed by poisoning, falls and murder. Causes of death are different in different parts of the world. In high-income and middle income countries nearly half up to more than two thirds of all people live beyond the age of 70 and predominantly die of chronic diseases. In low-income countries, where less than one in five of all people reach the age of 70, and more than a third of all deaths are among children under 15, people predominantly die of infectious diseases.\nAutopsy.\nAn autopsy, also known as a \"postmortem examination\" or an \"obduction\", is a medical procedure that consists of a thorough examination of a human corpse to determine the cause and manner of a person's death and to evaluate any disease or injury that may be present. It is usually performed by a specialized medical doctor called a pathologist.\nAutopsies are either performed for legal or medical purposes. A forensic autopsy is carried out when the cause of death may be a criminal matter, while a clinical or academic autopsy is performed to find the medical cause of death and is used in cases of unknown or uncertain death, or for research purposes. Autopsies can be further classified into cases where external examination suffices, and those where the body is dissected and an internal examination is conducted. Permission from next of kin may be required for internal autopsy in some cases. Once an internal autopsy is complete the body is generally reconstituted by sewing it back together. Autopsy is important in a medical environment and may shed light on mistakes and help improve practices.\nA necropsy, which is not always a medical procedure, was a term previously used to describe an unregulated postmortem examination . In modern times, this term is more commonly associated with the corpses of animals.\nSenescence.\nSenescence refers to a scenario when a living being is able to survive all calamities, but eventually dies due to causes relating to old age. Animal and plant cells normally reproduce and function during the whole period of natural existence, but the aging process derives from deterioration of cellular activity and ruination of regular functioning. Aptitude of cells for gradual deterioration and mortality means that cells are naturally sentenced to stable and long-term loss of living capacities, even despite continuing metabolic reactions and viability. In the United Kingdom, for example, nine out of ten of all the deaths that occur on a daily basis relates to senescence, while around the world it accounts for two-thirds of 150,000 deaths that take place daily (Hayflick &amp; Moody, 2003).\nAlmost all animals who survive external hazards to their biological functioning eventually die from biological aging, known in life sciences as \"senescence\". Some organisms experience negligible senescence, even exhibiting biological immortality. These include the jellyfish \"Turritopsis dohrnii\", the hydra, and the planarian. Unnatural causes of death include suicide and predation. From all causes, roughly 150,000 people die around the world each day.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.2202/1941-6008.1011\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Of these, two thirds die directly or indirectly due to senescence, but in industrialized countries \u2013 such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany \u2013 the rate approaches 90% (i.e., nearly nine out of ten of all deaths are related to senescence).\nPhysiological death is now seen as a process, more than an event: conditions once considered indicative of death are now reversible. Where in the process a dividing line is drawn between life and death depends on factors beyond the presence or absence of vital signs. In general, clinical death is neither necessary nor sufficient for a determination of legal death. A patient with working heart and lungs determined to be brain dead can be pronounced legally dead without clinical death occurring. As scientific knowledge and medicine advance, formulating a precise medical definition of death becomes more difficult.\nCryonics.\nCryonics (from Greek \u03ba\u03c1\u03cd\u03bf\u03c2 'kryos-' meaning 'icy cold') is the low-temperature preservation of animals and humans who cannot be sustained by contemporary medicine, with the hope that healing and resuscitation may be possible in the future.\nCryopreservation of people or large animals is not reversible with current technology. The stated rationale for cryonics is that people who are considered dead by current legal or medical definitions may not necessarily be dead according to the more stringent information-theoretic definition of death.\nSome scientific literature is claimed to support the feasibility of cryonics. Medical science and cryobiologists generally regards cryonics with skepticism.\nReperfusion.\n\"One of medicine's new frontiers: treating the dead\", recognizes that cells that have been without oxygen for more than five minutes die, not from lack of oxygen, but rather when their oxygen supply is resumed. Therefore, practitioners of this approach, e.g., at the Resuscitation Science institute at the University of Pennsylvania, \"aim to reduce oxygen uptake, slow metabolism and adjust the blood chemistry for gradual and safe reperfusion.\"\nLife extension.\nLife extension refers to an increase in maximum or average lifespan, especially in humans, by slowing down or reversing the processes of aging. Average lifespan is determined by vulnerability to accidents and age or lifestyle-related afflictions such as cancer, or cardiovascular disease. Extension of average lifespan can be achieved by good diet, exercise and avoidance of hazards such as smoking. Maximum lifespan is also determined by the rate of aging for a species inherent in its genes. Currently, the only widely recognized method of extending maximum lifespan is calorie restriction. Theoretically, extension of maximum lifespan can be achieved by reducing the rate of aging damage, by periodic replacement of damaged tissues, or by molecular repair or rejuvenation of deteriorated cells and tissues.\nA United States poll found that religious people and irreligious people, as well as men and women and people of different economic classes have similar rates of support for life extension, while Africans and Hispanics have higher rates of support than white people. 38 percent of the polled said they would desire to have their aging process cured.\nResearchers of life extension are a subclass of biogerontologists known as \"biomedical gerontologists\". They try to understand the nature of aging and they develop treatments to reverse aging processes or to at least slow them down, for the improvement of health and the maintenance of youthful vigor at every stage of life. Those who take advantage of life extension findings and seek to apply them upon themselves are called \"life extensionists\" or \"longevists\". The primary life extension strategy currently is to apply available anti-aging methods in the hope of living long enough to benefit from a complete cure to aging once it is developed.\nLocation.\nBefore about 1930, most people in Western countries died in their own homes, surrounded by family, and comforted by clergy, neighbors, and doctors making house calls. By the mid-20th century, half of all Americans died in a hospital. By the start of the 21st century, only about 20\u201325% of people in developed countries died outside of a medical institution. The shift away from dying at home towards dying in a professional medical environment has been termed the \"Invisible Death\". This shift occurred gradually over the years, until most deaths now occur outside the home.\nEmotional response.\nMany people are afraid of dying. Discussing, thinking, or planning their own deaths causes them discomfort. This fear may cause them to put off financial planning, preparing a will and testament, or requesting help from a hospice organization.\nDifferent people have different responses to the idea of their own deaths.\nPhilosopher Galen Strawson writes that the death that many people wish for is an instant, painless, unexperienced annihilation. In this unlikely scenario, the person dies without realizing it and without being able to fear it. One moment the person is walking, eating, or sleeping, and the next moment, the person is dead. Strawson reasons that this type of death would not take anything away from the person, as he believes that a person cannot have a legitimate claim to ownership in the future.\nSociety and culture.\nIn society, the nature of death and humanity's awareness of its own mortality has for millennia been a concern of the world's religious traditions and of philosophical inquiry. This includes belief in resurrection or an afterlife (associated with Abrahamic religions), reincarnation or rebirth (associated with Dharmic religions), or that consciousness permanently ceases to exist, known as eternal oblivion (associated with Secular humanism).\nCommemoration ceremonies after death may include various mourning, funeral practices and ceremonies of honouring the deceased. The physical remains of a person, commonly known as a \"corpse\" or \"body\", are usually interred whole or cremated, though among the world's cultures there are a variety of other methods of mortuary disposal. In the English language, blessings directed towards a dead person include \"rest in peace\", or its initialism RIP.\nDeath is the center of many traditions and organizations; customs relating to death are a feature of every culture around the world. Much of this revolves around the care of the dead, as well as the afterlife and the disposal of bodies upon the onset of death. The disposal of human corpses does, in general, begin with the last offices before significant time has passed, and ritualistic ceremonies often occur, most commonly interment or cremation. This is not a unified practice; in Tibet, for instance, the body is given a sky burial and left on a mountain top. Proper preparation for death and techniques and ceremonies for producing the ability to transfer one's spiritual attainments into another body (reincarnation) are subjects of detailed study in Tibet. Mummification or embalming is also prevalent in some cultures, to retard the rate of decay.\nLegal aspects of death are also part of many cultures, particularly the settlement of the deceased estate and the issues of inheritance and in some countries, inheritance taxation.\nCapital punishment is also a culturally divisive aspect of death. In most jurisdictions where capital punishment is carried out today, the death penalty is reserved for premeditated murder, espionage, treason, or as part of military justice. In some countries, sexual crimes, such as adultery and sodomy, carry the death penalty, as do religious crimes such as apostasy, the formal renunciation of one's religion. In many retentionist countries, drug trafficking is also a capital offense. In China, human trafficking and serious cases of corruption are also punished by the death penalty. In militaries around the world courts-martial have imposed death sentences for offenses such as cowardice, desertion, insubordination, and mutiny.\nDeath in warfare and in suicide attack also have cultural links, and the ideas of \"dulce et decorum est pro patria mori\", mutiny punishable by death, grieving relatives of dead soldiers and death notification are embedded in many cultures. Recently in the western world, with the increase in terrorism following the September 11 attacks, but also further back in time with suicide bombings, kamikaze missions in World War II and suicide missions in a host of other conflicts in history, death for a cause by way of suicide attack, and martyrdom have had significant cultural impacts.\nSuicide in general, and particularly euthanasia, are also points of cultural debate. Both acts are understood very differently in different cultures. In Japan, for example, ending a life with honor by seppuku was considered a desirable death, whereas according to traditional Christian and Islamic cultures, suicide is viewed as a sin. Death is personified in many cultures, with such symbolic representations as the Grim Reaper, Azrael, the Hindu god Yama and Father Time.\nIn Brazil, a human death is counted officially when it is registered by existing family members at a cart\u00f3rio, a government-authorized registry. Before being able to file for an official death, the deceased must have been registered for an official birth at the cart\u00f3rio. Though a Public Registry Law guarantees all Brazilian citizens the right to register deaths, regardless of their financial means, of their family members (often children), the Brazilian government has not taken away the burden, the hidden costs and fees, of filing for a death. For many impoverished families, the indirect costs and burden of filing for a death lead to a more appealing, unofficial, local, cultural burial, which in turn raises the debate about inaccurate mortality rates.\nTalking about death and witnessing it is a difficult issue with most cultures. Western societies may like to treat the dead with the utmost material respect, with an official embalmer and associated rites. Eastern societies (like India) may be more open to accepting it as a \"fait accompli\", with a funeral procession of the dead body ending in an open-air burning-to-ashes of the same.\nConsciousness.\nMuch interest and debate surround the question of what happens to one's consciousness as one's body dies. The belief in the permanent loss of consciousness after death is often called \"eternal oblivion\". Belief that the stream of consciousness is preserved after physical death is described by the term \"afterlife\". Neither are likely to ever be confirmed without the ponderer having to actually die.\nIn biology.\nAfter death, the remains of an organism become part of the biogeochemical cycle, during which animals may be consumed by a predator or a scavenger. Organic material may then be further decomposed by detritivores, organisms which recycle detritus, returning it to the environment for reuse in the food chain, where these chemicals may eventually end up being consumed and assimilated into the cells of a living organism. Examples of detritivores include earthworms, woodlice and dung beetles.\nMicroorganisms also play a vital role, raising the temperature of the decomposing matter as they break it down into yet simpler molecules. Not all materials need to be fully decomposed. Coal, a fossil fuel formed over vast tracts of time in swamp ecosystems, is one example.\nNatural selection.\nContemporary evolutionary theory sees death as an important part of the process of natural selection. It is considered that organisms less adapted to their environment are more likely to die having produced fewer offspring, thereby reducing their contribution to the gene pool. Their genes are thus eventually bred out of a population, leading at worst to extinction and, more positively, making the process possible, referred to as speciation. Frequency of reproduction plays an equally important role in determining species survival: an organism that dies young but leaves numerous offspring displays, according to Darwinian criteria, much greater fitness than a long-lived organism leaving only one.\nExtinction.\nExtinction is the cessation of existence of a species or group of taxa, reducing biodiversity. The moment of extinction is generally considered to be the death of the last individual of that species (although the capacity to breed and recover may have been lost before this point). Because a species' potential range may be very large, determining this moment is difficult, and is usually done retrospectively. This difficulty leads to phenomena such as Lazarus taxa, where species presumed extinct abruptly \"reappear\" (typically in the fossil record) after a period of apparent absence. New species arise through the process of speciation, an aspect of evolution. New varieties of organisms arise and thrive when they are able to find and exploit an ecological niche \u2013 and species become extinct when they are no longer able to survive in changing conditions or against superior competition.\nEvolution of aging and mortality.\nInquiry into the evolution of aging aims to explain why so many living things and the vast majority of animals weaken and die with age (exceptions include \"Hydra\" and the already cited jellyfish \"Turritopsis dohrnii\", which research shows to be biologically immortal). The evolutionary origin of senescence remains one of the fundamental puzzles of biology. Gerontology specializes in the science of human aging processes.\nOrganisms showing only asexual reproduction (e.g. bacteria, some protists, like the euglenoids and many amoebozoans) and unicellular organisms with sexual reproduction (colonial or not, like the volvocine algae \"Pandorina\" and \"Chlamydomonas\") are \"immortal\" at some extent, dying only due to external hazards, like being eaten or meeting with a fatal accident. In multicellular organisms (and also in multinucleate ciliates), with a Weismannist development, that is, with a division of labor between mortal somatic (body) cells and \"immortal\" germ (reproductive) cells, death becomes an essential part of life, at least for the somatic line.\nThe \"Volvox\" algae are among the simplest organisms to exhibit that division of labor between two completely different cell types, and as a consequence include death of somatic line as a regular, genetically regulated part of its life history.\nReligious views.\nBuddhism.\nIn Buddhist doctrine and practice, death plays an important role. Awareness of death was what motivated Prince Siddhartha to strive to find the \"deathless\" and finally to attain enlightenment. In Buddhist doctrine, death functions as a reminder of the value of having been born as a human being. Being reborn as a human being is considered the only state in which one can attain enlightenment. Therefore, death helps remind oneself that one should not take life for granted. The belief in rebirth among Buddhists does not necessarily remove death anxiety, since all existence in the cycle of rebirth is considered filled with suffering, and being reborn many times does not necessarily mean that one progresses.\nDeath is part of several key Buddhist tenets, such as the Four Noble Truths and dependent origination.\nHinduism.\nIn Hindu texts, death is described as the individual eternal spiritual \"jiva-atma\" (soul or conscious self) exiting the current temporary material body. The soul exits this body when the body can no longer sustain the conscious self (life), which may be due to mental or physical reasons, or more accurately, the inability to act on one's \"kama\" (material desires). During conception, the soul enters a compatible new body based on the remaining merits and demerits of one's \"karma\" (good/bad material activities based on \"dharma\") and the state of one's mind (impressions or last thoughts) at the time of death.\nUsually the process of reincarnation (soul's transmigration) makes one forget all memories of one's previous life. Because nothing really dies and the temporary material body is always changing, both in this life and the next, death simply means forgetfulness of one's previous experiences (previous material identity).\nMaterial existence is described as being full of miseries arising from birth, disease, old age, death, mind, weather, etc. To conquer \"samsara\" (the cycle of death and rebirth) and become eligible for one of the different types of \"moksha\" (liberation), one has to first conquer \"kama\" (material desires) and become self-realized. The human form of life is most suitable for this spiritual journey, especially with the help of \"sadhu\" (self-realized saintly persons), \"sastra\" (revealed spiritual scriptures), and \"guru\" (self-realized spiritual masters), given all three are in agreement.\nJudaism.\nThere are a variety of beliefs about the afterlife within Judaism, but none of them contradict the preference of life over death. This is partially because death puts a cessation to the possibility of fulfilling any commandments.\nLanguage around death.\nThe word death comes from Old English \"d\u0113a\u00fe\", which in turn comes from Proto-Germanic *\"dau\u00feuz\" (reconstructed by etymological analysis). This comes from the Proto-Indo-European stem *\"dheu-\" meaning the \"process, act, condition of dying\".\nThe concept and symptoms of death, and varying degrees of delicacy used in discussion in public forums, have generated numerous scientific, legal, and socially acceptable terms or euphemisms for death. When a person has died, it is also said they have \"passed away\", \"passed on\", \"expired\", or are \"gone\", among numerous other socially accepted, religiously specific, slang, and irreverent terms.\nAs a formal reference to a dead person, it has become common practice to use the participle form of \"decease\", as in \"the deceased\"; another noun form is \"decedent\".\nBereft of life, the dead person is then a \"corpse\", \"cadaver\", a \"body\", a \"set of remains\", and when all flesh has rotted away, a skeleton. The terms \"carrion\" and \"carcass\" can also be used, though these more often connote the remains of non-human animals. The ashes left after a cremation are sometimes referred to by the neologism \"cremains\".\nReferences.\nBibliography"}
{"id": "8222", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8222", "title": "Deseret alphabet", "text": "The Deseret alphabet (; Deseret: or ) is a phonemic English-language spelling reform developed between 1847 and 1854 by the board of regents of the University of Deseret under the leadership of Brigham Young, the second president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). George D. Watt is reported to have been the most actively involved in the development of the script, as well as being its first serious user.\nIn public statements, Young claimed the alphabet was intended to replace the traditional Latin alphabet with an alternative, more phonetically accurate alphabet for the English language. This would offer immigrants an opportunity to learn to read and write English, he said, the orthography of which is often less phonetically consistent than those of many other languages. Similar experiments have not been uncommon, the most well-known of which is the Shavian alphabet.\nThe Deseret alphabet was an outgrowth of Young's, and the early LDS Church's, idealism and utopianism. Young and his Mormon pioneers believed \"all aspects of life\" were in need of reform, and the Deseret alphabet was just one of many ways they sought to bring about a complete \"transformation in society\".\nYoung also prescribed the learning of Deseret to the school system, stating \"It will be the means of introducing uniformity in our orthography, and the years that are now required to learn to read and spell can be devoted to other studies.\"\nDuring the alphabet's heyday between 1854 and 1869, books, newspapers, street signs and correspondence used the new letters, but despite heavy and costly promotion by the early LDS Church, the alphabet never enjoyed prolonged widespread use and has been regarded by historians as a failure.\nHistory.\nCreation (1847\u20131854).\nThe Deseret alphabet was a project of the Mormon pioneers, a group of early followers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) which set about building a new society in the Utah desert after the death of the church's founder, Joseph Smith. The Deseret alphabet was just one of many ways that the Mormon pioneers tried to bring about a complete \"transformation in society\", as an outgrowth of their idealism and utopianism.\nThe Deseret alphabet was developed primarily by a committee made up of the board of regents of the University of Deseret, members of which included church leaders Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt and Heber C. Kimball. According to Brigham Young University professor Richard G. Moore, most scholars believe that George D. Watt's contribution to the actual form the alphabet took was the greatest; he furthermore \"plant[ed] the idea of spelling reform in Brigham Young's mind\" through a phonography class he gave after the death of Joseph Smith which Young attended. In addition, William W. Phelps helped \"work out the letters\" along with Pratt. Before they decided on the Deseret alphabet, the attention of the board of regents was mostly focused on Pitman style alphabets, and in April 1847 Brigham Young nearly purchased of lead type to print books using Pitman's orthography. The University of Deseret was incorporated on 28 February 1850; less than three weeks later, on 20 March, the new board of regents began to discuss spelling reform.\nOn 29 November 1853, the committee was ready to approve a slightly modified version of the Pitman orthography, when Willard Richards, who had been deathly ill and missed the debate before the vote, saw the proposed alphabet, which spelled the word \"phonetic\" as \"f\u0277netic\". Richards was quick to condemn it, saying to the committee that in his view \"those characters...seem like putting old wine into new bottles...I am inclined to think...we shall...throw away all characters that bear much resemblance to the English characters, and introduce an alphabet that is original.\"\nThese words persuaded Brigham Young and the rest of the committee, and Watt then endeavored to create an original alphabet. Less than two months later, on 19 January 1854, the board of regents finally approved the first 38-letter Deseret alphabet. One legacy of Pitman's orthography survived, though: the idea that one letter should equal one sound.\nUse by the Mormon pioneers (1854\u20131869).\nUpon the alphabet's acceptance, its first user was its principal architect, George D. Watt, who began writing the meeting minutes of the early Bishops in a cursive form of it in 1854. Almost immediately after its publication, church members began experimenting with it, and by 1855 travel writers Jules Remy and Julius Brenchley published a chart of the new alphabet which differed heavily from the 1854 version. Some early Mormons, such as Thales Hastings Haskell, began writing their personal journals in the new alphabet. Remy further reported that during his time in Salt Lake City, he saw signs on the street and above shops using the new alphabet.\nAfter its approval by the board of regents, Brigham Young testified before the Utah territorial legislature that the new alphabet should \"be thoroughly and extensively taught in all the schools.\" Some teaching in Utah schools did take place: John B. Milner taught the alphabet in Provo, Lehi, American Fork, and Pleasant Grove, while evening classes were taught in Salt Lake City and Farmington.\nAfter several months' practice writing with the new alphabet, Watt wrote to Brigham Young that he was unhappy with it, and proposed a complete overhaul, which was never followed up on.\nWord of the new alphabet soon spread outside Utah, and most press reports in non-Mormon papers were critical. Other writers, however, acquainted with other phonotypic and stenographic alphabets, ranged from neutral descriptions of the new alphabet to praise.\nUntil this point, all the printed material (mostly just charts of the alphabet and its standard orthography equivalents) had been produced with large wooden type, which was not suitable for printing at small sizes. Because the alphabet was wholly unique, no font existed, so in 1857 the board of regents appointed Erastus Snow to procure metal type from St. Louis-based font foundry Ladew &amp; Peer. However, in May 1857 the Utah War began, and Snow left St. Louis to support the Mormon pioneers. During the war, Ladew &amp; Peer kept working on the type, and the punches and matrices were delivered in the winter of 1858. The first use of the new type was to make a business card for George A. Smith, an early Mormon historian.\nIn 1859, with the new type in hand, the \"Deseret News\" began printing with it. It would print one piece per issue in the new alphabet, usually a quotation from \"The Book of Mormon\" or the New Testament. However, this only lasted for one year, after which the practice stopped; it would start again in May 1864 and stop permanently at the end of that year.Benn Pitman, the brother of Isaac Pitman, was also interested in spelling reform, and by 1864 had published his own orthography, which the board of regents considered adopting. However, they ultimately decided not to and used the opportunity to re-affirm their commitment to the Deseret alphabet.\nBrigham Young blamed the failure of this first attempt at reform on the ugliness of the type developed by Ladew &amp; Peer, and so he commissioned Russell's American Steam Printing House, a New York City based font foundry, to design more pleasing type. The result was the Bodoni-esque font (at right) that was used to print all of the books in this period. In an 1868 article, the \"Deseret News\" wrote that \"the characters, to a person unaccustomed to them, may look strange, [but] to the eye to which they are familiar they are beautiful.\"\nAt least four books were published in the new alphabet, all transcribed by Orson Pratt and all using the Russell's House font: \"The First Deseret Alphabet Reader\" (1868), \"The Second Deseret Alphabet Reader\" (1868), \"The Book of Mormon\" (1869), and a \"Book of Mormon\" excerpt called \"First Nephi\u2013Omni\" (1869).\nConsiderable non-printed material in the Deseret alphabet was made, including a replica headstone in Cedar City, Utah, some coinage, letters, diaries, and meeting minutes. One of the more curious items found in the Deseret alphabet is an English-Hopi dictionary prepared by two Mormon missionaries. It sat unappreciated in handwritten form at the LDS Church Archives until 2014, when Kenneth R. Beesley, a writing system researcher and computer scientist, noticed its significance and transcribed it into standard written English.\nDecline (1869\u20131877).\nDespite years of heavy promotion, the Deseret alphabet was never widely adopted. This reluctance was partly due to prohibitive costs; the project had already cost the early church $20,000, with $6,000 going to Pratt as remuneration for his transcription effort and most of the rest going to cutting metal type featuring the new alphabet and printing costs. In 1859, Orson Pratt estimated that the cost of supplying all Utah Territory schoolchildren with suitable textbooks would be over US$5,000,000.\nAccording to Beesley, many have written that interest in the Deseret alphabet died with Brigham Young. This, however, is not true; the alphabet was already regarded as a failure during Young's time. Only 500 copies of the full \"Book of Mormon\" translated into the Deseret alphabet sold for US$2 each, and even Young realized that the venture was too expensive and even the most devout Mormons could not be convinced to purchase and study the Deseret edition books over the books in the traditional orthography. In the winter of 1870, just one year after their publication, advertisements for the Deseret alphabet books were quietly removed from the \"Deseret News\".\nContemporary writers noted that thousands of copies of the US$0.15 and US$0.20 Deseret primers went unsold, and historian Roby Wentz speculated that the LDS Church at that time had a \"cache\" of the primers in mint condition, which it was slowly selling off; according to him, one such primer sold for $250 in 1978.\nThe Mormons had planned to use the profits from sale of the earlier books to fund printing of more books, and in anticipation Orson Pratt had already transcribed the complete Bible, \"Doctrine and Covenants\", and John Jaques's \"Catechism for Children\". Pratt had also prepared an apparent sequel to the primers, the \"Deseret Phonetic Speller\". After the sales failure, however, none of these books were ever published and were thought lost until being rediscovered in a storage area of the LDS Church Archives in Salt Lake City in May 1967.\nRalph Vigoda, a reporter for \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\", has speculated that the completion of the Transcontinental Railroad may have contributed to the alphabet's downfall: non-Mormons, not loyal to Brigham Young, became a large part of the city, and without the religious motivation it would be difficult indeed to get them to learn a new alphabet. In a retrospective piece, historian A. J. Simmonds claims that the new railroad doomed the alphabet. According to him, easy access to \"the whole literature of the English speaking world\" rendered the alphabet useless.\nIn July 1877, Young tried one more time at a spelling reform, ordering lead type designed for the orthography of Benn Pitman (Isaac's brother) with the intention of printing an edition of the \"Book of Mormon\" and \"Doctrine and Covenants\" using it. Most of the type had arrived by August, but with Young's death, the translation was never undertaken and the type never used. Young's death thus marked the end of the Mormon experimentation with English spelling reforms.\nRediscovery in the computer era.\nModern digital typography has reduced the costs of typesetting substantially, especially for small print runs. As long as a freely licensed Deseret alphabet font and a font of the standard orthography have similar inked surface areas, printing a book in the Deseret alphabet using modern technology would have a similar cost as printing a book in the standard orthography.\nFilm director Trent Harris used the Deseret alphabet in his 1994 satire of Mormon theology, \"Plan 10 from Outer Space\", where it features as an alien language used on a mysterious \"Plaque of Kolob\".\nDuring the 1996 Utah Centennial celebration, an activity book for children was distributed, within which one of the activities was for a child to write their own name in the alphabet. The book says that a child who does this will be \"the first kid in 100 years to write [their] name in the Deseret alphabet!\"\nAlso in 1996, \"Buffalo River Press\" published a reprint of the \"Deseret First Book\", of which only 10,000 were originally printed. The entire \"Book of Mormon\" in the Deseret alphabet has been likewise reprinted, as only 500 copies from the original print run exist, and they can sell on eBay for \u2248$7,500 (as of 2004). In 1997, John Jenkins uploaded a free three part PDF of the so-called \"triple combination\", that is, a combined \"Book of Mormon\", \"Doctrine and Covenants\" and \"Pearl of Great Price\".\nJohn Jenkins has gone on to publish many classic pieces of English literature in the Deseret alphabet, such as \"Alice in Wonderland,\" \"Pride and Prejudice\", and \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.\"\nOwing to the character set's inclusion in Unicode, most of the original books and many of the original manuscripts have been transcribed into plain text, and, when this is not possible due to discrepancies between the Unicode reference glyphs and the documents, LaTeX.\nFonts.\n The first digital font for the Deseret alphabet, called \"Deseret\", was designed by Greg Kearney as part of work he was doing for the LDS Church History Department in 1991; the font was used in an exhibit that year. In August 1995, a cleaned up, digitized version of the font in use in the \"Deseret Second Book\" was created by Salt Lake City graphic designer Edward Bateman, who made the font in Fontographer while working on \"Plan 10 from Outer Space\".\nAlthough it is not currently available in CTAN, Kenneth R. Beesley purports to have created a Metafont (and thus, LaTeX-compatible) font called in 2004.\nAll computers running Microsoft's Windows 7 operating system or newer can display the entire Deseret alphabet Unicode range as the glyphs are included in the Segoe UI Symbol font.\nBesides maintaining a Deseret input method for Windows, Joshua Erickson, a UCLA alumnus, also maintains a large collection of freeware Unicode fonts for the alphabet, which he collectively terms the \"Bee Fonts.\"\nThere also exist free software fonts for the Deseret alphabet. Google, through its Noto Sans project, the aim of which is \"to support all languages with a harmonious look and feel\", has also released a Deseret font under the name \"Noto Sans Deseret\". George Douros maintains a public domain font called \"Analecta\" as part of his Unicode Fonts for Ancient Scripts project, which supports the Coptic, Gothic, and Deseret scripts. Deseret glyphs are also available in the popular pan-Unicode fonts Code2001 and Everson Mono (as of version 5.1.5).\nAlphabet.\nAlthough the Deseret alphabet has letter case, the only difference between the minuscule and majuscule forms is that the majuscule forms are larger.\nA degree of free spelling is allowed to accommodate dialectal differences in English. For example, in the Deseret edition of \"The Book of Mormon\", the word \"wherefore\" is written as \ud801\udc38\ud801\udc36\ud801\udc2f\ud801\udc49\ud801\udc41\ud801\udc2c\ud801\udc49 (), which means that the translator of the book did not exhibit the wine\u2013whine merger. Those who do exhibit the merger might instead prefer the spelling \ud801\udc36\ud801\udc2f\ud801\udc49\ud801\udc41\ud801\udc2c\ud801\udc49 to match the pronunciation (), or, depending on dialect, perhaps \ud801\udc36\ud801\udc2f\ud801\udc49\ud801\udc41\ud801\udc2b\ud801\udc49 ().\nThe alphabet was designed to be able to write all of the vowels used in the dialect spoken in 19th century Utah. The vowel inventory has also been attributed to the fact that unlike other American pioneers, the Mormon pioneers were from New England as opposed to the American South. As such, many of the vowels in the Deseret alphabet have since merged in the modern era: they are no longer distinguished in many dialects of English.\nSpeakers who exhibit the father\u2013bother merger no longer distinguish (\ud801\udc2a) and (\ud801\udc31), and so both father and bother would be written with \ud801\udc2a: as \ud801\udc41\ud801\udc2a\ud801\udc44\ud801\udc32\ud801\udc49 and \ud801\udc3a\ud801\udc2a\ud801\udc44\ud801\udc32\ud801\udc49 as opposed to \ud801\udc41\ud801\udc2a\ud801\udc44\ud801\udc32\ud801\udc49 and \ud801\udc3a\ud801\udc31\ud801\udc44\ud801\udc32\ud801\udc49. For those with the cot\u2013caught merger, (\ud801\udc2b) and (\ud801\udc31) are no longer distinguished: both cot and caught are thus written by them as \ud801\udc3f\ud801\udc31\ud801\udc3b () in the case of North American English and as \ud801\udc3f\ud801\udc2b\ud801\udc3b () in the case of Scottish English. For those exhibiting both mergers, both would be written \ud801\udc3f\ud801\udc2a\ud801\udc3b ().\nVersions.\nThere have been several published versions of the alphabet. Most versions (including the versions used in \"The Deseret First Book\", \"The Deseret Second Book\", \"The Deseret News\" and \"The Book of Mormon\") had only 38 letters, but some versions contained two ligatures, \ud801\udc27 (ew) and \ud801\udc26 (oi). In place of \ud801\udc2e\ud801\udc2d or \ud801\udc37\ud801\udc2d, \ud801\udc4f was to be used; in place of \ud801\udc31\ud801\udc2e, \ud801\udc4e.\nIn the 23 February 1859 edition of the \"Deseret News\", the editors announced their approval of the two new letters and eventual intention to use them in the newsletter. However, due to the hot metal typesetting technology in use at the time, casting the new letters for use would have been a considerable expense, so it was never realized.\nRepresentation of.\nThe Deseret alphabet does not have a distinct symbol for the mid central vowel (, \"schwa\"). The lack of a schwa has been cited as the biggest \"phonological flaw\" in the alphabet.\nBecause of the lack of a schwa, the author must write the sound that would be used if the word was stressed. For example, the word \"enough\" is commonly pronounced , but when it is stressed (as in a declaration of irritation) it is pronounced . The Deseret spelling of the word, \ud801\udc28\ud801\udc4c\ud801\udc32\ud801\udc41, reflects that stressed pronunciation. If does not have an inherent stressed value in a word, as is often the case before , then it is written as \ud801\udc32.\nMarion J. Shelton, an early Mormon missionary, proposed the addition of a new glyph to represent the schwa, a simple vertical line of the same height as other Deseret characters with a similar appearance to the Turkish dotless i (\u0131). The addition of this glyph did not catch on among his contemporaries, however, and no document outside of ones penned by Shelton makes use of it. Shelton used the new glyph in an 1860 letter to Brigham Young reporting on a recently completed mission to the Paiute people.\nSyllabic values.\nEach letter in the Deseret alphabet has a name, and when a letter is written on its own it has the value of that name. This allows some short words to be written with a single letter, and is called a letter's \"syllabic value\". The most common word in English, \"the\", is written simply \ud801\udc44, as the letter's name is and that is the stressed pronunciation of the word. The consonants with syllabic values are \ud801\udc36 (woo), \ud801\udc37 (yee), \ud801\udc38 (ha), \ud801\udc39 (pee), \ud801\udc3a (be/bee), \ud801\udc3b (tee/tea), \ud801\udc3d (qi), \ud801\udc3e (gee), \ud801\udc40 (gay), and \ud801\udc44 (the/thee).\nSyllabic values do not apply within words, although this was formerly the case. In early documents, Watt writes \"people\" as \ud801\udc39\ud801\udc39\ud801\udc4a with the expectation that readers will interpret the first \ud801\udc39 as , but the second \ud801\udc39 as . This contextual value switching was soon done away with, so in later documents, while \"bee\" is written \ud801\udc3a, \"bees\" is written \ud801\udc3a\ud801\udc28\ud801\udc46.\nIn 40-letter versions of the alphabet which include the letter \ud801\udc27 (ew) which represents , the letter \ud801\udc27 when standing alone can be used to represent the word \"you\".\nExamples.\nThe first lesson in the \"Deseret First Book\" reads simply:\nIn the \"Deseret Second Book\", there is a version of \"Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star\" on page 19:\nHandwriting.\nThere were two main handwritten forms of the Deseret alphabet: a cursive version and a printed version. Over the lifetime of the alphabet, the cursive form fell out of favor among most users of the alphabet and by 1856 no more cursive documents exist. Its impact on the glyphs can however still be plainly seen in the loops of certain characters such as \ud801\udc45, \ud801\udc40 and \ud801\udc3c. The earliest surviving versions of the Deseret alphabet, from 1853 (one year before its January 1854 approval), have printed and cursive forms side-by-side, suggesting that a cursive form was part of the plan from the very beginning.\nCursive.\nThe cursive form of the Deseret alphabet was mainly used by two people: George D. Watt, and James Henry Martineau. Watt, a stenographer, recorded several bishops meetings and wrote other personal documents in this cursive style. A chart of the cursive form appears below. The blue glyphs represent how to write each character, while the top row of printed glyphs shows the corresponding Unicode reference glyph.\nThe cursive style has many unorthodox characteristics uncommon to Western writing systems. Vowels can be dropped if the writer is in a hurry and feels the word is obvious as in an abjad, letters can be written above or below the base line depending on what precedes them, and \ud801\udc2e is placed on letters after they are already written as in an abugida. Furthermore, unlike the typeset alphabet, the cursive alphabet has no letter case. These characteristics could have arisen because Watt was a local expert in Pitman shorthand, which is written in a similar way.\nThe table below shows some examples of how the cursive form is written. Dropped vowels are marked in parenthesis.\nBlock letters.\nGeorge D. Watt found his own alphabet cumbersome to write and abandoned it. As he wrote to Brigham Young on 21 August 1854:\nHis new alphabet closely resembled an 1853 publication of Isaac Pitman, containing only 33 letters. However, at this point, Young was still enamored with the original Deseret alphabet, and so he rejected the proposal and Watt continued to publicly promote the alphabet as part of his job despite his reservations.\nAfter 1855, no more cursive documents appear, and all surviving journals are written in block letters. Marion J. Shelton, an early Mormon missionary who wrote a dictionary of the Hopi language in the alphabet, was a \"typical\" 40-letter Deseret writer, and his style of writing is shown below.\nDesign criticism.\nThe Deseret alphabet was purposely designed so as to not have ascenders and descenders. This was envisioned as a practical benefit for the alphabet in an era of metal type: after many uses, the edges of type sorts become dull, and narrow ascenders and descenders are most prone to this effect.\nWhile well intentioned, this lack has been described as a \"catastrophic\" mistake that makes type look \"monotonous\" and makes all words look alike. Some have drawn comparisons between the alphabet and the Old Turkic script, saying that writing in the new alphabet could be mistaken from afar as a Turkish tax list.\nThe Mormon pioneers were apparently aware of the problems caused by its monotony:\nOther criticism of the design was harsher still. In an 18 December 1857 editorial in the \"Boston Globe\", the alphabet was described as being \"so arranged and named as to cause the greatest possible annoyance to outsiders\" and the design of the letters as \"incomprehensible as [...] the hieroglyphics of the [...] Egyptians.\" On 4 March 1872, \"The New York Times\" called the alphabet \"rude, awkward and cumbersome.\"\nSome modern computer fonts and printed books have attempted to correct this perceived fault: in the books in John Jenkins' \"Deseret Alphabet Classics\" series, the font used adds a descender to \ud801\udc49 and \ud801\udc3b and an ascender to \ud801\udc3c and \ud801\udc47 among other tweaks.\nOther motives.\nOfficially, the Deseret alphabet was created to simplify the spelling of English words for the benefit of children and English as a second language learners. Some of the alphabet's contemporaries, however, posited an alternative motivation for its development: increasing the isolation of the early Mormons.\nTo keep outsiders from reading Mormon secrets.\nThe charge that the Deseret alphabet's main purpose was to keep outsiders (\"gentiles\" in LDS terminology) in the dark was brought almost immediately, as evidenced by the following 1858 \"Lyttelton Times\" reprint of an unnamed \"New York newspaper\":\nHaving obtained a copy of the \"Deseret News\" in 1859, the \"Richmond Dispatch\" disparaged it on April 25, writing \"The \"Deseret News\" is filled with a lot of hieroglyphs. It seems to be [an alphabet] which the Mormons alone are to be taught.\"\nModern historians, however, doubt the veracity of this theory. For one thing, notes Kenneth R. Beesley, the \"Deseret News\" and every book published in the alphabet prominently feature the key to the alphabet, and anyone without a key could have gotten a copy of \"A Journey to Great-Salt-Lake City\", or traveled to Salt Lake City themselves and bought one. Contemporary scholars Richard F. Burton and Jules Remy also dismissed the secrecy argument, in 1860 and 1855 respectively.\nTo keep Mormons from reading outside literature.\nWith the impending completion of the Transcontinental Railroad, the Mormon pioneers would have easy, cheap access to publications from the east, including yellow-backs, penny dreadfuls, pulp magazines, and other often scandalous or dirty publications that were rising to prominence in the 19th century. Indeed, in an article about the benefits of the alphabet, the \"Deseret News\" proudly wrote:\nIn another article, the \"Deseret News\" cited an example of the kind of literature Mormons would benefit from not being able to read: \"The Police Gazette\". Historians A. J. Simmonds and Roby Wentz contend that while this may have been a tertiary goal of the alphabet, a sort of \"happy accident\", the main purpose of it was simple orthographic reform. Simmonds notes that the teaching of English to foreigners was not a mere hypothetical to mask isolationist tendencies: 35% of the Utah Territory's population at the time was Scandinavian, with German, Italian and Welsh speaking people also making up a considerable percentage of inhabitants; therefore, communication between the recently baptized and the community was a real problem.\nEncodings.\nThe Deseret alphabet (U+10400\u2013U+1044F) was added to the Unicode Standard in March 2001 with the release of version 3.1, after a request by John H. Jenkins of Apple, making it one of the first scripts to be added outside of the Basic Multilingual Plane. The letters \ud801\udc27 (ew) and \ud801\udc26 (oi) were added to the Unicode Standard in April 2003 with the release of version 4.0.\nAccording to Kenneth R. Beesley, who submitted the proposal to expand the encoding, \"Unicode fonts based on the current heterogeneous collection of glyphs will be useless for any practical typesetting of 40-letter Deseret Alphabet documents.\" This is because the Unicode Consortium chose to use glyphs from 1855 as the reference glyphs, while by 1859 those glyphs were already outmoded and replaced with newer glyphs. Beesley thus recommends using LaTeX along with his Metafont font to typeset Deseret text, but fonts which use the alternate glyphs for the two codepoints in question would also work for transcription of 40-letter Deseret texts written during and after 1859.\nOn 25 February 2016, the Library of Congress approved an ALA-LC romanization for the Deseret alphabet. The table can be used to display approximations of titles in non-Latin scripts using the Latin alphabet for use in library catalogs that do not support non-Latin alphabets."}
{"id": "8223", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8223", "title": "Data Compression/sampling frequency", "text": ""}
{"id": "8225", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8225", "title": "Definition Of Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "8226", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8226", "title": "Danish", "text": "Danish may refer to:"}
{"id": "8227", "revid": "7269056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8227", "title": "Danish language", "text": "Danish (; \"dansk\" , \"dansk sprog\" ) is a North Germanic language spoken by about six million people, principally in Denmark, Greenland and in the region of Southern Schleswig in northern Germany, where it has minority language status. Also, minor Danish-speaking communities are found in Norway, Sweden, Spain, the United States, Canada, Brazil, and Argentina. Due to immigration and language shift in urban areas, about 15\u201320% of the population of Greenland speak Danish as their first language.\nAlong with the other North Germanic languages, Danish is a descendant of Old Norse, the common language of the Germanic peoples who lived in Scandinavia during the Viking Era. Danish, together with Swedish, derives from the East Norse dialect group, while the Middle Norwegian language before the influence of Danish and Norwegian Bokm\u00e5l are classified as West Norse along with Faroese and Icelandic. A more recent classification based on mutual intelligibility separates modern spoken Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish as \"mainland Scandinavian\", while Icelandic and Faroese are classified as \"insular Scandinavian\". Although writing is compatible, spoken Danish is distinctly different from Norwegian and Swedish and thus the degree of mutual intelligibility with either is variable between regions and speakers.\nUntil the 16th century, Danish was a continuum of dialects spoken from Schleswig to Scania with no standard variety or spelling conventions. With the Protestant Reformation and the introduction of printing, a standard language was developed which was based on the educated Copenhagen dialect. It spread through use in the education system and administration, though German and Latin continued to be the most important written languages well into the 17th century. Following the loss of territory to Germany and Sweden, a nationalist movement adopted the language as a token of Danish identity, and the language experienced a strong surge in use and popularity, with major works of literature produced in the 18th and 19th centuries. Today, traditional Danish dialects have all but disappeared, though regional variants of the standard language exist. The main differences in language are between generations, with youth language being particularly innovative.\nDanish has a very large vowel inventory consisting of 27 phonemically distinctive vowels, and its prosody is characterized by the distinctive phenomenon \"st\u00f8d\", a kind of laryngeal phonation type. Due to the many pronunciation differences that set apart Danish from its neighboring languages, particularly the vowels, difficult prosody and \"weakly\" pronounced consonants, it is sometimes considered to be a \"difficult language to learn, acquire and understand\", and some evidence shows that children are slower to acquire the phonological distinctions of Danish compared to other languages. The grammar is moderately inflective with strong (irregular) and weak (regular) conjugations and inflections. Nouns and demonstrative pronouns distinguish common and neutral gender. Like English, Danish only has remnants of a former case system, particularly in the pronouns. Unlike English, it has lost all person marking on verbs. Its syntax is V2 word order, with the finite verb always occupying the second slot in the sentence.\nClassification.\nDanish is a Germanic language of the North Germanic branch. Other names for this group are the Nordic or Scandinavian languages. Along with Swedish, Danish descends from the Eastern dialects of the Old Norse language; Danish and Swedish are also classified as East Scandinavian or East Nordic languages.\nScandinavian languages are often considered a dialect continuum, where no sharp dividing lines are seen between the different vernacular languages.\nLike Norwegian and Swedish, Danish was significantly influenced by Low German in the Middle Ages, and has been influenced by English since the turn of the 20th century.\nDanish itself can be divided into three main dialect areas: West Danish (Jutlandic), Insular Danish (including the standard variety), and East Danish (including Bornholmian and Scanian). Under the view that Scandinavian is a dialect continuum, East Danish can be considered intermediary between Danish and Swedish, while Scanian can be considered a Swedified East Danish dialect, and Bornholmsk is its closest relative. Contemporary Scanian is fully mutually intelligible with Swedish and less so with Danish since it shares a standardized vocabulary and less distinct prounciations with the rest of Sweden than in the past. Blekinge and Halland, the two other provinces further away from Copenhagen that transitioned to Sweden in the 17th century speak dialects more similar to standard Swedish.\nMutual intelligibility.\nDanish is largely mutually intelligible with Norwegian and Swedish. Proficient speakers of any of the three languages can often understand the others fairly well, though studies have shown that speakers of Norwegian generally understand both Danish and Swedish far better than Swedes or Danes understand each other. Both Swedes and Danes also understand Norwegian better than they understand each other's languages. The reason Norwegian occupies a middle position in terms of intelligibility is because of its shared border with Sweden resulting in a similarity in pronunciation, combined with the long tradition of having Danish as a written language which has led to similarities in vocabulary. Among younger Danes, Copenhageners are worse at understanding Swedish than Danes from the provinces. In general, younger Danes are not as good at understanding the neighboring languages as are Norwegian and Swedish youths.\nHistory.\nThe Danish philologist Johannes Br\u00f8ndum-Nielsen divided the history of Danish into a period from 800 AD to 1525 to be \"Old Danish\", which he subdivided into \"Runic Danish\" (800-1100), Early Middle Danish (1100\u20131350) and Late Middle Danish (1350\u20131525).\nRunic Danish.\nBy the eighth century, the common Germanic language of Scandinavia, Proto-Norse, had undergone some changes and evolved into Old Norse.\nThis language was generally called the \"Danish tongue\" (\"D\u01ebnsk tunga\"), or \"Norse language\" (\"Norr\u0153nt m\u00e1l\"). Norse was written in the runic alphabet, first with the elder futhark and from the 9th century with the younger futhark.\nFrom the seventh century, the common Norse language began to undergo changes that did not spread to all of Scandinavia, resulting in the appearance of two dialect areas, Old West Norse (Norway and Iceland) and Old East Norse (Denmark and Sweden). Most of the changes separating East Norse from West Norse started as innovations in Denmark, that spread through Scania into Sweden and by maritime contact to southern Norway. A change that separated Old East Norse (Runic Swedish/Danish) from Old West Norse was the change of the diphthong \"\u00e6i\" (Old West Norse \"ei\") to the monophthong \"e\", as in \"st\u00e6in\" to \"sten\". This is reflected in runic inscriptions where the older read \"stain\" and the later \"stin\". Also, a change of \"au\" as in \"dau\u00f0r\" into \"\u00f8\" as in \"d\u00f8\u00f0r\" occurred. This change is shown in runic inscriptions as a change from \"tau\u00fer\" into \"tu\u00fer\". Moreover, the \"\u00f8y\" (Old West Norse \"ey\") diphthong changed into \"\u00f8\", as well, as in the Old Norse word for \"island\". This monophthongization started in Jutland and spread eastward, having spread throughout Denmark and most of Sweden by 1100.\nThrough Danish conquest, Old East Norse was once widely spoken in the northeast counties of England. Many words derived from Norse, such as \"gate\" () for street, still survive in Yorkshire, the East Midlands and East Anglia, and parts of eastern England colonized by Danish Vikings. The city of York was once the Viking settlement of Jorvik. Several other English words derive from Old East Norse, for example \"knife\" (), \"husband\" (), and \"egg\" (). The suffix \"-by\" for 'town' is common in place names in Yorkshire and the east Midlands, for example Selby, Whitby, Derby, and Grimsby. The word \"dale\" meaning valley is common in Yorkshire and Derbyshire placenames.\nOld and Middle dialects.\nIn the medieval period, Danish emerged as a separate language from Swedish. The main written language was Latin, and the few Danish-language texts preserved from this period are written in the Latin alphabet, although the runic alphabet seems to have lingered in popular usage in some areas. The main text types written in this period are laws, which were formulated in the vernacular language to be accessible also to those who were not Latinate. The Jutlandic Law and Scanian Law were written in vernacular Danish in the early 13th century. Beginning in 1350, Danish began to be used as a language of administration, and new types of literature began to be written in the language, such as royal letters and testaments. The orthography in this period was not standardized nor was the spoken language, and the regional laws demonstrate the dialectal differences between the regions in which they were written.\nThroughout this period, Danish was in contact with Low German, and many Low German loan words were introduced in this period. With the Protestant Reformation in 1536, Danish also became the language of religion, which sparked a new interest in using Danish as a literary language. Also in this period, Danish began to take on the linguistic traits that differentiate it from Swedish and Norwegian, such as the \"st\u00f8d\", the voicing of many stop consonants, and the weakening of many final vowels to /e/.\nThe first printed book in Danish dates from 1495, the \"Rimkr\u00f8niken\" (\"Rhyming Chronicle\"), a history book told in rhymed verses. The first complete translation of the Bible in Danish, the Bible of Christian II translated by Christiern Pedersen, was published in 1550. Pedersen's orthographic choices set the \"de facto\" standard for subsequent writing in Danish.\nEarly Modern.\nFollowing the first Bible translation, the development of Danish as a written language, as a language of religion, administration, and public discourse accelerated. In the second half of the 17th century, grammarians elaborated grammars of Danish, first among them Rasmus Bartholin's 1657 Latin grammar \"De studio lingv\u00e6 danic\u00e6\"; then Laurids Olufsen Kock's 1660 grammar of the Zealand dialect \"Introductio ad lingvam Danicam puta selandicam\"; and in 1685 the first Danish grammar written in Danish, \"Den Danske Sprog-Kunst\" (\"The Art of the Danish Language\") by Peder Syv. Major authors from this period are Thomas Kingo, poet and psalmist, and Leonora Christina Ulfeldt, whose novel \"Jammersminde\" (\"Remembered Woes\") is considered a literary masterpiece by scholars. Orthography was still not standardized and the principles for doing so were vigorously discussed among Danish philologists. The grammar of Jens Pedersen H\u00f8ysgaard was the first to give a detailed analysis of Danish phonology and prosody, including a description of the \"st\u00f8d\". In this period, scholars were also discussing whether it was best to \"write as one speaks\" or to \"speak as one writes\", including whether archaic grammatical forms that had fallen out of use in the vernacular, such as the plural form of verbs, should be conserved in writing (i.e. \"han er\" \"he is\" vs. \"de ere\" \"they are\").\nThe East Danish provinces were lost to Sweden after the Second Treaty of Br\u00f6msebro (1645) after which they were gradually Swedified; just as Norway was politically severed from Denmark, beginning also a gradual end of Danish influence on Norwegian (influence through the shared written standard language remained). With the introduction of absolutism in 1660, the Danish state was further integrated, and the language of the Danish chancellery, a Zealandic variety with German and French influence, became the \"de facto\" official standard language, especially in writing\u2014this was the original so-called \"rigsdansk\" (\"Danish of the Realm\"). Also, beginning in the mid-18th century, the \"skarre-R\", the uvular R sound (), began spreading through Denmark, likely through influence from Parisian French and German. It affected all of the areas where Danish had been influential, including all of Denmark, Southern Sweden, and coastal southern Norway.\nIn the 18th century, Danish philology was advanced by Rasmus Rask, who pioneered the disciplines of comparative and historical linguistics, and wrote the first English-language grammar of Danish. Literary Danish continued to develop with the works of Ludvig Holberg, whose plays and historical and scientific works laid the foundation for the Danish literary canon. With the Danish colonization of Greenland by Hans Egede, Danish became the administrative and religious language there, while Iceland and the Faroe Islands had the status of Danish colonies with Danish as an official language until the mid-20th century.\nStandardized national language.\nFollowing the loss of Schleswig to Germany, a sharp influx of German speakers moved into the area, eventually outnumbering the Danish speakers. The political loss of territory sparked a period of intense nationalism in Denmark, coinciding with the so-called \"Golden Age\" of Danish culture. Authors such as N.F.S. Grundtvig emphasized the role of language in creating national belonging. Some of the most cherished Danish-language authors of this period are existential philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard and prolific fairy tale author Hans Christian Andersen. The influence of popular literary role models, together with increased requirements of education did much to strengthen the Danish language, and also started a period of homogenization, whereby the Copenhagen standard language gradually displaced the regional vernacular languages. After the Schleswig referendum in 1920, a number of Danes remained as a minority within German territories. Throughout the 19th century, Danes emigrated, establishing small expatriate communities in the Americas, particularly in the US, Canada, and Argentina, where memory and some use of Danish remains today.\nAfter the occupation of Denmark by Germany in World War II, the 1948 orthography reform dropped the German-influenced rule of capitalizing nouns, and introduced the letter \u00c5/\u00e5. Three 20th-century Danish authors have become Nobel Prize laureates in Literature: Karl Gjellerup and Henrik Pontoppidan (joint recipients in 1917) and Johannes V. Jensen (awarded 1944).\nWith the exclusive use of \"rigsdansk\", the High Copenhagenian Standard, in national broadcasting, the traditional dialects came under increased pressure. In the 20th century, they have all but disappeared, and the standard language has extended throughout the country. Minor regional pronunciation variation of the standard language, sometimes called \"regionssprog\" (\"regional languages\") remain, and are in some cases vital. Today, the major varieties of Standard Danish are High Copenhagenian, associated with elderly, well to-do, and well educated people of the capital, and low-Copenhagenian traditionally associated with the working class, but today adopted as the prestige variety of the younger generations. Also, in the 21st century, the influence of immigration has had linguistic consequences, such as the emergence of a so-called multiethnolect in the urban areas, an immigrant Danish variety (also known as \"Perkerdansk\"), combining elements of different immigrant languages such as Arabic, Turkish, and Kurdish, as well as English and Danish.\nGeographic distribution.\nDanish is the national language of Denmark and one of two official languages of the Faroe Islands (alongside Faroese). Until 2009, it had also been one of two official languages of Greenland (alongside Greenlandic). Danish is widely spoken in Greenland now as \"lingua franca\", and an unknown portion of the native Greenlandic population has Danish as their first language; a large percentage of the native Greenlandic population speaks Danish as a second language since its introduction into the education system as a compulsory language in 1928. Danish was an official language in Iceland until 1944, but is today still widely used and is a mandatory subject in school taught as a second foreign language after English. Iceland was a territory ruled by Denmark-Norway, one of whose official languages was Danish.\nIn addition, a noticeable community of Danish speakers is in Southern Schleswig, the portion of Germany bordering Denmark, where it is an officially recognized regional language, just as German is north of the border. Furthermore, Danish is one of the official languages of the European Union and one of the working languages of the Nordic Council. Under the Nordic Language Convention, Danish-speaking citizens of the Nordic countries have the opportunity to use their native language when interacting with official bodies in other Nordic countries without being liable for any interpretation or translation costs.\nThe more widespread of the two varieties of written Norwegian, \"Bokm\u00e5l\", is very close to Danish, because standard Danish was used as the \"de facto\" administrative language until 1814 and one of the official languages of Denmark-Norway.\" Bokm\u00e5l \"is based on Danish, unlike the other variety of Norwegian, \"Nynorsk\", which is based on the Norwegian dialects, with Old Norwegian as an important reference point.\nNo law stipulates an official language for Denmark, making Danish the \"de facto\" language only. The Code of Civil Procedure does, however, lay down Danish as the language of the courts. Since 1997, public authorities have been obliged to observe the official spelling by way of the Orthography Law. In the 21st century, discussions have been held regarding creating a language law that would make Danish the official language of Denmark.\nDialects.\nStandard Danish (\"rigsdansk\") is the language based on dialects spoken in and around the capital, Copenhagen. Unlike Swedish and Norwegian, Danish does not have more than one regional speech norm. More than 25% of all Danish speakers live in the metropolitan area of the capital, and most government agencies, institutions, and major businesses keep their main offices in Copenhagen, which has resulted in a very homogeneous national speech norm.\nDanish dialects can be divided into the traditional dialects, which differ from modern Standard Danish in both phonology and grammar, and the Danish accents or regional languages, which are local varieties of the Standard language distinguished mostly by pronunciation and local vocabulary colored by traditional dialects. Traditional dialects are now mostly extinct in Denmark, with only the oldest generations still speaking them.\nDanish traditional dialects are divided into three main dialect areas:\nJutlandic is further divided into Southern Jutlandic and Northern Jutlandic, with Northern Jutlandic subdivided into North Jutlandic and West Jutlandic. Insular Danish is divided into Zealand, Funen, M\u00f8n, and Lolland-Falster dialect areas\u2015each with addition internal variation. The term \"Eastern Danish\" is occasionally used for Bornholmian, but including the dialects of Scania (particularly in a historical context)\u2015Jutlandic dialect, Insular Danish, and Bornholmian. Bornholmian is the only Eastern Danish dialect spoken in Denmark, since the other Eastern Danish dialects were spoken in areas ceded to Sweden and subsequently swedified.\nTraditional dialects differ in phonology, grammar, and vocabulary from standard Danish. Phonologically, one of the most diagnostic differences is the presence or absence of \"st\u00f8d\". Four main regional variants for the realization of st\u00f8d are known: In Southeastern Jutlandic, Southernmost Funen, Southern Langeland, and \u00c6r\u00f8, no \"st\u00f8d\" is used, but instead a pitch accent. South of a line ( \"The St\u00f8d border\") going through central South Jutland, crossing Southern Funen and central Langeland and north of Lolland-Falster, M\u00f8n, Southern Zealand and Bornholm neither \"st\u00f8d\" nor pitch accent exists. Most of Jutland and on Zealand use\" st\u00f8d\", and in Zealandic traditional dialects and regional language,\" st\u00f8d\" occurs more often than in the standard language. In Zealand, the \"st\u00f8d\" line divides Southern Zealand (without \"st\u00f8d\"), an area which used to be directly under the Crown, from the rest of the Island that used to be the property of various noble estates.\nGrammatically, a dialectally significant feature is the number of grammatical genders. Standard Danish has two genders and the definite form of nouns is formed by the use of suffixes, while Western Jutlandic has only one gender and the definite form of nouns uses an article before the noun itself, in the same fashion as West Germanic languages. The Bornholmian dialect has maintained to this day many archaic features, such as a distinction between three grammatical genders. Insular Danish traditional dialects also conserved three grammatical genders. By 1900, Zealand insular dialects had been reduced to two genders under influence from the standard language, but other Insular varieties, such as Funen dialect had not. Besides using three genders, the old Insular or Funen dialect, could also use personal pronouns (like he and she) in certain cases, particularly referring to animals. A classic example in traditional Funen dialect is the sentence: \"Katti, han f\u00e5r unger\", literally \"The cat, he is having kittens\", because cat is a masculine noun, thus is referred to as \"han\" (he), even if it is female cat.\nPhonology.\nThe sound system of Danish is unusual, particularly in its large vowel inventory and in the unusual prosody. In informal or rapid speech, the language is prone to considerable reduction of unstressed syllables, creating many vowel-less syllables with syllabic consonants, as well as reduction of final consonants. Furthermore, the language's prosody does not include many clues about the sentence structure, unlike many other languages, making it relatively more difficult to segment the speech flow into its constituent elements. These factors taken together make Danish pronunciation difficult to master for learners, and Danish children are indicated to take slightly longer in learning to segment speech in early childhood.\nVowels.\nAlthough somewhat depending on analysis, most modern variants of Danish distinguish 12 long vowels, 13 short vowels, and two \"schwa\" vowels, and that only occur in unstressed syllables. This gives a total of 27 different vowel phonemes \u2013 a very large number among the world's languages. At least 19 different diphthongs also occur, all with a short first vowel and the second segment being either , , or . The table below shows the approximate distribution of the vowels as given by in Modern Standard Danish, with the symbols used in . Questions of analysis may give a slightly different inventory, for example based on whether r-colored vowels are considered distinct phonemes. gives 25 \"full vowels\", not counting the two unstressed \"schwa\" vowels.\nConsonants.\nThe consonant inventory is comparatively simple. distinguishes 16 non-syllabic consonant phonemes in Danish.\nMany of these phonemes have quite different allophones in onset and coda. Phonetically there is no voicing distinction among the stops, rather the distinction is one of aspiration and fortis vs. lenis. are aspirated in onset realized as , but not in coda. The pronunciation of \"t\", , is in between a simple aspirated and a fully affricated as has happened in German with many words that now contain \"z\". /v/ is pronounced as a [w] in syllable coda, so e.g. /grav/ (\"grave\") is pronounced .\n often have slight frication, but are usually pronounced as approximants. Danish differs from the similar sound in English and Icelandic, in that it is not a dental fricative but an alveolar approximant which sounds like and is frequently mistaken for an [l] by second language learners.\nThe sound is found for example in the word /sjov\u02c0/ \"fun\" pronounced and /tjal\u02c0/ \"marijuana\" pronounced . Some analyses have posited it as a phoneme, but since it occurs only after or and doesn't occur after these phonemes, it can be analyzed as an allophone of , which is devoiced after voiceless alveolar frication. This makes it unnecessary to postulate a -phoneme in Danish.\nIn onset is realized as a uvu-pharyngeal approximant, , but in coda it is either realized as a non-syllabic low central vowel, or simply coalesces with the preceding vowel. The phenomenon is comparable to the \"r\" in German or in non-rhotic pronunciations of English. The Danish pronunciation of as a so-called skarre-r distinguishes the language from those varieties of Norwegian and Swedish that use trilled .\nProsody.\nDanish is characterized by a prosodic feature called \"st\u00f8d\" (lit. \"thrust\"). This is a form of laryngealization or creaky voice. Some sources have described it as a glottal stop, but this is a very infrequent realization, and today phoneticians consider it a phonation type or a prosodic phenomenon. It has phonemic status, since it serves as the sole distinguishing feature of words with different meanings in minimal pairs such as \"b\u00f8nder\" (\"peasants\") with st\u00f8d, versus \"b\u00f8nner\" (\"beans\") without st\u00f8d. The distribution of st\u00f8d in the vocabulary is related to the distribution of the common Scandinavian pitch accents found in most dialects of Norwegian and Swedish.\nStress is phonemic and distinguishes words such as \"billigst\" \"cheapest\" and \"bilist\" \"car driver\".\nGrammar.\nSimilarly to the case of English, modern Danish grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent-marking pattern with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax. Some traits typical of Germanic languages persist in Danish, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut or umlaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs \"tager/tog\" (\"takes/took\") and \"fod/f\u00f8dder\" (\"foot/feet\")) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as \"elsker/elskede\" \"love/loved\", \"bil/biler\" \"car/cars\"). Vestiges of the Germanic case and gender system are found in the pronoun system. Typical for an Indo-European language, Danish follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment. Danish distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, numerals, adjectives, adverbs, articles, prepositions, conjunctions, interjections and ideophones.\nNouns.\nNouns are inflected for number (singular vs. plural) and definiteness, and are classified into two grammatical genders. Only pronouns inflect for case, and the previous genitive case has become an enclitic. A distinctive feature of the Nordic languages, including Danish, is that the definite articles, which also mark noun gender, have developed into suffixes. Typical of Germanic language plurals are either irregular or \"strong\" stems inflected through umlaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem (e.g. \"fod/f\u00f8dder\" \"foot/feet\", \"mand/m\u00e6nd\" \"man/men\") or \"weak\" stems inflected through affixation (e.g. \"skib/skibe\" \"ship/ships\", \"kvinde/kvinder\" \"woman/women\").\nGender.\nStandard Danish has two nominal genders: \"common\" and \"neuter\"; the common gender arose as the historical feminine and masculine genders conflated into a single category. Some traditional dialects retain a three-way gender distinction, between masculine, feminine and neuter, and some dialects of Jutland have a masculine/feminine contrast. While the majority of Danish nouns (ca. 75%) have the \"common\" gender, and \"neuter\" is often used for inanimate objects, the genders of nouns are not generally predictable and must in most cases be memorized. The gender of a noun determines the form of adjectives that modify it, and the form of the definite suffixes. \nDefiniteness.\nDefiniteness is marked by two mutually exclusive articles, a preposed demonstrative article which occurs with nouns that are modified by an adjective or a postposed enclitic. Neuter nouns take the clitic \"-et\", and common gender nouns take \"-en\". Indefinite nouns take the articles \"en\" (common gender) or \"et\" (neuter). Hence, the common gender noun \"en mand\" \"a man\" (indefinite) has the definite form \"manden\" \"the man\", whereas the neuter noun \"et hus\" \"a house\" (indefinite) has the definite form, \"the house\" (definite) \"huset\". \nIndefinite:\nDefinite with enclitic article:\nDefinite with preposed demonstrative article:\nThe plural definite ending is \"-(e)ne\" (e.g. \"drenge\" \"boys &gt; \"drengene\" \"the boys\" and \"piger\" \"girls\" &gt; \"pigerne\" \"the girls\"), and nouns ending in -\"ere\" lose the last \"-e\" before adding the -ne suffix (e.g. \"danskere\" \"Danes\" &gt; \"danskerne\" \"the Danes\"). When the noun is modified by an adjective, the definiteness is marked by the definite article \"den\" (common) or \"det\" (neuter) and the definite/plural form of the adjective: \"den store mand\" \"the big man\", \"det store hus\" \"the big house\".\nNumber.\nThere are three different types of regular plurals: Class 1 forms the plural with the suffix -\"er\" (indefinite) and -\"erne\" (definite), Class 2 with the suffix \"-e\" (indefinite) and -\"ene\" (definite.), and Class 3 takes no suffix for the plural indefinite form and -\"ene\" for the plural definite.\nMost irregular nouns take an ablaut plural (with a change in the stem vowel), or combine ablaut stem-change with the suffix, and some have unique plural forms. Unique forms may be inherited (e.g. the plural of \"\u00f8je\" \"eye\", which is the old dual form \"\u00f8jne\"), or for loan words they may be borrowed from the donor language (e.g. the word \"konto\" \"account\" which is borrowed from Italian and uses the Italian masculine plural form \"konti\" \"accounts\").\nPossession.\nPossessive phrases are formed with the enclitic -\"s\", for example \"min fars hus\" \"my father's house\" where the noun \"far\" carries the possessive enclitic. This is however not an example of genitive case marking, because in the case of longer noun phrases the -s attaches to the last word in the phrase, which need not be the head-noun or even a noun at all. For example, the phrases \"kongen af Danmark's bolsjefabrik\" \"the king of Denmark's candy factory\", or \"det er pigen Uffe bor sammen meds datter\" \"that is the daughter of the girl that Uffe lives with\", where the enclitic attaches to a stranded preposition.\nPronouns.\nAs does English, the Danish pronominal system retains a distinction between subjective and oblique case. The subjective case form of pronouns is used when pronouns occur as grammatical subject of a sentence, and oblique forms are used for all non-subjective occurrences including accusative, dative, predicative, comparative and other types of constructions. The third person singular pronouns also distinguish between and animate masculine (\"han\" \"he\"), animate feminine (\"hun\" \"she\") forms, as well as inanimate neuter (\"det\" \"it\") and inanimate common gender (\"den\" \"it\"). \nPossessive pronouns have independent and adjectival forms. The adjectival form is used immediately preceding the possessed noun (\"det er min hest\" \"it is my horse\"), whereas the independent possessive pronoun is used in place of the possessed noun (\"den er min\" \"it is mine\"). In the third person singular \"sin\" is used when the owner is also the subject of the sentence, whereas \"hans\" (\"his\"), \"hendes\" (her) and \"dens/dets\" \"its\" is used when the owner is different from the grammatical subject.\nNominal compounds.\nLike all Germanic languages, Danish forms compound nouns. These are represented in Danish orthography as one word, as in \"kvindeh\u00e5ndboldlandsholdet\", \"the female national handball team\". In some cases, nouns are joined with an extra \"s\", originally possessive in function, like \"landsmand\" (from \"land\", \"country\", and \"mand\", \"man\", meaning \"compatriot\"), but \"landmand\" (from same roots, meaning \"farmer\"). Some words are joined with an extra \"e\", like \"g\u00e6stebog\" (from \"g\u00e6st\" and \"bog\", meaning \"guest book\").\nVerbs.\nDanish verbs are morphologically simple, marking very few grammatical categories. They do not mark person or number of subject, although the marking of plural subjects was still used in writing as late as the 19th century. Verbs have a past, non-past and infinitive form, past and present participle forms, and a passive, and an imperative.\nTense, aspect, mood, and voice.\nVerbs can be divided into two main classes, the strong/irregular verbs and the regular/weak verbs. The regular verbs are also divided into two classes, those that take the past suffix -\"te\" and those that take the suffix -\"ede\".\nThe infinitive always ends in a vowel, usually -e (pronounced ), infinitive forms are preceded by the article \"at\" (pronounced ). The non-past or present tense takes the suffix -\"r\", except for a few strong verbs that have irregular non-past forms. The past form does not necessarily mark past tense, but also counterfactuality or conditionality, and the non-past has many uses besides present tense time reference.\nThe present participle ends in -\"ende\" (e.g. \"l\u00f8bende\" \"running\"), and the past participle ends in -\"et\" (e.g. \"l\u00f8bet\" \"run\"), \"-t\" (e.g. k\u00f8bt \"bought\"). Perfect tense is constructed with \"at have\" (\"to have\") and participial forms, like in English. But some transitive verbs can also form an imperfective perfect using \"at v\u00e6re\" (\"to be\") instead.\nThe passive form takes the suffix -s: \"avisen l\u00e6ses hver dag\" (\"the newspaper is read every day\"). Another passive construction uses the auxiliary verb \"at blive\" \"to become\": \"avisen bliver l\u00e6st hver dag\".\nThe imperative mood is formed from the infinitive by removing the final schwa-vowel:\nSyntax.\nDanish basic constituent order in simple sentences with both a subject and an object is Subject\u2013Verb\u2013Object. However, Danish is also a V2 language, which means that the verb must always be the second constituent of the sentence. Following the Danish grammarian Paul Diderichsen Danish grammar tends to be analyzed as consisting of slots or fields, and in which certain types of sentence material can be moved to the pre-verbal (or \"grounding\") field to achieve different pragmatic effects. Usually the sentence material occupying the preverbal slot has to be pragmatically marked, usually either new information or topics. There is no rule that subjects must occur in the preverbal slot, but since subject and topic often coincide, they often do. Therefore, whenever any sentence material that is not the subject occurs in the preverbal position the subject is demoted to postverbal position and the sentence order becomes VSO.\nbut\nWhen there is no pragmatically marked constituents in the sentence to take the preverbal slot (for example when all the information is new), the slot has to take a dummy subject \"der\".\nMain clauses.\n describes the basic order of sentence constituents in main clauses as comprising the following 8 positions:\nPosition 0 is not part of the sentence and can only contain sentential connectors (such as conjunctions or interjections). Position 1 can contain any sentence constituent. Position 2 can only contain the main verb. Position 3 is the subject position, unless the subject is fronted to occur in position 1. Position 4 can only contain light adverbs and the negation. Position 5 is for non-finite verbs, such as auxiliaries. Position 6 is the position of direct and indirect objects, and position 7 is for heavy adverbial constituents.\nQuestions with wh-words are formed differently from yes/no questions. In wh-questions the question word occupies the preverbal field, regardless of whether its grammatical role is subject or object or adverbial. In yes/no questions the preverbal field is empty, so that the sentence begins with the verb.\nWh-question:\nSubordinate clauses.\nIn subordinate clauses, the syntax differs from that of main clauses. In the subordinate clause structure the verb is preceded by the subject and any light adverbial material (e.g. negation). Complement clauses begin with the particle \"at\" in the \"connector field\".\nRelative clauses are marked by the relative articles \"som\" or \"der\" which occupy the preverbal slot:\nVocabulary.\nAbout 2 000 of Danish non-compound words are derived from the Old Norse language, and ultimately from Proto Indo-European. Of these 2 000 words, 1 200 are nouns, 500 are verbs, 180 are adjectives and the rest belong to other word classes. Danish has also absorbed a large number of loan words, most of which were borrowed from Middle Low German in the late medieval period. Out of the 500 most frequently used words in Danish, 100 are medieval loans from Middle Low German, as Low German is the other official language of Denmark-Norway. In the 17th and 18th centuries, standard German and French superseded Low German influence and in the 20th century English became the main supplier of loan words, especially after World War II. Although many old Nordic words remain, some were replaced with borrowed synonyms, as can be seen with \"\u00e6de\" (to eat) which became less common when the Low German \"spise\" came into fashion. As well as loan words, new words are freely formed by compounding existing words. In standard texts of contemporary Danish, Middle Low German loans account for about 16\u201217% of the vocabulary, Graeco-Latin-loans 4\u20128%, French 2\u20124% and English about 1%.\nDanish and English are both Germanic languages. Danish is a North Germanic language descended from Old Norse, and English is a West Germanic language descended from Old English. Old Norse exerted a strong influence on Old English in the early medieval period. To see their shared Germanic heritage, one merely has to note the many common words that are very similar in the two languages. For example, commonly used Danish nouns and prepositions such as \"have\", \"over\", \"under\", \"for\", \"give\", \"flag,\" \"salt,\" and \"kat\" are easily recognizable in their written form to English speakers. Similarly, some other words are almost identical to their Scots equivalents, e.g., \"kirke\" (Scots \"kirk\", i.e., 'church') or \"barn\" (Scots \"bairn\", i.e. 'child'). In addition, the word \"by\", meaning \"village\" or \"town\", occurs in many English place-names, such as \"Whitby\" and \"Selby\", as remnants of the Viking occupation. During the latter period, English adopted \"are\", the third person plural form of the verb \"to be\", as well as the corresponding personal pronoun form \"they\" from contemporary Old Norse.\nNumerals.\nIn the word forms of numbers above 20, the units are stated before the tens, so 21 is rendered \"enogtyve\", literally \"one and twenty\".\nThe numeral \"halvanden\" means 1\u00bd (literally \"half second\", implying \"one plus half of the second one\"). The numerals \"halvtredje\" (2\u00bd), \"halvfjerde\" (3\u00bd) and \"halvfemte\" (4\u00bd) are obsolete, but still implicitly used in the vigesimal system described below. Similarly, the temporal designation (\"klokken\")\" halv tre\", literally \"half three (o'clock)\", is half past two.\nOne peculiar feature of the Danish language is the fact that numerals 50, 60, 70, 80 and 90 are (as are the French numerals from 80 through 99) based on a vigesimal system, meaning that the score (20) is used as a base unit in counting. \"Tres\" (short for \"tre-sinds-tyve\", \"three times twenty\") means 60, while 50 is \"halvtreds\" (short for \"halvtredje-sinds-tyve\", \"half third times twenty\", implying two score plus half of the third score). The ending \"sindstyve\" meaning \"times twenty\" is no longer included in cardinal numbers, but may still be used in ordinal numbers. Thus, in modern Danish fifty-two is usually rendered as \"tooghalvtreds\" from the now obsolete \"tooghalvtredsindstyve\", whereas 52nd is either \"tooghalvtredsende\" or \"tooghalvtredsindstyvende\". Twenty is \"tyve\" (derived from old Danish \"tiughu\", a haplology of \"tuttiughu\", meaning 'two tens'), while thirty is \"tredive\" (Old Danish \"\u00ferjatiughu\", \"three tens\"), and forty is \"fyrre\" (Old Danish \"fyritiughu\", \"four tens\", still used today as the archaism \"fyrretyve\"). Thus, the suffix \"-tyve\" should be understood as a plural of \"ti\" (10), though to modern Danes \"tyve\" means 20, making it hard to explain why \"fyrretyve\" is 40 (four tens) and not 80 (four times twenty).\nFor large numbers (one billion or larger), Danish uses the long scale, so that the short-scale billion (1,000,000,000) is called \"milliard\", and the short-scale trillion (1,000,000,000,000) is \"billion\".\nWriting system and alphabet.\nThe oldest preserved examples of written Danish (from the Iron and Viking Ages) are in the Runic alphabet. The introduction of Christianity also brought the Latin script to Denmark, and at the end of the High Middle Ages Runes had more or less been replaced by Latin letters.\nDanish orthography is conservative, using most of the conventions established in the 16th century. The spoken language however has changed a lot since then, creating a gap between the spoken and written languages.\nThe modern Danish alphabet is similar to the English one, with three additional letters: \"\u00e6\", \"\u00f8\", and \"\u00e5\", which come at the end of the alphabet, in that order. The letters c, q, w, x and z are only used in loan words. A spelling reform in 1948 introduced the letter \"\u00e5\", already in use in Norwegian and Swedish, into the Danish alphabet to replace the digraph \"aa\". The old usage continues to occur in some personal and geographical names; for example, the name of the city of \"Aalborg\" is spelled with Aa following a decision by the City Council in the 1970s and \"Aarhus\" decided to go back to Aa in 2011. When representing the \"\u00e5\" sound, \"aa\" is treated like \"\u00e5\" in alphabetical sorting, though it appears to be two letters. When the letters are not available due to technical limitations, they are often replaced by \"ae\" (\u00c6, \u00e6), \"oe\" or \"o\" (\u00d8, \u00f8), and \"aa\" (\u00c5, \u00e5), respectively.\nThe same spelling reform changed the spelling of a few common words, such as the past tense \"vilde\" (would), \"kunde\" (could) and \"skulde\" (should), to their current forms of \"ville\", \"kunne\" and \"skulle\" (making them identical to the infinitives in writing, as they are in speech). Modern Danish and Norwegian use the same alphabet, though spelling differs slightly, particularly with the phonetic spelling of loanwords; for example the spelling of \"station\" and \"garage\" in Danish remains identical to other languages, whereas in Norwegian, they are transliterated as \"stasjon\" and \"garasje\".\nSee also.\nRealm languages:\nNordic languages:"}
{"id": "8228", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8228", "title": "Decade (Neil Young album)", "text": "Decade is a compilation album by Canadian-American musician Neil Young, originally released in 1977 as a triple album, now available on two compact discs. It contains 35 of Young's songs recorded between 1966 and 1976, among them five tracks that had been unreleased up to that point. It peaked at No. 43 on the \"Billboard\" Top Pop Albums chart, and was certified platinum by the RIAA in 1986.\nHistory.\nCompiled by Young himself, with his hand-written liner notes about each track, \"Decade\" represents almost every album from his career and various affiliations through 1977 with the exception of \"4 Way Street\" and \"Time Fades Away\". Of the previously unreleased songs, \"Down to the Wire\" features the New Orleans pianist Dr. John with Buffalo Springfield on an item from their shelved \"Stampede\" album; \"Love Is a Rose\" was a minor hit for Linda Ronstadt in 1975; \"Winterlong\" received a cover by Pixies on the Neil Young tribute album from 1989, \"\"; and \"Campaigner\" is a Young song critical of Richard Nixon. The track \"Long May You Run\" is a different mix to that found on the album of the same name, featuring the harmonies of the full Crosby Stills &amp; Nash before David Crosby and Graham Nash left the recording sessions.\nFor many years, \"Decade\" was the only Neil Young compilation album available. A 1993 compilation called \"Lucky Thirteen\" was released, but it only covered Young's 1982\u20131988 output. It was not until 2004 that Reprise Records released a single-disc retrospective of his best-known tracks, titled \"Greatest Hits\". Throughout the 1980s and '90s, Young promised fans a follow-up to the original \"Decade\" collection, provisionally titled \"Decade II\"; eventually, this idea was scrapped in favor of a much more comprehensive anthology to be titled \"Archives\", spanning his entire career and ranging in size from a box set to an entire series of audio and/or video releases. The first release of archival material since \"Decade\" and \"Lucky Thirteen\" would appear in 2006, \"Live at the Fillmore East\", a recording from a 1970 concert featuring Crazy Horse with Danny Whitten. Several other archival live releases followed, and in 2009 the first of several planned multi-disc box sets, \"The Archives Vol. 1 1963\u20131972\", was issued. In April 2017 \"Decade\" was reissued on vinyl as a limited-edition Record Store Day release, with remastered vinyl and CD editions planned for general release in June 2017.\nAlternate early version.\nInitially, \"Decade\" was to be released in 1976, but was pulled at the last minute by Young. It was shelved until the following year, where it appeared with two songs removed from the original track list (a live version of \"Don't Cry No Tears\" recorded in Japan in 1976, and a live version of \"Pushed It Over the End\" recorded in 1974). Also removed were the following comments on those two songs and \"Time Fades Away\", from Young's handwritten liner notes:\nReception.\nThe album has been lauded in many quarters as one of the best examples of a career retrospective for a rock artist, and as a template for the box set collections that would follow in the 1980s and beyond. However, in the original article on Young from the first edition of the \"Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock and Roll\" and a subsequent article in the \"1983 Rolling Stone Record Guide\", critic Dave Marsh used this album to accuse Young of deliberately manufacturing a self-mythology, arguing that while his highlights could be seen to place him on a level with other artists from his generation like Bob Dylan or The Beatles, the particulars of his catalogue did not bear this out. The magazine has since excised the article from subsequent editions of the \"Illustrated History\" book.\nTrack listing.\nAll songs written by Neil Young."}
{"id": "8230", "revid": "1012993585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8230", "title": "Demeter", "text": " \nIn ancient Greek religion and mythology, Demeter (; Attic: \"D\u0113m\u1e17t\u0113r\" ; Doric: \"D\u0101m\u0101\u0301t\u0113r\") is the Olympian goddess of the harvest and agriculture, presiding over grains and the fertility of the earth. Her cult titles include Sito (), \"she of the Grain\", as the giver of food or grain, and Thesmophoros (, \"thesmos\": divine order, unwritten law; , \"phoros\": bringer, bearer), \"giver of customs\" or \"legislator\", in association with the secret female-only festival called the Thesmophoria.\nThough Demeter is often described simply as the goddess of the harvest, she presided also over the sacred law, and the cycle of life and death. She and her daughter Persephone were the central figures of the Eleusinian Mysteries, a religious tradition that predated the Olympian pantheon, and which may have its roots in the Mycenaean period c. 1400\u20131200 BC. Demeter was often considered to be the same figure as the Anatolian goddess Cybele, and she was identified with the Roman goddess Ceres.\nEtymology.\nIt is possible that Demeter appears in Linear A as \"da-ma-te\" on three documents (AR Zf 1 and 2, and KY Za 2), all three apparently dedicated in religious situations and all three bearing just the name (\"i-da-ma-te\" on AR Zf 1 and 2). It is unlikely that Demeter appears as \"da-ma-te\" in a Linear B (Mycenean Greek) inscription (PY En 609); the word , \"da-ma-te\", probably refers to \"households\". On the other hand, , \"si-to-po-ti-ni-ja\", \"Potnia of the Grain\", is regarded as referring to her Bronze Age predecessor or to one of her epithets.\nDemeter's character as mother-goddess is identified in the second element of her name \"meter\" () derived from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) \"*m\u00e9h\u2082t\u0113r\" (mother). In antiquity, different explanations were already proffered for the first element of her name. It is possible that \"Da\" (), a word which corresponds to \"G\u0113\" () in Attic, is the Doric form of \"De\" (), \"earth\", the old name of the chthonic earth-goddess, and that Demeter is \"Mother-Earth\". Liddell &amp; Scott find this \"improbable\" and Beekes writes, \"there is no indication that [\"da\"] means \"earth\", although it has also been assumed in the name of Poseidon found in the Linear B inscription \"E-ne-si-da-o-ne\", \"earth-shaker\". John Chadwick also argues that the \"d\u0101\" element in the name of Demeter is not so simply equated with \"earth\".\nM. L. West has proposed that Demeter, initially \"Damater\", could be a borrowing from an Illyrian deity attested in the Messapic goddess \"Damatura\", with a form \"d\u0101-\" (\"earth\", from PIE \"*d\u02b0\u01f5\u02b0(e)m-\") attached to -\"matura\" (\"mother\"), akin to the Illyrian god Dei-paturos (\"dei-\", \"sky\", attached to -\"paturos,\" \"father\"). The Lesbian form \"D\u014d-\" may simply reflect a different dialectal pronunciation of the non-Greek name. The element \"De\"- may also be connected with \"Deo\", an epithet of Demeter could derive from the Cretan word \"dea\" (), Ionic \"zeia\" ()\u2014variously identified with emmer, spelt, rye, or other grains by modern scholars\u2014so that she is the Mother and the giver of food generally. This view is shared by British scholar Jane Ellen Harrison, who suggests that D\u00e9meter's name means \"Grain-Mother\", instead of \"Earth-Mother\".\nWanax (\"wa-na-ka\") was her male companion (Greek: \u03a0\u03ac\u03c1\u03b5\u03b4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2, \"Paredros\") in Mycenaean cult. The Arcadian cult links her to the god Poseidon, who probably substituted the male companion of the Great Goddess; Demeter may therefore be related to a Minoan Great Goddess (Cybele).\nAn alternative Proto-Indo-European etymology comes through Potnia and Despoina, where \"Des-\" represents a derivative of PIE \"*dem\" (house, dome), and Demeter is \"mother of the house\" (from PIE \"*dems-m\u00e9h\u2082t\u0113r\"). R. S. P. Beekes rejects a Greek interpretation, but not necessarily an Indo-European one.\nIconography.\nDemeter was frequently associated with images of the harvest, including flowers, fruit, and grain. She was also sometimes pictured with her daughter Persephone. Demeter is not generally portrayed with any of her consorts; the exception is Iasion, the youth of Crete who lay with her in a thrice-ploughed field, and was sacrificed afterwards by a jealous Zeus with a thunderbolt.\nDemeter is assigned the zodiac constellation Virgo the Virgin by Marcus Manilius in his 1st century Roman work Astronomicon. In art, constellation Virgo holds Spica, a sheaf of wheat in her hand and sits beside constellation Leo the Lion. \nIn Arcadia, she was known as \"Black Demeter\". She was said to have taken the form of a mare to escape the pursuit of her younger brother, Poseidon, and having been raped by him despite her disguise, dressed all in black and retreated into a cave to mourn and to purify herself. She was consequently depicted with the head of a horse in this region. A sculpture of the Black Demeter was made by Onatas.\nDescription.\nAs goddess of agriculture.\nIn epic poetry and Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Demeter is the Corn-Mother, the goddess of cereals who provides grain for bread and blesses its harvesters. This was her main function at Eleusis, and became panhellenic. In Cyprus, \"grain-harvesting\" was \"damatrizein\". The main theme in the Eleusinian mysteries was the reunion of Persephone with her mother Demeter, when new crops were reunited with the old seed, a form of eternity.\nAccording to the Athenian rhetorician Isocrates, Demeter's greatest gifts to humankind were agriculture, particularly of cereals, and the Mysteries which give the initiate higher hopes in this life and the afterlife. These two gifts were intimately connected in Demeter's myths and mystery cults. In Hesiod, prayers to Zeus-Chthonios (chthonic Zeus) and Demeter help the crops grow full and strong. Demeter's emblem is the poppy, a bright red flower that grows among the barley.\nDemeter was also \"zeidoros ar\u03bfura\", the Homeric \"Mother Earth ar\u03bfura\" who gave the gift of cereals (\"zeai\" or \"deai\").\nAs an earth and underworld goddess.\nIn addition to her role as an agricultural goddess, Demeter was often worshipped more generally as a goddess of the earth. In Arcadia, she was represented as snake-haired, holding a dove and dolphin, perhaps to symbolize her power over the underworld, the air, and the water. In the cult of Flya, she was worshiped as \"Anesidora\", one who sends up gifts from the underworld. There was a temple of Demeter under this name in Phlius in Attica. In Sparta, she was known as Demeter-Chthonia (chthonic Demeter). The Athenians called the dead \"Demetrioi\", and this may reflect a link between Demeter and ancient cult of the dead, linked to the agrarian-belief that a new life would sprout from the dead body, as a new plant arises from buried seed. This was probably a belief shared by initiates in Demeter's mysteries, as interpreted by Pindar: \"Happy is he who has seen what exists under the earth, because he knows not only the end of life, but also his beginning that the Gods will give\".\nIn the mysteries of Pheneos in Arcadia, Demeter was known as \"Cidaria\". Her priest would put on the mask of Demeter, which was kept in a secret place. The cult may have been connected with both the underworld and a form of agrarian magic.\nAs a poppy goddess.\nTheocritus described one of Demeter's earlier roles as that of a goddess of poppies:\nKarl Ker\u00e9nyi asserted that poppies were connected with a Cretan cult which was eventually carried to the Eleusinian mysteries in Classical Greece. In a clay statuette from Gazi, the Minoan poppy goddess wears the seed capsules, sources of nourishment and narcosis, in her diadem. According to Ker\u00e9nyi, \"It seems probable that the Great Mother Goddess who bore the names Rhea and Demeter, brought the poppy with her from her Cretan cult to Eleusis and it is almost certain that in the Cretan cult sphere opium was prepared from poppies.\" Robert Graves speculated that the meaning of the depiction and use of poppies in the Greco-Roman myths is the symbolism of the bright scarlet color as signifying the promise of resurrection after death.\nOther functions and titles.\nDemeter's epithets show her many religious functions. She was the \"Corn-Mother\" who blesses the harvesters. Some cults interpreted her as \"Mother-Earth\". Demeter may be linked to goddess-cults of Minoan Crete, and embody aspects of a pre-Hellenic Mother Goddess. It is possible that the title \"Mistress of the labyrinth\", which appears in a Linear B inscription, belonged originally to \"Sito\" (\"[she] of the grain\"), the Great Mother Demeter and that in the Eleusinian mysteries this title was kept by her daughter Persephone (Kore or Despoina). However, there is no evidence that the name of Potnia in Eleusis was originally Demeter. Her other epithets include:\nDemeter might also be invoked in the guises of:\nWorship.\nIn Crete.\nThe earliest recorded worship of a deity possibly equivalent to Demeter is found in Linear B Mycenean Greek tablets of c. 1400\u20131200 BC found at Pylos. The tablets describe worship of the \"two queens and the king\", which may be related to Demeter, Persephone and Poseidon. An early name which may refer to Demeter, \"si-to-po-ti-ni-ja\" (Sito Potnia), appears in Linear B inscriptions found at Mycenae and Pylos. In Crete, Poseidon was often given the title \"wa-na-ka\" (\"wanax\") in Linear B inscriptions, in his role as king of the underworld, and his title \" E-ne-si-da-o-ne\" indicates his chthonic nature. In the cave of Amnisos, \"Enesidaon\" is associated with the cult of Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, who was involved with the annual birth of the divine child. During the Bronze Age, a goddess of nature dominated both in Minoan and Mycenean cults, and \"Wanax\" (\"wa-na-ka\") was her male companion (paredros) in the Mycenean cult. Elements of this early form of worship survived in the Eleusinian cult, where the following words were uttered: \"the mighty Potnia had born a strong son.\"\nOn the Greek mainland.\nTablets from Pylos record sacrificial goods destined for \"the Two Queens and Poseidon\" (\"to the Two Queens and the King\" :\"wa-na-ssoi\", \"wa-na-ka-te\"). The \"Two Queens\" may be related with Demeter and Persephone, or their precursors, goddesses who were no longer associated with Poseidon in later periods.\nMajor cults to Demeter are known at Eleusis in Attica, Hermion (in Crete), Megara, Celeae, Lerna, Aegila, Munychia, Corinth, Delos, Priene, Akragas, Iasos, Pergamon, Selinus, Tegea, Thoricus, Dion (in Macedonia) Lykosoura, Mesembria, Enna (Sicily), and Samothrace.\nAn ancient Amphictyony, probably the earliest centred on the cult of Demeter at Anthele (\u1f08\u03bd\u03b8\u03ae\u03bb\u03b7), which lay on the coast of Malis south of Thessaly. This was the locality of Thermopylae.\nAfter the \"First Sacred War\", the Anthelan body was known thenceforth as the Delphic Amphictyony\nMysian Demeter had a seven-day festival at Pellen\u00e9 in Arcadia. The geographer Pausainias passed the shrine to Mysian Demeter on the road from Mycenae to Argos, and reports that according to Argive tradition the shrine was founded by an Archive named Mysius who venerated Demeter.\nFestivals.\nDemeter's two major festivals were sacred mysteries. Her Thesmophoria festival (11\u201313 October) was women-only. Her Eleusinian mysteries were open to initiates of any gender or social class. At the heart of both festivals were myths concerning Demeter as Mother and Persephone as her daughter.\nConflation with other goddesses.\nIn the Roman period, Demeter became conflated with the Roman agricultural goddess Ceres under the Interpretatio graeca. The worship of Demeter was formally merged with that of Ceres around 205 BC, along with the \"ritus graecia cereris\", a Greek-inspired form of cult, as part of Rome's general religious recruitment of deities as allies against Carthage, towards the end of the Second Punic War. The cult originated in southern Italy (part of Magna Graecia) and was probably based on the Thesmophoria, a mystery cult dedicated to Demeter and Persephone as \"Mother and Maiden\". It arrived along with its Greek priestesses, who were granted Roman citizenship so that they could pray to the gods \"with a foreign and external knowledge, but with a domestic and civil intention\". The new cult was installed in the already ancient Temple of Ceres, Liber and Libera, Rome's Aventine patrons of the plebs; from the end of the 3rd century BC, Demeter's temple at Enna, in Sicily, was acknowledged as Ceres' oldest, most authoritative cult center, and Libera was recognized as Proserpina, Roman equivalent to Persephone. Their joint cult recalls Demeter's search for Persephone, after the latter's abduction into the underworld by Hades (or Pluto). At the Aventine, the new cult took its place alongside the old. It made no reference to Liber, whose open and gender-mixed cult continued to play a central role in plebeian culture, as a patron and protector of plebeian rights, freedoms and values. The exclusively female initiates and priestesses of the new \"greek style\" mysteries of Ceres and Proserpina were expected to uphold Rome's traditional, patrician-dominated social hierarchy and traditional morality. Unmarried girls should emulate the chastity of Proserpina, the maiden; married women should seek to emulate Ceres, the devoted and fruitful Mother. Their rites were intended to secure a good harvest, and increase the fertility of those who partook in the mysteries.\nBeginning in the 5th century BCE in Asia Minor, Demeter was also considered equivalent to the Phrygian goddess Cybele. Demeter's festival of Thesmophoria was popular throughout Asia Minor, and the myth of Persephone and Adonis in many ways mirrors the myth of Cybele and Attis.\nSome late antique sources syncretized several \"great goddess\" figures into a single deity. The Platonist philosopher Apuleius, writing in the late 2nd century, identified Ceres (Demeter) with Isis, having her declare:\n\"I, mother of the universe, mistress of all the elements, first-born of the ages, highest of the gods, queen of the shades, first of those who dwell in heaven, representing in one shape all gods and goddesses. My will controls the shining heights of heaven, the health-giving sea-winds, and the mournful silences of hell; the entire world worships my single godhead in a thousand shapes, with divers rites, and under many a different name. The Phrygians, first-born of mankind, call me the Pessinuntian Mother of the gods; ... the ancient Eleusinians Actaean Ceres; ... and the Egyptians who excel in ancient learning, honour me with the worship which is truly mine and call me by my true name: Queen Isis.\"\nMythology.\nFamily and consorts.\nSome of the earliest accounts of Demeter's relationships to other deities comes from Hesiod's \"Theogeny\", written c. 700 BC. In it, Demeter is described as the daughter of Cronus and Rhea.\nDemeter's most well-known relationship is with her daughter, Persephone, queen of the underworld. Both Hesiod and the \"Homeric Hymn to Demeter\"(2), describe Persephone as the daughter of Zeus and his older sister, Demeter, though no myths exist describing her conception or birth. The exception is a fragment of the lost Orphic theogony, which preserves part of a myth in which Zeus mates with his mother, Rhea, in the form of a snake, explaining the origin of the symbol on Hermes' staff. Their daughter is said to be Persephone, whom Zeus in turn mates with to conceive Dionysus. According to the Orphic fragments, \"After becoming the mother of Zeus, she who was formerly Rhea became Demeter.\"\nBefore her abduction by Hades, Persephone was known as Kore (\"maiden\"), and there is some evidence that the figures of Persephone Queen of the Underworld and Kore daughter of Demeter were originally considered separate goddesses. However, they must have become conflated with each other by the time of Hesiod in the 7th century BC. Demeter and Persephone were often worshiped together and were often referred to by joint cultic titles. In their cult at Eleusis, they were referred to simply as \"the goddesses\", often distinguished as \"the older\" and \"the younger\"; in Rhodes and Sparta, they were worshiped as \"the Demeters\"; in the Thesmophoria, they were known as \"the thesmophoroi\" (\"the legislators\"). In Arcadia they were known as \"the Great Goddesses\" and \"the mistresses\". In Mycenaean Pylos, Demeter and Persephone were probably called the \"queens\" (wa-na-ssoi).\nBoth Homer and Hesiod, writing c. 700 BC, described the agricultural hero Iasion as a consort of Demeter, saying they had intercourse in a \"thrice-ploughed fallow\". According to Hesiod, this union resulted in the birth of Plutus.\nAccording to Diodorus Siculus, in his \"Bibliotheca historica\" written in the 1st century BC, Demeter and her husband Zeus were also the parents of Dionysus. Diodorus described the myth of Dionysus' double birth (once from the earth, i.e. Demeter, when the plant sprouts) and once from the vine (when the fruit sprouts from the plant). Diodorus also related a version of the myth of Dionysus' destruction by the Titans (\"sons of Gaia\"), who boiled him, and how Demeter gathered up his remains so that he could be born a third time (Diod. iii.62). Diodorus states that Dionysus' birth from Zeus and his older sister Demeter was somewhat of a minority belief, possibly via conflation of Demeter with her daughter, as most sources state that the parents of Dionysus were Zeus and Persephone, and later Zeus and Semele.\nIn Arcadia, a major Arcadian deity known as Despoina (\"Mistress\") was said to be the daughter of Demeter and Poseidon. According to Pausanias, a Thelpusian tradition said that during Demeter's search for Persephone, Poseidon pursued her. Demeter turned into a horse in order to avoid her younger brother's advances, but he turned into a stallion and mated with the goddess, resulting in the birth of the horse god Arion and a daughter \"whose name they are not wont to divulge to the uninitiated\". Elsewhere he says that the Phigalians assert that the offspring of Poseidon and Demeter, was not a horse but in fact Despoina, \"as the Arcadians call her\".\nAbduction of Persephone.\nDemeter's daughter Persephone was abducted to the underworld by Hades, who received permission from her father Zeus to take her as his bride. Demeter searched for her ceaselessly, preoccupied with her grief. The seasons halted; living things ceased their growth, then began to die. Faced with the extinction of all life on earth, Zeus sent his messenger Hermes to the underworld to bring Persephone back. Hades agreed to release her if she had eaten nothing while in his realm; but Persephone had eaten a small number of pomegranate seeds. This bound her to Hades and the underworld for certain months of every year, either the dry Mediterranean summer, when plant life is threatened by drought, or the autumn and winter. There are several variations on the basic myth; the earliest account, the \"Homeric Hymn to Demeter\", relates that Persephone is secretly slipped a pomegranate seed by Hades and in Ovid's version, Persephone willingly and secretly eats the pomegranate seeds, thinking to deceive Hades, but is discovered and made to stay. Contrary to popular perception, Persephone's time in the underworld does not correspond with the unfruitful seasons of the ancient Greek calendar, nor her return to the upper world with springtime. Demeter's descent to retrieve Persephone from the underworld is connected to the Eleusinian Mysteries.\nThe myth of the capture of Persephone seems to be pre-Greek. In the Greek version, Ploutos (\u03c0\u03bb\u03bf\u03cd\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2, wealth) represents the wealth of the corn that was stored in underground silos or ceramic jars (\"pithoi\"). Similar subterranean \"pithoi\" were used in ancient times for funerary practices. At the beginning of the autumn, when the corn of the old crop is laid on the fields, she ascends and is reunited with her mother Demeter, for at this time the old crop and the new meet each other.\nAccording to the personal mythology of Robert Graves, Persephone is not only the younger self of Demeter, she is in turn also one of three guises of the Triple Goddess\u00a0\u2013 Kore (the youngest, the maiden, signifying green young grain), Persephone (in the middle, the nymph, signifying the ripe grain waiting to be harvested), and Hecate (the eldest of the three, the crone, the harvested grain), which to a certain extent reduces the name and role of Demeter to that of group name. Before her abduction, she is called Kore; and once taken she becomes Persephone ('she who brings destruction').\nDemeter at Eleusis.\nDemeter's search for her daughter Persephone took her to the palace of Celeus, the King of Eleusis in Attica. She assumed the form of an old woman, and asked him for shelter. He took her in, to nurse Demophon and Triptolemus, his sons by Metanira. To reward his kindness, she planned to make Demophon immortal; she secretly anointed the boy with ambrosia and laid him in the flames of the hearth, to gradually burn away his mortal self. But Metanira walked in, saw her son in the fire and screamed in fright. Demeter abandoned the attempt. Instead, she taught Triptolemus the secrets of agriculture, and he in turn taught them to any who wished to learn them. Thus, humanity learned how to plant, grow and harvest grain. The myth has several versions; some are linked to figures such as Eleusis, Rarus and Trochilus. The Demophon element may be based on an earlier folk tale.\nDemeter and Iasion.\nHomer's \"Odyssey\" (c. late 8th century BC) contains perhaps the earliest direct references to the myth of Demeter and her consort Iasion, a Samothracian hero whose name may refer to bindweed, a small white flower that frequently grows in wheat fields. In the \"Odyssey\", Calypso describes how Demeter, \"without disguise\", made love to Iasion. \"So it was when Demeter of the braided tresses followed her heart and lay in love with Iasion in the triple-furrowed field; Zeus was aware of it soon enough and hurled the bright thunderbolt and killed him.\" In ancient Greek culture, part of the opening of each agricultural year involved the cutting of three furrows in the field to ensure its fertility.\nHesiod expanded on the basics of this myth. According to him, the liaison between Demeter and Iasion took place at the wedding of Cadmus and Harmonia in Crete. Demeter, in this version, had lured Iasion away from the other revelers. Hesiod says that Demeter subsequently gave birth of Plutus.\nDemeter and Poseidon.\nIn Arcadia, located in what is now southern Greece, the major goddess Despoina was considered the daughter of Demeter and Poseidon \"Hippios\", Horse-Poseidon. In the associated myths, Poseidon represents the river spirit of the underworld, and he appears as a horse as often happens in northern European folklore. The myth describes how he pursued his older sister, Demeter, who hid from him among the horses of King Onkios, but even in the form of a mare, she could not conceal her divinity. In the form of a stallion, Poseidon caught and raped his older sister. Demeter was furious at Poseidon's assault; in this furious form, she became known as \"Demeter Erinys\". Her anger at Poseidon drove her to dress all in black and retreat into a cave in order to purify herself, an act which was the cause of a universal famine. Demeter's absence caused the death of crops, of livestock, and eventually of the people who depended on them (later Arcadian tradition held that it was \"both\" her rage at Poseidon and her loss of her daughter that caused the famine, merging the two myths). Demeter washed away her anger in the River Ladon, becoming \"Demeter Lousia\", the \"bathed Demeter\".\n\"In her alliance with Poseidon,\" Ker\u00e9nyi noted, \"she was Earth, who bears plants and beasts, and could therefore assume the shape of an ear of grain or a mare.\" She bore a daughter Despoina (: the \"Mistress\"), whose name should not be uttered outside the Arcadian Mysteries, and a horse named Arion, with a black mane and tail.\nAt Phigaleia, a \"xoanon\" (wood-carved statue) of Demeter was erected in a cave which, tradition held, was the cave into which Black Demeter retreated. The statue depicted a Medusa-like figure with a horse's head and snake-like hair, holding a dove and a dolphin, which probably represented her power over air and water:\nDemeter and Erysichthon.\nAnother myth involving Demeter's rage resulting in famine is that of Erysichthon, king of Thessaly. The myth tells of Erysichthon ordering all of the trees in one of Demeter's sacred groves to be cut down. One tree, a huge oak, was found to be covered with votive wreaths, symbols of the prayers Demeter had granted, and so Erysichthon's men refused to cut it down. The king used an axe to cut it down himself, killing a dryad nymph in the process. The nymph's dying words were a curse on Erysichthon. Demeter punished the king by calling upon Limos, the spirit of unrelenting and insatiable hunger, to enter his stomach. The more the king ate, the hungrier he became. Erysichthon sold all his possessions to buy food, but was still hungry. Finally, he sold his own daughter, Mestra, into slavery. Mestra was freed from slavery by her former lover, Poseidon, who gave her the gift of shape-shifting into any creature at will to escape her bonds. Erysichthon used her shape-shifting ability to sell her numerous times to make more money to feed himself, but no amount of food was enough. Eventually, Erysichthon ate himself."}
{"id": "8233", "revid": "27991771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8233", "title": "Death metal", "text": "Death metal is an extreme subgenre of heavy metal music. It typically employs heavily distorted and low-tuned guitars, played with techniques such as palm muting and tremolo picking; deep growling vocals; aggressive, powerful drumming, featuring double kick and blast beat techniques; minor keys or atonality; abrupt tempo, key, and time signature changes; and chromatic chord progressions. The lyrical themes of death metal may include slasher film-style violence, political conflict, religion, nature, philosophy, and science fiction.\nBuilding from the musical structure of thrash metal and early black metal, death metal emerged during the mid-1980s. Bands such as Venom, Celtic Frost, Slayer, and Kreator were important influences on the genre's creation. Possessed, Death, Necrophagia, Obituary, Autopsy, and Morbid Angel are often considered pioneers of the genre. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, death metal gained more media attention as a popular genre. Niche record labels like Combat, Earache, and Roadrunner began to sign death metal bands at a rapid rate.\nSince then, death metal has diversified, spawning several subgenres. Melodic death metal combines death metal elements with those of the new wave of British heavy metal. Technical death metal is a complex style, with uncommon time signatures, atypical rhythms, and unusual harmonies and melodies. Death-doom combines the deep growled vocals and double-kick drumming of death metal with the slow tempos and melancholic atmosphere of doom metal. Deathgrind, goregrind, and pornogrind mix the complexity of death metal with the intensity, speed, and brevity of grindcore. Deathcore combines death metal with metalcore traits. Death 'n' roll combines death metal's growled vocals and highly distorted, detuned guitar riffs with elements of 1970s hard rock and heavy metal.\nHistory.\nEmergence and early history.\nEnglish extreme metal band Venom, from Newcastle, crystallized the elements of what later became known as thrash metal, death metal and black metal, with their first two albums \"Welcome to Hell\" and \"Black Metal\". Their dark, blistering sound, harsh vocals, and macabre, proudly Satanic imagery proved a major inspiration for extreme metal bands. Another highly influential band, Slayer, formed in 1981. Although the band was a thrash metal act, Slayer's music was more violent than their thrash contemporaries Metallica, Megadeth, and Anthrax. Their breakneck speed and instrumental prowess combined with lyrics about death, violence, war, and Satanism won Slayer a cult following. According to Mike McPadden, \"Hell Awaits\", Slayer's sophomore album, \"largely invent[ed] much of the sound and fury that would evolve into death metal.\" According to AllMusic, their third album \"Reign in Blood\" inspired the entire death metal genre. It had a big impact on genre leaders such as Death, Obituary, and Morbid Angel.\nPossessed, a band that formed in the San Francisco Bay Area during 1983, is described by Allmusic as \"connecting the dots\" between thrash metal and death metal with their 1985 debut album, \"Seven Churches\". While attributed as having a Slayer influence, current and former members of the band had actually cited Venom and Mot\u00f6rhead, as well as early work by Exodus, as the main influences on their sound. Although the group had released only two studio albums and an EP in their formative years, they have been described by music journalists and musicians as either being \"monumental\" in developing the death metal style, or as being the first death metal band. Earache Records noted that \"the likes of Trey Azagthoth and Morbid Angel based what they were doing in their formative years on the Possessed blueprint laid down on the legendary \"Seven Churches\" recording. Possessed arguably did more to further the cause of 'Death Metal' than any of the early acts on the scene back in the mid-late 80's.\"\nDuring the same period as the dawn of Possessed, a second influential metal band was formed in Orlando, Florida: Death. Originally called Mantas, Death was formed in 1983 by Chuck Schuldiner, Kam Lee, and Rick Rozz. In 1984, they released their first demo entitled \"Death by Metal\", followed by several more. The tapes circulated through the tape trader world, quickly establishing the band's name. With Death guitarist Schuldiner adopting vocal duties, the band made a major impact on the scene. The fast minor-key riffs and solos were complemented with fast drumming, creating a style that would catch on in tape trading circles. Schuldiner has been credited by Allmusic's Eduardo Rivadavia for being widely recognized as the \"Father of Death Metal\". Death's 1987 debut release, \"Scream Bloody Gore\", has been described by About.com's Chad Bowar as being the \"evolution from thrash metal to death metal\", and \"the first true death metal record\" by the \"San Francisco Chronicle\". In an Interview Jeff Becerra talked about the discussions of being the creator of the genre, saying that Schuldiner cited Possessed as a massive influence, and Death were even called \"Possessed clones\" early on. Along with Possessed and Death, other pioneers of death metal in the United States include Macabre, Master, Massacre, Immolation, Cannibal Corpse, Obituary, and Post Mortem.\nGrowing popularity.\nBy 1989, many bands had been signed by eager record labels wanting to cash in on the subgenre, including Florida's Obituary, Morbid Angel and Deicide. This collective of death metal bands hailing from Florida are often labeled as \"Florida death metal\". Morbid Angel pushed the genre's limits both musically and lyrically, with the release of their debut album \"Altars of Madness\" in 1989. The album \"redefined what it meant to be heavy while influencing an upcoming class of brutal death metal.\"\nDeath metal spread to Sweden in the late 1980s, flourishing with pioneers such as Carnage, God Macabre, Entombed, Dismember, Grave and Unleashed. In the early 1990s, the rise of melodic death metal was recognized, with Swedish bands such as Dark Tranquillity, At the Gates, and In Flames.\nFollowing the original death metal innovators, new subgenres began by the end of the decade. British band Napalm Death became increasingly associated with death metal, in particular, on their 1990 album \"Harmony Corruption\". This album displays aggressive and fairly technical guitar riffing, complex rhythmics, a sophisticated growling vocal delivery by Mark \"Barney\" Greenway, and socially aware lyrical subjects, merging death metal with the \"grindcore\" subgenre. Other bands contributing significantly to this early movement include Britain's Bolt Thrower and Carcass and New York's Suffocation.\nTo close the circle, Death released their fourth album \"Human\" in 1991. Death's founder Schuldiner helped push the boundaries of uncompromising speed and technical virtuosity, mixing technical and intricate rhythm guitar work with complex arrangements and emotive guitar solos.\nEarache Records, Relativity Records and Roadrunner Records became the genre's most important labels, with Earache releasing albums by Carcass, Napalm Death, Morbid Angel, and Entombed, and Roadrunner releasing albums by Obituary, and Pestilence. Although these labels had not been death metal labels, initially, they became the genre's flagship labels in the beginning of the 1990s. In addition to these, other labels formed as well, such as Nuclear Blast, Century Media, and Peaceville. Many of these labels would go on to achieve successes in other genres of metal throughout the 1990s.\nIn September 1990, Death's manager Eric Greif held one of the first North American death metal festivals, \"Day of Death\", in Milwaukee suburb Waukesha, Wisconsin, and featured 26 bands including Autopsy, Broken Hope, Hellwitch, Obliveon, Revenant, Viogression, Immolation, Atheist, and Cynic.\nLater history.\nDeath metal's popularity achieved its initial peak during 1992\u20131993, with some bands such as Morbid Angel and Cannibal Corpse enjoying mild commercial success. However, the genre as a whole never broke into the mainstream. The genre's mounting popularity may have been partly responsible for a strong rivalry between Norwegian black metal and Swedish death metal scenes. Fenriz of Darkthrone has noted that Norwegian black metal musicians were \"fed up with the whole death metal scene\" at the time. Death metal diversified in the 1990s, spawning a rich variety of subgenres that still have a large \"underground\" following at the present.\nCharacteristics.\nInstrumentation.\nThe setup most frequently used within the death metal genre is two guitarists, a bass player, a vocalist and a drummer often using \"hyper double-bass blast beats\". Although this is the standard setup, bands have been known to occasionally incorporate other instruments such as electronic keyboards. The genre is often identified by fast, heavily distorted and low tuned guitars, played with techniques such as palm muting and tremolo picking. The percussion is usually aggressive and powerful.\nDeath metal is known for its abrupt tempo, key, and time signature changes. It may include chromatic chord progressions and a varied song structure. In some circumstances, the style will incorporate melodic riffs and harmonies for effect. This incorporation of melody and harmonious playing was even further used in the creation of melodic death metal. These compositions tend to emphasize an ongoing development of themes and motifs.\nVocals and lyrics.\nDeath metal vocals are referred to as death growls; hoarse roars/snarls. Death growling is mistakenly thought to be a form of screaming using the lowest vocal register known as vocal fry, however vocal fry is actually a form of overtone screaming, and while growling can be performed this way by experienced vocalists who use the fry screaming technique, \"true\" death growling is in fact created by an altogether different technique. The three major methods of harsh vocalization used in the genre are often mistaken for each other, encompassing vocal fry screaming, false chord screaming, and \"true\" death growls. Growling is sometimes also referred to as Cookie Monster vocals, tongue-in-cheek, due to the vocal similarity to the voice of the popular \"Sesame Street\" character of the same name. Although often criticized, death growls serve the aesthetic purpose of matching death metal's aggressive lyrical content. High-pitched screaming is occasionally utilized in death metal, being heard in songs by Death, Aborted, Exhumed, Dying Fetus, Cannibal Corpse, and Deicide.\nThe lyrical themes of death metal may invoke slasher film-stylised violence, but may also extend to topics like religion (sometimes including Satanism), occultism, Lovecraftian horror, nature, mysticism, mythology, theology, philosophy, science fiction, and politics. Although violence may be explored in various other genres as well, death metal may elaborate on the details of extreme acts, including psychopathy, delirium, mutilation, mutation, dissection, exorcism, torture, rape, cannibalism, and necrophilia. Sociologist Keith Kahn-Harris commented this apparent glamorisation of violence may be attributed to a \"fascination\" with the human body that all people share to some degree, a fascination that mixes desire and disgust. Heavy metal author Gavin Baddeley also stated there does seem to be a connection between \"how acquainted one is with their own mortality\" and \"how much they crave images of death and violence\" via the media. Additionally, contributing artists to the genre often defend death metal as little more than an extreme form of art and entertainment, similar to horror films in the motion picture industry. This explanation has brought such musicians under fire from activists internationally, who claim that this is often lost on a large number of adolescents, who are left with the glamorisation of such violence without social context or awareness of why such imagery is stimulating.\nAccording to Alex Webster, bassist of Cannibal Corpse, \"The gory lyrics are probably not, as much as people say, [what's keeping us] from being mainstream. Like, 'death metal would never go into the mainstream because the lyrics are too gory?' I think it's really the music, because violent entertainment is totally mainstream.\"\nOrigin of the term.\nThe most popular theory of the subgenre's christening is Possessed's 1984 demo, \"Death Metal\"; the song from the eponymous demo would also be featured on the band's 1985 debut album, \"Seven Churches\". Possessed vocalist/bassist Jeff Becerra said he coined the term in early 1983 for a high school English class assignment. Another possible origin was a magazine called \"Death Metal\", started by Thomas Fischer and Martin Ain of Hellhammer and Celtic Frost. The name was later given to the 1984 compilation \"Death Metal\" released by Noise Records. The term might also have originated from other recordings, such as the demo released by Death in 1984, called \"Death by Metal\".\nSubgenres and fusion genres.\nCited examples are not necessarily exclusive to one particular style. Many bands can easily be placed in two or more of the following categories, and a band's specific categorization is often a source of contention due to personal opinion and interpretation.\nBlackened death-doom.\nBlackened death-doom is a microgenre that combines the slow tempos and monolithic drumming of doom metal, the complex and loud riffage of death metal and the shrieking vocals of black metal. Examples of blackened death-doom bands include Morast, Faustcoven, The Ruins of Beverast, B\u00f6lzer, Necros Christos, Harvest Gulgaltha, Dragged into Sunlight, Hands of Thieves, and Soulburn.\nBlackened death metal.\nBlackened death metal is commonly death metal that incorporates musical, lyrical or ideological elements of black metal, such as an increased use of tremolo picking, anti-Christian or Satanic lyrical themes and chord progressions similar to those used in black metal. Blackened death metal bands are also more likely to wear corpse paint and suits of armour, than bands from other styles of death metal. Lower range guitar tunings, death growls and abrupt tempo changes are common in the genre. Examples of blackened death metal bands are Belphegor, Behemoth, Akercocke, and Sacramentum.\nMelodic black-death.\nMelodic black-death (also known as blackened melodic death metal or melodic blackened death metal) is a genre of extreme metal that describes the style created when melodic death metal bands began being inspired by black metal and European romanticism. However, unlike most other black metal, this take on the genre would incorporate an increased sense of melody and narrative. Some bands who have played this style include Dissection, Sacramentum, Embraced, Naglfar, Satariel, Throes of Dawn, Obscurity, Dawn, Cries of the Past-era Underoath, Catamenia, Midvinter, Twin Obscenity, Nokturnal Mortum Unanimated, Epoch of Unlight, This Ending, Suidakra, Oathean, Thulcandra, Skeletonwitch, and Cardinal Sin.\nWar metal.\nWar metal (also known as war black metal or bestial black metal) is an aggressive, cacophonous and chaotic subgenre of blackened death metal, described by \"Rock Hard\" journalist Wolf-R\u00fcdiger M\u00fchlmann as \"rabid\" and \"hammering\". Important influences include first wave black metal band Sodom, first wave black metal/death metal band Possessed as well as old grindcore, black and death metal bands like Repulsion, Autopsy, Sarc\u00f3fago and the first two Sepultura releases. War metal bands include Blasphemy, Archgoat, Impiety, In Battle, Beherit, Crimson Thorn, Bestial Warlust, and Zyklon-B.\nBrutal death metal.\nBrutal death metal is a subgenre of death metal that privileges heaviness, speed, and complex rhythms over other aspects, such as melody and timbres. Brutal death metal bands employ high-speed, palm-muted power chording and single-note riffage. Notable bands include Cannibal Corpse, Dying Fetus, Suffocation and Skinless.\nDeath-doom.\nDeath-doom is a style that combines the slow tempos and pessimistic atmosphere of doom metal with the deep growling vocals and double-kick drumming of death metal.&lt;ref name=\"Doom Metal Special: Doom/Death Terrorizer #142\"&gt;\"Doom Metal Special: Doom/Death\", \"Terrorizer #142\".&lt;/ref&gt; Influenced mostly by the early work of Hellhammer and Celtic Frost, the style emerged during the late 1980s and gained a certain amount of popularity during the 1990s. Death-doom was also pioneered by bands such as Winter, Disembowelment, Paradise Lost, Autopsy, Anathema, and My Dying Bride.\nFuneral doom.\nFuneral doom is a genre that crosses death-doom with funeral dirge music. It is played at a very slow tempo, and places an emphasis on evoking a sense of emptiness and despair. Typically, electric guitars are heavily distorted and dark ambient aspects such as keyboards or synthesizers are often used to create a \"dreamlike\" atmosphere. Vocals consist of mournful chants or growls and are often in the background. Funeral doom was pioneered by Mournful Congregation (Australia), Esoteric (United Kingdom), Evoken (United States), Funeral (Norway), Thergothon (Finland), and Skepticism (Finland).\nDeath 'n' roll.\nDeath 'n' roll is a style that combines death metal's growled vocals and highly distorted detuned guitar riffs along with elements of 1970s hard rock and heavy metal. Notable examples include Entombed, Gorefest, and Six Feet Under.\nDeathcore.\nWith the rise in popularity of metalcore, some of its traits have been combined with death metal. Bands such as Suicide Silence, Carnifex and Salt the Wound combine death metal with a variance of metalcore elements. Characteristics of death metal, such as fast drumming (including blast beats), down-tuned guitars, tremolo picking, growled vocals, and high-pitched shrieks are combined with the breakdowns of metalcore. \"Decibel\" magazine stated that \"one of Suffocation's trademarks, breakdowns, has spawned an entire metal subgenre: deathcore.\"\nDeathgrind, goregrind and pornogrind.\nGoregrind, deathgrind and pornogrind are styles that mix the intensity, speed, and brevity of grindcore with the complexity of death metal, with goregrind focused on themes like gore and forensic pathology, and pornogrind dealing with sexual and pornographic themes. Some notable examples of these genres are Brujeria, Cattle Decapitation, Cephalic Carnage, Pig Destroyer, Circle of Dead Children, Rotten Sound, Gut, and Cock and Ball Torture.\nDeathrash.\nDeathrash, also known as death-thrash, is a shorthand term to describe bands who play a fusion of death metal and thrash metal. The genre gained notoriety in Bali, Indonesia, where it attracted criticism of being related to the accelerated tourism development on the island and the superseding of its local culture, particularly by Jakartan one. Notable bands include Grave, Mortification, The Crown, Incapacity, Darkane, Deathchain, and Sepultura.\nIndustrial death metal.\nIndustrial death metal is a genre of death metal that adds elements of industrial music. Some notable bands include Fear Factory, Anaal Nathrakh, Autokrator, and Meathook Seed.\nMelodic death metal.\nSwedish death metal could be considered the forerunner of \"melodic death metal\". Melodic death metal, sometimes referred to as \"melodeath\", is heavy metal mixed with some death metal elements and is heavily influenced by the new wave of British heavy metal. Unlike most other death metal, melodeath usually features screams instead of growls, slower tempos, much more melody and even clean vocals are heard at rare times. Carcass is sometimes credited with releasing the first melodic death metal album with 1993's \"Heartwork\", although Swedish bands In Flames, Dark Tranquillity, and At the Gates are usually mentioned as the main pioneers of the genre and of the Gothenburg metal sound.\nSlam death metal.\nSlam death metal is a microgenre that evolved from the 1990s New York death metal scene, incorporating elements of hardcore punk. In contrast to other death metal styles, it is not generally focused on guitar solos and blast beats; instead, it employs mid-tempo rhythms, breakdowns, and palm-muted riffing, as well as hip hop-inspired vocal and drum beat rhythms. Notable acts include Devourment, Cephalotripsy, and Abominable Putridity.\nSymphonic death metal.\nSymphonic death metal is a genre of death metal that add elements of classical music. Bands described as symphonic death metal include Fleshgod Apocalypse, Septicflesh, Necronomicon, and Children of Bodom. Haggard's 2000 album, \"Awaking the Centuries\", has been described as death metal-styled symphonic metal.\nTechnical death metal.\nTechnical death metal (also known as tech-death, progressive death metal, or prog-death) is a subgenre of death metal that employs dynamic song structures, uncommon time signatures, atypical rhythms and unusual harmonies and melodies. Bands described as technical death metal or progressive death metal usually fuse common death metal aesthetics with elements of progressive rock, jazz or classical music. While the term technical death metal is sometimes used to describe bands that focus on speed and extremity as well as complexity, the line between progressive and technical death metal is thin. \"Tech death\" and \"prog death\", for short, are terms commonly applied to such bands as Nile, Edge of Sanity, and Opeth. Necrophagist and Spawn of Possession are known for a classical music-influenced death metal style. Death metal pioneers Death also refined their style in a more progressive direction in their final years. Some albums for this subgenre are \"Hallucinations\" (1990) by the German band Atrocity and Death's \"Human\" (1991). This style has significantly influenced many bands, creating a stream that in Europe was carried out at first by bands such as Gory Blister and Electrocution. The Polish band Decapitated gained recognition as one of Europe's primary modern technical death metal acts."}
{"id": "8234", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8234", "title": "Des Moines", "text": ""}
{"id": "8237", "revid": "36022642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8237", "title": "Don Quixote", "text": "The Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha (Modern Spanish: ' (in Part 2, \" caballero) , ), or just \"' (, ; , ), is a Spanish novel by Miguel de Cervantes. It was originally published in two parts, in 1605 and 1615. Considered a founding work of Western literature, it is often labeled \"the first modern European novel\" and many authors consider it to be the one of the greatest novels ever written. Don Quixote also holds the distinction of being the second most-translated book in the world, after the Bible.\nThe plot revolves around the adventures of a noble (hidalgo) from La Mancha named Alonso Quixano, who reads so many chivalric romances that he loses his mind and decides to become a knight-errant (\"caballero andante\") to revive chivalry and serve his nation, under the name \"Don Quixote de la Mancha\". He recruits a simple farmer, Sancho Panza, as his squire, who often employs a unique, earthy wit in dealing with Don Quixote's rhetorical monologues on knighthood, already considered old-fashioned at the time. Don Quixote, in the first part of the book, does not see the world for what it is and prefers to imagine that he is living out a knightly story.\nThe book had a major influence on the literary community, as evidenced by direct references in Alexandre Dumas' \"The Three Musketeers\" (1844), Mark Twain's \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" (1884), and Edmond Rostand's \"Cyrano de Bergerac\" (1897), as well as the word \"quixotic\" and the epithet \"Lothario\"; the latter refers to a character in \"El curioso impertinente\" (\"The Impertinently Curious Man\"), an intercalated story that appears in Part One, chapters 33\u201335. The 19th-century German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer cited \"Don Quixote\" as one of the four greatest novels ever written.\nWhen first published, \"Don Quixote\" was usually interpreted as a comic novel. After the French Revolution, it was better known for its central ethic that individuals can be right while society is quite wrong and seen as disenchanting. In the 19th century, it was seen as a social commentary, but no one could easily tell \"whose side Cervantes was on\". Many critics came to view the work as a tragedy in which Don Quixote's idealism and nobility are viewed by the post-chivalric world as insane, and are defeated and rendered useless by common reality. By the 20th century, the novel had come to occupy a canonical space as one of the foundations of modern literature.\nSummary.\nCervantes wrote that the first chapters were taken from \"the archives of La Mancha\", and the rest were translated from an Arabic text by the Moorish author Cide Hamete Benengeli. This metafictional trick appears to give a greater credibility to the text, implying that Don Quixote is a real character and that the events related truly occurred several decades prior to the recording of this account. However, it was also common practice in that era for fictional works to make some pretense of being factual, such as the common opening line of fairy tales \"Once upon a time in a land far away...\".\nIn the course of their travels, the protagonists meet innkeepers, prostitutes, goat-herders, soldiers, priests, escaped convicts and scorned lovers. The aforementioned characters sometimes tell tales that incorporate events from the real world. Their encounters are magnified by Don Quixote's imagination into chivalrous quests. Don Quixote's tendency to intervene violently in matters irrelevant to himself, and his habit of not paying debts, result in privations, injuries, and humiliations (with Sancho often the victim). Finally, Don Quixote is persuaded to return to his home village. The narrator hints that there was a third quest, but says that records of it have been lost.\nPart 1.\nThe First Sally (Chapters 1\u20135).\nAlonso Quixano, the protagonist of the novel (though he is not given this name until much later in the book), is a hidalgo (member of the lesser Spanish nobility), nearing 50 years of age, living in an unnamed section of La Mancha with his niece and housekeeper, as well as a boy who is never heard of again after the first chapter. Although Quixano is usually a rational man, in keeping with the humoral physiology theory of the time, not sleeping adequately\u2014because he was reading\u2014has caused his brain to dry. Quixano's temperament is thus choleric, the hot and dry humor. As a result, he is easily given to anger and believes every word of these fictional books of chivalry to be true.\nImitating the protagonists of these books, he decides to become a knight errant in search of adventure. To these ends, he dons an old suit of armor, renames himself \"Don Quixote\", names his exhausted horse \"Rocinante\", and designates Aldonza Lorenzo, a neighboring farm girl, as his lady love, renaming her Dulcinea del Toboso, while she knows nothing of this. Expecting to become famous quickly, he arrives at an inn, which he believes to be a castle, calls the prostitutes he meets \"ladies\" (\"doncellas\"), and demands that the innkeeper, who he takes to be the lord of the castle, dub him a knight. He spends the night holding vigil over his armor and becomes involved in a fight with muleteers who try to remove his armor from the horse trough so that they can water their mules. In a pretended ceremony, the innkeeper dubs him a knight to be rid of him and sends him on his way.\nDon Quixote next \"frees\" a slave named Andres who is tied to a tree and beaten by his master, and makes his master swear to treat the slave fairly, but the slave's beating is continued (and in fact redoubled) as soon as Quixote leaves. Don Quixote then encounters traders from Toledo, who \"insult\" the imaginary Dulcinea. He attacks them, only to be severely beaten and left on the side of the road, and is returned to his home by a neighboring peasant.\nDestruction of Don Quixote's library (Chapters 6 and 7).\nWhile Don Quixote is unconscious in his bed, his niece, the housekeeper, the parish curate, and the local barber burn most of his chivalric and other books. A large part of this section consists of the priest deciding which books deserve to be burned and which to be saved. It is a scene of high comedy: If the books are so bad for morality, how does the priest know them well enough to describe every naughty scene? Even so, this gives an occasion for many comments on books Cervantes himself liked and disliked. For example, Cervantes' own pastoral novel \"La Galatea\" is saved, while the rather unbelievable romance \"Felixmarte de Hyrcania\" is burned. After the books are dealt with, they seal up the room which contained the library, later telling Don Quixote that it was the action of a wizard (\"encantador\").\nThe Second Sally.\nAfter a short period of feigning health, Don Quixote requests his neighbour, Sancho Panza, to be his squire, promising him a petty governorship (\"\u00ednsula\"). Sancho is a poor and simple farmer but more practical than the head-in-the-clouds Don Quixote and agrees to the offer, sneaking away with Don Quixote in the early dawn. It is here that their famous adventures begin, starting with Don Quixote's attack on windmills that he believes to be ferocious giants.\nThe two next encounter two Benedictine friars travelling on the road ahead of a lady in a carriage. The friars are not travelling with the lady, but happen to be travelling on the same road. Don Quixote takes the friars to be enchanters who hold the lady captive, knocks a friar from his horse, and is challenged by an armed Basque traveling with the company. As he has no shield, the Basque uses a pillow from the carriage to protect himself, which saves him when Don Quixote strikes him. Cervantes chooses this point, in the middle of the battle, to say that his source ends here. Soon, however, he resumes Don Quixote's adventures after a story about finding Arabic notebooks containing the rest of the story by Cid Hamet Ben Engeli. The combat ends with the lady leaving her carriage and commanding those traveling with her to \"surrender\" to Don Quixote.\nThe Pastoral Peregrinations (Chapters 11\u201315).\nSancho and Don Quixote fall in with a group of goat herders. Don Quixote tells Sancho and the goat herders about the Golden Age\" of man, in which property does not exist and men live in peace. The goatherders invite the Knight and Sancho to the funeral of Gris\u00f3stomo, a former student who left his studies to become a shepherd after reading pastoral novels (paralleling Don Quixote's decision to become a knight), seeking the shepherdess Marcela. At the funeral Marcela appears, vindicating herself from the bitter verses written about her by Gris\u00f3stomo, and claiming her own autonomy and freedom from expectations put on her by pastoral clich\u00e9s. She disappears into the woods, and Don Quixote and Sancho follow. Ultimately giving up, the two dismount by a pond to rest. Some Galicians arrive to water their ponies, and Rocinante (Don Quixote's horse) attempts to mate with the ponies. The Galicians hit Rocinante with clubs to dissuade him, whereupon Don Quixote tries to defend Rocinante. The Galicians beat Don Quixote and Sancho, leaving them in great pain.\nThe inn (Chapters 16\u201317).\nAfter escaping the musketeers, Don Quixote and Sancho ride to a nearby inn. Once again, Don Quixote imagines the inn is a castle, although Sancho is not quite convinced. Don Quixote is given a bed in a former hayloft, and Sancho sleeps on the rug next to the bed; they share the loft with a muleteer. When night comes, Don Quixote imagines the servant girl at the inn, Helen, to be a beautiful princess, and makes her sit on his bed with him, scaring her. Seeing what is happening, the muleteer attacks Don Quixote, breaking the fragile bed and leading to a large and chaotic fight in which Don Quixote and Sancho are once again badly hurt. Don Quixote's explanation for everything is that they fought with an enchanted Moor. He also believes that he can cure their wounds with a mixture he calls \"the balm of Fierabras\", which only makes them sick. Don Quixote and Sancho decide to leave the inn, but Quixote, following the example of the fictional knights, leaves without paying. Sancho, however, remains and ends up wrapped in a blanket and tossed up in the air (blanketed) by several mischievous guests at the inn, something that is often mentioned over the rest of the novel. After his release, he and Don Quixote continue their travels.\nThe galley slaves and Cardenio (Chapters 19\u201324).\nAfter Don Quixote has adventures involving a dead body, a helmet, and freeing a group of galley slaves, he and Sancho wander into the Sierra Morena and there encounter the dejected Cardenio. Cardenio relates the first part of his story, in which he falls deeply in love with his childhood friend Lucinda, and is hired as the companion to the Duke's son, leading to his friendship with the Duke's younger son, Don Fernando. Cardenio confides in Don Fernando his love for Lucinda and the delays in their engagement, caused by Cardenio's desire to keep with tradition. After reading Cardenio's poems praising Lucinda, Don Fernando falls in love with her. Don Quixote interrupts when Cardenio suggests that his beloved may have become unfaithful after the formulaic stories of spurned lovers in chivalric novels. They get into a fight, ending with Cardenio beating all of them and walking away to the mountains.\nThe priest, the barber, and Dorotea (Chapters 25\u201331).\nQuixote pines for Dulcinea, imitating Cardenio. Quixote sends Sancho to deliver a letter to Dulcinea, but instead Sancho finds the barber and priest from his village and brings them to Quixote. The priest and barber make plans with Sancho to trick Don Quixote to come home. They get the help of Dorotea, a woman whom they discover in the forest, that has been deceived by Don Fernando with promises of love and marriage. She pretends that she is the Princess Micomicona and coming from Guinea desperate to get Quixote's help. Quixote runs into Andr\u00e9s, who insults his incompetence.\nReturn to the inn (Chapters 32\u201342).\nConvinced that he is on a quest to return princess Micomicona to the throne of her kingdom, Quixote and the group return to the previous inn where the priest reads aloud the manuscript of the story of Anselmo (The Impertinentely Curious Man) while Quixote, sleepwalking, battles with wineskins that he takes to be the giant who stole the princess Micomicona's kingdom. A stranger arrives at the inn accompanying a young woman. The stranger is revealed to be Don Fernando, and the young woman Lucinda. Dorotea is reunited with Don Fernando and Cardenio with Lucinda. A captive from Moorish lands in company of an Arabic speaking lady arrive and is asked to tell the story of his life; \"If your worships will give me your attention you will hear a true story which, perhaps, fictitious one constructed with ingenious and studied art can not come up to.\" A judge arrives, and it is found that the captive is his long-lost brother, and the two are reunited.\nThe ending (Chapters 45\u201352).\nAn officer of the Santa Hermandad has a warrant for Quixote's arrest for freeing the galley slaves. The priest begs for the officer to have mercy on account of Quixote's insanity. The officer agrees, and Quixote is locked in a cage and made to think that it is an enchantment and that there is a prophecy of his heroic return home. While traveling, the group stops to eat and lets Quixote out of the cage; he gets into a fight with a goatherd and with a group of pilgrims, who beat him into submission, and he is finally brought home. The narrator ends the story by saying that he has found manuscripts of Quixote's further adventures.\nPart 2.\nAlthough the two parts are now published as a single work, \"Don Quixote, Part Two\" was a sequel published ten years after the original novel. While \"Part One\" was mostly farcical, the second half is more serious and philosophical about the theme of deception. Opening just prior to the third Sally, the first chapters of Part Two show Don Quixote found to be still some sort of a modern day highly literate know-it-all, knight errant - Sancho his squire, however. \n\"Part Two\" of \"Don Quixote\" explores the concept of a character understanding that he is written about, an idea much explored in the 20th century. As \"Part Two\" begins, it is assumed that the literate classes of Spain have all read the first part of the story. Cervantes' meta-fictional device was to make even the characters in the story familiar with the publication of \"Part One\", as well as with an actually published, fraudulent Part Two.\nThe Third Sally.\nWhen strangers encounter the duo in person, they already know their famous history. A Duke and Duchess, and others, deceive Don Quixote for entertainment, setting forth a string of imagined adventures resulting in a series of practical jokes. Some of them put Don Quixote's sense of chivalry and his devotion to Dulcinea through many tests. Pressed into finding Dulcinea, Sancho decides they are both mad here but as for Don Quixote, \"with a madness that mostly takes one thing for another\" and plans to persuade him into seeing Dulcinea as a \"sublimated presence\" of a sorts. Sancho's luck brings three ragged peasant girls along the road he was sitting not far from where he set out from and he quickly tells Don Quixote that they are Dulcinea and her ladies-in-waiting. When Don Quixote only sees the peasant girls, Sancho pretends (reversing some incidents of \"Part One\") that their derelict appearance results from an enchantment. Don Quixote's lack of conviction in this matter results in \"Sancho, the rogue\" having \"nicely befooled\" him into thinking he'd met Dulcinea, delivered by Sancho.\nSancho later gets his comeuppance for this when, as part of one of the Duke and Duchess's pranks, the two are led to believe that the only method to release Dulcinea from her spell is for Sancho to give himself three thousand three hundred lashes. Sancho naturally resists this course of action, leading to friction with his master. Under the Duke's patronage, Sancho eventually gets a governorship, though it is false, and he proves to be a wise and practical ruler although this ends in humiliation as well. Near the end, Don Quixote reluctantly sways towards sanity.\nThe lengthy untold \"history\" of Don Quixote's adventures in knight-errantry comes to a close after his battle with the Knight of the White Moon (a young man from Don Quixote's hometown who had previously posed as the Knight of Mirrors) on the beach in Barcelona, in which the reader finds him conquered. Bound by the rules of chivalry, Don Quixote submits to prearranged terms that the vanquished is to obey the will of the conqueror: here, it is that Don Quixote is to lay down his arms and cease his acts of chivalry for the period of one year (in which he may be cured of his madness). He and Sancho undergo one more prank by the Duke and Duchess before setting off.\nUpon returning to his village, Don Quixote announces his plan to retire to the countryside as a shepherd, but his housekeeper urges him to stay at home. Soon after, he retires to his bed with a deathly illness, and later awakes from a dream, having fully recovered his sanity. Sancho tries to restore his faith, but Quixano (his proper name) only renounces his previous ambition and apologizes for the harm he has caused. He dictates his will, which includes a provision that his niece will be disinherited if she marries a man who reads books of chivalry. After Alonso Quixano dies, the author emphasizes that there are no more adventures to relate and that any further books about Don Quixote would be spurious.\nMeaning.\nHarold Bloom says \"Don Quixote\" is the first modern novel, and that the protagonist is at war with Freud's reality principle, which accepts the necessity of dying.\nEdith Grossman, who wrote and published a highly acclaimed English translation of the novel in 2003, says that the book is mostly meant to move people into emotion using a systematic change of course, on the verge of both tragedy and comedy at the same time. Grossman has stated:The question is that Quixote has multiple interpretations [...] and how do I deal with that in my translation. I'm going to answer your question by avoiding it [...] so when I first started reading the Quixote I thought it was the most tragic book in the world, and I would read it and weep [...] As I grew older [...] my skin grew thicker [...] and so when I was working on the translation I was actually sitting at my computer and laughing out loud. This is done [...] as Cervantes did it [...] by never letting the reader rest. You are never certain that you truly got it. Because as soon as you think you understand something, Cervantes introduces something that contradicts your premise.\nJonathan Shockley has placed the novel in the context of Terror Management Theory, claiming that the figure of Don Quixote represents the hidden essence of human culture: the centrality of heroic madness and its related death anxiety in all people. The flimsy, delusional (and evil-causing) nature of the things that grant humans conviction and self-aggrandizement. And the ironic (and ultimately tragic) need to acquire this conviction and self-aggrandizement to experience the goodness, richness and reality of life .\nThemes.\nThe novel's structure is episodic in form. The full title is indicative of the tale's object, as \"ingenioso\" (Spanish) means \"quick with inventiveness\", marking the transition of modern literature from dramatic to thematic unity. The novel takes place over a long period of time, including many adventures united by common themes of the nature of reality, reading, and dialogue in general.\nAlthough burlesque on the surface, the novel, especially in its second half, has served as an important thematic source not only in literature but also in much of art and music, inspiring works by Pablo Picasso and Richard Strauss. The contrasts between the tall, thin, fancy-struck and idealistic Quixote and the fat, squat, world-weary Panza is a motif echoed ever since the book's publication, and Don Quixote's imaginings are the butt of outrageous and cruel practical jokes in the novel.\nEven faithful and simple Sancho is forced to deceive him at certain points. The novel is considered a satire of orthodoxy, veracity and even nationalism. In exploring the individualism of his characters, Cervantes helped move beyond the narrow literary conventions of the chivalric romance literature that he spoofed, which consists of straightforward retelling of a series of acts that redound to the knightly virtues of the hero. The character of Don Quixote became so well known in its time that the word \"quixotic\" was quickly adopted by many languages. Characters such as Sancho Panza and Don Quixote's steed, Rocinante, are emblems of Western literary culture. The phrase \"tilting at windmills\" to describe an act of attacking imaginary enemies (or an act of extreme idealism), derives from an iconic scene in the book.\nIt stands in a unique position between medieval chivalric romance and the modern novel. The former consist of disconnected stories featuring the same characters and settings with little exploration of the inner life of even the main character. The latter are usually focused on the psychological evolution of their characters. In Part I, Quixote imposes himself on his environment. By Part II, people know about him through \"having read his adventures\", and so, he needs to do less to maintain his image. By his deathbed, he has regained his sanity, and is once more \"Alonso Quixano the Good\".\nBackground.\nSources.\nSources for \"Don Quixote\" include the Castilian novel \"Amadis de Gaula\", which had enjoyed great popularity throughout the 16th century. Another prominent source, which Cervantes evidently admires more, is \"Tirant lo Blanch\", which the priest describes in Chapter VI of \"Quixote\" as \"the best book in the world.\" (However, the sense in which it was \"best\" is much debated among scholars. Since the 19th century, the passage has been called \"the most difficult passage of \"Don Quixote\"\".)\nThe scene of the book burning gives us an excellent list of Cervantes' likes and dislikes about literature.\nCervantes makes a number of references to the Italian poem \"Orlando furioso\". In chapter 10 of the first part of the novel, Don Quixote says he must take the magical helmet of Mambrino, an episode from Canto I of \"Orlando\", and itself a reference to Matteo Maria Boiardo's \"Orlando innamorato\". The interpolated story in chapter 33 of Part four of the First Part is a retelling of a tale from Canto 43 of \"Orlando\", regarding a man who tests the fidelity of his wife.\nAnother important source appears to have been Apuleius's \"The Golden Ass\", one of the earliest known novels, a picaresque from late classical antiquity. The wineskins episode near the end of the interpolated tale \"The Curious Impertinent\" in chapter 35 of the first part of \"Don Quixote\" is a clear reference to Apuleius, and recent scholarship suggests that the moral philosophy and the basic trajectory of Apuleius's novel are fundamental to Cervantes' program. Similarly, many of both Sancho's adventures in Part II and proverbs throughout are taken from popular Spanish and Italian folklore.\nCervantes' experiences as a galley slave in Algiers also influenced \"Quixote\".\nMedical theories may have also influenced Cervantes' literary process. Cervantes had familial ties to the distinguished medical community. His father, Rodrigo de Cervantes, and his great-grandfather, Juan D\u00edaz de Torreblanca, were surgeons. Additionally, his sister, Andrea de Cervantes, was a nurse. He also befriended many individuals involved in the medical field, in that he knew medical author Francisco D\u00edaz, an expert in urology, and royal doctor Antonio Ponce de Santa Cruz who served as a personal doctor to both Philip III and Philip IV of Spain. \nApart from the personal relations Cervantes maintained within the medical field, Cervantes' personal life was defined by an interest in medicine. He frequently visited patients from the Hospital de Inocentes in Sevilla. Furthermore, Cervantes explored medicine in his personal library. His library contained more than 200 volumes and included books like \"Examen de Ingenios\" by Juan Huarte and \"Practica y te\u00f3rica de cirug\u00eda\" by Dionisio Daza Chac\u00f3n that defined medical literature and medical theories of his time.\nSpurious \"Second Part\" by Avellaneda.\nIt is not certain when Cervantes began writing \"Part Two\" of \"Don Quixote\", but he had probably not proceeded much further than Chapter LIX by late July 1614. About September, however, a spurious Part Two, entitled \"Second Volume of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha: by the Licenciado (doctorate) Alonso Fern\u00e1ndez de Avellaneda, of Tordesillas\", was published in Tarragona by an unidentified Aragonese who was an admirer of Lope de Vega, rival of Cervantes. It was translated into English by William Augustus Yardley, Esquire in two volumes in 1784.\nSome modern scholars suggest that Don Quixote's fictional encounter with Avellaneda in Chapter 59 of Part II should not be taken as the date that \"Cervantes\" encountered it, which may have been much earlier.\nAvellaneda's identity has been the subject of many theories, but there is no consensus as to who he was. In its prologue, the author gratuitously insulted Cervantes, who not surprisingly took offense and responded; the last half of Chapter LIX and most of the following chapters of Cervantes' \"Segunda Parte\" lend some insight into the effects upon him; Cervantes manages to work in some subtle digs at Avellaneda's own work, and in his preface to Part II, comes very near to criticizing Avellaneda directly.\nIn his introduction to \"The Portable Cervantes\", Samuel Putnam, a noted translator of Cervantes' novel, calls Avellaneda's version \"one of the most disgraceful performances in history\".\nThe second part of Cervantes' \"Don Quixote\", finished as a direct result of the Avellaneda book, has come to be regarded by some literary critics as superior to the first part, because of its greater depth of characterization, its discussions, mostly between Quixote and Sancho, on diverse subjects, and its philosophical insights. In Cervantes' \"Segunda Parte\", Don Quixote visits a printing-house in Barcelona and finds Avellaneda's \"Second Part\" being printed there, in an early example of metafiction.\nOther stories.\n\"Don Quixote, Part One\" contains a number of stories which do not directly involve the two main characters, but which are narrated by some of the picaresque figures encountered by the Don and Sancho during their travels. The longest and best known of these is \"El Curioso Impertinente\" (the impertinently curious man), found in Part One, Book Four. This story, read to a group of travelers at an inn, tells of a Florentine nobleman, Anselmo, who becomes obsessed with testing his wife's fidelity, and talks his close friend Lothario into attempting to seduce her, with disastrous results for all.\nIn \"Part Two\", the author acknowledges the criticism of his digressions in \"Part One\" and promises to concentrate the narrative on the central characters (although at one point he laments that his narrative muse has been constrained in this manner). Nevertheless, \"Part Two\" contains several back narratives related by peripheral characters.\nSeveral abridged editions have been published which delete some or all of the extra tales in order to concentrate on the central narrative.\nStyle.\nSpelling and pronunciation.\nCervantes wrote his work in early modern Spanish, heavily borrowing from Old Spanish, the medieval form of the language. The language of \"Don Quixote\", although still containing archaisms, is far more understandable to modern Spanish readers than is, for instance, the completely medieval Spanish of the \"Poema de mio Cid\", a kind of Spanish that is as different from Cervantes' language as Middle English is from Modern English. The Old Castilian language was also used to show the higher class that came with being a knight errant.\nIn \"Don Quixote\", there are basically two different types of Castilian: Old Castilian is spoken only by Don Quixote, while the rest of the roles speak a contemporary (late 16th century) version of Spanish. The Old Castilian of Don Quixote is a humoristic resource\u2014he copies the language spoken in the chivalric books that made him mad; and many times, when he talks nobody is able to understand him because his language is too old. This humorous effect is more difficult to see nowadays because the reader must be able to distinguish the two old versions of the language, but when the book was published it was much celebrated. (English translations can get some sense of the effect by having Don Quixote use King James Bible or Shakespearean English, or even Middle English.)\nIn Old Castilian, the letter \"x\" represented the sound written \"sh\" in modern English, so the name was originally pronounced . However, as Old Castilian evolved towards modern Spanish, a sound change caused it to be pronounced with a voiceless velar fricative sound (like the Scots or German \"ch\"), and today the Spanish pronunciation of \"Quixote\" is . The original pronunciation is reflected in languages such as Asturian, Leonese, Galician, Catalan, Italian, Portuguese, and French, where it is pronounced with a \"sh\" or \"ch\" sound; the French opera \"Don Quichotte\" is one of the best-known modern examples of this pronunciation.\nToday, English speakers generally attempt something close to the modern Spanish pronunciation of \"Quixote\" (\"Quijote\"), as , although the traditional English spelling-based pronunciation with the value of the letter x in modern English is still sometimes used, resulting in or . In Australian English, the preferred pronunciation amongst members of the educated classes was until well into the 1970s, as part of a tendency for the upper class to \"anglicise its borrowing ruthlessly\". The traditional English rendering is preserved in the pronunciation of the adjectival form \"quixotic\", i.e., , defined by \"Merriam-Webster\" as the foolishly impractical pursuit of ideals, typically marked by rash and lofty romanticism.\nSetting.\nCervantes' story takes place on the plains of La Mancha, specifically the \"comarca\" of Campo de Montiel.\nThe story also takes place in El Toboso where Don Quixote goes to seek Dulcinea's blessings.\nThe location of the village to which Cervantes alludes in the opening sentence of \"Don Quixote\" has been the subject of debate since its publication over four centuries ago. Indeed, Cervantes deliberately omits the name of the village, giving an explanation in the final chapter:\nTheories\nIn 2004, a multidisciplinary team of academics from Complutense University, led by Francisco Parra Luna, Manuel Fern\u00e1ndez Nieto, and Santiago Petschen Verdaguer, deduced that the village was that of Villanueva de los Infantes. Their findings were published in a paper titled \"'El Quijote' como un sistema de distancias/tiempos: hacia la localizaci\u00f3n del lugar de la Mancha\", which was later published as a book: \"El enigma resuelto del Quijote\". The result was replicated in two subsequent investigations: \"La determinaci\u00f3n del lugar de la Mancha como problema estad\u00edstico\" and \"The Kinematics of the Quixote and the Identity of the 'Place in La Mancha'\".\nResearchers Isabel Sanchez Duque and Francisco Javier Escudero have found relevant information regarding the possible sources of inspiration of Cervantes for writing Don Quixote. Cervantes was friend of the family Villase\u00f1or, which was involved in a combat with Francisco de Acu\u00f1a. Both sides combated disguised as medieval knights in the road from El Toboso to Miguel Esteban in 1581. They also found a person called Rodrigo Quijada, who bought the title of nobility of \"hidalgo\", and created diverse conflicts with the help of a squire.\nLanguage.\nBecause of its widespread influence, \"Don Quixote\" also helped cement the modern Spanish language. The opening sentence of the book created a classic Spanish clich\u00e9 with the phrase (\"whose name I do not wish to recall\"): (\"In a village of La Mancha, whose name I do not wish to recall, there lived, not very long ago, one of those gentlemen with a lance in the lance-rack, an ancient shield, a skinny old horse, and a fast greyhound.\")\nThe novel's farcical elements make use of punning and similar verbal playfulness. Character-naming in \"Don Quixote\" makes ample figural use of contradiction, inversion, and irony, such as the names \"Rocinante\" (a reversal) and \"Dulcinea\" (an allusion to illusion), and the word itself, possibly a pun on (jaw) but certainly (Catalan: thighs), a reference to a horse's rump.\nAs a military term, the word \"quijote\" refers to \"cuisses\", part of a full suit of plate armour protecting the thighs. The Spanish suffix \"-ote\" denotes the augmentative\u2014for example, \"grande\" means large, but \"grandote\" means extra large. Following this example, \"Quixote\" would suggest 'The Great Quijano', a play on words that makes much sense in light of the character's delusions of grandeur.\n\"La Mancha\" is a region of Spain, but \"mancha\" (Spanish word) means spot, mark, stain. Translators such as John Ormsby have declared La Mancha to be one of the most desertlike, unremarkable regions of Spain, the least romantic and fanciful place that one would imagine as the home of a courageous knight.\nPublication.\nIn July 1604, Cervantes sold the rights of \"El ingenioso hidalgo don Quixote de la Mancha\" (known as \"Don Quixote, Part I\") to the publisher-bookseller Francisco de Robles for an unknown sum. License to publish was granted in September, the printing was finished in December, and the book came out on 16 January 1605.\nThe novel was an immediate success. The majority of the 400 copies of the first edition were sent to the New World, with the publisher hoping to get a better price in the Americas. Although most of them disappeared in a shipwreck near La Havana, approximately 70 copies reached Lima, from where they were sent to Cuzco in the heart of the defunct Inca Empire.\nNo sooner was it in the hands of the public than preparations were made to issue derivative (pirated) editions. \"Don Quixote\" had been growing in favour, and its author's name was now known beyond the Pyrenees. By August 1605, there were two Madrid editions, two published in Lisbon, and one in Valencia. Publisher Francisco de Robles secured additional copyrights for Aragon and Portugal for a second edition.\nSale of these publishing rights deprived Cervantes of further financial profit on \"Part One\". In 1607, an edition was printed in Brussels. Robles, the Madrid publisher, found it necessary to meet demand with a third edition, a seventh publication in all, in 1608. Popularity of the book in Italy was such that a Milan bookseller issued an Italian edition in 1610. Yet another Brussels edition was called for in 1611. Since then, numerous editions have been released and in total, the novel is believed to have sold more than 500 million copies worldwide. The work has been produced in numerous editions and languages, the Cervantes Collection, at the State Library of New South Wales includes over 1,100 editions. These were collected, by Dr Ben Haneman, over a period of thirty years.\nIn 1613, Cervantes published the \"Novelas Ejemplares\", dedicated to the Maecenas of the day, the Conde de Lemos. Eight and a half years after \"Part One\" had appeared came the first hint of a forthcoming \"Segunda Parte\" (Part Two). \"You shall see shortly,\" Cervantes says, \"the further exploits of Don Quixote and humours of Sancho Panza.\" \"Don Quixote, Part Two\", published by the same press as its predecessor, appeared late in 1615, and quickly reprinted in Brussels and Valencia (1616) and Lisbon (1617). Parts One and Two were published as one edition in Barcelona in 1617. Historically, Cervantes' work has been said to have \"smiled Spain's chivalry away\", suggesting that Don Quixote as a chivalric satire contributed to the demise of Spanish Chivalry.\nEnglish editions in translation.\nThere are many translations of the book, and it has been adapted many times in shortened versions. Many derivative editions were also written at the time, as was the custom of envious or unscrupulous writers. Seven years after the \"Parte Primera\" appeared, \"Don Quixote\" had been translated into French, German, Italian, and English, with the first French translation of 'Part II' appearing in 1618, and the first English translation in 1620. One abridged adaptation, authored by Agust\u00edn S\u00e1nchez, runs slightly over 150 pages, cutting away about 750 pages.\nThomas Shelton's English translation of the \"First Part\" appeared in 1612 while Cervantes was still alive, although there is no evidence that Shelton had met the author. Although Shelton's version is cherished by some, according to John Ormsby and Samuel Putnam, it was far from satisfactory as a carrying over of Cervantes' text. Shelton's translation of the novel's \"Second Part\" appeared in 1620.\nNear the end of the 17th century, John Phillips, a nephew of poet John Milton, published what Putnam considered the worst English translation. The translation, as literary critics claim, was not based on Cervantes' text but mostly upon a French work by Filleau de Saint-Martin and upon notes which Thomas Shelton had written.\nAround 1700, a version by Pierre Antoine Motteux appeared. Motteux's translation enjoyed lasting popularity; it was reprinted as the Modern Library Series edition of the novel until recent times. Nonetheless, future translators would find much to fault in Motteux's version: Samuel Putnam criticized \"the prevailing slapstick quality of this work, especially where Sancho Panza is involved, the obtrusion of the obscene where it is found in the original, and the slurring of difficulties through omissions or expanding upon the text\". John Ormsby considered Motteux's version \"worse than worthless\", and denounced its \"infusion of Cockney flippancy and facetiousness\" into the original.\nThe proverb 'The proof of the pudding is in the eating' is widely attributed to Cervantes. The Spanish word for pudding, 'bud\u00edn', however, doesn't appear in the original text but premieres in the Motteux translation. In Smolletts translation of 1755, he notes that the original text reads literally \"you will see when the eggs are fried\" meaning 'time will tell'.\nA translation by Captain John Stevens, which revised Thomas Shelton's version, also appeared in 1700, but its publication was overshadowed by the simultaneous release of Motteux's translation.\nIn 1742, the Charles Jervas translation appeared, posthumously. Through a printer's error, it came to be known, and is still known, as \"the Jarvis translation\". It was the most scholarly and accurate English translation of the novel up to that time, but future translator John Ormsby points out in his own introduction to the novel that the Jarvis translation has been criticized as being too stiff. Nevertheless, it became the most frequently reprinted translation of the novel until about 1885. Another 18th-century translation into English was that of Tobias Smollett, himself a novelist, first published in 1755. Like the Jarvis translation, it continues to be reprinted today.\nA translation by Alexander James Duffield appeared in 1881 and another by Henry Edward Watts in 1888. Most modern translators take as their model the 1885 translation by John Ormsby.\nAn expurgated children's version, under the title \"The Story of Don Quixote\", was published in 1922 (available on Project Gutenberg). It leaves out the risqu\u00e9 sections as well as chapters that young readers might consider dull, and embellishes a great deal on Cervantes' original text. The title page actually gives credit to the two editors as if they were the authors, and omits any mention of Cervantes.\nThe most widely read English-language translations of the mid-20th century are by Samuel Putnam (1949), J. M. Cohen (1950; Penguin Classics), and Walter Starkie (1957). The last English translation of the novel in the 20th century was by Burton Raffel, published in 1996. The 21st century has already seen five new translations of the novel into English. The first is by John D. Rutherford and the second by Edith Grossman. Reviewing the novel in the \"New York Times\", Carlos Fuentes called Grossman's translation a \"major literary achievement\" and another called it the \"most transparent and least impeded among more than a dozen English translations going back to the 17th century.\"\nIn 2005, the year of the novel's 400th anniversary, Tom Lathrop published a new English translation of the novel, based on a lifetime of specialized study of the novel and its history. The fourth translation of the 21st century was released in 2006 by former university librarian James H Montgomery, 26 years after he had begun it, in an attempt to \"recreate the sense of the original as closely as possible, though not at the expense of Cervantes' literary style.\"\nIn 2011, another translation by Gerald J. Davis appeared. It is the latest and the fifth translation of the 21st century.\nTilting at windmills.\nTilting at windmills is an English idiom that means attacking imaginary enemies. The expression is derived from \"Don Quixote\", and the word \"tilt\" in this context comes from jousting.\nThe phrase is sometimes used to describe either confrontations where adversaries are incorrectly perceived, or courses of action that are based on misinterpreted or misapplied heroic, romantic, or idealistic justifications. It may also connote an inopportune, unfounded, and vain effort against adversaries real or imagined.\nList of English translations.\nReviewing the English translations as a whole, Daniel Eisenberg stated that there is no one translation ideal for every purpose, but expressed a preference for those of Putnam and the revision of Ormsby's translation by Douglas and Jones."}
{"id": "8238", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8238", "title": "Distributed programming", "text": ""}
{"id": "8239", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8239", "title": "Dylan", "text": "Dylan may refer to: "}
{"id": "8240", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8240", "title": "Dada", "text": "Dada () or Dadaism was an art movement of the European avant-garde in the early 20th century, with early centres in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland, at the Cabaret Voltaire (c. 1916). New York Dada began c. 1915, and after 1920 Dada flourished in Paris. Dadaist activities lasted until c. the mid 1920s.\nDeveloped in reaction to World War I, the Dada movement consisted of artists who rejected the logic, reason, and aestheticism of modern capitalist society, instead expressing nonsense, irrationality, and anti-bourgeois protest in their works. The art of the movement spanned visual, literary, and sound media, including collage, sound poetry, cut-up writing, and sculpture. Dadaist artists expressed their discontent toward violence, war, and nationalism, and maintained political affinities with radical left-wing and far-left politics.\nThere is no consensus on the origin of the movement's name; a common story is that the German artist Richard Huelsenbeck slid a paper knife (letter-opener) at random into a dictionary, where it landed on \"dada\", a colloquial French term for a hobby horse. Jean Arp wrote that Tristan Tzara invented the word at 6\u00a0p.m. on 6\u00a0February 1916, in the Caf\u00e9 de la Terrasse in Z\u00fcrich. Others note that it suggests the first words of a child, evoking a childishness and absurdity that appealed to the group. Still others speculate that the word might have been chosen to evoke a similar meaning (or no meaning at all) in any language, reflecting the movement's internationalism.\nThe roots of Dada lie in pre-war avant-garde. The term anti-art, a precursor to Dada, was coined by Marcel Duchamp around 1913 to characterize works that challenge accepted definitions of art. Cubism and the development of collage and abstract art would inform the movement's detachment from the constraints of reality and convention. The work of French poets, Italian Futurists and the German Expressionists would influence Dada's rejection of the tight correlation between words and meaning. Works such as \"Ubu Roi\" (1896) by Alfred Jarry and the ballet \"Parade\" (1916\u201317) by Erik Satie would also be characterized as proto-Dadaist works. The Dada movement's principles were first collected in Hugo Ball's Dada Manifesto in 1916.\nThe Dadaist movement included public gatherings, demonstrations, and publication of art/literary journals; passionate coverage of art, politics, and culture were topics often discussed in a variety of media. Key figures in the movement included Jean Arp, Johannes Baader, Hugo Ball, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst, Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven, George Grosz, Raoul Hausmann, John Heartfield, Emmy Hennings, Hannah H\u00f6ch, Richard Huelsenbeck, Francis Picabia, Man Ray, Hans Richter, Kurt Schwitters, Sophie Taeuber-Arp, Tristan Tzara, and Beatrice Wood, among others. The movement influenced later styles like the avant-garde and downtown music movements, and groups including Surrealism, \"nouveau r\u00e9alisme\", pop art and Fluxus.\nOverview.\nDada was an informal international movement, with participants in Europe and North America. The beginnings of Dada correspond with the outbreak of World War I. For many participants, the movement was a protest against the bourgeois nationalist and colonialist interests, which many Dadaists believed were the root cause of the war, and against the cultural and intellectual conformity\u2014in art and more broadly in society\u2014that corresponded to the war.\nAvant-garde circles outside France knew of pre-war Parisian developments. They had seen (or participated in) Cubist exhibitions held at Galeries Dalmau, Barcelona (1912), Galerie Der Sturm in Berlin (1912), the Armory Show in New York (1913), SVU M\u00e1nes in Prague (1914), several Jack of Diamonds exhibitions in Moscow and at , Amsterdam (between 1911 and 1915). Futurism developed in response to the work of various artists. Dada subsequently combined these approaches.\nMany Dadaists believed that the 'reason' and 'logic' of bourgeois capitalist society had led people into war. They expressed their rejection of that ideology in artistic expression that appeared to reject logic and embrace chaos and irrationality. For example, George Grosz later recalled that his Dadaist art was intended as a protest \"against this world of mutual destruction\".\nAccording to Hans Richter Dada was not art: it was \"anti-art.\" Dada represented the opposite of everything which art stood for. Where art was concerned with traditional aesthetics, Dada ignored aesthetics. If art was to appeal to sensibilities, Dada was intended to offend.\nAs Hugo Ball expressed it, \"For us, art is not an end in itself ... but it is an opportunity for the true perception and criticism of the times we live in.\"\nA reviewer from the \"American Art News\" stated at the time that \"Dada philosophy is the sickest, most paralyzing and most destructive thing that has ever originated from the brain of man.\" Art historians have described Dada as being, in large part, a \"reaction to what many of these artists saw as nothing more than an insane spectacle of collective homicide\".\nYears later, Dada artists described the movement as \"a phenomenon bursting forth in the midst of the postwar economic and moral crisis, a savior, a monster, which would lay waste to everything in its path... [It was] a systematic work of destruction and demoralization... In the end it became nothing but an act of sacrilege.\"\nTo quote Dona Budd's \"The Language of Art Knowledge\", Dada was born out of negative reaction to the horrors of the First World War. This international movement was begun by a group of artists and poets associated with the Cabaret Voltaire in Z\u00fcrich. Dada rejected reason and logic, prizing nonsense, irrationality and intuition. The origin of the name Dada is unclear; some believe that it is a nonsensical word. Others maintain that it originates from the Romanian artists Tristan Tzara's and Marcel Janco's frequent use of the words \"da, da,\" meaning \"yes, yes\" in the Romanian language. Another theory says that the name \"Dada\" came during a meeting of the group when a paper knife stuck into a French\u2013German dictionary happened to point to 'dada', a French word for 'hobbyhorse'. The movement primarily involved visual arts, literature, poetry, art manifestos, art theory, theatre, and graphic design, and concentrated its anti-war politics through a rejection of the prevailing standards in art through anti-art cultural works.\nThe creations of Duchamp, Picabia, Man Ray, and others between 1915 and 1917 eluded the term Dada at the time, and \"New York Dada\" came to be seen as a post facto invention of Duchamp. At the outset of the 1920s the term Dada flourished in Europe with the help of Duchamp and Picabia, who had both returned from New York. Notwithstanding, Dadaists such as Tzara and Richter claimed European precedence. Art historian David Hopkins notes:\nIronically, though, Duchamp's late activities in New York, along with the machinations of Picabia, re-cast Dada's history. Dada's European chroniclers\u2014primarily Richter, Tzara, and Huelsenbeck\u2014would eventually become preoccupied with establishing the pre-eminence of Zurich and Berlin at the foundations of Dada, but it proved to be Duchamp who was most strategically brilliant in manipulating the genealogy of this avant-garde formation, deftly turning New York Dada from a late-comer into an originating force.\nHistory.\nDada emerged from a period of artistic and literary movements like Futurism, Cubism and Expressionism; centered mainly in Italy, France and Germany respectively, in those years. However, unlike the earlier movements Dada was able to establish a broad base of support, giving rise to a movement that was international in scope. Its adherents were based in cities all over the world including New York, Z\u00fcrich, Berlin, Paris and others. There were regional differences like an emphasis on literature in Z\u00fcrich and political protest in Berlin.\nProminent Dadaists published manifestos, but the movement was loosely organized and there was no central hierarchy. On 14 July 1916, Ball originated the seminal manifesto. Tzara wrote a second Dada manifesto, considered important Dada reading, which was published in 1918. Tzara's manifesto articulated the concept of \"Dadaist disgust\"\u2014the contradiction implicit in avant-garde works between the criticism and affirmation of modernist reality. In the Dadaist perspective modern art and culture are considered a type of fetishization where the objects of consumption (including organized systems of thought like philosophy and morality) are chosen, much like a preference for cake or cherries, to fill a void.\nThe shock and scandal the movement inflamed was deliberate; Dadist magazines were banned and their exhibits closed. Some of the artists even faced imprisonment. These provocations were part of the entertainment but, over time, audiences' expectations eventually outpaced the movement's capacity to deliver. As the artists' well-known \"sarcastic laugh\" started to come from the audience, the provocations of Dadaists began to lose their impact. Dada was an active movement during years of political turmoil from 1916 when European countries were actively engaged in World War I, the conclusion of which, in 1918, set the stage for a new political order.\nZ\u00fcrich.\nThere is some disagreement about where Dada originated. The movement is commonly accepted by most art historians and those who lived during this period to have identified with the Cabaret Voltaire (housed inside the \"Holl\u00e4ndische Meierei\" bar in Z\u00fcrich) co-founded by poet and cabaret singer Emmy Hennings and Hugo Ball. Some sources propose a Romanian origin, arguing that Dada was an offshoot of a vibrant artistic tradition that transposed to Switzerland when a group of Jewish modernist artists, including Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco, and Arthur Segal settled in Z\u00fcrich. Before World War I, similar art had already existed in Bucharest and other Eastern European cities; it is likely that Dada's catalyst was the arrival in Z\u00fcrich of artists like Tzara and Janco.\nThe name \"Cabaret Voltaire\" was a reference to the French philosopher Voltaire, whose novel \"Candide\" mocked the religious and philosophical dogmas of the day. Opening night was attended by Ball, Tzara, Jean Arp, and Janco. These artists along with others like Sophie Taeuber, Richard Huelsenbeck and Hans Richter started putting on performances at the Cabaret Voltaire and using art to express their disgust with the war and the interests that inspired it. Having left Germany and Romania during World War I, the artists arrived in politically neutral Switzerland. They used abstraction to fight against the social, political, and cultural ideas of that time. They used techniques of shock art, provocation and \"vaudevilleian excess\" were all tools to subvert the conventions they believed had caused the Great War. The Dadaists believed those ideas to be a byproduct of bourgeois society that was so apathetic it would wage war against itself rather than challenge the \"status quo\":\nBall said that Janco's mask and costume designs, inspired by Romanian folk art, made \"the horror of our time, the paralyzing background of events\" visible. According to Ball, performances were accompanied by a \"balalaika orchestra playing delightful folk-songs\". Influenced by African music, arrhythmic drumming and jazz were common at Dada gatherings.\nAfter the cabaret closed down, Dada activities moved on to a new gallery, and Hugo Ball left for Bern. Tzara began a relentless campaign to spread Dada ideas. He bombarded French and Italian artists and writers with letters, and soon emerged as the Dada leader and master strategist. The Cabaret Voltaire re-opened, and is still in the same place at the Spiegelgasse 1 in the Niederdorf.\nZ\u00fcrich Dada, with Tzara at the helm, published the art and literature review \"Dada\" beginning in July 1917, with five editions from Z\u00fcrich and the final two from Paris.\nOther artists, such as Andr\u00e9 Breton and Philippe Soupault, created \"literature groups to help extend the influence of Dada\".\nAfter the fighting of the First World War had ended in the armistice of November 1918, most of the Z\u00fcrich Dadaists returned to their home countries, and some began Dada activities in other cities. Others, such as the Swiss native Sophie Taeuber, would remain in Z\u00fcrich into the 1920s.\nBerlin.\n\"Berlin was a city of tightened stomachers, of mounting, thundering hunger, where hidden rage was transformed into a boundless money lust, and men's minds were concentrating more and more on questions of naked existence... Fear was in everybody's bones\" \u2013 Richard H\u00fclsenbeck\nRaoul Hausmann, who helped establish Dada in Berlin, published his manifesto \"Synthethic Cino of Painting\" in 1918 where he attacked Expressionism and the art critics who promoted it. Dada is envisioned in contrast to art forms, such as Expressionism, that appeal to viewers' emotional states: \"the exploitation of so-called echoes of the soul\". In Hausmann's conception of Dada, new techniques of creating art would open doors to explore new artistic impulses. Fragmented use of real world stimuli allowed an expression of reality that was radically different from other forms of art:\nThe groups in Germany were not as strongly anti-art as other groups. Their activity and art were more political and social, with corrosive manifestos and propaganda, satire, public demonstrations and overt political activities. The intensely political and war-torn environment of Berlin had a dramatic impact on the ideas of Berlin Dadaists. Conversely, New York's geographic distance from the war spawned its more theoretically-driven, less political nature. According to Hans Richter, a Dadaist who was in Berlin yet \u201caloof from active participation in Berlin Dada\u201d, several distinguishing characteristics of the Dada movement there included: \u201cits political element and its technical discoveries in painting and literature\u201d; \u201cinexhaustible energy\u201d; \u201cmental freedom which included the abolition of everything\u201d; and \u201cmembers intoxicated with their own power in a way that had no relation to the real world\u201d, who would \u201cturn their rebelliousness even against each other\u201d.\nIn February 1918, while the Great War was approaching its climax, Huelsenbeck gave his first Dada speech in Berlin, and he produced a Dada manifesto later in the year. Following the October Revolution in Russia, by then out of the war, Hannah H\u00f6ch and George Grosz used Dada to express communist sympathies. Grosz, together with John Heartfield, H\u00f6ch and Hausmann developed the technique of photomontage during this period. Johannes Baader, the uninhibited Oberdada, was the \u201ccrowbar\u201d of the Berlin movement's direct action according to Hans Richter and is credited with creating the first giant collages, according to Raoul Hausmann.\nAfter the war, the artists published a series of short-lived political magazines and held the First International Dada Fair, 'the greatest project yet conceived by the Berlin Dadaists', in the summer of 1920. As well as work by the main members of Berlin Dada \u2013 Grosz, Raoul Hausmann, Hannah H\u00f6ch, Johannes Baader, Huelsenbeck and Heartfield \u2013 the exhibition also included the work of Otto Dix, Francis Picabia, Jean Arp, Max Ernst, Rudolf Schlichter, Johannes Baargeld and others. In all, over 200 works were exhibited, surrounded by incendiary slogans, some of which also ended up written on the walls of the Nazi's \"Entartete Kunst\" exhibition in 1937. Despite high ticket prices, the exhibition lost money, with only one recorded sale.\nThe Berlin group published periodicals such as \"Club Dada\", \"Der Dada\", \"Everyman His Own Football\", and \"Dada Almanach\". They also established a political party, the Central Council of Dada for the World Revolution.\nCologne.\nIn Cologne, Ernst, Baargeld, and Arp launched a controversial Dada exhibition in 1920 which focused on nonsense and anti-bourgeois sentiments. Cologne's Early Spring Exhibition was set up in a pub, and required that participants walk past urinals while being read lewd poetry by a woman in a communion dress. The police closed the exhibition on grounds of obscenity, but it was re-opened when the charges were dropped.\nNew York.\nLike Z\u00fcrich, New York City was a refuge for writers and artists from the First World War. Soon after arriving from France in 1915, Marcel Duchamp and Francis Picabia met American artist Man Ray. By 1916 the three of them became the center of radical anti-art activities in the United States. American Beatrice Wood, who had been studying in France, soon joined them, along with Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven. Arthur Cravan, fleeing conscription in France, was also in New York for a time. Much of their activity centered in Alfred Stieglitz's gallery, 291, and the home of Walter and Louise Arensberg.\nThe New Yorkers, though not particularly organized, called their activities \"Dada,\" but they did not issue manifestos. They issued challenges to art and culture through publications such as \"The Blind Man\", \"Rongwrong\", and \"New York Dada\" in which they criticized the traditionalist basis for \"museum\" art. New York Dada lacked the disillusionment of European Dada and was instead driven by a sense of irony and humor. In his book \"Adventures in the arts: informal chapters on painters, vaudeville and poets\" Marsden Hartley included an essay on \"\u2009\".\nDuring this time Duchamp began exhibiting \"readymades\" (everyday objects found or purchased and declared art) such as a bottle rack, and was active in the Society of Independent Artists. In 1917 he submitted the now famous \"Fountain\", a urinal signed R.\u00a0Mutt, to the Society of Independent Artists exhibition but they rejected the piece. First an object of scorn within the arts community, the \"Fountain\" has since become almost canonized by some as one of the most recognizable modernist works of sculpture. Art world experts polled by the sponsors of the 2004 Turner Prize, Gordon's gin, voted it \"the most influential work of modern art\". As recent scholarship documents, the work is still controversial. Duchamp indicated in a 1917 letter to his sister that a female friend was centrally involved in the conception of this work: \"One of my female friends who had adopted the pseudonym Richard Mutt sent me a porcelain urinal as a sculpture.\" The piece is in line with the scatological aesthetics of Duchamp's neighbour, the Baroness Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven. In an attempt to \"pay homage to the spirit of Dada\" a performance artist named Pierre Pinoncelli made a crack in a replica of \"The Fountain\" with a hammer in January 2006; he also urinated on it in 1993.\nPicabia's travels tied New York, Z\u00fcrich and Paris groups together during the Dadaist period. For seven years he also published the Dada periodical \"391\" in Barcelona, New York City, Z\u00fcrich, and Paris from 1917 through 1924.\nBy 1921, most of the original players moved to Paris where Dada had experienced its last major incarnation.\nParis.\nThe French avant-garde kept abreast of Dada activities in Z\u00fcrich with regular communications from Tristan Tzara (whose pseudonym means \"sad in country,\" a name chosen to protest the treatment of Jews in his native Romania), who exchanged letters, poems, and magazines with Guillaume Apollinaire, Andr\u00e9 Breton, Max Jacob, Cl\u00e9ment Pansaers, and other French writers, critics and artists.\nParis had arguably been the classical music capital of the world since the advent of musical Impressionism in the late 19th century. One of its practitioners, Erik Satie, collaborated with Picasso and Cocteau in a mad, scandalous ballet called \"Parade\". First performed by the Ballets Russes in 1917, it succeeded in creating a scandal but in a different way than Stravinsky's \"Le Sacre du printemps\" had done almost five years earlier. This was a ballet that was clearly parodying itself, something traditional ballet patrons would obviously have serious issues with.\nDada in Paris surged in 1920 when many of the originators converged there. Inspired by Tzara, Paris Dada soon issued manifestos, organized demonstrations, staged performances and produced a number of journals (the final two editions of \"Dada\", \"Le Cannibale\", and \"Litt\u00e9rature\" featured Dada in several editions.)\nThe first introduction of Dada artwork to the Parisian public was at the \"Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants\" in 1921. Jean Crotti exhibited works associated with Dada including a work entitled, \"Explicatif\" bearing the word \"Tabu\". In the same year Tzara staged his Dadaist play \"The Gas Heart\" to howls of derision from the audience. When it was re-staged in 1923 in a more professional production, the play provoked a theatre riot (initiated by Andr\u00e9 Breton) that heralded the split within the movement that was to produce Surrealism. Tzara's last attempt at a Dadaist drama was his \"ironic tragedy\" \"Handkerchief of Clouds\" in 1924.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands the Dada movement centered mainly around Theo van Doesburg, best known for establishing the \"De Stijl\" movement and magazine of the same name. Van Doesburg mainly focused on poetry, and included poems from many well-known Dada writers in \"De Stijl\" such as Hugo Ball, Hans Arp and Kurt Schwitters. Van Doesburg and (a cordwainer and artist in Drachten) became friends of Schwitters, and together they organized the so-called \"Dutch Dada campaign\" in 1923, where van Doesburg promoted a leaflet about Dada (entitled \"What is Dada?\"), Schwitters read his poems, Vilmos Husz\u00e1r demonstrated a mechanical dancing doll and Nelly van Doesburg (Theo's wife), played avant-garde compositions on piano.\nVan Doesburg wrote Dada poetry himself in \"De Stijl\", although under a pseudonym, I.K.\u00a0Bonset, which was only revealed after his death in 1931. 'Together' with I.K.\u00a0Bonset, he also published a short-lived Dutch Dada magazine called \"M\u00e9cano\" (1922\u20133). Another Dutchman identified by K. Schippers in his study of the movement in the Netherlands was the Groningen typographer H. N. Werkman, who was in touch with van Doesburg and Schwitters while editing his own magazine, \"The Next Call\" (1923\u20136). Two more artists mentioned by Schippers were German-born and eventually settled in the Netherlands. These were Otto van Rees, who had taken part in the liminal exhibitions at the Caf\u00e9 Voltaire in Z\u00fcrich, and Paul Citroen.\nGeorgia.\nThough Dada itself was unknown in Georgia until at least 1920, from 1917 until 1921 a group of poets called themselves \"41st Degree\" (referring both to the latitude of Tbilisi, Georgia and to the temperature of a high fever) organized along Dadaist lines. The most important figure in this group was Iliazd, whose radical typographical designs visually echo the publications of the Dadaists. After his flight to Paris in 1921, he collaborated with Dadaists on publications and events.\nYugoslavia.\nIn Yugoslavia, alongside the new art movement Zenitism, there was significant Dada activity between 1920 and 1922, run mainly by Dragan Aleksi\u0107 and including work by Mihailo S.\u00a0Petrov, Ljubomir Mici\u0107 and Branko Ve Poljanski. Aleksi\u0107 used the term \"Yougo-Dada\" and is known to have been in contact with Raoul Hausmann, Kurt Schwitters, and Tristan Tzara.\nItaly.\nThe Dada movement in Italy, based in Mantua, was met with distaste and failed to make a significant impact in the world of art. It published a magazine for a short time and held an exhibition in Rome, featuring paintings, quotations from Tristan Tzara, and original epigrams such as \"True Dada is against Dada\". One member of this group was Julius Evola, who went on to become an eminent scholar of occultism, as well as a right-wing philosopher.\nJapan.\nA prominent Dada group in Japan was Mavo, founded in July 1923 by Tomoyoshi Murayama, and Yanase Masamu later joined by Tatsuo Okada. Other prominent artists were Jun Tsuji, Eisuke Yoshiyuki, Shinkichi Takahashi and Katu\u00e9 Kitasono.\nIn the Tsuburaya Productions's \"Ultra Series\", an alien named Dada was inspired by Dadaism movement, with said character first appearing in episode 28 of the 1966 tokusatsu series, \"Ultraman\", its design by character artist Toru Narita. Dada's design is primarily monochromatic, and features numerous sharp lines and alternating black and white stripes, in reference to the movement and, in particular, to chessboard and Go patterns. On May 19, 2016, in celebration to the 100 year anniversary of Dadaism in Tokyo, the Ultra Monster was invited to meet the Swiss Ambassador Urs Bucher.\nButoh, the Japanese dance-form originating in 1959, can be considered to have direct connections to the spirit of the Dada movement, as Tatsumi Hijikata, one of Butoh's founders, \"was influenced early in his career by Dadaism\".\nRussia.\nDada in itself was relatively unknown in Russia, however, avant-garde art was widespread due to the Bolshevik's revolutionary agenda. The , a literary group sharing Dadaist ideals achieved infamy after one of its members suggested that Vladimir Mayakovsky should go to the \"Pampushka\" (Pameatnik Pushkina \u2013 Pushkin monument) on the \"Tverbul\" (Tverskoy Boulevard) to clean the shoes of anyone who desired it, after Mayakovsky declared that he was going to cleanse Russian literature. For more information on Dadaism's influence upon Russian avant-garde art, see the book \"Russian Dada 1914\u20131924\".\nPoetry.\nDadists used shock, nihilism, negativity, paradox, randomness, subconscious forces and antinomianism to subvert established traditions in the aftermath of the Great War. Tzara's 1920 manifesto proposed cutting words from a newspaper and randomly selecting fragments to write poetry, a process in which the synchronous universe itself becomes an active agent in creating the art. A poem written using this technique would be a \"fruit\" of the words that were clipped from the article.\nIn literary arts Dadaists focused on poetry, particularly the so-called sound poetry invented by Hugo Ball. Dadaist poems attacked traditional conceptions of poetry, including structure, order, as well as the interplay of sound and the meaning of language. For Dadaists, the existing system by which information is articulated robs language of its dignity. The dismantling of language and poetic conventions are Dadaist attempts to restore language to its purest and most innocent form: \"With these sound poem, we wanted to dispense with a language which journalism had made desolate and impossible.\"\nSimultaneous poems (or \"po\u00e8mes simultan\u00e9s\") were recited by a group of speakers who, collectively, produced a chaotic and confusing set of voices. These poems are considered manifestations of modernity including advertising, technology, and conflict. Unlike movements such as Expressionism, Dadaism did not take a negative view of modernity and the urban life. The chaotic urban and futuristic world is considered natural terrain that opens up new ideas for life and art.\nMusic.\nDada was not confined to the visual and literary arts; its influence reached into sound and music. Kurt Schwitters developed what he called \"sound poems\", while Francis Picabia and Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes composed Dada music performed at the Festival Dada in Paris on 26 May 1920. Other composers such as Erwin Schulhoff, Hans Heusser and Alberto Savinio all wrote \"Dada music\", while members of Les Six collaborated with members of the Dada movement and had their works performed at Dada gatherings. Erik Satie also dabbled with Dadaist ideas during his career, although he is primarily associated with musical Impressionism.\nLegacy.\nWhile broadly based, the movement was unstable. By 1924 in Paris, Dada was melding into Surrealism, and artists had gone on to other ideas and movements, including Surrealism, social realism and other forms of modernism. Some theorists argue that Dada was actually the beginning of postmodern art.\nBy the dawn of the Second World War, many of the European Dadaists had emigrated to the United States. Some (Otto Freundlich, Walter Serner) died in death camps under Adolf Hitler, who actively persecuted the kind of \"degenerate art\" that he considered Dada to represent. The movement became less active as post-war optimism led to the development of new movements in art and literature.\nDada is a named influence and reference of various anti-art and political and cultural movements, including the Situationist International and culture jamming groups like the Cacophony Society. Upon breaking up in July 2012, anarchist pop band Chumbawamba issued a statement which compared their own legacy with that of the Dada art movement.\nAt the same time that the Z\u00fcrich Dadaists were making noise and spectacle at the Cabaret Voltaire, Lenin was planning his revolutionary plans for Russia in a nearby apartment. Tom Stoppard used this coincidence as a premise for his play \"Travesties\" (1974), which includes Tzara, Lenin, and James Joyce as characters. French writer Dominique Noguez imagined Lenin as a member of the Dada group in his tongue-in-cheek \"L\u00e9nine Dada\" (1989).\nThe former building of the Cabaret Voltaire fell into disrepair until it was occupied from January to March 2002, by a group proclaiming themselves Neo-Dadaists, led by Mark Divo. The group included Jan Thieler, Ingo Giezendanner, Aiana Calugar, Lennie Lee, and Dan Jones. After their eviction, the space was turned into a museum dedicated to the history of Dada. The work of Lee and Jones remained on the walls of the new museum.\nSeveral notable retrospectives have examined the influence of Dada upon art and society. In 1967, a large Dada retrospective was held in Paris. In 2006, the Museum of Modern Art in New York City mounted a Dada exhibition in partnership with the National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C. and the Centre Pompidou in Paris. The LTM label has released a large number of Dada-related sound recordings, including interviews with artists such as Tzara, Picabia, Schwitters, Arp, and Huelsenbeck, and musical repertoire including Satie, Ribemont-Dessaignes, Picabia, and Nelly van Doesburg.\nMusician Frank Zappa was a self-proclaimed Dadaist after learning of the movement:In the early days, I didn't even know what to call the stuff my life was made of. You can imagine my delight when I discovered that someone in a distant land had the same idea\u2014AND a nice, short name for it.\nArt techniques developed.\nDadaism also blurred the line between literary and visual arts:\nDada is the groundwork to abstract art and sound poetry, a starting point for performance art, a prelude to postmodernism, an influence on pop art, a celebration of antiart to be later embraced for anarcho-political uses in the 1960s and the movement that laid the foundation for Surrealism.\nCollage.\nThe Dadaists imitated the techniques developed during the cubist movement through the pasting of cut pieces of paper items, but extended their art to encompass items such as transportation tickets, maps, plastic wrappers, etc. to portray aspects of life, rather than representing objects viewed as still life. They also invented the \u201cchance collage\" technique, involving dropping torn scraps of paper onto a larger sheet and then pasting the pieces wherever they landed.\nCut-up technique.\nCut-up technique is an extension of collage to words themselves, Tristan Tzara describes this in the Dada Manifesto:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 2em;\"&gt;\nTO MAKE A DADAIST POEM\nTake a newspaper.\nTake some scissors.\nChoose from this paper an article of the length you want to make your poem.\nCut out the article.\nNext carefully cut out each of the words that makes up this article and put them all in a bag.\nShake gently.\nNext take out each cutting one after the other.\nCopy conscientiously in the order in which they left the bag.\nThe poem will resemble you.\nAnd there you are \u2013 an infinitely original author of charming sensibility, even though unappreciated by the vulgar herd.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nPhotomontage.\nThe Dadaists \u2013 the \"monteurs\" (mechanics) \u2013 used scissors and glue rather than paintbrushes and paints to express their views of modern life through images presented by the media. A variation on the collage technique, photomontage utilized actual or reproductions of real photographs printed in the press. In Cologne, Max Ernst used images from the First World War to illustrate messages of the destruction of war.\nAssemblage.\nThe assemblages were three-dimensional variations of the collage \u2013 the assembly of everyday objects to produce meaningful or meaningless (relative to the war) pieces of work including war objects and trash. Objects were nailed, screwed or fastened together in different fashions. Assemblages could be seen in the round or could be hung on a wall.\nReadymades.\nMarcel Duchamp began to view the manufactured objects of his collection as objects of art, which he called \"readymades\". He would add signatures and titles to some, converting them into artwork that he called \"readymade aided\" or \"rectified readymades\". Duchamp wrote: \"One important characteristic was the short sentence which I occasionally inscribed on the 'readymade.' That sentence, instead of describing the object like a title, was meant to carry the mind of the spectator towards other regions more verbal. Sometimes I would add a graphic detail of presentation which in order to satisfy my craving for alliterations, would be called 'readymade aided.'\" One such example of Duchamp's readymade works is the urinal that was turned onto its back, signed \"R. Mutt\", titled \"Fountain\", and submitted to the Society of Independent Artists exhibition that year, though it was not displayed.\nReferences.\nSources\nExternal links.\nManifestos"}
{"id": "8241", "revid": "12711397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8241", "title": "Debian GNU/Linux", "text": ""}
{"id": "8242", "revid": "40505107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8242", "title": "Debian", "text": "Debian (), also known as Debian GNU/Linux, is a Linux distribution composed of free and open-source software, developed by the community-supported Debian Project, which was established by Ian Murdock on August 16, 1993. The first version of Debian (0.01) was released on September 15, 1993, and its first stable version (1.1) was released on June 17, 1996. The Debian Stable branch is the most popular edition for personal computers and servers. Debian is also the basis for many other distributions, most notably Ubuntu.\nDebian is one of the oldest operating systems based on the Linux kernel. The project is coordinated over the Internet by a team of volunteers guided by the Debian Project Leader and three foundational documents: the Debian Social Contract, the Debian Constitution, and the Debian Free Software Guidelines. New distributions are updated continually, and the next candidate is released after a time-based freeze.\nSince its founding, Debian has been developed openly and distributed freely according to the principles of the GNU Project. Because of this, the Free Software Foundation sponsored the project from November 1994 to November 1995. When the sponsorship ended, the Debian Project formed the nonprofit organization Software in the Public Interest to continue financially supporting development.\nHistory.\nDebian version history.\nDebian distribution codenames are based on the names of characters from the \"Toy Story\" films. Debian's \"unstable\" trunk is named after Sid, a character who regularly destroyed his toys.\nFounding (1993\u20131998).\nDebian was first announced on August 16, 1993, by Ian Murdock, who initially called the system \"the Debian Linux Release\". The word \"Debian\" was formed as a portmanteau of the first name of his then-girlfriend (later ex-wife) Debra Lynn and his own first name. Before Debian's release, the Softlanding Linux System (SLS) had been a popular Linux distribution and the basis for Slackware. The perceived poor maintenance and prevalence of bugs in SLS motivated Murdock to launch a new distribution.\nDebian 0.01, released on September 15, 1993, was the first of several internal releases. Version 0.90 was the first public release, providing support through mailing lists hosted at Pixar. The release included the Debian Linux Manifesto, outlining Murdock's view for the new operating system. In it he called for the creation of a distribution to be maintained openly, in the spirit of Linux and GNU.\nThe Debian project released the 0.9x versions in 1994 and 1995. During this time it was sponsored by the Free Software Foundation for one year. Ian Murdock delegated the base system, the core packages of Debian, to Bruce Perens and Murdock focused on the management of the growing project. The first ports to non-IA-32 architectures began in 1995, and Debian 1.1 was released in 1996. By that time and thanks to Ian Jackson, the dpkg package manager was already an essential part of Debian.\nIn 1996, Bruce Perens assumed the project leadership. Perens was a controversial leader, regarded as authoritarian and strongly attached to Debian. He drafted a social contract and edited suggestions from a month-long discussion into the Debian Social Contract and the Debian Free Software Guidelines. After the FSF withdrew their sponsorship in the midst of the free software vs. open source debate, Perens initiated the creation of the legal umbrella organization Software in the Public Interest instead of seeking renewed involvement with the FSF. He led the conversion of the project from a.out to ELF. He created the BusyBox program to make it possible to run a Debian installer on a single floppy, and wrote a new installer. By the time Debian 1.2 was released, the project had grown to nearly two hundred volunteers. Perens left the project in 1998.\nIan Jackson became the leader in 1998. Debian 2.0 introduced the second official port, m68k. During this time the first port to a non-Linux kernel, Debian GNU/Hurd, was started. On December 2, the first Debian Constitution was ratified.\nLeader election (1999\u20132005).\nFrom 1999, the project leader was elected yearly. The Advanced Packaging Tool was deployed with Debian 2.1. The number of applicants was overwhelming and the project established the new member process. The first Debian derivatives, namely Libranet, Corel Linux and Stormix's Storm Linux, were started in 1999. The 2.2 release in 2000 was dedicated to Joel Klecker, a developer who died of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.\nIn late 2000, the project reorganized the archive with new package \"pools\" and created the \"Testing\" distribution, made up of packages considered stable, to reduce the freeze for the next release. In the same year, developers began holding an annual conference called DebConf with talks and workshops for developers and technical users. In May 2001, Hewlett-Packard announced plans to base its Linux development on Debian.\nIn July 2002, the project released version 3.0, code-named Woody, the first release to include cryptographic software, a free licensed KDE and internationalization. During these last release cycles, the Debian project drew considerable criticism from the free software community because of the long time between stable releases.\nSome events disturbed the project while working on Sarge, as Debian servers were attacked by fire and hackers. One of the most memorable was the Vancouver prospectus. After a meeting held in Vancouver, release manager Steve Langasek announced a plan to reduce the number of supported ports to four in order to shorten future release cycles. There was a large reaction because the proposal looked more like a decision and because such a drop would damage Debian's aim to be \"the universal operating system\".\nSarge and later releases (2005\u2013present).\nThe 3.1 Sarge release was made in June 2005. This release updated 73% of the software and included over 9,000 new packages. A new installer with a modular design, Debian-Installer, allowed installations with RAID, XFS and LVM support, improved hardware detection, made installations easier for novice users, and was translated into almost forty languages. An installation manual and release notes were in ten and fifteen languages respectively. The efforts of Skolelinux, Debian-Med and Debian-Accessibility raised the number of packages that were educational, had a medical affiliation, and ones made for people with disabilities.\nIn 2006, as a result of a much-publicized dispute, Mozilla software was rebranded in Debian, with Firefox forked as Iceweasel and Thunderbird as Icedove. The Mozilla Corporation stated that software with unapproved modifications could not be distributed under the Firefox trademark. Two reasons that Debian modifies the Firefox software are to change the non-free artwork and to provide security patches. In February 2016, it was announced that Mozilla and Debian had reached an agreement and Iceweasel would revert to the name Firefox; similar agreement was anticipated for Icedove/Thunderbird.\nA fund-raising experiment, Dunc-Tank, was created to solve the release cycle problem and release managers were paid to work full-time; in response, unpaid developers slowed down their work and the release was delayed.&lt;br&gt;\nDebian 4.0 (Etch) was released in April 2007, featuring the x86-64 port and a graphical installer.&lt;br&gt;\nDebian 5.0 (Lenny) was released in February 2009, supporting Marvell's Orion platform and netbooks such as the Asus Eee PC. The release was dedicated to Thiemo Seufer, a developer who died in a car crash.\nIn July 2009, the policy of time-based development freezes on a two-year cycle was announced. Time-based freezes are intended to blend the predictability of time based releases with Debian's policy of feature based releases, and to reduce overall freeze time. The Squeeze cycle was going to be especially short; however, this initial schedule was abandoned. In September 2010, the backports service became official, providing more recent versions of some software for the stable release.\nDebian 6.0 (Squeeze) was released in February 2011, introduced Debian GNU/kFreeBSD as a technology preview, featured a dependency-based boot system, and moved problematic firmware to the non-free area.&lt;br&gt;\nDebian 7.0 (Wheezy) was released in May 2013, featuring multiarch support&lt;br&gt;\nDebian 8.0 (Jessie) was released in April 2015, using systemd as the new init system.&lt;br&gt;\nDebian 9.0 (Stretch) was released in June 2017.&lt;br&gt;\nDebian 10.0 (Buster) was released in July 2019. Debian is still in development and new packages are uploaded to \"unstable\" every day.\nDebian used to be released as a very large set of CDs for each architecture, but with the release of Debian 9 (Stretch) in 2017, these have been dropped.\nThroughout Debian's lifetime, both the Debian distribution and its website have won various awards from different organizations, including \"Server Distribution of the Year\" 2011, \"The best Linux distro of 2011\", and a \"Best of the Net\" award for October 1998.\nOn December 2, 2015, Microsoft announced that they would offer Debian GNU/Linux as an endorsed distribution on the Azure cloud platform. Microsoft has also added a user environment to their Windows 10 desktop operating system called Windows Subsystem for Linux that offers a Debian subset.\nFeatures.\nDebian has access to online repositories that contain over 51,000 packages. Debian officially contains only free software, but non-free software can be downloaded and installed from the Debian repositories. Debian includes popular free programs such as LibreOffice, Firefox web browser, Evolution mail, K3b disc burner, VLC media player, GIMP image editor, and Evince document viewer. Debian is a popular choice for servers, for example as the operating system component of a LAMP stack.\nKernels.\nSeveral flavors of the Linux kernel exist for each port. For example, the i386 port has flavors for IA-32 PCs supporting Physical Address Extension and real-time computing, for older PCs, and for x86-64 PCs. The Linux kernel does not officially contain firmware without sources, although such firmware is available in non-free packages and alternative installation media.\nDesktop environments.\nDebian offers CD and DVD images specifically built for XFCE, GNOME, KDE, MATE, Cinnamon, LXDE, and LXQT. MATE is officially supported, while Cinnamon support was added with Debian 8.0 Jessie. Less common window managers such as Enlightenment, Openbox, Fluxbox, IceWM, Window Maker and others are available.\nThe default desktop environment of version 7.0 Wheezy was temporarily switched to Xfce, because GNOME 3 did not fit on the first CD of the set. The default for the version 8.0 Jessie was changed again to Xfce in November 2013, and back to GNOME in September 2014.\nLocalization.\nSeveral parts of Debian are translated into languages other than American English, including package descriptions, configuration messages, documentation and the website. The level of software localization depends on the language, ranging from the highly supported German and French to the barely translated Creek and Samoan. The Debian 10 installer is available in 76 languages.\nMultimedia support.\nMultimedia support has been problematic in Debian regarding codecs threatened by possible patent infringements, without sources or under too restrictive licenses, and regarding technologies such as Adobe Flash. Even though packages with problems related to their distribution could go into the non-free area, software such as libdvdcss is not hosted at Debian.\nA notable third party repository exists, formerly named debian-multimedia.org, providing software not present in Debian such as Windows codecs, libdvdcss and the Adobe Flash Player. Even though this repository is maintained by Christian Marillat, a Debian developer, it is not part of the project and is not hosted on a Debian server. The repository provides packages already included in Debian, interfering with the official maintenance. Eventually, project leader Stefano Zacchiroli asked Marillat to either settle an agreement about the packaging or to stop using the \"Debian\" name. Marillat chose the latter and renamed the repository to deb-multimedia.org. The repository was so popular that the switchover was announced by the official blog of the Debian project.\nDistribution.\nDebian offers DVD and CD images for installation that can be downloaded using BitTorrent or jigdo. Physical discs can also be bought from retailers. The full sets are made up of several discs (the amd64 port consists of 13 DVDs or 84 CDs), but only the first disc is required for installation, as the installer can retrieve software not contained in the first disc image from online repositories.\nDebian offers different network installation methods. A minimal install of Debian is available via the \"netinst\" CD, whereby Debian is installed with just a base and later added software can be downloaded from the Internet. Another option is to boot the installer from the network.\nThe default bootstrap loader is GNU GRUB version 2, though the package name is simply grub, while version 1 was renamed to grub-legacy. This conflicts with (e.g, Fedora), where grub version 2 is named grub2.\nThe default desktop may be chosen from the DVD boot menu among GNOME, KDE Plasma, Xfce and LXDE, and from special disc 1 CDs.\nDebian releases live install images for CDs, DVDs and USB thumb drives, for IA-32 and x86-64 architectures, and with a choice of desktop environments. These \"Debian Live\" images allow users to boot from removable media and run Debian without affecting the contents of their computer. A full install of Debian to the computer's hard drive can be initiated from the live image environment. Personalized images can be built with the live-build tool for discs, USB drives and for network booting purposes. Installation images are hybrid on some architectures and can be used to create a bootable USB drive (Live USB).\nPackages.\nPackage management operations can be performed with different tools available on Debian, from the lowest level command dpkg to graphical front-ends like Synaptic. The recommended standard for administering packages on a Debian system is the apt toolset.\ndpkg provides the low-level infrastructure for package management. The dpkg database contains the list of installed software on the current system. The dpkg command tool does not know about repositories. The command can work with local .deb package files, and information from the dpkg database.\nAPT tools.\nAn Advanced Packaging Tool (APT) allows administering an installed Debian system to retrieve and resolve package dependencies from repositories. APT share dependency information and cached packages.\nGDebi and other front-ends.\nGDebi is an APT tool which can be used in command-line and on the GUI. GDebi can install a local .deb file via the command line like the dpkg command, but with access to repositories to resolve dependencies. Other graphical front-ends for APT include Software Center, Synaptic and Apper.\nGNOME Software is a graphical front-end for PackageKit, which itself can work on top of various software packaging systems.\nRepositories.\nThe Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG) define the distinctive meaning of the word \"free\" as in \"free and open-source software\". Packages that comply with these guidelines, usually under the GNU General Public License, Modified BSD License or Artistic License, are included inside the \"main\" area; otherwise, they are included inside the \"non-free\" and \"contrib\" areas. These last two areas are not distributed within the official installation media, but they can be adopted manually.\nNon-free includes packages that do not comply with the DFSG, such as documentation with invariant sections and proprietary software, and legally questionable packages. Contrib includes packages which do comply with the DFSG but fail other requirements. For example, they may depend on packages which are in non-free or requires such for building them.\nRichard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation have criticized the Debian project for hosting the non-free repository and because the contrib and non-free areas are easily accessible, an opinion echoed by some in Debian including the former project leader Wichert Akkerman. The internal dissent in the Debian project regarding the non-free section has persisted, but the last time it came to a vote in 2004, the majority decided to keep it.\nBranches.\nThree branches of Debian (also called \"releases\", \"distributions\" or \"suites\") are regularly maintained:\nOther branches in Debian:\nThe \"snapshot\" archive provides older versions of the branches. They may be used to install a specific older version of some software.\nNumbering scheme.\n\"Stable\" and \"oldstable\" get minor updates, called \"point releases\"; , the \"stable\" release is version 10.8, released on , and the \"oldstable\" release is version 9.13\nThe numbering scheme for the point releases up to Debian 4.0 was to include the letter \"r\" (for \"revision\") after the main version number and then the number of the point release; for example, the latest point release of version 4.0 is 4.0r9. This scheme was chosen because a new dotted version would make the old one look obsolete and vendors would have trouble selling their CDs.\nFrom Debian 5.0, the numbering scheme of point releases was changed, conforming to the GNU version numbering standard; the first point release of Debian 5.0 was 5.0.1 instead of 5.0r1. The numbering scheme was once again changed for the first Debian 7 update, which was version 7.1. The \"r\" scheme is no longer in use, but point release announcements include a note about not throwing away old CDs.\nDerivatives and flavors.\nDebian is one of the most popular Linux distributions, and many other distributions have been created from the Debian codebase. , DistroWatch lists 141 active Debian derivatives. The Debian project provides its derivatives with guidelines for best practices and encourages derivatives to merge their work back into Debian.\nDebian Pure Blends are subsets of a Debian release configured out-of-the-box for users with particular skills and interests. For example, Debian Jr. is made for children, while Debian Science is for researchers and scientists. The complete Debian distribution includes all available Debian Pure Blends. \"Debian Blend\" (without \"Pure\") is a term for a Debian-based distribution that strives to become part of mainstream Debian, and have its extra features included in future releases.\nDebian GNU/kFreeBSD is a discontinued Debian flavor. It used the FreeBSD kernel and GNU userland. The majority of software in Debian GNU/kFreeBSD was built from the same sources as Debian, with some kernel packages from FreeBSD. The \"k\" in \"kFreeBSD\" is an abbreviation for \"kernel\", which refers to the FreeBSD kernel. Before discontinuing the project, Debian maintained i386 and amd64 ports. The last version of Debian kFreeBSD was Debian 8 (Jessie) RC3. Debian GNU/kFreeBSD was created in 2002. It was included in Debian 6.0 (Squeeze) as a technology preview, and in Debian 7.0 (Wheezy) as an official port. Debian GNU/kFreeBSD was discontinued as an officially supported platform as of Debian 8.0. Debian developers cited OSS, pf, jails, NDIS, and ZFS as reasons for being interested in the FreeBSD kernel. It has not been updated since Debian 8. As of July 2019, however, the operating system continues to be maintained unofficially.\nDebian GNU/Hurd is a flavor based on the Hurd microkernel, instead of Linux. Debian GNU/Hurd has been in development since 1998, and made a formal release in May 2013, with 78% of the software packaged for Debian GNU/Linux ported to the GNU Hurd. Hurd is not yet an official Debian release, and is maintained and developed as an unofficial port. Debian GNU/Hurd is distributed as an installer CD (running the official Debian installer) or ready-to-run virtual disk image (Live CD, Live USB). The CD uses the IA-32 architecture, making it compatible with IA-32 and x86-64 PCs. The current version of Debian GNU/Hurd is 2019, published in July 2019.\nBranding.\nThe Debian \"swirl\" logo was designed by Raul Silva in 1999 as part of a contest to replace the semi-official logo that had been used. The winner of the contest received an @debian.org email address, and a set of Debian 2.1 install CDs for the architecture of their choice. There has been no official statement from the Debian project on the logo's meaning, but at the time of the logo's selection, it was suggested that the logo represented the magic smoke ( or the genie ) that made computers work.\nOne theory about the origin of the Debian logo is that Buzz Lightyear, the chosen character for the first named Debian release, has a swirl in his chin. Stefano Zacchiroli also suggested that this swirl is the Debian one. Buzz Lightyear's swirl is a more likely candidate as the codenames for Debian are names of Toy Story characters. The former Debian project leader Bruce Perens used to work for Pixar and is credited as a studio tools engineer on \"Toy Story 2\" (1999).\nHardware.\nHardware requirements are at least those of the kernel and the GNU toolsets. Debian's recommended system requirements depend on the level of installation, which corresponds to increased numbers of installed components:\nThe real minimum memory requirements depend on the architecture and may be much less than the numbers listed in this table. It is possible to install Debian with 170\u00a0MB of RAM for x86-64; the installer will run in low memory mode and it is recommended to create a swap partition. The installer for z/Architecture requires about 20\u00a0MB of RAM, but relies on network hardware. Similarly, disk space requirements, which depend on the packages to be installed, can be reduced by manually selecting the packages needed. , no Pure Blend exists that would lower the hardware requirements easily.\nIt is possible to run graphical user interfaces on older or low-end systems, but the installation of window managers instead of desktop environments is recommended, as desktop environments are more resource intensive. Requirements for individual software vary widely and must be considered, with those of the base operating environment.\nArchitectures.\n, the official ports are:\nUnofficial ports are available as part of the \"unstable\" distribution:\nDebian supports a variety of ARM-based NAS devices. The NSLU2 was supported by the installer in Debian 4.0 and 5.0, and Martin Michlmayr is providing installation tarballs since version 6.0. Other supported NAS devices are the Buffalo Kurobox Pro, GLAN Tank, Thecus N2100 and QNAP Turbo Stations.\nDevices based on the Kirkwood system on a chip (SoC) are supported too, such as the SheevaPlug plug computer and OpenRD products. There are efforts to run Debian on mobile devices, but this is not a project goal yet since the Debian Linux kernel maintainers would not apply the needed patches. Nevertheless, there are packages for resource-limited systems.\nThere are efforts to support Debian on wireless access points. Debian is known to run on set-top boxes. Work is ongoing to support the AM335x processor, which is used in electronic point of service solutions. Debian may be customized to run on cash machines.\nBeagleBoard, a low-power open-source hardware single-board computer (made by Texas Instruments) has switched to Debian Linux preloaded on its Beaglebone Black board's flash.\nRoqos Core, manufactured by Roqos, is a x86-64 based IPS firewall router running Debian Linux.\nOrganization.\nDebian's policies and team efforts focus on collaborative software development and testing processes. As a result, a new major release tends to occur every two years with revision releases that fix security issues and important problems. The Debian project is a volunteer organization with three foundational documents:\nDebian developers are organized in a web of trust. There are about one thousand active Debian developers, but it is possible to contribute to the project without being an official developer.\nThe project maintains official mailing lists and conferences for communication and coordination between developers. For issues with single packages and other tasks, a public bug tracking system is used by developers and end users. Internet Relay Chat channels (primarily on the Open and Free Technology Community (OFTC) and freenode networks) are also used for communication among developers and to provide real time help.\nDebian is supported by donations made to organizations authorized by the leader. The largest supporter is Software in the Public Interest, the owner of the Debian trademark, manager of the monetary donations and umbrella organization for various other community free software projects.\nA Project Leader is elected once per year by the developers. The leader has special powers, but they are not absolute, and appoints delegates to perform specialized tasks. Delegates make decisions as they think is best, taking into account technical criteria and consensus. By way of a General Resolution, the developers may recall the leader, reverse a decision made by the leader or a delegate, amend foundational documents and make other binding decisions. The voting method is based on the Schulze method (Cloneproof Schwartz Sequential Dropping).\nProject leadership is distributed occasionally. Branden Robinson was helped by the Project Scud, a team of developers that assisted the leader, but there were concerns that such leadership would split Debian into two developer classes. Anthony Towns created a supplemental position, Second In Charge (2IC), that shared some powers of the leader. Steve McIntyre was 2IC and had a 2IC himself.\nOne important role in Debian's leadership is that of a release manager. The release team sets goals for the next release, supervises the processes and decides when to release. The team is led by the next release managers and stable release managers. Release assistants were introduced in 2003.\nDevelopers.\nThe Debian Project has an influx of applicants wishing to become developers. These applicants must undergo a vetting process which establishes their identity, motivation, understanding of the project's principles, and technical competence. This process has become much harder throughout the years.\nDebian developers join the project for many reasons. Some that have been cited include:\nDebian developers may resign their positions at any time or, when deemed necessary, they can be expelled. Those who follow the retiring protocol are granted the \"emeritus\" status and they may regain their membership through a shortened new member process.\nDevelopment.\nFlowchart of the life cycle of a Debian package\nEach software package has a \"maintainer\" that may be either one person or a team of Debian developers and non-developer maintainers. The maintainer keeps track of upstream releases, and ensures that the package coheres with the rest of the distribution and meets the standards of quality of Debian. Packages may include modifications introduced by Debian to achieve compliance with Debian Policy, even to fix non-Debian specific bugs, although coordination with upstream developers is advised.\nThe maintainer releases a new version by uploading the package to the \"incoming\" system, which verifies the integrity of the packages and their digital signatures. If the package is found to be valid, it is installed in the package archive into an area called the \"pool\" and distributed every day to hundreds of mirrors worldwide. The upload must be signed using OpenPGP-compatible software. All Debian developers have individual cryptographic key pairs. Developers are responsible for any package they upload even if the packaging was prepared by another contributor.\nInitially, an accepted package is only available in the \"unstable\" branch. For a package to become a candidate for the next release, it must migrate to the \"Testing\" branch by meeting the following:\nThus, a release-critical bug in a new version of a shared library on which many packages depend may prevent those packages from entering \"Testing\", because the updated library must meet the requirements too. From the branch viewpoint, the migration process happens twice per day, rendering \"Testing\" in perpetual beta.\nPeriodically, the release team publishes guidelines to the developers in order to ready the release. A new release occurs after a freeze, when all important software is reasonably up-to-date in the \"Testing\" branch and any other significant issues are solved. At that time, all packages in the \"testing\" branch become the new \"stable\" branch. Although freeze dates are time-based, release dates are not, which are announced by the release managers a couple of weeks beforehand.\nA version of a package can belong to more than one branch, usually \"testing\" and \"unstable\". It is possible for a package to keep the same version between stable releases and be part of \"oldstable\", \"stable\", \"testing\" and \"unstable\" at the same time. Each branch can be seen as a collection of pointers into the package \"pool\" mentioned above.\nRelease cycle.\nA new \"stable\" branch of Debian gets released approximately every 2 years. It will receive official support for about 3 years with update for major security or usability fixes. Point releases will be available every several months as determined by Stable Release Managers (SRM).\nDebian also launched its Long Term Support (LTS) project since Debian 6 (Debian Squeeze). For each Debian release, it will receive two years of extra security updates provided by LTS Team after its End Of Life (EOL). However, no point releases will be made. Now each Debian release can receive 5 years of security support in total.\nSecurity.\nThe Debian project handles security through public disclosure. Debian security advisories are compatible with the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures dictionary, are usually coordinated with other free software vendors and are published the same day a vulnerability is made public. There used to be a security audit project that focused on packages in the stable release looking for security bugs; Steve Kemp, who started the project, retired in 2011 but resumed his activities and applied to rejoin in 2014.\nThe \"stable\" branch is supported by the Debian security team; \"oldstable\" is supported for one year. Although Squeeze is not officially supported, Debian is coordinating an effort to provide long-term support (LTS) until February 2016, five years after the initial release, but only for the IA-32 and x86-64 platforms. \"Testing\" is supported by the \"testing\" security team, but does not receive updates in as timely a manner as \"stable\". \"Unstable\"s security is left for the package maintainers.\nThe Debian project offers documentation and tools to harden a Debian installation both manually and automatically. AppArmor support is available and enabled by default since Buster. Debian provides an optional hardening wrapper, and does not harden all of its software by default using gcc features such as PIE and buffer overflow protection, unlike operating systems such as OpenBSD, but tries to build as many packages as possible with hardening flags.\nIn May 2008, a Debian developer discovered that the OpenSSL package distributed with Debian and derivatives such as Ubuntu made a variety of security keys vulnerable to a random number generator attack, since only 32,767 different keys were generated. The security weakness was caused by changes made in 2006 by another Debian developer in response to memory debugger warnings. The complete resolution procedure was cumbersome because patching the security hole was not enough; it involved regenerating all affected keys and certificates.\nValue.\nThe cost of developing all of the packages included in Debian 5.0 Lenny (323 million lines of code) has been estimated to be about , using one method based on the COCOMO model. , Black Duck Open Hub estimates that the current codebase (74 million lines of code) would cost about to develop, using a different method based on the same model.\nForks and derivatives.\nA large number of forks and derivatives have been built upon Debian over the years. Among the more notable are Ubuntu, developed by Canonical Ltd. and first released in 2004, which has surpassed Debian in popularity with desktop users; Knoppix, first released in the year 2000 and one of the first distributions optimized to boot from external storage; and Devuan, which gained attention in 2014 when it forked in disagreement over Debian's adoption of the systemd software suite, and has been mirroring Debian releases since 2017."}
{"id": "8243", "revid": "15428987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8243", "title": "Doonesbury", "text": "Doonesbury is a comic strip by American cartoonist Garry Trudeau that chronicles the adventures and lives of an array of characters of various ages, professions, and backgrounds, from the President of the United States to the title character, Michael Doonesbury, who has progressed from a college student to a youthful senior citizen over the decades.\nCreated in \"the throes of '60s and '70s counterculture,\" and frequently political in nature, \"Doonesbury\" features characters representing a range of affiliations, but the cartoon is noted for a liberal viewpoint. The name \"Doonesbury\" is a combination of the word \"doone\" (prep school slang for someone who is clueless, inattentive, or careless) and the surname of Charles Pillsbury, Trudeau's roommate at Yale University.\n\"Doonesbury\" is written and penciled by Garry Trudeau, then inked and lettered by an assistant: Don Carlton\nthen Todd Pound. Sunday strips are colored by George Corsillo. A daily strip through most of its existence, since February 2014 \"Doonesbury\" has run repeat strips Monday through Saturday, and new strips on Sunday.\nHistory.\n\"Doonesbury\" began as a continuation of \"Bull Tales\", which appeared in the Yale University student newspaper, the \"Yale Daily News\", from 1968 to 1970. It focused on local campus events at Yale.\n\"Doonesbury\" proper debuted as a daily strip in twenty-eight newspapers on October 26, 1970 (it being the first strip from Universal Press Syndicate). A Sunday strip began on March 21, 1971. Many of the early strips were reprints of the \"Bull Tales\" cartoons, with some changes to the drawings and plots. B. D.'s helmet changed from having a \"Y\" (for Yale) to a star (for the fictional Walden College). Mike and B. D. started \"Doonesbury\" as roommates; they were not roommates in \"Bull Tales\".\n\"Doonesbury\" became known for its social and political commentary. As of the mid-2010s it is syndicated in approximately 1,400 newspapers worldwide.\nIn May 1975, \"Doonesbury\" became the first daily comic strip to win a Pulitzer Prize, taking the award for Editorial Cartooning. That year, US President Gerald Ford told the Radio and Television Correspondents' Association at their annual dinner, \"There are only three major vehicles to keep us informed as to what is going on in Washington: the electronic media, the print media, and \"Doonesbury\", not necessarily in that order.\"\nIn 1977, Trudeau wrote a script for a 26-minute animated special, \"A Doonesbury Special\", which was produced and directed by Trudeau along with John Hubley (who died during the storyboarding stage) and Faith Hubley. The special was first broadcast by NBC on November 27, 1977. It won a Special Jury Award at the Cannes International Film Festival for best short film, and received an Oscar nomination (for best animated short film), both in 1978. Voice actors for the special included Barbara Harris, William Sloane Coffin, Jr., Jack Gilford and Will Jordan. Also included were two songs \"sung\" by the character Jimmy Thudpucker (actually actor/singer/songwriter/producer James Allen \"Jimmy\" Brewer), entitled \"Stop in the Middle\" and \"I Do Believe\", also part of the \"Special\". While the compositions and performances were credited to \"Jimmy Thudpucker\", they were in fact co-written and sung by Brewer, who also co-wrote and provided the vocals for \"Ginny's Song\", a 1976 single on the Warner Bros. label, and \"Jimmy Thudpucker's Greatest Hits\", an LP released by Windsong Records, John Denver's subsidiary of RCA Records.\n1983\u20131984 hiatus.\nTrudeau took a 22-month hiatus, from January 1983 to October 1984. Before the break in the strip, the characters were eternal college students, living in a commune together near Walden College, which was modeled after Trudeau's alma mater, Yale. During the break, Trudeau helped create a Broadway musical of the strip, showing the graduation of the main characters. The Broadway adaptation opened at the Biltmore Theatre on November 21, 1983, and played 104 performances. Elizabeth Swados composed the music for Trudeau's book and lyrics.\nAfter the hiatus.\nThe strip resumed some time after the events in the musical, with further changes having taken place after the end of the musical's plot. While Mike, Mark, Zonker, B.D., and Boopsie were all now graduates, B.D. and Boopsie were living in Malibu, California, where B.D. was a third-string quarterback for the Los Angeles Rams, and Boopsie was making a living from walk-on and cameo roles. Mark was living in Washington, DC, working for National Public Radio. Michael and J.J. had gotten married, and Mike had dropped out of business school to start work in an advertising agency in New York City. Zonker, still not ready for the \"real world\", was living with Mike and J.J. until he was accepted as a medical student at his Uncle Duke's \"Baby Doc College\" in Haiti.\nPrior to the hiatus, the strip's characters had aged only slightly. But when Trudeau returned to \"Doonesbury,\" the characters began to age in something close to real time, as in \"Gasoline Alley\" and \"For Better or for Worse.\" Since then, the main characters' ages and career developments have tracked that of standard media portrayals of baby boomers, with jobs in advertising, law enforcement, and the dot-com boom. Current events are mirrored through the original characters, their offspring (the \"second generation\"), and occasional new characters.\nGarry Trudeau received the National Cartoonist Society Newspaper Comic Strip Award for 1994, and their Reuben Award for 1995 for his work on the strip.\n\"Alpha House\" and hiatuses: 2013.\n\"Doonesbury\"'s syndicate, Universal Uclick, announced on May 29, 2013, that the comic strip would go on hiatus from June 10 to Labor Day of that year while Garry Trudeau worked on his streaming video comedy \"Alpha House\", which was picked up by Amazon Studios. \"Doonesbury Flashbacks\" were offered during those weeks, but due to the unusually long hiatus, some newspapers opted to run different comic strips instead. Sunday strips returned as scheduled, but the daily strip's hiatus was extended until November 2013.\nAfter \"Alpha House\" was retained for a second season in February 2014, Trudeau announced that he would now produce only Sunday strips for the foreseeable future. Since March 3, 2014, the strip has offered reruns starting from the very beginning of its history as opposed to the recent ones that re-run when Trudeau is on vacation.\nThough \"Alpha House\" was cancelled following its second season and has not been in production since 2014, Trudeau has not returned to creating new daily \"Doonesbury\" strips.\nIn a 2018 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Trudeau said that while Donald Trump appears in only a limited number of strips, \"for the last two years, he's been subtext in almost all of them.\"\nStyle.\nWith the exception of Walden College, Trudeau has frequently used real-life settings, based on real scenarios, but with fictional results. Because of lead times, real-world events have rendered some of Trudeau's comics unusable, such as a 1973 series featuring John Ehrlichman, a 1989 series set in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, China, a 1993 series involving Zo\u00eb Baird, and a 2005 series involving Harriet Miers. Trudeau has also displayed fluency in various forms of jargon, including those of real estate agents, flight attendants, computer scientists, journalists, presidential aides, and soldiers in Iraq.\nWalden College.\nThe unnamed college attended by the main characters was later given the name \"Walden College\", revealed to be in Connecticut (the same state as Yale), and depicted as devolving into a third-rate institution under the weight of grade inflation, slipping academic standards, and the end of tenure, issues that Trudeau has consistently revisited since the original characters graduated. Some of the second generation of \"Doonesbury\" characters have attended Walden, a venue Trudeau uses to advance his concerns about academic standards in the United States.\nPresident King, the leader of Walden College, was originally intended as a parody of Kingman Brewster, President of Yale, but all that remains of that is a certain physical resemblance.\nUse of real-life politicians as characters.\nEven though \"Doonesbury\" frequently features real-life U.S. politicians, they are rarely depicted with their real faces. Originally, strips featuring the President of the United States would show an external view of the White House, with dialogue emerging from inside. During the Gerald Ford administration, characters would be shown speaking to Ford at press conferences, and fictional dialogue supposedly spoken by Ford would be written as coming \"off-panel\". Similarly, while having several characters as students in a class taught by Henry Kissinger, the dialogue made up for Kissinger would also come from \"off-panel\" (although Kissinger had earlier appeared as a character with his face shown in a 1972 series of strips in which he met Mark Slackmeyer while the latter was on a trip to Washington). Sometimes hands, or in rare cases, the back of heads would also be seen.\nLater, personal symbols reflecting some aspect of their character came into use. For example, during the 1980s, character Ron Headrest served as a doppelg\u00e4nger for Ronald Reagan and was depicted as a computer-generated artificial-intelligence, an image based on the television character \"Max Headroom\". Members of the Bush family have been depicted as invisible. During his term as Vice President, George H. W. Bush was first depicted as completely invisible, his words emanating from a little \"voice box\" in the air. (In one strip, published March 20, 1988, the vice president almost materialized, but only made it to an outline before reverting to invisibility.)\nGeorge W. Bush was symbolized by a Stetson hat atop the same invisible point, because he was Governor of Texas prior to his presidency (Trudeau accused him of being \"all hat and no cattle\", reiterating the characterization of Bush by columnist Molly Ivins). The point became a giant asterisk (a la Roger Maris) following the 2000 presidential elections and the controversy over vote-counting. Later, President Bush's hat was changed to a Roman military helmet (again, atop an asterisk) representing imperialism. Towards the end of his first term, the helmet became battered, with the gilt work starting to come off and with clumps of bristles missing from the top. By late 2008, the helmet had been dented almost beyond recognition. No symbol for Barack Obama has appeared in the strip; the May 30, 2009, strip had Obama and an aide wondering what the reason for this might be (off panel).\nOther symbols include a waffle for Bill Clinton (chosen by popular vote\u2014the other possibility had been a flipping coin), an unexploded (but sometimes lit) bomb for Newt Gingrich, a feather for Dan Quayle, and a giant groping hand for Arnold Schwarzenegger (who is addressed by other characters as \"Herr Gr\u00f6penfuhrer\", a reference to accusations of sexual assault against Schwarzenegger). Many less well-known politicians have also been represented as icons over the years, like a swastika for David Duke, but only for the purposes of a gag strip or two. Trudeau has made his use of icons something of an in joke to readers, where the first appearance of a new one is often a punchline in itself.\nThe long career of the series and continual use of real-life political figures, analysts note, have led to some uncanny cases of the cartoon foreshadowing a national shift in the politicians' political fortunes. Tina Gianoulis in \"St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture\" observes that \"In 1971, well before the conservative Reagan years, a forward-looking BD called Ronald Reagan his 'hero.' In 1984, almost ten years before Congressman Newt Gingrich became Speaker of the House, another character worried that he would 'wake up someday in a country run by Newt Gingrich.'\" In 1999, Donald Trump was depicted as a presidential candidate. In its 2003 series \"John Kerry: A Candidate in the Making\" on the 2004 presidential race, the \"Boston Globe\" reprinted and discussed 1971 \"Doonesbury\" cartoons of the young Kerry's Vietnam War protest speeches.\nCharacters.\n\"Doonesbury\" has a large group of recurring characters, with 24 currently listed at the strip's website. There, it notes that \"readers new to \"Doonesbury\" sometimes experience a temporary bout of character shock,\" as the sheer number of characters (and the historical connections among them) can be overwhelming.\nThe main characters are a group who attended the fictional Walden College during the strip's first 12 years, and moved into a commune together in April 1972. Most of the other characters first appeared as family members, friends, or other acquaintances. The original Walden Commune residents were Mike Doonesbury, Zonker Harris, Mark Slackmeyer, Nicole, Bernie, and DiDi. In September 1972, Joanie Caucus joined the comic, meeting Mike and Mark in Colorado and eventually moving into the commune. They were later joined by B.D. and his girlfriend (later wife) Boopsie, upon B.D.'s return from Vietnam. Nicole, DiDi, and Bernie were mostly phased out in subsequent years, and Zonker's Uncle Duke was introduced as the most prominent character outside the Walden group, and the main link to many secondary characters.\nThe Walden students graduated in 1983, after which the strip began to progress in something closer to real time. Their spouses and developing families became more important after this: Joanie's daughter J.J. Caucus married Mike and they had a daughter, Alex Doonesbury. They divorced, Mike married Kim Rosenthal, a Vietnamese refugee (who had appeared in the strip as a baby adopted by a Jewish family just after the fall of Saigon; see Operation Babylift), and J.J. married Zeke Brenner, her former boyfriend and Uncle Duke's former groundskeeper. Joanie married Rick Redfern, and they had a son, Jeff. Uncle Duke and Roland Hedley have also appeared often, frequently in more topical settings unconnected to the main characters. In more recent years the second generation has taken prominence as they have grown to college age: Jeff Redfern, Alex Doonesbury, Zonker's nephew Zipper Harris, and Uncle Duke's son Earl.\nControversies.\n\"Doonesbury\" has delved into a number of political and social issues, causing controversies and breaking new ground on the comics pages. Among the controversies:\nCriticism.\nCharles M. Schulz of \"Peanuts\" called Trudeau \"unprofessional\" for taking a long sabbatical. (See also, similar comments by Schulz about sabbaticals taken by Bill Watterson.) Nor was the return of the strip itself greeted with universal acclaim; in 1985, \"Saturday Review\" listed Trudeau as one of the country's \"Most Overrated People in American Arts and Letters,\" commenting that the \"most publicized return since MacArthur's has produced a strip that is predictable, mean-spirited, and not as funny as before.\"\n\"Doonesbury\" has angered, irritated, or been rebuked by many of the political figures that have appeared or been referred to in the strip over the years. A 1984 series of strips showing Vice President George H.W. Bush placing his manhood in a blind trust\u2014in parody of Bush's use of that financial instrument to fend off concerns that his governmental decisions would be influenced by his investment holdings\u2014brought the politician to complain, \"\"Doonesbury\"'s carrying water for the opposition. Trudeau is coming out of deep left field.\"\nSome conservatives have intensely criticized \"Doonesbury\". Several examples are cited in the Milestones section of the strip's website. The strip has also met criticism from its readers almost since it began syndicated publication. For example, when Lacey Davenport's husband Dick, in the last moments before his death, calls on God, several conservative pundits called the strip blasphemous. The sequence of Dick Davenport's final bird-watching and fatal heart attack was run in November 1986.\nLiberal politicians skewered by Trudeau in the strip have also complained, including Democrats such as former U.S. House Speaker Tip O'Neill and California Governor Jerry Brown.\nStrips about America's wars have also generated controversy, including Vietnam, Grenada, Panama and both Gulf Wars.\nAfter many letter-writing campaigns demanding the removal of the strip were unsuccessful, conservatives changed their tactics, and instead of writing to newspaper editors, they began writing to one of the printers who prints the color Sunday comics. In 2005, Continental Features gave in to their demands, and refused to continue printing the Sunday \"Doonesbury\", causing it to disappear from the 38 Sunday papers that Continental Features printed. Of the 38, only one newspaper, \"The Anniston Star\" in Anniston, Alabama, continued to carry the Sunday \"Doonesbury\", though of necessity in black and white.\nSome newspapers have dealt with the criticism by moving the strip from the comics page to the editorial page, because many people believe that a politically based comic strip like \"Doonesbury\" does not belong in a traditionally child-friendly comics section. The \"Lincoln Journal\" started the trend in 1973. In some papers (such as the \"Tulsa World\" and \"Orlando Sentinel\") \"Doonesbury\" appears on the opinions page alongside \"Mallard Fillmore\", a politically conservative comic strip."}
{"id": "8244", "revid": "63601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8244", "title": "Dice", "text": "Dice (singular die or dice) are small, throwable objects with marked sides that can rest in multiple positions. They are used for generating random numbers, commonly as part of tabletop games, including dice games, board games, role-playing games, and games of chance.\nA traditional die is a cube with each of its six faces marked with a different number of dots (pips) from one to six. When thrown or rolled, the die comes to rest showing a random integer from one to six on its upper surface, with each value being equally likely. Dice may also have polyhedral or irregular shapes and may have faces marked with numerals or symbols instead of pips. Loaded dice are designed to favor some results over others for cheating or entertainment.\nHistory.\nDice have been used since before recorded history, and it is uncertain where they originated. It is theorized that dice developed from the practice of fortune-telling with the talus of hoofed animals, colloquially known as knucklebones. The Egyptian game of senet was played with flat two-sided throwsticks which indicated the number of squares a player could move, and thus functioned as a form of dice. Senet was played before 3000\u00a0BC and up to the 2nd century AD. Perhaps the oldest known dice were excavated as part of a backgammon-like game set at the Burnt City, an archeological site in south-eastern Iran, estimated to be from between 2800 and 2500\u00a0BC. Bone dice from Skara Brae have been dated to 3100\u20132400\u00a0BC. Excavations from graves at Mohenjo-daro, an Indus Valley civilization settlement, unearthed terracotta dice dating to 2500\u20131900\u00a0BC.\nGames involving dice are mentioned in the ancient Indian \"Rigveda\", \"Atharvaveda,\" \"Mahabharata\" and Buddhist games list. There are several biblical references to \"casting lots\" ( \"yapp\u00eel\u016b \u1e21\u014dr\u0101l\"), as in Psalm 22, indicating that dicing (or a related activity) was commonplace when the psalm was composed. Knucklebones was a game of skill played in ancient Greece; a derivative form had the four sides of bones receive different values like modern dice.\nAlthough gambling was illegal, many Romans were passionate gamblers who enjoyed dicing, which was known as \"aleam ludere\" (\"to play at dice\"). There were two sizes of Roman dice. \"Tali\" were large dice inscribed with one, three, four, and six on four sides. \"Tesserae\" were smaller dice with sides numbered from one to six. Twenty-sided dice date back to the 2nd\u00a0century AD and from Ptolemaic Egypt as early as the 2nd century\u00a0BC.\nDominoes and playing cards originated in China as developments from dice. The transition from dice to playing cards occurred in China around the Tang dynasty, and coincides with the technological transition from rolls of manuscripts to block printed books. In Japan, dice were used to play a popular game called sugoroku. There are two types of sugoroku. \"Ban-sugoroku\" is similar to backgammon and dates to the Heian period, while \"e-sugoroku\" is a racing game.\nUse.\nDice are thrown onto a surface either from the hand or from a container designed for this (such as a cup or tray). The face of the die that is uppermost when it comes to rest provides the value of the throw. \nThe result of a die roll is determined by the way it is thrown, according to the laws of classical mechanics. A die roll is made random by uncertainty in minor factors such as tiny movements in the thrower's hand; they are thus a crude form of hardware random number generator. \nOne typical contemporary dice game is craps, where two dice are thrown simultaneously and wagers are made on the total value of the two dice. Dice are frequently used to introduce randomness into board games, where they are often used to decide the distance through which a piece will move along the board (as in backgammon and \"Monopoly\").\nConstruction.\nArrangement.\nCommon dice are small cubes, most often across, whose faces are numbered from one to six, usually by patterns of round dots called pips. (While the use of Arabic numerals is occasionally seen, such dice are less common.)\nOpposite sides of a modern die traditionally add up to seven, requiring the 1, 2, and 3 faces to share a vertex. The faces of a die may be placed clockwise or counterclockwise about this vertex. If the 1, 2, and 3 faces run counterclockwise, the die is called \"right-handed\". If those faces run clockwise, the die is called \"left-handed\". Western dice are normally right-handed, and Chinese dice are normally left-handed.\nThe pips on standard six-sided dice are arranged in specific patterns as shown. Asian style dice bear similar patterns to Western ones, but the pips are closer to the center of the face; in addition, the pips are differently sized on Asian style dice, and the pips are colored red on the 1 and 4 sides. Red fours may be of Indian origin.\nManufacturing.\nNon-precision dice are manufactured via the plastic injection molding process. The pips or numbers on the die are a part of the mold. Different pigments can be added to the dice to make them opaque or transparent, or multiple pigments may be added to make the dice speckled or marbled.\nThe coloring for numbering is achieved by submerging the die entirely in paint, which is allowed to dry. The die is then polished via a tumble finishing process similar to rock polishing. The abrasive agent scrapes off all of the paint except for the indents of the numbering. A finer abrasive is then used to polish the die. This process also creates the smoother, rounded edges on the dice.\nPrecision casino dice may have a polished or sand finish, making them transparent or translucent respectively. Casino dice have their pips drilled, then filled flush with a paint of the same density as the material used for the dice, such that the center of gravity of the dice is as close to the geometric center as possible. This mitigates concerns that the pips will cause a small bias. All such dice are stamped with a serial number to prevent potential cheaters from substituting a die. Precision backgammon dice are made the same way; they tend to be slightly smaller and have rounded corners and edges, to allow better movement inside the dice cup and stop forceful rolls from damaging the playing surface.\nEtymology and terms.\nThe word die comes from Old French \"d\u00e9\"; from Latin \"datum\" \"something which is given or played\".\nWhile the terms \"ace\", \"deuce\", \"trey\", \"cater\", \"cinque\" and \"sice\" are generally obsolete, with the names of the numbers preferred, they are still used by some professional gamblers to designate different sides of the dice. \"Ace\" is from the Latin \"as\", meaning \"a unit\"; the others are 2 to 6 in Old French.\nThe term \"snake eyes\" is the outcome of rolling the dice and getting only one pip on each die. The \"Online Etymology Dictionary\" traces use of the term as far back as 1919.\nThe term \"boxcars\", also known as \"midnight\", is the outcome of rolling the dice and getting a six on each die. The pair of six pips resembles a pair of boxcars on a freight train.\nUnicode representation.\nUsing Unicode characters, the faces \u2680 \u2681 \u2682 \u2683 \u2684 \u2685, can be shown in text using the range U+2680 to U+2685 or using decimal codice_1 to codice_2.\nLoaded dice.\nA loaded, weighted, cheat, or crooked die is one that has been tampered with so that it will land with a specific side facing upwards more or less often than a fair die would. There are several methods for creating loaded dice, including rounded faces, off-square faces, and weights. Casinos and gambling halls frequently use transparent cellulose acetate dice as tampering is easier to detect than with opaque dice.\nVariants.\nPolyhedral dice.\nVarious shapes like two-sided or four-sided dice are documented in archaeological findings e.g. from Ancient Egypt or the Middle East. While the cubical six-sided die became the most common type in many parts of the world, other shapes were always known, like 20-sided dice in Ptolemaic and Roman times. \nThe modern tradition of using \"sets\" of polyhedral dice started around the end of the 1960s when non-cubical dice became popular among players of wargames, and since have been employed extensively in role-playing games and trading card games. Dice using both the numerals 6 and 9, which are reciprocally symmetric through rotation, typically distinguish them with a dot or underline.\nCommon variations.\nDice are often sold in sets, matching in color, of six different shapes. Five of the dice are shaped like the Platonic solids, whose faces are regular polygons. Aside from the cube, the other four Platonic solids have 4, 8, 12, and 20 faces, allowing for those number ranges to be generated. The only other common non-cubical die is the 10-sided die, a pentagonal trapezohedron die, whose faces are ten kites, each with two different edge lengths, three different angles, and two different kinds of vertices. Such sets frequently include a second 10-sided die either of contrasting color or numbered by tens, allowing the pair of 10-sided dice to be combined to generate numbers between 1 and 100.\nUsing these dice in various ways, games can closely approximate a variety of probability distributions. For instance, 10-sided dice can be rolled in pairs to produce a uniform distribution of random percentages, and summing the values of multiple dice will produce approximations to normal distributions. \nUnlike other common dice, a four-sided (tetrahedral) die does not have a side that faces upward when it is at rest on a surface, so it must be read in a different way. On some four-sided dice, each face features multiple numbers, with same number printed near each vertex on all sides. In this case, the number around the vertex pointing up is used. Alternatively, the numbers on a tetrahedral die can be placed at the middles of the edges, in which case the numbers around the base are used.\nNormally, the faces on a die will be placed so opposite faces will add up to one more than the number of faces. (This is not possible with 4-sided dice and dice with an odd-number of faces.) Some dice, such as those with 10 sides, are usually numbered sequentially beginning with 0, in which case the opposite faces will add to one less than the number of faces.\nSome twenty-sided dice sport a different arrangement used for the purpose of keeping track of an integer that counts down, such as health points. These \"spindown dice\" are arranged such that adjacent integers appear on adjacent faces, allowing the user to easily find the next lower number. They are commonly used with collectible card games.\nRarer variations.\n\"Uniform fair dice\" are dice where all faces have equal probability of outcome due to the symmetry of the die as it is face-transitive. Theoretically, these include:\nTwo other types of polyhedra are technically not face-transitive, but are still fair dice due to symmetry:\nLong dice and teetotums can in principle be made with any number of faces, including odd numbers. Long dice are based on the infinite set of prisms. All the rectangular faces are mutually face-transitive, so they are equally probable. The two ends of the prism may be rounded or capped with a pyramid, designed so that the die cannot rest on those faces. 4-sided long dice are easier to roll than tetrahedra, and are used in the traditional board games dayakattai and dald\u00f8s.\nNon-numeric dice.\nThe faces of most dice are labelled using sequences of whole numbers, usually starting at one, expressed with either pips or digits. However, there are some applications that require results other than numbers. Examples include letters for Boggle, directions for \"Warhammer Fantasy Battle\", Fudge dice, playing card symbols for poker dice, and instructions for sexual acts using sex dice.\nAlternatively numbered dice.\nDice may have numbers that do not form a counting sequence starting at one. One variation on the standard die is known as the \"average\" die. These are six-sided dice with sides numbered codice_3, which have the same arithmetic mean as a standard die (3.5 for a single die, 7 for a pair of dice), but have a narrower range of possible values (2 through 5 for one, 4 through 10 for a pair). They are used in some table-top wargames, where a narrower range of numbers is required. Other numbered variations include Sicherman dice and nontransitive dice.\nSpherical dice.\nA die can be constructed in the shape of a sphere, with the addition of an internal cavity in the shape of the dual polyhedron of the desired die shape and an internal weight. The weight will settle in one of the points of the internal cavity, causing it to settle with one of the numbers uppermost. For instance, a sphere with an octahedral cavity and a small internal weight will settle with one of the 6 points of the cavity held downwards by the weight.\nApplications.\nPolyhedral dice are commonly used in role-playing games. The fantasy role-playing game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (D&amp;D) is largely credited with popularizing dice in such games. Some games use only one type, like \"Exalted\" which uses only ten-sided dice. Others use numerous types for different game purposes, such as D&amp;D, which makes use of all common polyhedral dice. Dice are usually used to determine the outcome of events. Games typically determine results either as a total on one or more dice above or below a fixed number, or a certain number of rolls above a certain number on one or more dice. Due to circumstances or character skill, the initial roll may have a number added to or subtracted from the final result, or have the player roll extra or fewer dice. To keep track of rolls easily, dice notation is frequently used.\nMany board games use dice to randomize how far pieces move or to settle conflicts. Typically, this has meant that rolling higher numbers is better. Some games, such as \"Axis &amp; Allies\", have inverted this system by making the lower values more potent. In the modern age, a few games and game designers have approached dice in a different way by making each side of the die similarly valuable. In \"Castles of Burgundy\", players spend their dice to take actions based on the die's value. In this game, a six is not better than a one, or vice versa. In \"Quarriors\" (and its descendant, Dicemasters), different sides of the dice can offer completely different abilities. Several sides often give resources while others grant the player useful actions.\nDice can be used for divination and using dice for such a purpose is called cleromancy. A pair of common dice is usual, though other forms of polyhedra can be used. Tibetan Buddhists sometimes use this method of divination. It is highly likely that the Pythagoreans used the Platonic solids as dice. They referred to such dice as \"the dice of the gods\" and they sought to understand the universe through an understanding of geometry in polyhedra.\nAstrological dice are a specialized set of three 12-sided dice for divination; the first die represents planets, the Sun, the Moon, and the nodes of the Moon, the second die represents the 12 zodiac signs, and the third represents the 12 houses. A specialized icosahedron die provides the answers of the Magic 8-Ball, conventionally used to provide answers to yes-or-no questions.\nDice can be used to generate random numbers for use in passwords and cryptography applications. The Electronic Frontier Foundation describes a method by which dice can be used to generate passphrases. Diceware is a method recommended for generating secure but memorable passphrases, by repeatedly rolling five dice and picking the corresponding word from a pre-generated list.\nNotation.\nIn many gaming contexts, especially tabletop role-playing games, shorthand notations representing different dice rolls are used. A \"d\" or \"D\" is used to indicate a die with a specific number of sides; for example, codice_4 denotes a four-sided die. If several dice of the same type are to be rolled, this is indicated by a leading number specifying the number of dice. Hence, codice_5 means the player should roll six eight-sided dice and add the results. Modifiers to a die roll can also be indicated as desired. For example, codice_6 instructs the player to roll three six-sided dice, calculate the total, and add four to it."}
{"id": "8246", "revid": "1891007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8246", "title": "Dumpster diving", "text": "Dumpster diving (also totting, skipping, skip diving or skip salvage,) is salvaging from large commercial, residential, industrial and construction containers for unused items discarded by their owners, but deemed useful to the picker. It is not confined to dumpsters and skips specifically, and may cover standard household waste containers, curb sides, landfills or small dumps.\nDifferent terms are used to refer to different forms of this activity. For picking materials from the curbside trash collection, expressions such as curb shopping, trash picking or street scavenging are sometimes used. When seeking primarily metal to be recycled, one is scrapping. When picking the leftover food from farming left in the fields one is gleaning.\nPeople dumpster dive for items such as clothing, furniture, food, and similar items in good working condition. Some people do this out of necessity due to poverty, others for ideological reasons, while still others do so professionally and systematically for profit.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"dumpster diving\" emerged in the 1980s, combining \"diving\" with \"dumpster\", a large commercial trash bin. The term \"Dumpster\" itself comes from the Dempster Dumpster, a brand of bins manufactured by Dempster Brothers beginning in 1937. \"Dumpster\" became genericized by the 1970s. According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the term \"dumpster diving\" is chiefly found in American English and first appeared in print in 1983, with the verb \"dumpster-dive\" appearing a few years later. In British English, the practice may be known as \"skipping\", from skip, another term for this type of container.\nAlternative names for the practice include bin-diving, containering, D-mart, dumpstering, totting, and skipping. In Australia, garbage picking is called \"skip dipping.\"\nParticipants.\nThe term \"binner\" is often used to describe individuals who collect recyclable materials for their deposit value. For example, in Vancouver, British Columbia, binners, or bottle collectors, search garbage cans and dumpsters for recyclable materials that can be redeemed for their deposit value. On average, these binners earn about $40 a day for several garbage bags full of discarded containers. Some are scammers seeking for receipts to use in committing return fraud.\nThe karung guni, Zabbaleen, the rag and bone man, waste picker, junk man or bin hoker are terms for people who make their living by sorting and trading trash. A similar process known as gleaning was practised in rural areas and some ancient agricultural societies, where the residue from farmers' fields was collected.\nSome dumpster divers, who self-identify as freegans, aim to reduce their ecological footprint by living from dumpster-dived-goods, sometimes exclusively.\nOverview.\nThe activity is performed by people out of necessity in the developing world. Some scavengers perform in organized groups, and some organize on various internet forums and social networking websites. By reusing, or repurposing, resources destined for the landfill, dumpster diving is sometimes considered to be an environmentalist endeavor, and is thus practiced by many pro-green communities. The wastefulness of consumer society and throw-away culture compels some individuals to rescue usable items (for example, computers or smartphones, which are frequently discarded due to the extensive use of planned obsolescence in the technology industry) from destruction and divert them to those who can make use of the items.\nA wide variety of things may be disposed while still repairable or in working condition, making salvage of them a source of potentially free items for personal use, or to sell for profit. Irregular, blemished or damaged items that are still otherwise functional are regularly thrown away. Discarded food that might have slight imperfections, near its expiration date, or that is simply being replaced by newer stock is often tossed out despite being still edible. Many retailers are reluctant to sell this stock at reduced prices because of the risks that people will buy it instead of the higher-priced newer stock, that extra handling time is required, and that there are liability risks. In the United Kingdom, cookery books have been written on the cooking and consumption of such foods, which has contributed to the popularity of skipping. Artists often use discarded materials retrieved from trash receptacles to create works of found objects or assemblage.\nStudents have been known to partake in dumpster diving to obtain high tech items for technical projects, or simply to indulge their curiosity for unusual items. Dumpster diving can additionally be used in support of academic research. Garbage picking serves as the main tool for garbologists, who study the sociology and archeology of trash in modern life. Private and government investigators may pick through garbage to obtain information for their inquiries. Illegal cigarette consumption may be deduced from discarded packages.\nDumpster diving can be hazardous, due to potential exposure to biohazardous matter, broken glass, and overall unsanitary conditions that may exist in dumpsters.\nArguments against garbage picking often focus on the health and cleanliness implications of people rummaging in trash. This exposes the dumpster divers to potential health risks, and, especially if the dumpster diver does not return the non-usable items to their previous location, may leave trash scattered around. Divers can also be seriously injured or killed by garbage collection vehicles; in January 2012, in La Jolla, Swiss-American man Alfonso de Bourbon was killed by a truck while dumpster diving.\nDumpster diving with criminal intentions.\nDiscarded billing records may be used for identity theft. As a privacy violation, discarded medical records as trash led to a $140,000 penalty against Massachusetts billing company Goldthwait Associates and a group of pathology offices in 2013 and a $400,000 settlement between Midwest Women's Healthcare Specialists and 1,532 clients in Kansas City in 2014.\nCriminals sometime dumpster dive seeking cash receipts with the intention of going to the store the receipt belongs to and stealing the items listed on receipt from the shelves in order to return them for cash in a practice known as \"shoplisting\". In an instance of shoplifting investigation in Bellingham, Washington, police found a stash of dozens receipts from retailers such as The Home Depot, Rite Aid and Fred Meyer along with a hand written list of items on the receipt. Thieves known to several Walmart locations for fishing receipts from trash bins for the purpose of perpetrating return fraud by locating the same items on the receipt and returning them for cash were arrested in 2016 in Madison, Wisconsin\nLegal status.\nSince dumpsters are usually located on private premises, divers may occasionally get in trouble for trespassing while dumpster diving, though the law is enforced with varying degrees of rigor. Some businesses may lock dumpsters to prevent pickers from congregating on their property, vandalism to their property, and to limit potential liability if a dumpster diver is injured while on their property.\nPolice searches of discarded waste as well as similar methods are also generally not considered violations; evidence seized in this manner has been permitted in many criminal trials. In the United States this has been affirmed by numerous courts including and up to the Supreme Court, in the decision \"California v. Greenwood\". The doctrine is not as well established in regards to civil litigation.\nCompanies run by private investigators specializing in such techniques have emerged as a result of the need for discreet, undetected retrieval of documents and evidence for civil and criminal trials. Private investigators have also written books on \"P.I. technique\" in which dumpster diving or its equivalent \"wastebasket recovery\" figures prominently.\nBy country.\nIn 2009, a Belgian dumpster diver and eco-activist nicknamed Ollie was detained for a month for removing food from a garbage can, and was accused of theft and burglary. On February 25, 2009, he was arrested for removing food from a garbage can at an AD Delhaize supermarket in Bruges. Ollie's trial evoked protests in Belgium against restrictions from taking discarded food items.\nIn Ontario, Canada, the \"Trespass to Property Act\"\u2014legislation dating back to the \"British North America Act\" of 1867\u2014grants property owners and security guards the power to ban anyone from their premises, for any reason, permanently. This is done by issuing a notice to the intruder, who will only be breaking the law upon return. Similar laws exist in Prince Edward Island and Saskatchewan. A recent case in Canada, which involved a police officer who retrieved a discarded weapon from a trash receptacle as evidence, created some controversy. The judge ruled the policeman's actions as legal although there was no warrant present, which led some to speculate the event as validation for any Canadian citizen to raid garbage disposals.\nSkipping in England and Wales may qualify as theft within the Theft Act 1968 or as common-law theft in Scotland, though there is very little enforcement in practice.\nIn Germany, dumpster diving is referred to as \"containern\", and a waste container's contents are regarded as the property of the container's owner. Therefore, taking items from such a container is viewed as theft. However, the police will routinely disregard the illegality of garbage picking since the items found are generally of low value. There has only been one known instance where people were prosecuted. In 2009 individuals were arrested on assumed burglary as they had surmounted a supermarket's fence which was then followed by a theft complaint by the owner; the case was suspended.\nIn the United States, the 1988 \"California v. Greenwood\" case in the U.S. Supreme Court held that there is no common law expectation of privacy for discarded materials. There are, however, limits to what can legally be taken from a company's refuse. In a 1983 Minnesota case involving the theft of customer lists from a garbage can, \"Tennant Company v. Advance Machine Company\" (355 N.W.2d 720), the owner of the discarded information was awarded $500,000 in damages.\nItems.\nDumpster diving is practiced differently in developed countries than in developing countries.\nNotable instances.\nIn the 1960s, Jerry Schneider, using recovered instruction manuals from The Pacific Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company, used the company's own procedures to acquire hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of telephone equipment over several years until his arrest.\nThe \"Castle Infinity\" videogame, after its shutdown in 2005, was brought back from the dead by a fan rescuing its servers from the trash.\nIn October 2013, in North London, three men were arrested and charged under the 1824 Vagrancy Act when they were caught taking discarded food: tomatoes, mushrooms, cheese and cakes from bins behind an Iceland supermarket. The charges were dropped on 29 January 2014 after much public criticism as well as a request by Iceland's chief executive, Malcolm Walker."}
{"id": "8247", "revid": "1001749627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8247", "title": "Digital synthesizer", "text": "A digital synthesizer is a synthesizer that uses digital signal processing (DSP) techniques to make musical sounds. This in contrast to older analog synthesizers, which produce music using analog electronics, and samplers, which play back digital recordings of acoustic, electric, or electronic instruments. Some digital synthesizers emulate analog synthesizers; others include sampling capability in addition to digital synthesis.\nHistory.\nThe very earliest digital synthesis experiments were made with computers, as part of academic research into sound generation. In 1973, the Japanese company Yamaha licensed the algorithms for frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis) from John Chowning, who had experimented with it at Stanford University since 1971. Yamaha's engineers began adapting Chowning's algorithm for use in a commercial digital synthesizer, adding improvements such as the \"key scaling\" method to avoid the introduction of distortion that normally occurred in analog systems during frequency modulation, though it would take several years before Yamaha were to release their FM digital synthesizers. In the 1970s, Yamaha were granted a number of patents, under the company's former name \"Nippon Gakki Seizo Kabushiki Kaisha\", evolving Chowning's early work on FM synthesis technology. Yamaha built the first prototype digital synthesizer in 1974.\nBy the end of 1977 New England Digital (NED) released the Synclavier, the first commercial synthesizer to use purely digital sound generation and also the world's first commercial FM synthesizer.\nReleased in 1979, the Casio VL-1 was the first low budget digital synthesizer, selling for $69.95. Yamaha eventually commercialized their FM synthesis technology and released the company's first FM digital synthesizer in 1980, the Yamaha GS-1, but at an expensive retail price of $16,000.\nEarly commercial digital synthesizers used simple hard-wired digital circuitry to implement techniques such as additive synthesis and FM synthesis. Other techniques, such as wavetable synthesis and physical modeling, only became possible with the advent of high-speed microprocessor and digital signal processing technology. Two other early commercial digital synthesizers were the Fairlight CMI, introduced in 1979, and the New England Digital Synclavier II, introduced in 1979 as an upgrade to the original Synclavier. The Fairlight CMI was the world's first sampling synthesizer, while the Synclavier originally used FM synthesis technology licensed from Yamaha, before adding the world's first 16-bit, real-time hard drive streaming sampler later in 1982. The Fairlight CMI and the Synclavier were both expensive systems, retailing for more than $20,000 in the early 1980s. The cost of digital synthesizers began falling rapidly in the early 1980s. E-mu Systems introduced the Emulator sampling synthesizer in 1982 at a retail price of $7,900. Although not as flexible or powerful as either the Fairlight CMI or the Synclavier, its lower cost and portability made it popular.\nIntroduced in 1983, the Yamaha DX7 was the breakthrough digital synthesizer to have a major impact, both innovative and affordable, and thus spelling the decline of analog synthesizers. It used FM synthesis and, although it was incapable of the sampling synthesis of the Fairlight CMI, its price was around $2,000, putting it within range of a much larger number of musicians. The DX-7 was also known for its \"key scaling\" method to avoid distortion and for its recognizably bright tonality that was partly due to its high sampling rate of 57\u00a0kHz. It became indispensable to many music artists of the 1980s, and would become one of the best-selling synthesizers of all time.\nIn 1987, Roland released its own influential synthesizer of the time, the D-50. This popular synth broke new ground in affordably combining short samples and digital oscillators, as well as the innovation of built-in digital effects (reverb., chorus, equalizer). Roland called this Linear Arithmetic (LA) synthesis. This instrument is responsible for some of the very recognisable preset synthesizer sounds of the late 1980s, such as the Pizzagogo sound used on Enya's \"Orinoco Flow.\"\nIt gradually became feasible to include high quality samples of existing instruments as opposed to synthesizing them. In 1988, Korg introduced the last of the hugely popular trio of digital synthesizers of the 1980s after the DX7 and D50, the M1. This heralded both the increasing popularisation of digital sample-based synthesis, and the rise of 'workstation' synthesizers. After this time, many popular modern digital synthesizers have been described as not being full synthesizers in the most precise sense, as they play back samples stored in their memory. However, they still include options to shape the sounds through use of envelopes, LFOs, filters and effects such as reverb. The Yamaha Motif and Roland Fantom series of keyboards are typical examples of this type, described as 'ROMplers'; at the same time, they are also examples of \"workstation\" synthesizers.\nWith the addition of sophisticated sequencers on board, now added to built-in effects and other features, the 'workstation' synthesizer had been born. These always include a multi-track sequencer, and can often record and play back samples, and in later years full audio tracks, to be used to record an entire song. These are usually also ROMplers, playing back samples, to give a wide variety of realistic instrument and other sounds such as drums, string instruments and wind instruments to sequence and compose songs, along with popular keyboard instrument sounds such as electric pianos and organs.\nAs there was still interest in analog synthesizers, and with the increase of computing power, over the 1990s another type of synthesizer arose: the analog modeling, or \"virtual analog\" synthesizer. These use computing power to simulate traditional analog waveforms and circuitry such as envelopes and filters, with the most popular examples of this type of instrument including the Nord Lead and Access Virus.\nAs the cost of processing power and memory fell, new types of synthesizers emerged, offering a variety of novel sound synthesis options. The Korg Oasys was one such example, packaging multiple digital synthesizers into a single unit.\nDigital synthesizers can now be completely emulated in software (\"softsynth\"), and run on conventional PC hardware. Such soft implementations require careful programming and a fast CPU to get the same latency response as their dedicated equivalents. To reduce latency, some professional sound card manufacturers have developed specialized Digital Signal Processing ([DSP]) hardware. Dedicated digital synthesizers have the advantage of a performance-friendly user interface (physical controls like buttons for selecting features and enabling functionality, and knobs for setting variable parameters). On the other hand, software synthesizers have the advantages afforded by a rich graphical display.\nWith focus on performance-oriented keyboards and digital computer technology, manufacturers of commercial electronic instruments created some of the earliest digital synthesizers for studio and experimental use with computers being able to handle built-in sound synthesis algorithms.\nAnalog vs. digital.\nThe main difference is that a digital synthesizer uses digital processors and usually uses the direct digital synthesis architecture, while an analog synthesizer uses analog circuitry and a phase-locked loop. A digital synthesizer uses a numerically-controlled oscillator while an analog synthesizer may use a voltage-controlled oscillator. A digital synthesizer is in essence a computer with (often) a piano-keyboard and an LCD as an interface. An analog synthesizer is made up of sound-generating circuitry and modulators. Because computer technology is rapidly advancing, it is often possible to offer more features in a digital synthesizer than in an analog synthesizer at a given price. However, both technologies have their own merit. Some forms of synthesis, such as, for instance, sampling and additive synthesis are not feasible in analog synthesizers, while on the other hand, many musicians prefer the character of analog synthesizers over their digital equivalent.\nBands using digital synths.\nThe new wave era of the 1980s first brought the digital synthesizer to the public ear. Bands like Talking Heads and Duran Duran used the digitally made sounds on some of their most popular albums. Other more pop-inspired bands like Hall &amp; Oates began incorporating the digital synthesizer into their sound in the 1980s. Through breakthroughs in technology in the 1990s many modern synthesizers use DSP.\nDigital synthesis.\nWorking in more or less the same way, every digital synthesizer appears similar to a computer. At a steady sample rate, digital synthesis produces a stream of numbers. Sound from speakers is then produced by a conversion to analog form. Direct digital synthesis is the typical architecture for digital synthesizers. Through signal generation, voice and instrument-level processing, a signal flow is created and controlled either by MIDI capabilities or voice and instrument-level controls."}
{"id": "8248", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8248", "title": "Drug of abuse", "text": ""}
{"id": "8249", "revid": "800198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8249", "title": "Definition of music", "text": "A definition of music endeavors to give an accurate and concise explanation of music's basic attributes or essential nature and it involves a process of defining what is meant by the term \"music\". Many authorities have suggested definitions, but defining music turns out to be more difficult than might first be imagined, and there is ongoing debate. A number of explanations start with the notion of music as \"organized sound,\" but they also highlight that this is perhaps too broad a definition and cite examples of organized sound that are not defined as music, such as human speech and sounds found in both natural and industrial environments . The problem of defining music is further complicated by the influence of culture in music cognition.\nThe \"Concise Oxford Dictionary\" defines music as \"the art of combining vocal or instrumental sounds (or both) to produce beauty of form, harmony, and expression of emotion\" . However, some music genres, such as noise music and musique concr\u00e8te, challenge these ideas by using sounds not widely considered as musical, beautiful or harmonious, like randomly produced electronic distortion, feedback, static, cacophony, and sounds produced using compositional processes which utilize indeterminacy (; ).\nAn oft cited example of the dilemma in defining music is the work \"4\u203233\u2033\" (1952) by the American composer John Cage (1912\u20131992). The written score has three movements and directs the performer(s) to appear on stage, indicate by gesture or other means when the piece begins, then make no sound throughout the duration of the piece, marking sections and the end by gesture. The audience hears only whatever ambient sounds may occur in the room. Some argue that \"4\u203233\u2033\" is not music because, among other reasons, it contains no sounds that are conventionally considered \"musical\" and the composer and performer(s) exert no control over the organization of the sounds heard . Others argue it is music because the conventional definitions of musical sounds are unnecessarily and arbitrarily limited, and control over the organization of the sounds is achieved by the composer and performer(s) through their gestures that divide what is heard into specific sections and a comprehensible form .\nConcepts of music.\nBecause of differing fundamental concepts of music, the languages of many cultures do not contain a word that can be accurately translated as \"music\" as that word is generally understood by Western cultures . Inuit and most North American Indian languages do not have a general term for music. Among the Aztecs, the ancient Mexican theory of rhetoric, poetry, dance, and instrumental music used the Nahuatl term \"In xochitl-in kwikatl\" to refer to a complex mix of music and other poetic verbal and non-verbal elements, and reserved the word \"Kwikakayotl\" (or cuicacayotl) only for the sung expressions . There is no term for music in Nigerian languages Tiv, Yoruba, Igbo, Efik, Birom, Hausa, Idoma, Eggon or Jarawa. Many other languages have terms which only partly cover what Western culture typically means by the term \"music\" (). The Mapuche of Argentina do not have a word for \"music\", but they do have words for instrumental versus improvised forms (\"kantun\"), European and non-Mapuche music (\"kantun winka\"), ceremonial songs (\"\u00f6l\"), and \"tayil\" .\nWhile some languages in West Africa have no term for music, some West African languages accept the general concepts of music (). \"Musiqi\" is the Persian word for the science and art of music, \"muzik\" being the sound and performance of music (), though some things European-influenced listeners would include, such as Quran chanting, are excluded.\nMusic vs. noise.\nBen Watson points out that Ludwig van Beethoven's \"Grosse Fuge\" (1825) \"sounded like noise\" to his audience at the time. Indeed, Beethoven's publishers persuaded him to remove it from its original setting as the last movement of a string quartet. He did so, replacing it with a sparkling \"Allegro\". They subsequently published it separately . Musicologist Jean-Jacques Nattiez considers the difference between noise and music nebulous, explaining that \"The border between music and noise is always culturally defined\u2014which implies that, even within a single society, this border does not always pass through the same place; in short, there is rarely a consensus\u00a0... By all accounts there is no \"single\" and \"intercultural\" universal concept defining what music might be\" .\nDefinitions.\nOrganized sound.\nAn often-cited definition of music is that it is \"organized sound\", a term originally coined by modernist composer Edgard Var\u00e8se in reference to his own musical aesthetic. Var\u00e8se's concept of music as \"organized sound\" fits into his vision of \"sound as living matter\" and of \"musical space as open rather than bounded\" . He conceived the elements of his music in terms of \"sound-masses\", likening their organization to the natural phenomenon of crystallization . Var\u00e8se thought that \"to stubbornly conditioned ears, anything new in music has always been called noise\", and he posed the question, \"what is music but organized noises?\" .\nThe fifteenth edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" states that \"while there are no sounds that can be described as inherently unmusical, musicians in each culture have tended to restrict the range of sounds they will admit.\" A human organizing element is often felt to be implicit in music (sounds produced by non-human agents, such as waterfalls or birds, are often described as \"musical\", but perhaps less often as \"music\"). The composer R. Murray states that the sound of classical music \"has decays; it is granular; it has attacks; it fluctuates, swollen with impurities\u2014and all this creates a musicality that comes before any 'cultural' musicality.\" However, in the view of semiologist Jean-Jacques Nattiez, \"just as music is whatever people choose to recognize as such, noise is whatever is recognized as disturbing, unpleasant, or both\" . (See \"music as social construct\" below.)\"\"'\nLanguage.\nLevi R. Bryant defines music not as a language, but as a marked-based, problem-solving method, comparable to mathematics .\nMusical universals.\nMost definitions of music include a reference to sound and a list of universals of music can be generated by stating the elements (or aspects) of sound: pitch, timbre, loudness, duration, spatial location and texture (). However, in terms more specifically relating to music: following Wittgenstein, cognitive psychologist Eleanor Rosch proposes that categories are not clean cut but that something may be more or less a member of a category . As such the search for musical universals would fail and would not provide one with a valid definition . This is primarily because other cultures have different understandings in relation to the sounds that English language writers refer to as music.\nSocial construct.\nMany people do, however, share a general idea of music. The Websters definition of music is a typical example: \"the science or art of ordering tones or sounds in succession, in combination, and in temporal relationships to produce a composition having unity and continuity\" (\"Webster's Collegiate Dictionary\", online edition).\nSubjective experience.\nThis approach to the definition focuses not on the \"construction\" but on the \"experience\" of music. An extreme statement of the position has been articulated by the Italian composer Luciano Berio: \u201cMusic is everything that one listens to with the intention of listening to music\u201d . This approach permits the boundary between music and noise to change over time as the conventions of musical interpretation evolve within a culture, to be different in different cultures at any given moment, and to vary from person to person according to their experience and proclivities. It is further consistent with the subjective reality that even what would commonly be considered music is experienced as non-music if the mind is concentrating on other matters and thus not perceiving the sound's \"essence\" \"as music\" .\nSpecific definitions.\nClifton.\nIn his 1983 book, \"Music as Heard\", which sets out from the phenomenological position of Husserl, Merleau-Ponty, and Ric\u0153ur, Thomas Clifton defines music as \"an ordered arrangement of sounds and silences whose meaning is presentative rather than denotative ... This definition distinguishes music, as an end in itself, from compositional technique, and from sounds as purely physical objects.\" More precisely, \"music is the actualization of the possibility of any sound whatever to present to some human being a meaning which he experiences with his body\u2014that is to say, with his mind, his feelings, his senses, his will, and his metabolism\" . It is therefore \"a certain reciprocal relation established between a person, his behavior, and a sounding object\" .\nClifton accordingly differentiates music from non-music on the basis of the human behavior involved, rather than on either the nature of compositional technique or of sounds as purely physical objects. Consequently, the distinction becomes a question of what is meant by musical behavior: \"a musically behaving person is one whose very being is absorbed in the significance of the sounds being experienced.\" However, \"It is not altogether accurate to say that this person is listening \"to\" the sounds. First, the person is doing more than listening: he is perceiving, interpreting, judging, and feeling. Second, the preposition 'to' puts too much stress on the sounds as such. Thus, the musically behaving person experiences musical significance by means of, or through, the sounds\" .\nIn this framework, Clifton finds that there are two things that separate music from non-music: (1) musical meaning is presentative, and (2) music and non-music are distinguished in the idea of personal involvement. \"It is the notion of personal involvement which lends significance to the word \"ordered\" in this definition of music\" . This is not to be understood, however, as a sanctification of extreme relativism, since \"it is precisely the 'subjective' aspect of experience which lured many writers earlier in this century down the path of sheer opinion-mongering. Later on this trend was reversed by a renewed interest in 'objective,' scientific, or otherwise non-introspective musical analysis. But we have good reason to believe that a musical experience is not a purely private thing, like seeing pink elephants, and that reporting about such an experience need not be subjective in the sense of it being a mere matter of opinion\" .\nClifton's task, then, is to describe musical experience and the objects of this experience which, together, are called \"phenomena,\" and the activity of describing phenomena is called \"phenomenology\" . It is important to stress that this definition of music says nothing about aesthetic standards. Music is not a fact or a thing in the world, but a meaning constituted by human beings. ... To talk about such experience in a meaningful way demands several things. First, we have to be willing to let the composition speak to us, to let it reveal its own order and significance. ... Second, we have to be willing to question our assumptions about the nature and role of musical materials. ... Last, and perhaps most important, we have to be ready to admit that describing a meaningful experience is itself meaningful. \nNattiez.\n\"Music, often an art/entertainment, is a total social fact whose definitions vary according to era and culture,\" according to Jean . It is often contrasted with noise. According to musicologist Jean-Jacques Nattiez: \"The border between music and noise is always culturally defined\u2014which implies that, even within a single society, this border does not always pass through the same place; in short, there is rarely a consensus ... By all accounts there is no \"single\" and \"intercultural\" universal concept defining what music might be\" . Given the above demonstration that \"there is no limit to the number or the genre of variables that might intervene in a definition of the musical,\" an organization of definitions and elements is necessary.\nNattiez (1990, 17) describes definitions according to a tripartite semiological scheme similar to the following:\nThere are three levels of description, the poietic, the neutral, and the esthesic:\nTable describing types of definitions of music :\nBecause of this range of definitions, the study of music comes in a wide variety of forms. There is the study of sound and vibration or acoustics, the cognitive study of music, the study of music theory and performance practice or music theory and ethnomusicology and the study of the reception and history of music, generally called musicology.\nXenakis.\nComposer Iannis Xenakis in \"Towards a Metamusic\" (chapter 7 of \"Formalized Music\") defined music in the following way :"}
{"id": "8253", "revid": "9475572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8253", "title": "Dayton, Ohio", "text": "Dayton () is the sixth-largest city in the state of Ohio and the county seat of Montgomery County. A small part of the city extends into Greene County. The 2019 U.S. census estimate put the city population at 140,407, while Greater Dayton was estimated to be at 803,416 residents. This makes Dayton the fourth-largest metropolitan area in Ohio and 63rd in the United States. Dayton is within Ohio's Miami Valley region, just north of Greater Cincinnati.\nOhio's borders are within of roughly 60 percent of the country's population and manufacturing infrastructure, making the Dayton area a logistical centroid for manufacturers, suppliers, and shippers. Dayton also hosts significant research and development in fields like industrial, aeronautical, and astronautical engineering that have led to many technological innovations. Much of this innovation is due in part to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and its place in the community. With the decline of heavy manufacturing, Dayton's businesses have diversified into a service economy that includes insurance and legal sectors as well as healthcare and government sectors.\nAlong with defense and aerospace, healthcare accounts for much of the Dayton area's economy. Hospitals in the Greater Dayton area have an estimated combined employment of nearly 32,000 and a yearly economic impact of $6.8\u00a0billion. It is estimated that Premier Health Partners, a hospital network, contributes more than $2\u00a0billion a year to the region through operating, employment, and capital expenditures. In 2011, Dayton was rated the #3 city in the nation by HealthGrades for excellence in healthcare.\nDayton is also noted for its association with aviation; the city is home to the National Museum of the United States Air Force and is the birthplace of Orville Wright. Other well-known individuals born in the city include poet Paul Laurence Dunbar and entrepreneur John H. Patterson. Dayton is also known for its many patents, inventions, and inventors, most notably the Wright brothers' invention of powered flight. In 2007 Dayton was a part of the top 100 cities in America. In 2008, 2009, and 2010, \"Site Selection\" magazine ranked Dayton the #1 mid-sized metropolitan area in the nation for economic development. Also in 2010, Dayton was named one of the best places in the United States for college graduates to find a job.\nOn Memorial Day of 2019 Dayton was affected by a tornado outbreak, in which a total of 15 tornadoes touched down in the Dayton area. One was a half-mile wide EF4 that tore through the heart of the city causing damage.\nHistory.\nDayton was founded on April 1, 1796, by 12 settlers known as the Thompson Party. They traveled in March from Cincinnati up the Great Miami River by pirogue and landed at what is now St. Clair Street, where they found two small camps of Native Americans. Among the Thompson Party was Benjamin Van Cleve, whose memoirs provide insights into the Ohio Valley's history. Two other groups traveling overland arrived several days later.\nIn 1797, Daniel C. Cooper laid out Mad River Road, the first overland connection between Cincinnati and Dayton, opening the \"Mad River Country\" to settlement. Ohio was admitted into the Union in 1803, and the village of Dayton was incorporated in 1805 and chartered as a city in 1841. The city was named after Jonathan Dayton, a captain in the American Revolutionary War who signed the U.S. Constitution and owned a significant amount of land in the area. In 1827, construction on the Dayton\u2013Cincinnati canal began, which would provide a better way to transport goods from Dayton to Cincinnati and contribute significantly to Dayton's economic growth during the 1800s.\nInnovation.\nInnovation led to business growth in the region. In 1884, John Henry Patterson acquired James Ritty's National Manufacturing Company along with his cash register patents and formed the National Cash Register Company (NCR). The company manufactured the first mechanical cash registers and played a crucial role in the shaping of Dayton's reputation as an epicenter for manufacturing in the early 1900s. In 1906, Charles F. Kettering, a leading engineer at the company, helped develop the first electric cash register, which propelled NCR into the national spotlight. NCR also helped develop the US Navy Bombe, a code-breaking machine that helped crack the Enigma machine cipher during World War II.\nDayton has been the home for many patents and inventions since the 1870s. According to the National Park Service, citing information from the U.S. Patent Office, Dayton had granted more patents per capita than any other U.S. city in 1890 and ranked fifth in the nation as early as 1870. The Wright brothers, inventors of the airplane, and Charles F. Kettering, world-renowned for his numerous inventions, hailed from Dayton. The city was also home to James Ritty's Incorruptible Cashier, the first mechanical cash register, and Arthur E. Morgan's hydraulic jump, a flood prevention mechanism that helped pioneer hydraulic engineering. Paul Laurence Dunbar, an African-American poet and novelist, penned his most famous works in the late 19th century and became an integral part of the city's history.\nBirthplace of Aviation.\nPowered aviation began in Dayton. Orville and Wilbur Wright were the first to construct and demonstrate powered flight. Although the first flight was in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, their Wright Flyer was built in and returned to Dayton for improvements and further flights at Huffman Field, a cow pasture eight miles (13\u00a0km) northeast of Dayton, near the current Wright Patterson Air Force Base.\nWhen the government tried to move development to Langley field in southern Virginia, six Dayton businessmen including Edward A. Deeds, formed the Dayton-Wright Airplane Company in Moraine and established a flying field. Deeds also opened a field to the north in the flood plain of the Great Miami River between the confluences of that river, the Stillwater River, and the Mad River, near downtown Dayton. Later named McCook Field for Alexander McDowell McCook, an American Civil War general, this became the Army Signal Corps' primary aviation research and training location. Wilbur Wright also purchased land near Huffman prairie to continue their research.\nDuring World War I, the Army purchased 40 acres adjacent to Huffman Prairie for the Fairfield Aviation General Supply Depot. As airplanes developed more capability, they needed more runway space than McCook could offer, and a new location was sought. The Patterson family formed the Dayton Air Service Committee, Inc which held a campaign that raised $425,000 in two days and purchased 4,520.47 acres (18.2937 km2) northeast of Dayton, including Wilbur Wright Field and the Huffman Prairie Flying Field. Wright Field was \"formally dedicated\" on 12 October 1927. After World War II, Wright Field and the adjacent Patterson Field, Dayton Army Air Field, and Clinton Army Air Field were merged as the Headquarters, Air Force Technical Base. On 13 January 1948, the facility was renamed Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.\nThe Dayton Flood.\nA catastrophic flood in March 1913, known as the Great Dayton Flood, led to the creation of the Miami Conservancy District, a series of dams as well as hydraulic pumps installed around Dayton, in 1914. \nThe war effort.\nLike other cities across the country, Dayton was heavily involved in the war effort during World War II. Several locations around the city hosted the Dayton Project, a branch of the larger Manhattan Project, to develop polonium triggers used in early atomic bombs. The war efforts led to a manufacturing boom throughout the city, including high demand for housing and other services. At one point, emergency housing was put into place due to a housing shortage in the region, much of which is still in use today.\nAlan Turing visited NCR in Dayton, Ohio in Dec. 1942.\nAlan Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence. He visited the National Cash Register (NCR) company in Dayton in December 1942. He was able to show that it was not necessary to build 336 Bombes, so the initial order was scaled down to 96 machines to decipher German Enigma-machine-encrypted secret messages during World War II.\nPost-War Dayton.\nBetween the 1940s and the 1970s, the city saw significant growth in suburban areas from population migration. Veterans were returning from military service in large numbers seeking industrial and manufacturing jobs, a part of the local industry that was expanding rapidly. Advancements in architecture also contributed to the suburban boom. New, modernized shopping centers and the Interstate Highway System allowed workers to commute greater distances and families to live further from the downtown area. More than 127,000 homes were built in Montgomery County during the 1950s.\nSince the 1980s, however, Dayton's population has declined, mainly due to the loss of manufacturing jobs and decentralization of metropolitan areas, as well as the national housing crisis that began in 2008. While much of the state has suffered for similar reasons, the impact on Dayton has been greater than most. Dayton had the third-greatest percentage loss of population in the state since the 1980s, behind Cleveland and Youngstown. Despite this, Dayton has begun diversifying its workforce from manufacturing into other growing sectors such as healthcare and education.\nCurrent initiatives.\nDowntown expansion that began in the 2000s has helped revitalize the city and encourage growth. Day Air Ballpark, home of the Dayton Dragons, was built in 2000. The highly successful minor league baseball team has been an integral part of Dayton's culture. In 2001, the city's public park system, Five Rivers MetroParks, built RiverScape MetroPark, an outdoor entertainment venue that attracts more than 400,000 visitors each year. A new performance arts theater, the Schuster Center, opened in 2003. A large health network in the region, Premier Health Partners, expanded its Miami Valley Hospital with a 12-story tower addition.\nIn 2010, the Downtown Dayton Partnership, in cooperation with the City of Dayton and community leaders, introduced the Greater Downtown Dayton Plan. It focuses on job creation and retention, infrastructure improvements, housing, recreation, and collaboration. The plan is to be implemented through the year 2020.\nPeace accords.\nIn 1995, the Dayton Agreement, a peace accord between the parties to the hostilities of the conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the former Yugoslavia, was negotiated at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, near Fairborn, Ohio, from November 1 to 21.\nRichard Holbrooke wrote about these events in his memoirs:\n There was also a real Dayton out there, a charming Ohio city, famous as the birthplace of the Wright brothers. Its citizens energized us from the outset. Unlike the population of, say, New York City, Geneva or Washington, which would scarcely notice another conference, Daytonians were proud to be part of history. Large signs at the commercial airport hailed Dayton as the \"temporary center of international peace.\" The local newspapers and television stations covered the story from every angle, drawing the people deeper into the proceedings. When we ventured into a restaurant or a shopping center downtown, people crowded around, saying that they were praying for us. Warren Christopher was given at least one standing ovation in a restaurant. Families on the airbase placed \"candles of peace\" in their front windows, and people gathered in peace vigils outside the base. One day they formed a \"peace chain,\" although it was not large enough to surround the sprawling eight-thousand-acre base. Ohio's famous ethnic diversity was on display.\nNickname.\nDayton is known as the \"Gem City\". The nickname's origin is uncertain, but several theories exist. In the early 19th century, a well-known racehorse named Gem hailed from Dayton. In 1845, an article published in the \"Cincinnati Daily Chronicle\" by an author known as T stated:\nIn the late 1840s, Major William D. Bickham of the \"Dayton Journal\" began a campaign to nickname Dayton the \"Gem City.\" The name was adopted by the city's Board of Trade several years later. Paul Laurence Dunbar referred to the nickname in his poem, \"Toast to Dayton\", as noted in the following excerpt:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nShe shall ever claim our duty,\nFor she shines\u2014the brightest gem\nThat has ever decked with beauty\n Dear Ohio's diadem.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nDayton also plays a role in a nickname given to the state of Ohio, \"Birthplace of Aviation.\" Dayton is the hometown of the Wright brothers, aviation pioneers who are credited with inventing and building the first practical airplane in history. After their first manned flights in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, which they had chosen due to its ideal weather and climate conditions, the Wrights returned to Dayton and continued testing at nearby Huffman Prairie.\nAdditionally, Dayton is colloquially referred to as \"Little Detroit\". This nickname comes from Dayton's prominence as a Midwestern manufacturing center.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nClimate.\nDayton's climate features warm, muggy summers and cold, dry winters, and is classified as a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"). Unless otherwise noted, all normal figures quoted within the text below are from the official climatology station, Dayton International Airport, at an elevation of about to the north of downtown Dayton, which lies within the valley of the Miami River; thus temperatures there are typically cooler than in downtown.\nAt the airport, monthly mean temperatures range from in January to in July. The highest temperature ever recorded in Dayton was on July 22, 1901, and the coldest was on February 13 during the Great Blizzard of 1899. On average, there are 14 days of + highs and 4.5 nights of sub- lows annually. Snow is moderate, with a normal seasonal accumulation of , usually occurring from November to March, occasionally April, and rarely October. Precipitation averages annually, with total rainfall peaking in May.\nDayton is subject to severe weather typical of the Midwestern United States. Tornadoes are possible from the spring to the fall. Floods, blizzards, and severe thunderstorms can also occur.\nAround midnight May 27\u201328, 2019, 14 tornadoes cut a path through the region, causing extensive property damage, but only one death. The tornadoes closed several streets, including portions of I-75 and North Dixie Street. 64,000 residents lost power and much of the region's water supply was cut off. Although some of the tornadoes were only EF0 and remained on the ground for less than a mile, an EF4 tornado passed through the communities of Brookville, Trotwood, Dayton, Beavercreek, and Riverside.\nEcology.\nThe Dayton Audubon Society is the National Audubon Society's local chapter. The Dayton chapter manages local activities contributing to the annual, hemisphere-wide Christmas Bird Count. The Chapter began participation in the National Count in 1924. The local Count was initially coordinated by Ben Blincoe, who was succeeded by Jim Hill in 1970. In the mid-1960s, the freezing of Lake Erie and associated marshlands led species of waterfowl to appear in the Dayton-area, where surface waters remained unfrozen. Nine varieties of birds have been observed every year in the Dayton area: downy woodpecker, Carolina chickadee, tufted titmouse, brown creeper, cardinal, junco, tree sparrow, song sparrow and crow.\nDemographics.\nDayton's population declined significantly from a peak of 262,332 residents in 1960 to only 141,759 in 2010. This was in part due to the slowdown of the region's manufacturing and the growth of Dayton's affluent suburbs including Oakwood, Englewood, Beavercreek, Springboro, Miamisburg, Kettering, and Centerville. The city's most populous ethnic group, white, declined from 78.1% in 1960 to 51.7% by 2010. However, recent census estimates show a 1.3% population increase since 2010, the first increase in five decades.\nAs of the 2000 census, the median income for a household in the city was $27,523, and the median income for a family was $34,978. Males had a median income of $30,816 versus $24,937 for females. The per capita income for the city was $34,724. About 18.2% of families and 23.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 32.0% of those under age 18 and 15.3% of those age 65 or over.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 141,759 people, 58,404 households, and 31,064 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 74,065 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 51.7% White, 42.9% African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.9% Asian, 1.3% from other races, and 2.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.0% of the population.\nThere were 58,404 households, of which 28.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 25.9% were married couples living together, 21.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 5.9% had a male householder with no wife present, and 46.8% were non-families. 38.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26, and the average family size was 3.03.\nThe median age in the city was 34.4 years. 22.9% of residents were under the age of 18; 14.2% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 25.3% were from 25 to 44; 25.8% were from 45 to 64, and 11.8% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.7% male and 51.3% female.\n2013 census population estimates.\nThe 2013 census population estimate showed an increasing city of Dayton population for the first time in five decades, attributed to revitalization efforts downtown and the increasing downtown population. However, the 2014 population estimate indicates a net decrease of 897 individuals from 2013's estimate.\nEconomy.\nDayton's economy is relatively diversified and vital to the overall economy of the state of Ohio. In 2008 and 2009, \"Site Selection\" magazine ranked Dayton the #1 medium-sized metropolitan area in the U.S. for economic development. Dayton is also among the top 100 metropolitan areas in both exports and export-related jobs, ranked 16 and 14 respectively by the Brookings Institution. The 2010 report placed the value of exports at $4.7\u00a0billion and the number of export-related jobs at 44,133. The Dayton Metropolitan Statistical Area ranks 4th in Ohio's Gross Domestic Product with a 2008 industry total of $33.78\u00a0billion. Additionally, Dayton ranks third among 11 major metropolitan areas in Ohio for exports to foreign countries. The Dayton Development Coalition is attempting to leverage the region's large water capacity, estimated to be 1.5\u00a0trillion gallons of renewable water aquifers, to attract new businesses. Moody's Investment Services revised Dayton's bond rating from A1 to the stronger rating of Aa2 as part of its global recalibration process. Standard &amp; Poor's upgraded Dayton's rating from A+ to AA- in the summer of 2009.\n\"Bloomberg Businessweek\" ranked Dayton in 2010 as one of the best places in the U.S. for college graduates looking for a job. Companies such as Reynolds and Reynolds, CareSource, DPL, LexisNexis, Kettering Health Network, Premier Health Partners, and Standard Register have their headquarters in Dayton. It is also the former home of the Speedwell Motor Car Company, MeadWestvaco (formerly known as the Mead Paper Company), and NCR. NCR was headquartered in Dayton for over 125 years and was a major innovator in computer technology.\nResearch, development, aerospace and aviation.\nThe Dayton region gave birth to aviation and is known for its high concentration of aerospace and aviation technology. In 2009, Governor Ted Strickland designated Dayton as Ohio's aerospace innovation hub, the state's first such technology hub. Two major United States research and development organizations have leveraged Dayton's historical leadership in aviation and maintain their headquarters in the area: The National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC) and the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL). Both have their headquarters at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.\nSeveral research organizations support NASIC, AFRL, and the Dayton community. The Advanced Technical Intelligence Center is a confederation of government, academic, and industry partners. The University of Dayton Research Institute (UDRI) is led by the University of Dayton. The Cognitive Technologies Division (CTD) of Applied Research Associates, Inc., which carries out human-centered research and design, is headquartered in the Dayton suburb of Fairborn. The city of Dayton has started Tech Town, a development project to attract technology-based firms and revitalize the downtown area. Tech Town is home to the world's first RFID business incubator. The University of Dayton\u2013led Institute for Development &amp; Commercialization of Sensor Technologies (IDCAST) at TechTown is a center for remote sensing and sensing technology. It is one of Dayton's technology business incubators housed in The Entrepreneurs Center building.\nHealthcare.\nThe Kettering Health Network and Premier Health Partners have a major role on the Dayton area's economy. Hospitals in the Greater Dayton area have an estimated combined employment of nearly 32,000 and a yearly economic impact of $6.8\u00a0billion. In addition, several Dayton area hospitals consistently earn top national ranking and recognition including the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"s list of \"America's Best Hospitals\" as well as many of HealthGrades top ratings. The most notable hospitals are Miami Valley Hospital and Kettering Medical Center. \nThe Dayton region has several key institutes and centers for health care. The Center for Tissue Regeneration and Engineering at Dayton focuses on the science and development of human tissue regeneration. The National Center for Medical Readiness (NCMR) is also in the Dayton area. The center includes Calamityville, which is a disaster training facility. Over five years, Calamityville is estimated to have a regional economic impact of $374\u00a0million. Also, the Neurological Institute at Miami Valley Hospital is an institute focused on the diagnosis, treatment, and research of neurological disorders.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2018 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city proper in are:\nGovernment.\nThe Dayton City Commission is composed of the mayor and four city commissioners. Each city commission member is elected at-large on a non-partisan basis for four-year, overlapping terms. All policy items are decided by the City Commission, which is empowered by the City Charter to pass ordinances and resolutions, adopt regulations, and appoint the city manager. The city manager is responsible for budgeting and implementing policies and initiatives. Dayton was the first large American city to adopt the city manager form of municipal government, in 1913.\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nUnlike many Midwestern cities its age, Dayton has very broad and straight downtown streets (generally two or three full lanes in each direction) that improved access to the downtown even after the automobile became popular. The main reason for the broad streets was that Dayton was a marketing and shipping center from its beginning; streets were broad to enable wagons drawn by teams of three to four pairs of oxen to turn around. Also, some of today's streets were once barge canals flanked by draw-paths.\nA courthouse building was built in downtown Dayton in 1888 to supplement Dayton's original Neoclassical courthouse, which still stands. This second, \"new\" courthouse has since been replaced with new facilities as well as a park. The Old Court House has been a favored political campaign stop. On September 17, 1859, Abraham Lincoln delivered an address on its steps. Eight other presidents have visited the courthouse, either as presidents or during presidential campaigns: Andrew Johnson, James Garfield, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, and Bill Clinton.\nThe Dayton Arcade, which opened on March 3, 1904, was built in the hopes of replacing open-air markets throughout the city. Throughout the decades, the Arcade has gone through many transformations but has retained its charm. Some of its main features include a Flemish facade at the Third Street entrance, a glass dome above the Arcade rotunda, and a chateau roof line above the Third Street facade. The Dayton Arcade is currently under renovations with no official completion date set.\nIn 2009, the CareSource Management Group finished construction of a $55\u00a0million corporate headquarters in downtown Dayton. The , 10-story building was downtown's first new office tower in more than a decade.\nDayton's two tallest buildings are the Kettering Tower at and the KeyBank Tower at . Kettering Tower was originally Winters Tower, the headquarters of Winters Bank. The building was renamed after Virginia Kettering when Winters was merged into Bank One. KeyBank Tower was known as the MeadWestvaco Tower before KeyBank gained naming rights to the building in 2008.\nTed Rall said in 2015 that over the last five decades Dayton has been demolishing some of its architecturally significant buildings to reduce the city's rental vacancy rate and thus increase the occupancy rate.\nNeighborhoods.\nDayton's ten historic neighborhoods\u2014Oregon District, Wright Dunbar, Dayton View, Grafton Hill, McPherson Town, Webster Station, Huffman, Kenilworth, St. Anne's Hill, and South Park\u2014feature mostly single-family houses and mansions in the Neoclassical, Jacobethan, Tudor Revival, English Gothic, Chateauesque, Craftsman, Queen Anne, Georgian Revival, Colonial Revival, Renaissance Revival Architecture, Shingle Style Architecture, Prairie, Mission Revival, Eastlake/Italianate, American Foursquare, and Federal styles. Downtown Dayton is also a large area that encompasses several neighborhoods itself and has seen a recent uplift and revival.\nSuburbs.\nDayton's suburbs with a population of 10,000 or more include Beavercreek, Centerville, Clayton, Englewood, Fairborn, Harrison Township, Huber Heights, Kettering, Miami Township, Miamisburg, Oakwood, Riverside, Springboro (partial), Trotwood, Vandalia, Washington Township, West Carrollton, and Xenia.\nRecreation.\nDayton was named National Geographic's outdoor adventure capital of the Midwest in 2019 due in large part to the metropolitan area's revitalized Five Rivers MetroPark, extensive bicycle and jogging trail system, urban green spaces, lakes and camping areas.\nBicycling.\nIn cooperation with the Miami Conservancy District, Five Rivers MetroParks hosts 340 miles of paved trails, the largest network of paved off-street trails in the United States. The regional trail system represents over 35% of the 900 miles in Ohio's off-street trail network. In 2010, the city of Troy was named \"bike friendly\" by the League of American Bicyclists, which gave the city the organization's bronze designation. The honorable mention made Dayton one of two cities in Ohio to receive the award, the other being Columbus, and one of 15 cities nationwide.\nCulture.\nFine arts.\nThe Dayton Region ranked within the top 10% in the nation in arts and culture. In a 2012 readers' poll by \"American Style\" magazine, Dayton ranked #2 in the country among mid-size cities as an arts destination, ranking higher than larger cities such as Atlanta, St. Louis, and Cincinnati. Dayton is the home of the Dayton Art Institute.\nThe Benjamin and Marian Schuster Performing Arts Center in downtown Dayton is a world-class performing arts center and the home venue of the Dayton Philharmonic Orchestra, Dayton Opera, and the Dayton Ballet. In addition to philharmonic and opera performances, the Schuster Center hosts concerts, lectures, and traveling Broadway shows, and is a popular spot for weddings and other events. The historic Victoria Theatre in downtown Dayton hosts concerts, traveling Broadway shows, ballet, a summertime classic film series, and more. The Loft Theatre, also downtown, is the home of the Human Race Theatre Company. The Dayton Playhouse, in West Dayton, is the site of numerous plays and theatrical productions. Between 1957 and 1995, the Kenley Players presented live theater productions in Dayton. In 2013, John Kenley was inducted into the Dayton Theatre Hall of Fame.\nDayton is the home to several ballet companies including:\nFood.\nThe city's fine dining restaurants include The Pine Club, a nationally known steakhouse. Dayton is home to a variety of pizza chains that have become woven into local culture, the most notable of which are Cassano's and Marion's Piazza. Notable Dayton-based restaurant chains include Hot Head Burritos.\nIn addition to restaurants, the city is also home to Esther Price Candies, a candy and chocolate company, and Mike-sells, the oldest potato chip company in the United States.\nThe city began developing a reputation for its number of breweries and craft beer venues by the late 2010s.\nReligion.\nMany major religions are represented in Dayton. Christianity is represented in Dayton by dozens of denominations and their respective churches. Notable Dayton churches include the First Lutheran Church, Sacred Heart Church, and Ginghamsburg Church. Dayton's Muslim community is largely represented by the Islamic Society of Greater Dayton (ISGD), a Muslim community that includes a mosque on Josie Street. Dayton is also home to the United Theological Seminary, one of 13 seminaries affiliated with the United Methodist Church. Judaism is represented by Temple Israel. Hinduism is represented by the Hindu Temple of Dayton. Old North Dayton also has a number of Catholic churches built by immigrants from Lithuania, Poland, Hungary, and Germany.\nTourism.\nTourism also accounts for one out of every 14 private sector jobs in the county. Tourism in the Dayton region is led by the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, the largest and oldest military aviation museum in the world. The museum draws over 1.3\u00a0million visitors per year and is one of the most-visited tourist attractions in Ohio. The museum houses the National Aviation Hall of Fame.\nOther museums also play significant roles in the tourism and economy of the Dayton area. The Dayton Art Institute, a museum of fine arts, owns collections containing more than 20,000 objects spanning 5,000 years of art and archaeological history. The Dayton Art Institute was rated one of the top 10 best art museums in the United States for children. The Boonshoft Museum of Discovery is a children's museum of science with numerous exhibits, one of which includes an indoor zoo with nearly 100 different animals.\nThere are also some notable historical museums in the region. The Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park, operated by the National Park Service, commemorates the lives and achievements of Dayton natives Orville and Wilbur Wright and Paul Laurence Dunbar. The Wright brothers' famous Wright Flyer III aircraft is housed in a museum at Carillon Historical Park. Dayton is also home to America's Packard Museum, which contains many restored historical Packard vehicles. SunWatch Indian Village/Archaeological Park, a partially reconstructed 12th-century prehistoric American Indian village, is on the south end of Dayton; it is organized around a central plaza dominated by wood posts forming an astronomical calendar. The park includes a museum where visitors can learn about the Indian history of the Miami Valley.\nEntertainment.\nThe Vectren Dayton Air Show is an annual air show that takes place at the Dayton International Airport. The Vectren Dayton Airshow is one of the largest air shows in the United States.\nThe Dayton area is served by Five Rivers MetroParks, encompassing over 23 facilities for year-round recreation, education, and conservation. In cooperation with the Miami Conservancy District, the MetroParks maintains over of paved, multi-use scenic trails that connect Montgomery County with Greene, Miami, Warren, and Butler counties. \nFrom 1996 to 1998, Dayton hosted the National Folk Festival. Since then, the annual Cityfolk Festival has continued to bring folk, ethnic, and world music and arts to Dayton. The Five Rivers MetroParks also owns and operates the PNC Second Street Market near downtown Dayton.\nThe Dayton area hosts several arenas and venues. South of Dayton in Kettering is the Fraze Pavilion, whose notable performances have included the Backstreet Boys, Boston, and Steve Miller Band. South of downtown, on the banks of the Great Miami River, is the University of Dayton Arena, home venue for the University of Dayton Flyers basketball teams and the location of various other events and concerts. It also hosts the Winter Guard International championships, at which hundreds of percussion and color guard ensembles from around the world compete. In addition, the Dayton Amateur Radio Association hosts the annual Dayton Hamvention, North America's largest hamfest, at the Greene County Fairgrounds in nearby Xenia. The Nutter Center, which is just east of Dayton in the suburb of Fairborn, is the home arena for athletics of Wright State University and the former Dayton Bombers hockey team. This venue is used for many concerts, community events, and various national traveling shows and performances.\nThe Oregon District is a historic residential and commercial district in southeast downtown Dayton. The district is populated with art galleries, specialty shops, pubs, nightclubs, and coffee houses.\nThe city of Dayton is also host to yearly festivals, such as the Dayton Celtic Festival, the Dayton Blues Festival, Dayton Music Fest, Urban Nights, Women in Jazz, the African American and Cultural Festival, and the Dayton Reggae Fest.\nSports.\nThe Dayton area is home to several minor league and semi pro teams, as well as NCAA Division I sports programs.\nBaseball.\nThe Dayton Dragons professional baseball team is a Class A minor league affiliate for the Cincinnati Reds. The Dayton Dragons are the first (and only) team in minor league baseball history to sell out an entire season before it began and was voted as one of the top 10 hottest tickets to get in all of professional sports by Sports Illustrated. The Dayton Dragons 815 consecutive sellouts surpassed the NBA's Portland Trail Blazers for the longest sellout streak across all professional sports in the U.S.\nCollegiate.\nThe University of Dayton and Wright State University both host NCAA basketball. The University of Dayton Arena has hosted more games in the NCAA men's basketball tournament over its history than any other venue. UD Arena is also the site of the First Round games of the NCAA Tournament. In 2012, eight teams competed for the final four spots in the NCAA Basketball Tournament. Wright State University's NCAA men's basketball is the Wright State Raiders and the University of Dayton's NCAA men's basketball team is the Dayton Flyers.\nHockey.\nThe Dayton Gems were a minor league ice hockey team in the International Hockey League from 1964 to 1977, 1979 to 1980, and most recently 2009 to 2012.\nThe Dayton Bombers were an ECHL ice hockey team from 1991 to 2009. They most recently played the North Division of the ECHL's American Conference. In June 2009, it was announced the Bombers would turn in their membership back to the league.\nDespite the folding of the Bombers, hockey remained in Dayton as the Dayton Gems of the International Hockey League were formed in the fall of 2009 at Hara Arena. The Gems folded after the 2011\u201312 season. Shortly after the Gems folded, it was announced a new team, the Dayton Demonz, would begin play in 2012 in the Federal Hockey League (FHL). The Demonz folded in 2015 and were immediately replaced by the Dayton Demolition, also in the FHL. However, the Demolition would cease operations after only one season when Hara Arena decided to close due to financial difficulties.\nFootball.\nDayton hosted the first American Professional Football Association game (precursor to the NFL). The game was played at Triangle Park between the Dayton Triangles and the Columbus Panhandles on October 3, 1920, and is considered one of the first professional football games ever played. Football teams in the Dayton area include the Dayton Flyers and the Dayton Sharks.\nGolf.\nThe Dayton region is also known for the many golf courses and clubs that it hosts. The Miami Valley Golf Club, Moraine Country Club, NCR Country Club, and the Pipestone Golf Course are some of the more notable courses. Also, several PGA Championships have been held at area golf courses. The Miami Valley Golf Club hosted the 1957 PGA Championship, the Moraine Country Club hosted the 1945 PGA Championship, and the NCR Country club hosted the 1969 PGA Championship. Additionally, NCR CC hosted the 1986 U.S. Women's Open and the 2005 U.S. Senior Open. Other notable courses include the Yankee Trace Golf Club, the Beavercreek Golf Club, Dayton Meadowbrook Country Club, Sycamore Creek Country Club, Heatherwoode Golf Club, Community Golf Course, and Kitty Hawk Golf Course.\nRugby.\nThe city of Dayton is the home to the Dayton Area Rugby Club which hosts their home games at the Dayton Rugby Grounds. As of 2018, the club fields two men's and one women's side for Rugby Union and several Rugby Sevens sides. The club also hosts the annual Gem City 7's tournament.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nDayton is served in print by \"The Dayton Daily News\", the city's sole remaining daily newspaper. The \"Dayton Daily News\" is owned by Cox Enterprises. The Dayton region's main business newspaper is the \"Dayton Business Journal\". The \"Dayton City Paper,\" a community paper focused on music, art, and independent thought ceased operation in 2018. \"The Dayton Weekly News\" has been published since 1993, providing news and information to Dayton\u2019s African-American community.\nMagazines.\nThere are numerous magazines produced in and for the Dayton region. \"The Dayton Magazine\" provides insight into arts, food, and events. \"Focus on Business\" is published by the Chamber of Commerce to provide awareness of companies and initiatives affecting the regional economy\nTelevision.\nNielsen Media Research ranked the 11-county Dayton television market as the No. 62 market in the United States. The market is served by stations affiliated with major American networks including: WDTN, channel 2 \u2013 NBC, operated by Nexstar Media Group; WHIO-TV, channel 7 \u2013 CBS, operated by Cox Media Group; WPTD, channel 16 \u2013 PBS, operated by ThinkTV, which also operates WPTO, assigned to Oxford; WKEF, channel 22 \u2013 ABC/Fox, operated by Sinclair Broadcasting; WBDT, channel 26 \u2013 The CW, operated by Vaughan Media (a shell corporation of Nexstar), assigned to Springfield; WKOI-TV, channel 43 \u2013 Ion Television, assigned to Richmond, Indiana; and WRGT-TV, channel 45 \u2013 My Network TV, operated under a local marketing agreement by Sinclair Broadcasting. The nationally syndicated morning talk show \"The Daily Buzz\" originated from WBDT, the former ACME Communications property in Miamisburg, before moving to its current home in Florida.\nRadio.\nDayton is also served by 42 AM and FM radio stations directly, and numerous other stations are heard from elsewhere in southwest Ohio, which serve outlying suburbs and adjoining counties.\nTransportation.\nPublic transit.\nThe Greater Dayton Regional Transit Authority (RTA) operates public bus routes in the Dayton metro area. In addition to routes covered by traditional diesel-powered buses, RTA has several electric trolley bus routes. The Dayton trolleybus system is the second longest-running of the five remaining trolleybus systems in the U.S., having entered service in 1933. It is the present manifestation of an electric transit service that has operated continuously in Dayton since 1888.\nDayton operates a Greyhound Station which provides inter-city bus transportation to and from Dayton. The hub is in the Greater Dayton Regional Transit Authority North-West hub in Trotwood.\nAirports.\nAir transportation is available north of Dayton proper, via Dayton International Airport in Vandalia, Ohio. The airport offers service to 21 markets through 10 airlines. In 2008, it served 2.9\u00a0million passengers. The Dayton International Airport is also a significant regional air freight hub hosting FedEx Express, UPS Airlines, United States Postal Service, and major commercial freight carriers.\nThe Dayton area also has several regional airports. The Dayton\u2013Wright Brothers Airport is a general aviation airport owned by the City of Dayton south of the central business district of Dayton on Springboro Pike in Miami Township. It serves as the reliever airport for Dayton International Airport. The airport primarily serves corporate and personal aircraft users. The Dahio Trotwood Airport, also known as Dayton-New Lebanon Airport, is a privately owned, public-use airport west of the central business district of Dayton. The Moraine Airpark is a privately owned, public-use airport southwest of the city of Dayton.\nMajor highways.\nThe Dayton region is primarily served by three interstates:\nOther major routes for the region include:\nFrom 2010 through 2017, the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) performed a $533\u00a0million construction project to modify, reconstruct and widen I-75 through downtown Dayton, from Edwin C Moses Blvd. to Stanley Avenue.\nRail.\nDayton hosts several inter-modal freight railroad terminals. Two Class I railroads, CSX and Norfolk Southern Railway, operate switching yards in the city.\nFormerly the Baltimore &amp; Ohio Railroad, New York Central Railroad and the Pennsylvania Railroad, and afterward, Amtrak made long-distance passenger train stops at Dayton Union Station on S. Sixth Street. The last train leaving there was the \"National Limited\" in October 1979.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nThe Dayton Public Schools operates 34 schools that serve 16,855 students, including:\nPrivate schools.\nThe city of Dayton has more than 35 private schools within the city, including:\nCharter schools.\nDayton has 33 charter schools. Three of the top five charter schools named in 2011 are K\u20138 schools managed by National Heritage Academies. Notable charter schools include:\nColleges and universities.\nThe Dayton area was ranked tenth for higher education among metropolitan areas in the United States by \"Forbes\" in 2009. The city is home to two major universities. The University of Dayton is a private, Catholic institution founded in 1850 by the Marianist order. It has the only American Bar Association (ABA)-approved law school in the Dayton area. The University of Dayton is Ohio's largest private university and is also home to the University of Dayton Research Institute, which ranks third in the nation for sponsored materials research, and the Center for Tissue Regeneration and Engineering at Dayton, which focuses on human tissue regeneration.\nThe public Wright State University became a state university in 1967. Wright State University established the National Center for Medical Readiness, a national training program for disaster preparedness and relief. Wright State's Boonshoft School of Medicine is the Dayton area's only medical school and is a leader in biomedical research.\nDayton is also home to Sinclair Community College, the largest community college at a single location in Ohio and one of the nation's largest community colleges. Sinclair is acclaimed as one of the country's best community colleges. Sinclair was founded as the YMCA college in 1887.\nOther schools just outside Dayton that shape the educational landscape are Antioch College and Antioch University, both in Yellow Springs, Central State University in Wilberforce, Kettering College of Medical Arts and School of Advertising Art in Kettering, DeVry University in Beavercreek, and Clark State Community College and Wittenberg University in Springfield. The Air Force Institute of Technology, which was founded in 1919 and serves as a graduate school for the United States Air Force, is at the nearby Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.\nCrime.\nDayton's crime declined between 2003 and 2008 in key categories according to FBI Uniform Crime Reports and Dayton Police Department data. In 2009, crime continued to fall in the city of Dayton. Crime in the categories of forcible rape, aggravated assault, property crime, motor vehicle theft, robbery, burglary, theft and arson all showed declines for 2009. Overall, crime in Dayton dropped 40% over the previous year. The Dayton Police Department reported a total of 39 murders in 2016, which marked a 39.3% increase in homicides from 2015.\nJohn Dillinger, a bank robber during the early 1930s, was captured and arrested by Dayton city police while visiting his girlfriend at a high-class boarding house in downtown Dayton.\nOn August 4, 2019, a mass shooting took place in Dayton. Ten people were killed, including the perpetrator; and twenty-seven were injured."}
{"id": "8254", "revid": "35002153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8254", "title": "Diode", "text": "A diode is a two-terminal electronic component that conducts current primarily in one direction (asymmetric conductance); it has low (ideally zero) resistance in one direction, and high (ideally infinite) resistance in the other. A diode vacuum tube or thermionic diode is a vacuum tube with two electrodes, a heated cathode and a plate, in which electrons can flow in only one direction, from cathode to plate. A semiconductor diode, the most commonly used type today, is a crystalline piece of semiconductor material with a p\u2013n junction connected to two electrical terminals. Semiconductor diodes were the first semiconductor electronic devices. The discovery of asymmetric electrical conduction across the contact between a crystalline mineral and a metal was made by German physicist Ferdinand Braun in 1874. Today, most diodes are made of silicon, but other semiconducting materials such as gallium arsenide and germanium are also used.\nMain functions.\nThe most common function of a diode is to allow an electric current to pass in one direction (called the diode's \"forward\" direction), while blocking it in the opposite direction (the \"reverse\" direction). As such, the diode can be viewed as an electronic version of a check valve. This unidirectional behavior is called rectification, and is used to convert alternating current (ac) to direct current (dc). Forms of rectifiers, diodes can be used for such tasks as extracting modulation from radio signals in radio receivers.\nHowever, diodes can have more complicated behavior than this simple on\u2013off action, because of their nonlinear current-voltage characteristics. Semiconductor diodes begin conducting electricity only if a certain threshold voltage or cut-in voltage is present in the forward direction (a state in which the diode is said to be \"forward-biased\"). The voltage drop across a forward-biased diode varies only a little with the current, and is a function of temperature; this effect can be used as a temperature sensor or as a voltage reference. Also, diodes' high resistance to current flowing in the reverse direction suddenly drops to a low resistance when the reverse voltage across the diode reaches a value called the breakdown voltage.\nA semiconductor diode's current\u2013voltage characteristic can be tailored by selecting the semiconductor materials and the doping impurities introduced into the materials during manufacture. These techniques are used to create special-purpose diodes that perform many different functions. For example, diodes are used to regulate voltage (Zener diodes), to protect circuits from high voltage surges (avalanche diodes), to electronically tune radio and TV receivers (varactor diodes), to generate radio-frequency oscillations (tunnel diodes, Gunn diodes, IMPATT diodes), and to produce light (light-emitting diodes). Tunnel, Gunn and IMPATT diodes exhibit negative resistance, which is useful in microwave and switching circuits.\nDiodes, both vacuum and semiconductor, can be used as shot-noise generators.\nHistory.\nThermionic (vacuum-tube) diodes and solid-state (semiconductor) diodes were developed separately, at approximately the same time, in the early 1900s, as radio receiver detectors. Until the 1950s, vacuum diodes were used more frequently in radios because the early point-contact semiconductor diodes were less stable. In addition, most receiving sets had vacuum tubes for amplification that could easily have the thermionic diodes included in the tube (for example the 12SQ7 double diode triode), and vacuum-tube rectifiers and gas-filled rectifiers were capable of handling some high-voltage/high-current rectification tasks better than the semiconductor diodes (such as selenium rectifiers) that were available at that time.\nVacuum tube diodes.\nIn 1873, Frederick Guthrie observed that a grounded, white-hot metal ball brought in close proximity to an electroscope would discharge a positively charged electroscope, but not a negatively charged electroscope.\nIn 1880, Thomas Edison observed unidirectional current between heated and unheated elements in a bulb, later called Edison effect, and was granted a patent on application of the phenomenon for use in a DC voltmeter.\nAbout 20 years later, John Ambrose Fleming (scientific adviser to the Marconi Company\nand former Edison employee) realized that the Edison effect could be used as a radio detector. Fleming patented the first true thermionic diode, the Fleming valve, in Britain on November 16, 1904 (followed by in November 1905).\nThroughout the vacuum tube era, valve diodes were used in almost all electronics such as radios, televisions, sound systems, and instrumentation. They slowly lost market share beginning in the late 1940s due to selenium rectifier technology and then to semiconductor diodes during the 1960s. Today they are still used in a few high power applications where their ability to withstand transient voltages and their robustness gives them an advantage over semiconductor devices, and in musical instrument and audiophile applications.\nSolid-state diodes.\nIn 1874, German scientist Karl Ferdinand Braun discovered the \"unilateral conduction\" across a contact between a metal and a mineral. Jagadish Chandra Bose was the first to use a crystal for detecting radio waves in 1894. The crystal detector was developed into a practical device for wireless telegraphy by Greenleaf Whittier Pickard, who invented a silicon crystal detector in 1903 and received a patent for it on November 20, 1906. Other experimenters tried a variety of other minerals as detectors. Semiconductor principles were unknown to the developers of these early rectifiers. During the 1930s understanding of physics advanced and in the mid 1930s researchers at Bell Telephone Laboratories recognized the potential of the crystal detector for application in microwave technology. Researchers at Bell Labs, Western Electric, MIT, Purdue and in the UK intensively developed point-contact diodes (\"crystal rectifiers\" or \"crystal diodes\") during World War II for application in radar. After World War II, AT&amp;T used these in their microwave towers that criss-crossed the United States, and many radar sets use them even in the 21st century. In 1946, Sylvania began offering the 1N34 crystal diode. During the early 1950s, junction diodes were developed.\nEtymology.\nAt the time of their invention, asymmetrical conduction devices were known as rectifiers. In 1919, the year tetrodes were invented, William Henry Eccles coined the term \"diode\" from the Greek roots \"di\" (from \"\u03b4\u03af\"), meaning 'two', and \"ode\" (from \"\u03bf\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2\"), meaning 'path'. The word \"diode\", however, as well as \"triode, tetrode, pentode, hexode\", were already in use as terms of multiplex telegraphy.\nRectifiers.\nAlthough all diodes \"rectify\", the term \"rectifier\" is usually applied to diodes intended for power supply application in order to differentiate them from diodes intended for small signal circuits.\nVacuum tube diodes.\nA thermionic diode is a thermionic-valve device consisting of a sealed, evacuated glass or metal envelope containing two electrodes: a cathode and a plate. The cathode is either \"indirectly heated\" or \"directly heated\". If indirect heating is employed, a heater is included in the envelope.\nIn operation, the cathode is heated to red heat (800\u20131000\u00a0\u00b0C, 1500-1800\u00b0F). A directly heated cathode is made of tungsten wire and is heated by a current passed through it from an external voltage source. An indirectly heated cathode is heated by infrared radiation from a nearby heater that is formed of Nichrome wire and supplied with current provided by an external voltage source.\nThe operating temperature of the cathode causes it to release electrons into the vacuum, a process called thermionic emission. The cathode is coated with oxides of alkaline earth metals, such as barium and strontium oxides. These have a low work function, meaning that they more readily emit electrons than would the uncoated cathode.\nThe plate, not being heated, does not emit electrons; but is able to absorb them.\nThe alternating voltage to be rectified is applied between the cathode and the plate. When the plate voltage is positive with respect to the cathode, the plate electrostatically attracts the electrons from the cathode, so a current of electrons flows through the tube from cathode to plate. When the plate voltage is negative with respect to the cathode, no electrons are emitted by the plate, so no current can pass from the plate to the cathode.\nSemiconductor diodes.\nPoint-contact diodes.\nPoint-contact diodes were developed starting in the 1930s, out of the early crystal detector technology, and are now generally used in the 3 to 30 gigahertz range. Point-contact diodes use a small diameter metal wire in contact with a semiconductor crystal, and are of either \"non-welded\" contact type or \"welded contact\" type. Non-welded contact construction utilizes the Schottky barrier principle. The metal side is the pointed end of a small diameter wire that is in contact with the semiconductor crystal. In the welded contact type, a small P region is formed in the otherwise N-type crystal around the metal point during manufacture by momentarily passing a relatively large current through the device. Point contact diodes generally exhibit lower capacitance, higher forward resistance and greater reverse leakage than junction diodes.\nJunction diodes.\np\u2013n junction diode.\nA p\u2013n junction diode is made of a crystal of semiconductor, usually silicon, but germanium and gallium arsenide are also used. Impurities are added to it to create a region on one side that contains negative charge carriers (electrons), called an n-type semiconductor, and a region on the other side that contains positive charge carriers (holes), called a p-type semiconductor. When the n-type and p-type materials are attached together, a momentary flow of electrons occurs from the n to the p side resulting in a third region between the two where no charge carriers are present. This region is called the depletion region because there are no charge carriers (neither electrons nor holes) in it. The diode's terminals are attached to the n-type and p-type regions. The boundary between these two regions called a p\u2013n junction, is where the action of the diode takes place. When a sufficiently higher electrical potential is applied to the P side (the anode) than to the N side (the cathode), it allows electrons to flow through the depletion region from the N-type side to the P-type side. The junction does not allow the flow of electrons in the opposite direction when the potential is applied in reverse, creating, in a sense, an electrical check valve.\nSchottky diode.\nAnother type of junction diode, the Schottky diode, is formed from a metal\u2013semiconductor junction rather than a p\u2013n junction, which reduces capacitance and increases switching speed.\nCurrent\u2013voltage characteristic.\nA semiconductor diode's behavior in a circuit is given by its current\u2013voltage characteristic, or I\u2013V graph (see graph below). The shape of the curve is determined by the transport of charge carriers through the so-called \"depletion layer\" or \"depletion region\" that exists at the p\u2013n junction between differing semiconductors. When a p\u2013n junction is first created, conduction-band (mobile) electrons from the N-doped region diffuse into the P-doped region where there is a large population of holes (vacant places for electrons) with which the electrons \"recombine\". When a mobile electron recombines with a hole, both hole and electron vanish, leaving behind an immobile positively charged donor (dopant) on the N side and negatively charged acceptor (dopant) on the P side. The region around the p\u2013n junction becomes depleted of charge carriers and thus behaves as an insulator.\nHowever, the width of the depletion region (called the depletion width) cannot grow without limit. For each electron\u2013hole pair recombination made, a positively charged dopant ion is left behind in the N-doped region, and a negatively charged dopant ion is created in the P-doped region. As recombination proceeds and more ions are created, an increasing electric field develops through the depletion zone that acts to slow and then finally stop recombination. At this point, there is a \"built-in\" potential across the depletion zone.\nReverse bias.\nIf an external voltage is placed across the diode with the same polarity as the built-in potential, the depletion zone continues to act as an insulator, preventing any significant electric current flow (unless electron\u2013hole pairs are actively being created in the junction by, for instance, light; see photodiode). This is called the \"reverse bias\" phenomenon.\nForward bias.\nHowever, if the polarity of the external voltage opposes the built-in potential, recombination can once again proceed, resulting in a substantial electric current through the p\u2013n junction (i.e. substantial numbers of electrons and holes recombine at the junction). For silicon diodes, the built-in potential is approximately 0.7 V (0.3 V for germanium and 0.2 V for Schottky). Thus, if an external voltage greater than and opposite to the built-in voltage is applied, a current will flow and the diode is said to be \"turned on\" as it has been given an external \"forward bias\". The diode is commonly said to have a forward \"threshold\" voltage, above which it conducts and below which conduction stops. However, this is only an approximation as the forward characteristic is smooth (see I-V graph above).\nA diode's I\u2013V characteristic can be approximated by four regions of operation:\nIn a small silicon diode operating at its rated currents, the voltage drop is about 0.6 to 0.7 volts. The value is different for other diode types\u2014Schottky diodes can be rated as low as 0.2 V, germanium diodes 0.25 to 0.3 V, and red or blue light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can have values of 1.4 V and 4.0 V respectively.\nAt higher currents, the forward voltage drop of the diode increases. A drop of 1 V to 1.5 V is typical at full rated current for power diodes.\nShockley diode equation.\nThe \"Shockley ideal diode equation\" or the \"diode law\" (named after the bipolar junction transistor co-inventor William Bradford Shockley) gives the I\u2013V characteristic of an ideal diode in either forward or reverse bias (or no bias). The following equation is called the \"Shockley ideal diode equation\" when \"n\", the ideality factor, is set equal to 1 :\nwhere\nThe thermal voltage \"V\"T is approximately 25.85 mV at 300 K, a temperature close to \"room temperature\" commonly used in device simulation software. At any temperature it is a known constant defined by:\nwhere \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant, \"T\" is the absolute temperature of the p\u2013n junction, and \"q\" is the magnitude of charge of an electron (the elementary charge).\nThe reverse saturation current, \"I\"S, is not constant for a given device, but varies with temperature; usually more significantly than \"V\"T, so that \"V\"D typically decreases as \"T\" increases.\nThe \"Shockley ideal diode equation\" or the \"diode law\" is derived with the assumption that the only processes giving rise to the current in the diode are drift (due to electrical field), diffusion, and thermal recombination\u2013generation (R\u2013G) (this equation is derived by setting n = 1 above). It also assumes that the R\u2013G current in the depletion region is insignificant. This means that the \"Shockley ideal diode equation\" does not account for the processes involved in the reverse breakdown and photon-assisted R\u2013G. Additionally, it does not describe the \"leveling off\" of the I\u2013V curve at high forward bias due to internal resistance. Introducing the ideality factor, n, accounts for recombination and generation of carriers.\nUnder \"reverse bias\" voltages the exponential in the diode equation is negligible, and the current is a constant (negative) reverse current value of \u2212\"IS\". The reverse \"breakdown region\" is not modeled by the Shockley diode equation.\nFor even rather small \"forward bias\" voltages the exponential is very large since the thermal voltage is very small in comparison. The subtracted '1' in the diode equation is then negligible and the forward diode current can be approximated by\nThe use of the diode equation in circuit problems is illustrated in the article on diode modeling.\nSmall-signal behavior.\nAt forward voltages less than the saturation voltage, the voltage versus current characteristic curve of most diodes is not a straight line. The current can be approximated by formula_3 as mentioned in the previous section.\nIn detector and mixer applications, the current can be estimated by a Taylor's series. The odd terms can be omitted because they produce frequency components that are outside the pass band of the mixer or detector. Even terms beyond the second derivative usually need not be included because they are small compared to the second order term. The desired current component is approximately proportional to the square of the input voltage, so the response is called \"square law\" in this region.\nReverse-recovery effect.\nFollowing the end of forwarding conduction in a p\u2013n type diode, a reverse current can flow for a short time. The device does not attain its blocking capability until the mobile charge in the junction is depleted.\nThe effect can be significant when switching large currents very quickly. A certain amount of \"reverse recovery time\" r (on the order of tens of nanoseconds to a few microseconds) may be required to remove the reverse recovery charge r from the diode. During this recovery time, the diode can actually conduct in the reverse direction. This might give rise to a large constant current in the reverse direction for a short time while the diode is reverse biased. The magnitude of such a reverse current is determined by the operating circuit (i.e., the series resistance) and the diode is said to be in the storage-phase. In certain real-world cases it is important to consider the losses that are incurred by this non-ideal diode effect. However, when the slew rate of the current is not so severe (e.g. Line frequency) the effect can be safely ignored. For most applications, the effect is also negligible for Schottky diodes.\nThe reverse current ceases abruptly when the stored charge is depleted; this abrupt stop is exploited in step recovery diodes for the generation of extremely short pulses.\nTypes of semiconductor diode.\nNormal (p\u2013n) diodes, which operate as described above, are usually made of doped silicon or germanium. Before the development of silicon power rectifier diodes, cuprous oxide and later selenium was used. Their low efficiency required a much higher forward voltage to be applied (typically 1.4 to 1.7\u00a0V per \"cell\", with multiple cells stacked so as to increase the peak inverse voltage rating for application in high voltage rectifiers), and required a large heat sink (often an extension of the diode's metal substrate), much larger than the later silicon diode of the same current ratings would require. The vast majority of all diodes are the p\u2013n diodes found in CMOS integrated circuits, which include two diodes per pin and many other internal diodes.\nOther uses for semiconductor diodes include the sensing of temperature, and computing analog logarithms (see Operational amplifier applications#Logarithmic output).\nGraphic symbols.\nThe symbol used to represent a particular type of diode in a circuit diagram conveys the general electrical function to the reader. There are alternative symbols for some types of diodes, though the differences are minor. The triangle in the symbols points to the forward direction, i.e. in the direction of conventional current flow.\nNumbering and coding schemes.\nThere are a number of common, standard and manufacturer-driven numbering and coding schemes for diodes; the two most common being the EIA/JEDEC standard and the European Pro Electron standard:\nEIA/JEDEC.\nThe standardized 1N-series numbering \"EIA370\" system was introduced in the US by EIA/JEDEC (Joint Electron Device Engineering Council) about 1960. Most diodes have a 1-prefix designation (e.g., 1N4003). Among the most popular in this series were: 1N34A/1N270 (germanium signal), 1N914/1N4148 (silicon signal), 1N400x (silicon 1A power rectifier), and 1N580x (silicon 3A power rectifier).\nJIS.\nThe JIS semiconductor designation system has all semiconductor diode designations starting with \"1S\".\nPro Electron.\nThe European Pro Electron coding system for active components was introduced in 1966 and comprises two letters followed by the part code. The first letter represents the semiconductor material used for the component (A = germanium and B = silicon) and the second letter represents the general function of the part (for diodes, A = low-power/signal, B = variable capacitance, X = multiplier, Y = rectifier and Z = voltage reference); for example:\nOther common numbering/coding systems (generally manufacturer-driven) include:\nRelated devices.\nIn optics, an equivalent device for the diode but with laser light would be the Optical isolator, also known as an Optical Diode, that allows light to only pass in one direction. It uses a Faraday rotator as the main component.\nApplications.\nRadio demodulation.\nThe first use for the diode was the demodulation of amplitude modulated (AM) radio broadcasts. The history of this discovery is treated in depth in the crystal detector article. In summary, an AM signal consists of alternating positive and negative peaks of a radio carrier wave, whose amplitude or envelope is proportional to the original audio signal. The diode rectifies the AM radio frequency signal, leaving only the positive peaks of the carrier wave. The audio is then extracted from the rectified carrier wave using a simple filter and fed into an audio amplifier or transducer, which generates sound waves.\nIn microwave and millimeter wave technology, beginning in the 1930s, researchers improved and miniaturized the crystal detector. Point contact diodes (\"crystal diodes\") and Schottky diodes are used in radar, microwave and millimeter wave detectors.\nPower conversion.\nRectifiers are constructed from diodes, where they are used to convert alternating current (AC) electricity into direct current (DC). Automotive alternators are a common example, where the diode, which rectifies the AC into DC, provides better performance than the commutator or earlier, dynamo. Similarly, diodes are also used in \"Cockcroft\u2013Walton voltage multipliers\" to convert AC into higher DC voltages.\nReverse-voltage protection.\nSince most electronic circuits can be damaged when the polarity of their power supply inputs are reversed, a series diode is sometimes used to protect against such situations. This concept is known by multiple naming variations that mean the same thing: reverse voltage protection, reverse polarity protection, and reverse battery protection.\nOver-voltage protection.\nDiodes are frequently used to conduct damaging high voltages away from sensitive electronic devices. They are usually reverse-biased (non-conducting) under normal circumstances. When the voltage rises above the normal range, the diodes become forward-biased (conducting). For example, diodes are used in (stepper motor and H-bridge) motor controller and relay circuits to de-energize coils rapidly without the damaging voltage spikes that would otherwise occur. (A diode used in such an application is called a flyback diode). Many integrated circuits also incorporate diodes on the connection pins to prevent external voltages from damaging their sensitive transistors. Specialized diodes are used to protect from over-voltages at higher power (see Diode types above).\nLogic gates.\nDiodes can be combined with other components to construct AND and OR logic gates. This is referred to as diode logic.\nIonizing radiation detectors.\nIn addition to light, mentioned above, semiconductor diodes are sensitive to more energetic radiation. In electronics, cosmic rays and other sources of ionizing radiation cause noise pulses and single and multiple bit errors.\nThis effect is sometimes exploited by particle detectors to detect radiation. A single particle of radiation, with thousands or millions of electron volt, s of energy, generates many charge carrier pairs, as its energy is deposited in the semiconductor material. If the depletion layer is large enough to catch the whole shower or to stop a heavy particle, a fairly accurate measurement of the particle's energy can be made, simply by measuring the charge conducted and without the complexity of a magnetic spectrometer, etc.\nThese semiconductor radiation detectors need efficient and uniform charge collection and low leakage current. They are often cooled by liquid nitrogen. For longer-range (about a centimeter) particles, they need a very large depletion depth and large area. For short-range particles, they need any contact or un-depleted semiconductor on at least one surface to be very thin. The back-bias voltages are near breakdown (around a thousand volts per centimeter). Germanium and silicon are common materials. Some of these detectors sense position as well as energy.\nThey have a finite life, especially when detecting heavy particles, because of radiation damage. Silicon and germanium are quite different in their ability to convert gamma rays to electron showers.\nSemiconductor detectors for high-energy particles are used in large numbers. Because of energy loss fluctuations, accurate measurement of the energy deposited is of less use.\nTemperature measurements.\nA diode can be used as a temperature measuring device, since the forward voltage drop across the diode depends on temperature, as in a silicon bandgap temperature sensor. From the Shockley ideal diode equation given above, it might \"appear\" that the voltage has a \"positive\" temperature coefficient (at a constant current), but usually the variation of the reverse saturation current term is more significant than the variation in the thermal voltage term. Most diodes therefore have a \"negative\" temperature coefficient, typically \u22122 mV/\u00b0C for silicon diodes. The temperature coefficient is approximately constant for temperatures above about 20 kelvin. Some graphs are given for 1N400x series, and CY7 cryogenic temperature sensor.\nCurrent steering.\nDiodes will prevent currents in unintended directions. To supply power to an electrical circuit during a power failure, the circuit can draw current from a battery. An uninterruptible power supply may use diodes in this way to ensure that the current is only drawn from the battery when necessary. Likewise, small boats typically have two circuits each with their own battery/batteries: one used for engine starting; one used for domestics. Normally, both are charged from a single alternator, and a heavy-duty split-charge diode is used to prevent the higher-charge battery (typically the engine battery) from discharging through the lower-charge battery when the alternator is not running.\nDiodes are also used in electronic musical keyboards. To reduce the amount of wiring needed in electronic musical keyboards, these instruments often use keyboard matrix circuits. The keyboard controller scans the rows and columns to determine which note the player has pressed. The problem with matrix circuits is that, when several notes are pressed at once, the current can flow backward through the circuit and trigger \"phantom keys\" that cause \"ghost\" notes to play. To avoid triggering unwanted notes, most keyboard matrix circuits have diodes soldered with the switch under each key of the musical keyboard. The same principle is also used for the switch matrix in solid-state pinball machines.\nWaveform clipper.\nDiodes can be used to limit the positive or negative excursion of a signal to a prescribed voltage.\nClamper.\nA diode clamp circuit can take a periodic alternating current signal that oscillates between positive and negative values, and vertically displace it such that either the positive or the negative peaks occur at a prescribed level. The clamper does not restrict the peak-to-peak excursion of the signal, it moves the whole signal up or down so as to place the peaks at the reference level.\nAbbreviations.\nDiodes are usually referred to as \"D\" for diode on PCBs. Sometimes the abbreviation \"CR\" for \"crystal rectifier\" is used."}
{"id": "8255", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8255", "title": "DX communication", "text": ""}
{"id": "8256", "revid": "30826712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8256", "title": "Drexel University", "text": "Drexel University is a private research university with its main campus in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. It was founded in 1891 by Anthony J. Drexel, a financier and philanthropist. Founded as Drexel Institute of Art, Science and Industry, it was renamed Drexel Institute of Technology in 1936, before assuming its current name in 1970.\n, more than 24,000 students were enrolled in over 70 undergraduate programs and more than 100 master's, doctoral, and professional programs at the university. Drexel's cooperative education program (co-op) is a prominent aspect of the school's degree programs, offering students the opportunity to gain up to 18 months of paid, full-time work experience in a field relevant to their undergraduate major or graduate degree program prior to graduation.\nHistory.\nDrexel University was founded in 1891 as the Drexel Institute of Art, Science and Industry, by Philadelphia financier and philanthropist Anthony J. Drexel. The original mission of the institution was to provide educational opportunities in the \"practical arts and sciences\" for women and men of all backgrounds. The institution became known as the Drexel Institute of Technology in 1936, and in 1970 the Drexel Institute of Technology gained university status, becoming Drexel University.\nAlthough there were many changes during its first century, the university's identity has been held constant as a privately controlled, non-sectarian, coeducational center of higher learning, distinguished by a commitment to practical education and hands-on experience in an occupational setting. The central aspect of Drexel University's focus on career preparation, in the form of its cooperative education program, was introduced in 1919. The program became integral to the university's unique educational experience. Participating students alternate periods of classroom-based study with periods of full-time, practical work experience related to their academic major and career interests.\nBetween 1995 and 2009, Drexel University underwent a period of significant change to its programs, enrollment, and facilities under the leadership of Dr. Constantine Papadakis, the university's president during that time. Papadakis oversaw Drexel's largest expansion in its history, with a 471 percent increase in its endowment and a 102 percent increase in student enrollment. His leadership also guided the university toward improved performance in collegiate rankings, a more selective approach to admissions, and a more rigorous academic program at all levels. It was during this period of expansion that Drexel acquired and assumed management of the former MCP Hahnemann University, creating the Drexel University College of Medicine in 2002. In 2006, the university established the Thomas R. Kline School of Law, and in 2011 the School of Law achieved full accreditation by the American Bar Association.\nDr. Constantine Papadakis died of pneumonia in April 2009 while still employed as the university's president. His successor, John Anderson Fry, was formerly the president of Franklin &amp; Marshall College and served as the Executive Vice President of the University of Pennsylvania. Under Fry's leadership, Drexel has continued its expansion, including the July 2011 acquisition of The Academy of Natural Sciences.\nAcademics.\nSchools and colleges.\nCollege of Arts and Sciences.\nThe College of Arts and Sciences was formed in 1990 when Drexel merged the two existing College of Sciences and College of Humanities together.\nAntoinette Westphal College of Media Arts and Design.\nThe College of Media Arts and Design \"fosters the study, exploration and management of the arts: media, design, the performing and visual\". The college offers sixteen undergraduate programs, and 6 graduate programs, in modern art and design fields that range from graphic design and dance to fashion design and television management. Its wide range of programs has helped the college earn full accreditation from the National Association of Schools of Art and Design, the National Architectural Accrediting Board, and the Council for Interior Design Accreditation.\nBennett S. LeBow College of Business.\nThe Bennett S. LeBow College of Business history dates to the founding in 1891 of the Drexel Institute, that later became Drexel University, and of its Business Department in 1896. Today LeBow offers thirteen undergraduate majors, eight graduate programs, and two doctoral programs; 22 percent of Drexel University's undergraduate students are enrolled in a LeBow College of Business program. \nThe LeBow College of Business has been ranked as the 38th best private business school in the nation. Its online MBA program is ranked 14th in the world by the \"Financial Times\"; the publication also ranks the undergraduate business program at LeBow as 19th in the United States. The part-time MBA program ranks 1st in academic quality in the 2015 edition of \"Business Insider's\" rankings. Undergraduate and graduate entrepreneurship programs are ranked 19th in the country by the \"Princeton Review\". Lebow College of Business's Master of Finance program is ranked 101st in the world by the 2020 QS World University Rankings.\nSchool of Economics.\nEconomics programs at the LeBow College of Business are housed within the School of Economics. In addition to the undergraduate program in economics, the school is home to an M.S. in Economics program as well as a PhD program in economics. Faculty members in the School of Economics have been published in the \"American Economic Review\", \"RAND Journal of Economics\", and \"Review of Economics and Statistics.\" The school has been ranked among the best in the world for its extensive research into matters of international trade.\nCollege of Engineering.\nDrexel's College of Engineering is one of its oldest and largest academic colleges, and served as the original focus of the career-oriented school upon its founding in 1891. The College of Engineering is home to several notable alumni, including two astronauts; financier Bennett S. LeBow, for whom the university's College of Business is named; and Paul Baran, inventor of the packet-switched network. Today, Drexel University's College of Engineering, which is home to 19 percent of the undergraduate student body, is known for creating the world's first engineering degree in appropriate technology. The college is also one of only 17 U.S. universities to offer a bachelor's degree in architectural engineering, and only one of five private institutions to do so.\nThe Drexel Engineering Curriculum (tDEC).\nThe 2006 edition of U.S. News ranks the undergraduate engineering program #57 in the country and the 2007 edition of graduate schools ranks the graduate program #61. The 2008 edition ranks the University Engineering Program at #55 and in the 2009 US News Ranking, the university has moved up to the #52 position.\nThe engineering curriculum used by the school was originally called E4 (Enhanced Educational Experience for Engineers) which was established in 1986 and funded in part by the Engineering Directorate of the National Science Foundation. In 1988 the program evolved into tDEC (the Drexel Engineering Curriculum) which is composed of two full years of rigorous core engineering courses which encompass the freshman and sophomore years of the engineering student. The College of Engineering hasn't used the tDEC curriculum since approximately 2005.\nCollege of Computing and Informatics.\nThe College of Computing and Informatics is a recent addition to Drexel University, though its programs have been offered to students for many years. The college was formed by the consolidation of the former College of Information Science &amp; Technology (often called the \"iSchool\"), the Department of Computer Science, and the Computing and Security Technology program. Undergraduate and graduate programs in computer science, software engineering, data science, information systems, and computer security are offered by the college.\nCollege of Medicine.\nThe Drexel University College of Medicine was added to the colleges and schools of the university in 2002, having been formed upon the acquisition of MCP Hahnemann University. In addition to its M.D. program, the College of Medicine offers more than 40 graduate programs in its Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences and Professional Studies.\nGraduate School of Biomedical Sciences and Professional Studies.\nThe Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences and Professional studies offers both Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy degree programs in fields like biochemistry, biotechnology, clinical research, and forensic science. The school also serves as the center for biomedical research at Drexel University.\nSchool of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems.\nFounded in 1961 as the United States\u2019 first Biomedical Engineering and Science Institute, the School of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems focuses on the emerging field of biomedical science at the undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral levels. Primary research areas within the school include bioinformatics, biomechanics, biomaterials, neuroengineering, and cardiovascular engineering.\nCollege of Nursing and Health Professions.\nFormed in 2002 along with the College of Medicine, Drexel's College of Nursing and Health Professions offers more than 25 programs to undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of nursing, nutrition, health sciences, health services, and radiologic technology. The college's research into matters of nutrition and rehabilitation have garnered approximately $2.9 million in external research funding on an annual basis. The physician assistant program at Drexel's College of Nursing and Health Professions is ranked in the top 15 such programs in the United States; its anesthesia programs and physical therapy programs are, respectively, ranked as top-50 programs nationwide.\nRichard C. Goodwin College of Professional Studies.\nEstablished in 1892, the department now known as the College of Professional Studies has focused exclusively on educational programs and pursuits for nontraditional adult learners. Today, the Goodwin College of Professional Studies offers several options designed for adult learners at all stages of career and educational development. Bachelor of Science degree completion programs are offered in part-time evening or weekend formats; graduate programs and doctoral programs are offered at the graduate level, as are self-paced \"continuing education\" courses and nearly a dozen self-paced certification programs.\nPennoni Honors College.\nThe Pennoni Honors College, named for Drexel alumnus and trustee Dr. C.R. \"Chuck\" Pennoni '63, '66, Hon. '92, and his wife Annette, recognizes and promotes excellence among Drexel students. Students admitted to the Honors College live together and take many of the same classes; the college provides these students with access to unique cultural and social activities and a unique guest speaker series. Students are also involved in the university's Honors Student Advisory Committee and have the opportunity to take part in Drexel's \"Alternative Spring Break\", an international study tour held each spring.\nThomas R. Kline School of Law.\nUpon its founding in 2006, the Thomas R. Kline School of Law, originally known as the Earle Mack School of Law, was the first law school founded in Philadelphia in more than three decades. The School of Law offers L.L.M. and Master of Legal Studies degrees, in addition to the flagship Juris Doctorate program, and uniquely offers cooperative education as part of its curriculum across all programs. In 2015, \"Bloomberg Business\" ranked the Kline School of Law as the second most underrated law school in the United States.\nSchool of Education.\nOne of the oldest schools within Drexel University, the modern School of Education dates back to the 1891 founding of the school. Originally, the Department of Education offered teacher training to women as one of its original, career-focused degree programs. Today, the School of Education offers a coeducational approach to teacher training at the elementary and secondary levels for undergraduates. Other undergraduate programs include those focused on the intersection between learning and technology, teacher certification for non-education majors, and a minor in education for students with an interest in instruction. Graduate degrees offered by the School of Education include those in administration and leadership, special education, higher education, mathematics education, international education, and educational creativity and innovation. Doctoral degrees are offered in educational leadership and learning technologies. \nDornsife School of Public Health.\nThe School of Public Health states that its mission is to \"provide education, conduct research, and partner with communities and organizations to improve the health of populations\". To that end, the school offers both a B.S. and a minor in public health for undergraduate students as well as several options for students pursuing graduate and doctoral degrees in the field. At the graduate level, the Dornsife School offers both a Master of Public Health and an Executive Master of Public Health, as well as an M.S. in biostatistics and an M.S. in epidemiology. Two Doctor of Public Health degrees are also offered, as isa Doctor of Philosophy in epidemiology. The school's graduate and doctoral students are heavily invested in the research activities of the Dornsife School of Public Health, which has helped the school attract annual funding for its four research centers.\nCenter for Hospitality and Sport Management.\nThe Center for Hospitality and Sport Management was formed in 2013, in an effort to house and consolidate academic programs in hospitality, tourism management, the culinary arts, and sport management. Academic programs combine the unique skills required of the sports and hospitality industries with the principles and curriculum espoused by the management programs within Drexel's LeBow College of Business.\nCharles D. Close School of Entrepreneurship.\nFocusing specifically on the skills required to successfully start and launch a business, the Charles D. Close School of Entrepreneurship is the first and only freestanding school of entrepreneurship in the United States. Undergraduate students take part in a B.A. program in entrepreneurship and innovation, while graduate students a combined Master of Science degree in biomedicine and entrepreneurship. Minors in entrepreneurship are also offered to undergraduate students.\nLaurence A. Baiada Institute for Entrepreneurship.\nHoused within the Close School is the Baiada Institute for Entrepreneurship. The institute serves as an incubator for Drexel student startups, providing resources and mentorships to students and some post-graduates who are starting their own business while enrolled in one of the Close School's degree programs or academic minors.\nOnline education.\nDrexel University launched its first Internet-based education program, a master's degree in Library &amp; Information Science, in 1996. In 2001, Drexel created its wholly owned, for-profit online education subsidiary, Drexel e-Learning, Inc., better known as Drexel University Online. It was announced in October 2013 that Drexel University Online would no longer be a for-profit venture, but rather become an internal division within the university to better serve its online student population. Although headquartered in Philadelphia, Drexel announced a new Washington, D.C., location in December 2012 to serve as both an academic and outreach center, catering to the online student population.\nIn an effort to create greater awareness of distance learning and to recognize exceptional leaders and best practices in the field, Drexel University Online founded National Distance Learning Week, in conjunction with the United States Distance Learning Association, in 2007. In September 2010, Drexel University Online received the Sloan-C award for institution-wide excellence in online education indicating that it had exceptional programs of \"demonstrably high quality\" at the regional and national levels and across disciplines. Drexel University Online won the 2008 United States Distance Learning Association's Best Practices Awards for Distance Learning Programming. In 2007, the online education subsidiary had a revenue of $40 million. In March 2013, Drexel Online had more than 7,000 unique students from all 50 states and more than 20 countries pursuing a bachelor's, master's, or certificate. , Drexel University Online offers more than 100 fully accredited master's degrees, bachelor's degrees and certificate programs.\nCooperative education program.\nDrexel's longstanding cooperative education, or \"co-op\" program is one of the largest and oldest in the United States. Drexel has a fully internet-based job database, where students can submit r\u00e9sum\u00e9s and request interviews with any of the thousands of companies that offer positions. Students also have the option of obtaining a co-op via independent search. A student graduating from Drexel's 5-year degree program typically has a total of 18 months of co-op with up to three different companies. The majority of co-ops are paid, averaging $18,720 per 6-month period, however this figure changes with major. About one third of Drexel graduates are offered full-time positions by their co-op employers right after graduation.\nResearch activity.\nDrexel is classified among \". The university was ranked 51st in the 2018 edition of the \"Top 100 Worldwide Universities Granted U.S. Utility Patents\" list released by the National Academy of Inventors and the Intellectual Property Owners Association.\nResearch Centers and Institutes at Drexel include:\nRankings.\nIn its 2021 rankings, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Drexel tied for 133rd among national universities in the United States, tied for 23rd in the \"Most Innovative Schools\" category, 78th in \"Best Value Schools\", and tied for 291 in \"Top Performers on Social Mobility.\nIn its 2018 rankings, \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" and the \"Wall Street Journal\" ranked Drexel 74th among national universities and 351st-400th among international universities.\nIn its 2018 rankings, \"Forbes\" ranked Drexel 24th among STEM universities. In 2019, it also ranked Drexel 226th among 650 national universities, liberal arts colleges and service academies, 120th among research universities, 154th among private universities, and 96th among universities in the Northeast.\nIn 2016, \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" ranked the undergraduate business program 78th in the country. In 2014, Business Insider ranked Drexel's graduate business school 19th in the country for networking.\nIn 2014, \"The Princeton Review\" ranked Drexel 20th in its list of worst college libraries.\nCampuses.\nDrexel University's programs are divided across three Philadelphia-area campuses: the University City Campus, the Center City Campus and the Queen Lane College of Medicine Campus.\nUniversity City Main Campus.\nThe University City Main Campus of Drexel University is located just west of the Schuylkill River in the University City district of Philadelphia. It is Drexel's largest and oldest campus; the campus contains the university's administrative offices and serves as the main academic center for students. The northern, residential portion of the main campus is located in the Powelton Village section of West Philadelphia. The two prominent performing stages at Drexel University are the Mandell Theater and the Main Auditorium. The Main Auditorium dates back to the founding of Drexel and construction of its main hall. It features over 1000 seats, and a pipe organ installed in 1928. The organ was purchased by Saturday Evening Post publisher Cyrus H. K. Curtis after he had donated a similar organ, the Curtis Organ, to nearby University of Pennsylvania and it was suggested that he do the same for Drexel. The 424-seat Mandell Theater was built in 1973 and features a more performance-oriented stage, including a full fly system, modern stage lighting facilities, stadium seating, and accommodations for wheelchairs. It is used for the semiannual spring musical, as well as various plays and many events.\nQueen Lane Campus.\nThe Queen Lane Campus was purchased by Drexel University as part of its acquisition of MCP Hahnemann University. It is located in the East Falls neighborhood of northwest Philadelphia and is primarily utilized by first- and second-year medical students, and researchers. A free shuttle is available, connecting the Queen Lane Campus to the Center City Hahnemann and University City Main campuses.\nCenter City Campus.\nThe Center City Campus is in the middle of Philadelphia, straddling the Vine Street Expressway between Broad and 15th Streets. Shuttle service is offered between the Center City Campus and both the University City and Queen Lane campuses of the university.\nThe Academy of Natural Sciences.\nIn 2011, The Academy of Natural Sciences entered into an agreement to become a subsidiary of Drexel University. Founded in 1812, the Academy of Natural Sciences is America's oldest natural history museum and is a world leader in biodiversity and environmental research.\nDrexel University Sacramento.\nOn January 5, 2009, Drexel University opened the Center for Graduate Studies in Sacramento, California. Eventually renamed Drexel University Sacramento upon the addition of an undergraduate program in business administration, the campus also offered an Ed.D. program in Educational Leadership and Management and master's degree programs in Business Administration, Finance, Higher Education, Human Resource Development, Public Health, and Interdepartmental Medical Science. On March 5, 2015, Drexel University announced the closure of the Sacramento campus, with an 18-month \"phase out\" period designed to allow current students to complete their degrees.\nStudent life.\nStudent government.\nThe Undergraduate Student Government Association of Drexel University works with administrators to solve student problems and tries to promote communication between the students and the administration.\nGraduate Students Association.\nThe Graduate Student Association \"advocates the interests and addresses concerns of graduate students at Drexel; strives to enhance graduate student life at the University in all aspects, from academic to campus security; and provides a formal means of communication between graduate students and the University community\".\nCampus Activities Board.\nThe Campus Activities Board (CAB) is an undergraduate, student-run event planning organization. CAB creates events for the undergraduate population. To assist with planning and organization, the Campus Activities Board is broken down into 5 committees: Special Events, Traditions, Marketing, Culture and Discovery, and Performing and Fine Arts.\nJewish Life on Campus.\nDrexel has an approximate Jewish population of 5% and has both a Chabad House and a Hillel. Both provide services to Jewish and non-Jewish students at Drexel. Due to the recent influx of Orthodox Jewish students the Chabad now has its own daily kosher meal plan. The Hillel also has hot kosher food but only on select nights. There is also an eruv which is jointly managed by Jewish students from Drexel and the University of Pennsylvania.\nPress and radio.\nRadio.\nWKDU is Drexel's student-run FM radio station, with membership open to all undergraduate students. Its status as an 800-watt, non-commercial station in a major market city has given it a wider audience and a higher profile than many other college radio stations.\nTelevision.\nDUTV is Drexel's Philadelphia cable television station. The student operated station is part of the Paul F. Harron Studios at Drexel University. The purpose of DUTV is to provide \"the people of Philadelphia with quality educational television, and providing Drexel students the opportunity to gain experience in television management and production\". The Programing includes an eclectic variety of shows from a bi-monthly news show, DNews, to old films, talk shows dealing with important current issues and music appreciation shows. Over 75 percent of DUTV\u2019s programming is student produced.\nPublications.\n\"The Triangle\" has been the university's newspaper since 1926 and currently publishes on a weekly basis every Friday. \n\"The Triangle\" has won several Mark of Excellence Awards which honor the best in Student Journalism from the Society of Professional Journalists. First place in Editorial Writing (2000), General Column Writing (2000), Second place in Editorial Writing (2001), and third place in Sports Column Writing (2001). In 2004, it won two National Pacemaker Awards for excellence in college newspapers. In December 2019 \"The Triangle\" announced the creation of their podcasting division, \"Tri-Pod,\", which debuted on January 10, 2020. Tri-Pod currently has two active podcasts, \"Last Call\". and \"Mark and Jair Explain Sports\".\nThe school yearbook was first published in 1911 and named the Lexerd in 1913. Prior to the publishing of a campus wide yearbook in 1911 \"The Hanseatic\" and \"The Eccentric\" were both published in 1896 as class books. Other publications include \"MAYA\", the undergraduate student literary and artistic magazine; \"D&amp;M Magazine\", Design &amp; Merchandising students crafted magazine; \"The Smart Set from Drexel University\", an online magazine founded in 2005; and \"The Drexelist\" a blog-style news source founded in 2010.\nThe Drexel Publishing Group serves as a medium for literary publishing on campus. The Drexel Publishing Group oversees \"ASK\" (The Journal of the College of Arts and Sciences at Drexel University), \"Painted Bride Quarterly\", a 36-year-old national literary magazine housed at Drexel; \"The 33rd\", an annual anthology of student and faculty writing at Drexel; \"DPG Online Magazine\", and \"Maya\", the undergraduate literary and artistic magazine. The Drexel Publishing Group also serves as a pedagogical organization by allowing students to intern and work on its publications.\nHousing.\nDrexel requires all non-commuting first- and second-year students to live in one of its ten residence halls or in \"university approved housing\". First year students must live in one of the residence halls designated specifically for first-years. These residence halls include Millennium, Bentley, Kelly, Myers, Towers, Van Rensselaer, North, and Race Halls. Kelly, Myers, Towers, and Bentley Halls are traditional residence halls (a bedroom shared with one or more roommate(s) and one bathroom per floor), while Race, North, Caneris, and Van Rensselaer Halls are suite-style residence halls (shared bedrooms, private bathrooms, kitchens, and common area within the suite). Millennium Hall, Drexel's newest residence hall, is a modified suite (a bedroom shared with one roommate, and bathrooms and showers that look like closets with open sinks in the hallway).\nEach residence hall is designed to facilitate the Freshman Experience in a slightly different way. Millennium, Kelly, and Towers Halls are all typical residence halls. Myers Hall offers \"Living Learning Communities\" where a group of students who share common interests such as language or major live together. Most of Bentley Hall is reserved for students of the Pennoni Honors College, although some floors are occupied by other students.\nSecond-year students have the option of living in a residence hall designated for upperclassmen, or \"university approved housing\". The residence halls for upperclassmen are North and Caneris Halls. North Hall operates under the For Students By Students Residential Experience Engagement Model, developed by the Residential Living Office. There are many apartments that are university approved that second-year students can choose to live in. Three of the largest apartment buildings that fit this description are Chestnut Square, University Crossings, and The Summit, all owned by American Campus Communities. Many other students live in smaller apartment buildings or individual townhouse-style apartments in Powelton Village. A second-year student can choose one of the already listed university approved housing options or petition the university to add a new property to the approved list. While living in a university approved apartment offers the freedom of living outside a residence hall, due to the Drexel co-op system, many students end up in the residence halls because they operate on a quarter to quarter basis, and don't require students to be locked into leases.\nGraduate students can live in Stiles Hall.\nAll residence halls except Caneris Hall and Stiles Memorial Hall are located north of Arch Street between 34th Street and 32nd Street in the Powelton Village area.\nStudent organizations.\nDrexel University recognizes over 250 student organizations in the following categories:\nHonorary and professional organizations.\nThe following groups are recognized as honors or professional organizations under the Office of Campus Activities and are not considered part of social Greek life at Drexel University.\nGreek life.\nApproximately 12 percent of Drexel's undergraduate population are members of a social Greek-letter organization. There are currently fourteen Interfraternity Council (IFC) chapters, seven Panhellenic Council (PHC) chapters and thirteen Multi-cultural Greek Council (MGC) chapters.\nTwo IFC chapters have been awarded Top Chapters in 2008 by their respective national organizations; Pi Kappa Alpha, and Alpha Chi Rho. In 2013, Sigma Phi Epsilon and Alpha Epsilon Pi were awarded the Top Chapter award by their respective national headquarters.\nAthletics.\nDrexel's school mascot is a dragon known, as \"Mario the Magnificent\", named in honor of alumnus and Board of Trustees member Mario V. Mascioli. The Dragon has been the mascot of the school since around the mid-1920s; the first written reference to the Dragons occurred in 1928, when the football team was called \"The Dragons in The Triangle\". Before becoming known as the Dragons, the athletic teams had been known by such names as the Blue &amp; Gold, the Engineers, and the Drexelites. The school's sports teams, now known as the Drexel Dragons, participate in the NCAA's Division I as a member of the Colonial Athletic Association. They do not currently field a varsity football team.\nIn addition to its NCAA Division I teams, Drexel University is home to 33 active club teams including men's ice hockey, lacrosse, water polo, squash, triathlon, and cycling. Other club teams include soccer, baseball, rugby, field hockey, and roller hockey. The club teams operate under the direction of the Club Sports Council and the Recreational Sports Office.\nStudent lore and traditions.\nTradition suggests that rubbing the toe of the bronze \"Waterboy\" statue, located in the Main Building atrium, can result in receiving good grades on exams. Although the rest of the bronze statue has developed a dark brown patina over the years, the toe has remained highly polished and shines like new.\nIn popular culture.\nDrexel has appeared in news and television media several times. In 2006 Drexel served as the location for ABC Family's reality show \"Back on Campus\". Also in 2006, the Epsilon Zeta chapter of Delta Zeta won ABC Daytime's Summer of Fun contest. As a result, the sorority was featured in national television spots for a week and hosted an ABC party on campus, which was attended by cast members from \"General Hospital\" and \"All My Children\".\nJohn Langdon, who taught typography in the Antoinette Westphal College of Media Arts &amp; Design from 1988 to 2015, created the ambigram featured on the cover of Dan Brown's Angels &amp; Demons; a number of other ambigrams served as the central focus of the book and its corresponding film. It is believed Prof. Langdon was the inspiration for the name of the lead character, played by Tom Hanks in the film adaptation.\nIn 2007, Drexel was the host of the 2008 Democratic Presidential candidate debate in Philadelphia, televised by MSNBC. The university hosted the US Table Tennis Olympic Trials between January 10 and 13, 2008. Drexel University also hosted the 2011 U.S. Open Squash Championships from October 1\u20136, 2011, as well as the 2012 U.S. Open Squash Championships from October 4\u201312, 2012.\nAlumni.\nSince its founding the university has graduated over 100,000 alumni. Certificate-earning alumni such as artist Violet Oakley and illustrator Frank Schoonover reflect the early emphasis on art as part of the university's curriculum. With World War II, the university's technical programs swelled, and as a result Drexel graduated alumni such as Paul Baran, one of the founding fathers of the Internet and one of the inventors of the packet switching network, and Norman Joseph Woodland the inventor of barcode technology. In addition to its emphasis on technology Drexel has graduated several notable athletes such as National Basketball Association (NBA) basketball players Michael Anderson and Malik Rose, and several notable business people such as Raj Gupta, former President and Chief executive officer (CEO) of Rohm and Haas, and Kenneth C. Dahlberg, former CEO of Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC). Alassane Dramane Ouattara President of the Republic of Ivory Coast. In 2018, Tirthak Saha -a 2016 graduate of the ECE school - was named to the Forbes 30 Under 30 list for achievements in the Energy field.\nIn 1991, the university's centennial anniversary, Drexel created an association called the Drexel 100, for alumni who have demonstrated excellence work, philanthropy, or public service. After the creation of the association 100 alumni were inducted in 1992 and since then the induction process has been on a biennial basis. In 2006 164 total alumni had been inducted into the association.\nAwards.\nDrexel University created the annual $100,000 Anthony J. Drexel Exceptional Achievement Award to recognize a faculty member from a U.S. institution whose work transforms both research and the society it serves. The first recipient was bioengineer James J. Collins of Boston University (now at MIT) and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.\nIn 2004, in conjunction with BAYADA Home Health Care, Drexel University's College of Nursing and Health Professions created the BAYADA Award for Technological Innovation in Nursing Education and Practice. The award honors nursing educators and practicing nurses whose innovation leads to improved patient care or improved nursing education."}
{"id": "8258", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8258", "title": "Daedalus", "text": "In Greek mythology, Daedalus (; ; ; Etruscan: \"Taitale\") was a skillful architect and craftsman, and was seen as a symbol of wisdom, knowledge, and power. He is the father of Icarus, the uncle of Perdix, and possibly also the father of Iapyx, although this is unclear. He invented and built the Labyrinth for King Minos of Crete, but shortly after finishing it King Minos had Daedalus imprisoned within the labyrinth. He and his son Icarus devised a plan to escape by using wings made of feathers and wax that Daedalus had invented. They escaped, but Icarus did not heed his father's warnings and flew too close to the sun. The wax melted and Icarus fell to his death. This left Daedalus heartbroken, but instead of giving up he flew to the island of Sicily.\nFamily.\nDaedalus's parentage was supplied as a later addition, providing him with a father in Metion, Eupalamus, or Palamaon, and a mother, Alcippe, Iphinoe, or Phrasmede. Daedalus had two sons: Icarus and Iapyx, along with a nephew either Talos or Perdix.\nAthenians transferred Cretan Daedalus to make him Athenian-born, the grandson of the ancient king Erechtheus, claiming that Daedalus fled to Crete after killing his nephew Talos. Over time, other stories were told of Daedalus.\nMythology.\nThe Labyrinth.\nDaedalus is first mentioned by Homer as the creator of a wide dancing-ground for Ariadne. He also created the Labyrinth on Crete, in which the Minotaur (part man, part bull) was kept. In the story of the labyrinth as told by the Hellenes, the Athenian hero Theseus is challenged to kill the Minotaur, finding his way with the help of Ariadne's thread. Daedalus' appearance in Homer is in an extended metaphor, \"plainly not Homer's invention\", Robin Lane Fox observes: \"He is a point of comparison and so he belongs in stories which Homer's audience already recognized.\" In Bronze Age Crete, an inscription (//) has been read as referring to a place at Knossos, and a place of worship.\nIn Homer's language, \"daidala\" refers to finely crafted objects. They are mostly objects of armor, but fine bowls and furnishings are also \"daidala\", and on one occasion so are the \"bronze-working\" of \"clasps, twisted brooches, earrings and necklaces\" made by Hephaestus while cared for in secret by the goddesses of the sea.\nIgnoring Homer, later writers envisaged the Labyrinth as an edifice rather than a single dancing path to the center and out again, and gave it numberless winding passages and turns that opened into one another, seeming to have neither beginning nor end. Ovid, in his \"Metamorphoses\", suggests that Daedalus constructed the Labyrinth so cunningly that he himself could barely escape it after he built it. Daedalus built the labyrinth for King Minos, who needed it to imprison his wife's son the Minotaur. The story is told that Poseidon had given a white bull to Minos so that he might use it as a sacrifice. Instead, Minos kept it for himself; and in revenge, Poseidon, with the help of Aphrodite, made Pasipha\u00eb, King Minos's wife, lust for the bull. For Pasipha\u00eb, as Greek mythologers interpreted it, Daedalus also built a wooden cow so she could mate with the bull, for the Greeks imagined the Minoan bull of the sun to be an actual, earthly bull, the slaying of which later required a heroic effort by Theseus.\nDaedalus and Icarus.\nThe most familiar literary telling explaining Daedalus' wings is a late one, that of Ovid: in his \"Metamorphoses\" (VIII:183\u2013235) Daedalus was shut up in a tower to prevent the knowledge of his Labyrinth from spreading to the public. He could not leave Crete by sea, as the king kept a strict watch on all vessels, permitting none to sail without being carefully searched. Since Minos controlled the land and sea routes, Daedalus set to work to fabricate wings for himself and his young son Icarus. He tied feathers together, from smallest to largest so as to form an increasing surface. He secured the feathers at their midpoints with string and at their bases with wax, and gave the whole a gentle curvature like the wings of a bird. When the work was done, the artist, waving his wings, found himself buoyed upward and hung suspended, poising himself on the beaten air. He next equipped his son in the same manner, and taught him how to fly. When both were prepared for flight, Daedalus warned Icarus not to fly too high, because the heat of the sun would melt the wax, nor too low, because the sea foam would soak the feathers.\nThey had passed Samos, Delos and Lebynthos by the time the boy, forgetting himself, began to soar upward toward the sun. The blazing sun melted and softened the wax that held the feathers together and they came off. Icarus's feathers fell one by one, and they were falling like snowflakes. Icarus quickly fell in the sea and drowned. Daedalus wept (lamenting his own arts), took Icarus's body and buried it, and called the island near the place (where Icarus fell into the ocean) Icaria in the memory of his child. Some time later, the goddess Athena visited Daedalus and gave him wings, telling him to fly like a god.\nAn early image of winged Daedalus appears on an Etruscan jug of ca 630 BC found at Cerveteri, where a winged figure captioned \"Taitale\" appears on one side of the vessel, paired on the other side, uniquely, with \"Metaia\", Medea: \"its linking of these two mythical figures is unparalleled,\" Robin Lane Fox observes: \"The link was probably based on their wondrous, miraculous art. Magically, Daedalus could fly, and magically Medea was able to rejuvenate the old (the scene on the jug seems to show her doing just this)\". The image of Daedalus demonstrates that he was already well known in the West.\nSicily.\nFurther to the west Daedalus arrived safely in Sicily, in the care of King Cocalus of Kamikos on the island's south coast; there Daedalus built a temple to Apollo, and hung up his wings, an offering to the god. In an invention of Virgil (\"Aeneid\" VI), Daedalus flies to Cumae and founds his temple there, rather than in Sicily; long afterward Aeneas confronts the sculpted golden doors of the temple.\nMinos, meanwhile, searched for Daedalus by traveling from city to city asking a riddle. He presented a spiral seashell and asked for a string to be run through it. When he reached Kamikos, King Cocalus, knowing Daedalus would be able to solve the riddle, privately fetched the old man to him. He tied the string to an ant which, lured by a drop of honey at one end, walked through the seashell stringing it all the way through. Minos then knew Daedalus was in the court of King Cocalus and demanded he be handed over. Cocalus managed to convince Minos to take a bath first, where Cocalus' daughters killed Minos. In some versions, Daedalus himself poured boiling water on Minos and killed him.\nThe anecdotes are literary and late; however, in the founding tales of the Greek colony of Gela, founded in the 680s on the southwest coast of Sicily, a tradition was preserved that the Greeks had seized cult images wrought by Daedalus from their local predecessors, the Sicani.\nDaedalus and Perdix.\nDaedalus was so proud of his achievements that he could not bear the idea of a rival. His sister had placed her son, named variously as Perdix, Talos, or Calos, under his charge to be taught the mechanical arts. The nephew was an art scholar and showed striking evidence of ingenuity. Walking on the seashore, he picked up the spine of a fish. According to Ovid, imitating it, he took a piece of iron and notched it on the edge, and thus invented the saw. He put two pieces of iron together, connecting them at one end with a rivet, and sharpening the other ends, and made a pair of compasses. Daedalus was so envious of his nephew's accomplishments that he took an opportunity and caused him to fall from the Acropolis. Athena turned Perdix into a partridge and left a scar that looked like a partridge on Daedalus' right shoulder and Daedalus left Athens due to this.\nInnovator.\nSuch anecdotal details as these were embroideries upon the reputation of Daedalus as an innovator in many arts. In Pliny's Natural History (7.198) he is credited with inventing carpentry \"and with it the saw, axe, plumb-line, drill, glue, and isinglass\". Pausanias, in travelling around Greece, attributed to Daedalus numerous archaic wooden cult figures (see \"xoana\") that impressed him: \"All the works of this artist, though somewhat uncouth to look at, nevertheless have a touch of the divine in them.\"\nIt is said he first conceived masts and sails for ships for the navy of Minos. He is said to have carved statues so well they looked as if alive; even possessing self-motion. They would have escaped if not for the chain that bound them to the wall.\nDaedalus gave his name, eponymously, to any Greek artificer and to many Greek contraptions that represented dextrous skill. At Plataea there was a festival, the Daedala, in which a temporary wooden altar was fashioned, and an effigy was made from an oak-tree and dressed in bridal attire. It was carried in a cart with a woman who acted as bridesmaid. The image was called \"Daedale\" and the archaic ritual given an explanation through a myth to the purpose\nIn the period of Romanticism, Daedalus came to denote the classic artist, a skilled mature craftsman, while Icarus symbolized the romantic artist, whose impetuous, passionate and rebellious nature, as well as his defiance of formal aesthetic and social conventions, may ultimately prove to be self-destructive. Stephen Dedalus, in Joyce's \"Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man\" envisages his future artist-self \"a winged form flying above the waves ... a hawk-like man flying sunward above the sea, a prophecy of the end he had been born to serve\u201d.\nDaedalus's statues.\nDaedalus is said to have created statues that were so realistic that they had to be tied down to stop them from wandering off. In \"Meno\", Socrates and Meno are debating the nature of knowledge and true belief when Socrates refers to Daedalus' statues: \"... if they are not fastened up they play truant and run away; but, if fastened, they stay where they are.\""}
{"id": "8259", "revid": "4358157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8259", "title": "Deception Pass", "text": "Deception Pass is a strait separating Whidbey Island from Fidalgo Island, in the northwest part of the U.S. state of Washington. It connects Skagit Bay, part of Puget Sound, with the Strait of Juan de Fuca. A pair of bridges known collectively as Deception Pass Bridge cross Deception Pass. The bridges were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1982.\nHistory.\nThe Deception Pass area has been home to various Coast Salish tribes for thousands of years. The first Europeans to see Deception Pass were members of the 1790 expedition of Manuel Quimper on the \"Princesa Real\". The Spanish gave it the name \"Boca de Flon\". A group of sailors led by Joseph Whidbey, part of the Vancouver Expedition, found and mapped Deception Pass on June 7, 1792. George Vancouver gave it the name \"Deception\" because it had misled him into thinking Whidbey Island was a peninsula. The \"deception\" was heightened due to Whidbey's failure to find the strait at first. In May 1792, Vancouver was anchored near the southern end of Whidbey Island. He sent Joseph Whidbey to explore the waters east of Whidbey Island, now known as Saratoga Passage, using small boats. Whidbey reached the northern end of Saratoga Passage and explored eastward into Skagit Bay, which is shallow and difficult to navigate. He returned south to rejoin Vancouver without having found Deception Pass. It appeared that Skagit Bay was a dead-end and that Whidbey Island and Fidalgo Island were a long peninsula attached to the mainland. In June the expedition sailed north along the west coast of Whidbey Island. Vancouver sent Joseph Whidbey to explore inlets leading to the east. The first inlet turned out to be a \"very narrow and intricate channel, which...abounded with rocks above and beneath the surface of the water\". This channel led to Skagit Bay, thus separating Whidbey Island from the mainland. Vancouver apparently felt he and Joseph Whidbey had been deceived by the tricky strait. Vancouver wrote of Whidbey's efforts: \"This determined [the shore they had been exploring] to be an island, which, in consequence of Mr. Whidbey\u2019s circumnavigation, I distinguished by the name of Whidbey\u2019s Island: and this northern pass, leading into [Skagit Bay], Deception Passage\".\nIn the waters of Deception Pass, just east of the present-day Deception Pass Bridge, is a small island known as Ben Ure Island. The island became infamous for its activity of human smuggling of migrant Chinese people for local labor. Ben Ure and his partner Lawrence \"Pirate\" Kelly were quite profitable at their human smuggling business and played hide-and-seek with the United States Customs Department for years. Ure's own operation at Deception Pass in the late 1880s consisted of Ure and his Native-American wife. Local tradition has it that his wife would camp on the nearby Strawberry Island (which was visible from the open sea) and signal him with a fire on the island's summit to alert him to whether or not it was safe to attempt to bring the human cargo he illegally transported ashore. For transport, Ure would tie the people up in burlap bags so that if customs agents approached he could toss the bagged people overboard. The tidal currents carried the entrapped drowned migrants' bodies to San Juan Island to the north and west of the pass; many ended up in Dead Man's Bay.\nBetween 1910 and 1914, a prison rock quarry was operated on the Fidalgo Island side of the pass. Nearby barracks housed some 40 prisoners, members of an honors program out of Walla Walla State Penitentiary and the prison population was made up of several types of prisoners, including those convicted of murder. Guards stood watch at the quarry as prisoners cut the rock into gravel and loaded it onto barges at the base of the cliff atop the pass's waters. The quarried rock was then barged to the Seattle waterfront. The camp was dismantled in 1924 and although abandoned as a quarry, the remains of the camp can still be found. The location is hazardous; over the years there have been several fatal accidents when visitors have ventured onto the steep cliffs.\nUpon completion on July 31, 1935, the span Deception Pass Bridge connected Whidbey Island to the tiny Pass Island, and Pass Island to Fidalgo Island. Prior to the bridge, travelers used an inter-island ferry to commute between Fidalgo and Whidbey islands.\nCurrents.\nDeception Pass is a dramatic seascape where the tidal flow and whirlpools beneath the twin bridges connecting Fidalgo Island to Whidbey Island move quickly. During ebb and flood tide current speed reaches about , flowing in opposite directions between ebb and flood. This swift current can lead to standing waves, large whirlpools, and roiling eddies. This swift current phenomenon can be viewed from the twin bridges' pedestrian walkways or from the trail leading below the larger south bridge from the parking lot on the Whidbey Island side. Boats can be seen waiting on either side of the pass for the current to stop or change direction before going through. Thrill-seeking kayakers go there during large tide changes to surf the standing waves and brave the class 2 and 3 rapid conditions.\nScuba diving.\nDiving Deception Pass is dangerous and only for the most competent and prepared divers. There are a few times each year that the tides are right for a drift dive from the cove, under the bridge, and back to the cove as the tide changes. These must be planned well in advance by divers who know how to read currents and are aware of the dangerous conditions. However, because of the large tidal exchange, Deception Pass hosts some of the most spectacular colors and life in the Pacific Northwest. The walls and bottom are covered in colorful invertebrates, lingcod, greenlings, and barnacles everywhere.\nState park.\nDeception Pass is surrounded by Deception Pass State Park, one of the most visited Washington state parks with over two million annual visitors. \nThe park was officially established in 1923, when the original of a military reserve was transferred to Washington State Parks. The park's facilities were greatly enhanced in the 1930s when the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) built roads, trails, and buildings in order to develop the park. The road to West Beach was created in 1950, opening up a stretch of beach to hordes of vehicles. The former fish hatchery at Bowman Bay became a part of the park in the early 1970s. The old entrance to the park was closed in 1997 when a new entrance was created at the intersection of Highway 20 and Cornet Bay road, improving access into and out of the park.\nThe park's recreational facilities include campgrounds, hiking trails, beaches, and tidepools. Several miles of the Pacific Northwest Trail are within the park, most notably including the section that crosses Deception Pass on the Highway 20 bridge. In addition, the Cornet Bay Retreat Center provides cabins and dining and recreation facilities. Cornet Bay offers boat launches and fishing opportunities, while Bowman Bay has an interpretive center that explains the story of the Civilian Conservation Corps throughout Washington state. Near the center is a CCC honor statue, which can be found in 30 different states in the country. Fishing is popular in Pass Lake, on the north side of the bridge. Boat rentals and guided tours of the park are also offered.\nIncluded in the park are ten islands: Northwest Island, Deception Island, Pass Island, Strawberry, Ben Ure, Kiket, Skagit, Hope, and Big and Little Deadman Islands. Ben Ure Island is partially privately owned. The island is not open to the public except for a small rentable cabin available via the state park, which is only accessible by rowboat.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 2002 horror movie \"The Ring\" was in part filmed near the pass. The bridge is fictionalized as a toll bridge named \"Desolation Bridge\" in season one of The Killing. Seattle shoegaze act The Sight Below filmed the 2008 video for their track \"Further Away\" at Deception Pass, with Deception Island's scenic imagery prominently featured. Seattle grunge band Mudhoney named a song on their 1993 EP Five Dollar Bob's Mock Cooter Stew \"Deception Pass.\" Seattle progressive rock band Queensr\u00ffche filmed scenes of their video \"Anybody Listening\" near Deception Pass and Deception Island."}
