{"id": "4456", "revid": "59944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4456", "title": "Book of Zechariah", "text": "The Book of Zechariah, attributed to the Hebrew prophet Zechariah, is included in the Twelve Minor Prophets in the Hebrew Bible.\nHistorical context.\nZechariah's prophecies took place during the reign of Darius the Great, and were contemporary with Haggai in a post-exilic world after the fall of Jerusalem in 587/6\u00a0BC. Ezekiel and Jeremiah wrote before the fall of Jerusalem, while continuing to prophesy in the early exile period. Scholars believe Ezekiel, with his blending of ceremony and vision, heavily influenced the visionary works of Zechariah 1\u20138. Zechariah is specific about dating his writing (520\u2013518\u00a0BC).\nDuring the Exile many Judahites and Benjamites were taken to Babylon, where the prophets told them to make their homes, suggesting they would spend a long period of time there. Eventually freedom did come to many Israelites, when Cyrus the Great overtook the Babylonians in 539\u00a0BC. In 538\u00a0BC, the famous Edict of Cyrus was released, and the first return took place under Sheshbazzar. After the death of Cyrus in 530\u00a0BC, Darius consolidated power and took office in 522\u00a0BC. His system divided the different colonies of the empire into easily manageable districts overseen by governors. Zerubbabel comes into the story, appointed by Darius as governor over the district of Yehud Medinata.\nUnder the reign of Darius, Zechariah also emerged, centering on the rebuilding of the Temple. Unlike the Babylonians, the Persian Empire went to great lengths to keep \u201ccordial relations\u201d between vassal and lord. The rebuilding of the Temple was encouraged by the leaders of the empire in hopes that it would strengthen the authorities in local contexts. This policy was good politics on the part of the Persians, and the Jews viewed it as a blessing from God.\nProphet.\nThe name \"Zechariah\" means \"God remembered.\" Not much is known about Zechariah's life other than what may be inferred from the book. It has been speculated that his grandfather Iddo was the head of a priestly family who returned with Zerubbabel, and that Zechariah may himself have been a priest as well as a prophet. This is supported by Zechariah's interest in the Temple and the priesthood, and from Iddo's preaching in the Books of Chronicles.\nAuthorship.\nMost modern scholars believe the Book of Zechariah was written by at least two different people. Zechariah 1\u20138, sometimes referred to as First Zechariah, was written in the 6th century BC. Zechariah 9\u201314, often called Second Zechariah, contains within the text no datable references to specific events or individuals but most scholars give the text a date in the 5th century BC. Second Zechariah, in the opinion of some scholars, appears to make use of the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, the Deuteronomistic History, and the themes from First Zechariah. This has led some to believe that the writer(s) or editor(s) of Second Zechariah may have been a disciple of the prophet Zechariah. There are some scholars who go even further and divide Second Zechariah into Second Zechariah (9\u201311) and Third Zechariah (12\u201314) since each begins with a heading oracle.\nComposition.\nThe return from exile is the theological premise of the prophet's visions in chapters 1\u20136. Chapters 7\u20138 address the quality of life God wants his renewed people to enjoy, containing many encouraging promises to them. Chapters 9\u201314 comprise two \"oracles\" of the future.\nChapters 1 to 6.\nThe book begins with a preface, which recalls the nation's history, for the purpose of presenting a solemn warning to the present generation. Then follows a series of eight visions, succeeding one another in one night, which may be regarded as a symbolical history of Israel, intended to furnish consolation to the returned exiles and stir up hope in their minds. The symbolic action, the crowning of Joshua, describes how the kingdoms of the world become the kingdom of God's Messiah.\nChapters 7 and 8.\nChapters Zechariah 7 and Zechariah 8, delivered two years later, are an answer to the question whether the days of mourning for the destruction of the city should be kept any longer, and an encouraging address to the people, assuring them of God's presence and blessing.\nChapters 9 to 14.\nThis section consists of two \"oracles\" or \"burdens\": \nThemes.\nThe purpose of this book is not strictly historical but theological and pastoral. The main emphasis is that God is at work and all His good deeds, including the construction of the Second Temple, are accomplished \"not by might nor by power, but by My Spirit.\"() Ultimately, YHWH plans to live again with His people in Jerusalem. He will save them from their enemies and cleanse them from sin. However, God requires repentance, a turning away from sin towards faith in Him ()\nZechariah's concern for purity is apparent in the temple, priesthood and all areas of life as the prophecy gradually eliminates the influence of the governor in favour of the high priest, and the sanctuary becomes ever more clearly the centre of messianic fulfillment. The prominence of prophecy is quite apparent in Zechariah, but it is also true that Zechariah (along with Haggai) allows prophecy to yield to the priesthood; this is particularly apparent in comparing Zechariah to \"Third Isaiah\" (chapters 55\u201366 of the Book of Isaiah), whose author was active sometime after the first return from exile.\nMost Christian commentators read the series of predictions in chapters 7 to 14 as Messianic prophecies, either directly or indirectly. These chapters helped the writers of the Gospels understand Jesus\u2019 suffering, death and resurrection, which they quoted as they wrote of Jesus\u2019 final days. Much of the Book of Revelation, which narrates the denouement of history, is also colored by images in Zechariah.\nApocalyptic literature.\nChapters 9\u201314 of the Book of Zechariah are an early example of apocalyptic literature. Although not as fully developed as the apocalyptic visions described in the Book of Daniel, the \"oracles\", as they are titled in Zechariah 9\u201314, contain apocalyptic elements. One theme these oracles contain is descriptions of the Day of the Lord, when \"the Lord will go forth and fight against those nations as when he fights on a day of battle\" (Zechariah 14:3). These chapters also contain \"pessimism about the present, but optimism for the future based on the expectation of an ultimate divine victory and the subsequent transformation of the cosmos\".\nThe final word in Zechariah proclaims that on the Day of the Lord \"in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the LORD of hosts\" (, KJV), proclaiming the need for purity in the Temple, which would come when God judges at the end of time. The word \u05db\u05b0\u05e0\u05b7\u05e2\u05b2\u05e0\u05b4\u05d9 rendered \"Canaanite\" is alternatively translated as \"trader\" (RSV) or \"trafficker\" (, Mechon-Mamre) as in other scripture verses."}
{"id": "4457", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4457", "title": "Book of Zephaniah", "text": "The Book of Zephaniah (, \"Tsfanya\") is the ninth of the Twelve Minor Prophets, preceded by the Book of Habakkuk and followed by the Book of Haggai. Zephaniah means \"Yahweh has hidden/protected,\" or \"Yahweh hides\". Zephaniah is also a male given name.\nAuthorship and date.\nThe book's superscription attributes its authorship to \"Zephaniah son of Cushi son of Gedaliah son of Amariah son of Hezekiah, in the days of King Josiah son of Amon of Judah\" (1:1, NRSV). All that is known of Zephaniah comes from the text.\nThe name \"Cushi,\" Zephaniah's father, means \"Cushite\" or \"Ethiopian,\" and the text of Zephaniah mentions the sin and restoration of Ethiopians. While some have concluded from this that Zephaniah was a black Jew, Ehud Ben Zvi maintains that, based on the context, \"Cushi\" must be understood as a personal name rather than an indicator of nationality. Abraham ibn Ezra interpreted the name Hezekiah in the superscription as King Hezekiah of Judah, though that is not a claim advanced in the text of Zephaniah.\nAs with many of the other prophets, there is no external evidence to directly associate composition of the book with a prophet by the name of Zephaniah. Some scholars, such as Kent Harold Richards and Jason DeRouchie, consider the words in Zephaniah to reflect a time early in the reign of King Josiah (640\u2013609 BC) before his reforms of 622 BC took full effect, in which case the prophet may have been born during the reign of Manasseh (698/687\u2013642 BC). Others agree that some portion of the book is postmonarchic, that is, dating to later than 586 BC when the Kingdom of Judah fell in the Siege of Jerusalem. Some who consider the book to have largely been written by a historical Zephaniah have suggested that he may have been a disciple of Isaiah because of the two books' similar focus on rampant corruption and injustice in Judah.\nPurpose.\nIf Zephaniah was largely composed during the monarchic period, then its composition was occasioned by Judah's refusal to obey its covenant obligations toward Yahweh despite having seen Israel's exile a generation or two previously\u2014an exile that the Judahite literary tradition attributed to Yahweh's anger against Israel's disobedience to his covenant. In this historical context, Zephaniah urges Judah to obedience to Yahweh, saying that \"perhaps\" he will forgive them if they do.\nThemes.\n\"The HarperCollins Study Bible\" supplies headings for the book as follows:\nMore consistently than any other prophetic book, Zephaniah focuses on \"the day of the Lord,\" developing this tradition from its first appearance in Amos. The day of the Lord tradition also appears in Isaiah, Ezekiel, Obadiah, Joel, and Malachi.\nThe book begins by describing Yahweh's judgement. The threefold repetition of \"I will sweep away\" in emphasizes the totality of the destruction, as the number three often signifies complete perfection in the Bible. The order of creatures in (\"humans and animals ... the birds ... the fish\") is the opposite of the creation order in , signifying an undoing of creation. This is also signified by the way that \"from the face of the earth\" forms an \"inclusio\" around , hearkening back to how the phrase is used in the Genesis flood narrative in , , and , where it also connotes an undoing of creation.\nAs is common in prophetic literature in the Bible, a \"remnant\" survives Yahweh's judgement in Zephaniah by humbly seeking refuge in Yahweh. The book concludes in an announcement of hope and joy, as Yahweh \"bursts forth in joyful divine celebration\" over his people.\nLater influence.\nBecause of its hopeful tone of the gathering and restoration of exiles, has been included in Jewish liturgy.\nZephaniah served as a major inspiration for the medieval Catholic hymn \"Dies Irae,\" whose title and opening words are from the Vulgate translation of ."}
{"id": "4458", "revid": "1273126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4458", "title": "Book of Habakkuk", "text": "The Book of Habakkuk is the eighth book of the 12 minor prophets of the Bible. It is attributed to the prophet Habakkuk, and was probably composed in the late 7th century BC.\nOf the three chapters in the book, the first two are a dialog between Yahweh and the prophet. The message that \"the just shall live by his faith\" (2:4) plays an important role in Christian thought. It is used in the Epistle to the Romans, Epistle to the Galatians, and the Epistle to the Hebrews as the starting point of the concept of faith. A copy of these chapters is included in the Habakkuk Commentary, found among the Dead Sea Scrolls. Chapter 3 may be an independent addition, now recognized as a liturgical piece, but was possibly written by the same author as chapters 1 and 2.\nBackground.\nThe prophet Habakkuk is generally believed to have written his book in the mid-to-late 7th century BC, not long before the Babylonians' siege and capture of Jerusalem in 586 BC.\nAuthor.\nHabakkuk identifies himself as a prophet in the opening verse. Due to the liturgical nature of the book of Habakkuk, there have been some scholars who think that the author may have been a temple prophet. Temple prophets are described in 1 Chronicles 25:1 as using lyres, harps and cymbals. Some feel that this is echoed in Habakkuk 3:19b, and that Habakkuk may have been a Levite and singer in the Temple.\nThere is no biographical information on the prophet Habakkuk; in fact less is known about him than any other writer of the Bible. The only canonical information that exists comes from the book that is named for him. His name comes either from the Hebrew word \u05d7\u05d1\u05e7 (\"khavak\") meaning \"embrace\" or else from an Akkadian word \"hambakuku\" for a kind of plant.\nAlthough his name does not appear in any other part of the Jewish Bible, Rabbinic tradition holds Habakkuk to be the Shunammite woman's son, who was restored to life by Elisha in 2 Kings 4:16. The prophet Habakkuk is also mentioned in the narrative of Bel and the Dragon, part of the deuterocanonical additions to Daniel in a late section of that book. In the superscription of the Old Greek version, Habakkuk is called the son of Joshua of the tribe of Levi. In this book Habakkuk is lifted by an angel to Babylon to provide Daniel with some food while he is in the lion's den.\nHistorical context.\nIt is unknown when Habakkuk lived and preached, but the reference to the rise and advance of the Chaldeans in 1:6\u201311 places him in the middle to last quarter of the 7th century BC. One possible period might be during the reign of Jehoiakim, from 609 to 598 BC. The reasoning for this date is that it is during his reign that the Neo-Babylonian Empire of the Chaldeans was growing in power. The Babylonians marched against Jerusalem in 598 BC. Jehoiakim died while the Babylonians were marching towards Jerusalem and Jehoiakim's eighteen-year-old son Jehoiachin assumed the throne. Upon the Babylonians' arrival, Jehoiachin and his advisors surrendered Jerusalem after a short time. With the transition of rulers and the young age and inexperience of Jehoiachin, they were not able to stand against Chaldean forces. There is a sense of an intimate knowledge of the Babylonian brutality in 1:12\u201317.\nOverview.\nThe book of Habakkuk is a book of the Tanakh (the Old Testament) and stands eighth in a section known as the 12 Minor Prophets in the Masoretic and Greek texts. In the Masoretic listing, it follows Nahum and precedes Zephaniah, who are considered to be his contemporaries.\nThe book consists of three chapters and the book is neatly divided into three different genres:\nThemes.\nThe major theme of Habakkuk is trying to grow from a faith of perplexity and doubt to the height of absolute trust in God. Habakkuk addresses his concerns over the fact that God will use the Babylonian empire to execute judgment on Judah for their sins.\nHabakkuk openly questions the wisdom of God. In the first part of the first chapter, the Prophet sees the injustice among his people and asks why God does not take action. \"\"1:2 Yahweh, how long will I cry, and you will not hear? I cry out to you \u201cViolence!\u201d and will you not save?\"\u00a0\u2013 World English Bible.\"\nIn the middle part of Chapter 1, God explains that he will send the Chaldeans (also known as the Babylonians) to punish his people. \"1:5 \u201cLook among the nations, watch, and wonder marvelously; for I am working a work in your days, which you will not believe though it is told you. 1:6 For, behold, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, that march through the breadth of the earth, to possess dwelling places that are not theirs. (World English Bible)\"\nOne of the \"Eighteen Emendations to the Hebrew Scriptures\" appears at 1:12. According to the professional Jewish scribes, the Sopherim, the text of 1:12 was changed from \"You [God] do not die\" to \"We shall not die.\" The Sopherim considered it disrespectful to say to God, \"\"You\" do not die.\"\nIn the final part of the first chapter, the prophet expresses shock at God's choice of instrument for judgment. \"1:13 You who have purer eyes than to see evil, and who cannot look on perversity, why do you tolerate those who deal treacherously, and keep silent when the wicked swallows up the man who is more righteous than he, (World English Bible )\"\nIn Chapter 2, he awaits God's response to his challenge. God explains that He will also judge the Chaldeans, and much more harshly. \"2:8 Because you have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples will plunder you, because of men\u2019s blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell in it. 2:9 Woe to him who gets an evil gain for his house, (World English Bible )\"\nFinally, in Chapter 3, Habakkuk expresses his ultimate faith in God, even if he doesn't fully understand.\n\"3:17 For though the fig tree doesn\u2019t flourish, nor fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive fails, the fields yield no food; the flocks are cut off from the fold, and there is no herd in the stalls: 3:18 yet I will rejoice in Yahweh. I will be joyful in the God of my salvation! (World English Bible )\"\nImportance.\nThe book of Habakkuk is accepted as canonical by adherents of the Jewish and Christian faiths. A commentary on the first two chapters of the book was found among the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran. Passages from Habakkuk are quoted by authors of the New Testament, and its message has inspired modern Christian hymn writers.\nJudaism.\nThe Book of Habakkuk is the eighth book of the Twelve Prophets of the Hebrew Bible, and this collection appears in all copies of texts of the Septuagint, the Ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible completed by 132 BC. Likewise, the book of Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus), also written in the 2nd century BC, mentions \"The Twelve Prophets\".\nA partial copy of Habakkuk itself is included in the Habakkuk Commentary, a \"pesher\" found among the original seven Dead Sea Scrolls discovered in 1947. The Commentary contains a copy of the first two chapters of Habakkuk, but not of the third chapter. The writer of the \"pesher\" draws a comparison between the Babylonian invasion of the original text and the Roman threat of the writer's own period. What is even more significant than the commentary in the \"pesher\" is the quoted text of Habakkuk itself. The divergences between the Hebrew text of the scroll and the standard Masoretic Text are startlingly minimal. The biggest differences are word order, small grammatical variations, addition or omission of conjunctions, and spelling variations, but these are small enough to not to damage the meaning of the text.\nSome scholars suggest that Chapter 3 may be a later independent addition to the book, in part because it is not included among the Dead Sea Scrolls. However, this chapter does appear in all copies of the Septuagint, as well as in texts from as early as the 3rd century BC. This final chapter is a poetic praise of God, and has some similarities with texts found in the Book of Daniel. However, the fact that the third chapter is written in a different style, as a liturgical piece, does not necessarily mean that Habakkuk was not also its author. Its omission from the Dead Sea Scrolls is attributed to the inability of the Qumran sect to fit Habakkuk's theology with their own narrow viewpoint.\nThe Talmud (Makkot 24a) mentions that various Biblical figures summarized the 613 commandments into categories that encapsulated all of the 613. At the end of this discussion, the Talmud concludes \"Habakkuk came and established [the 613 mitzvoth] upon one, as it is stated: 'But the righteous person shall live by his faith' (Habakkuk 2:4)\", meaning that faith encapsulates all of the other commandments.\nChristianity.\n is well known in Christianity:\nThe second half of this verse is quoted by some of the earliest Christian writers. Although this passage is only three words in the original Hebrew, it is quoted three times in the New Testament. Paul the Apostle quotes this verse twice in his epistles: in Epistle to the Romans () and again in Epistle to the Galatians (). In doing so, Paul extends Habakkuk's original concept of righteous living at the present time into a future life. The same verse is quoted in Epistle to the Hebrews, where Habakkuk's vision is tied to Christ and used to comfort the church during a period of persecution. These three epistles are considered to be \"the three great doctrinal books of the New Testament,\" and Habakkuk's statement concerning faith forms the backbone of each book.\nModern Christian hymns have been inspired by the words of the prophet Habakkuk. The Christian hymn \"\", written in 1900 by William J. Kirkpatrick, is based on verse 2:20. The fourth verse of William Cowper's hymn \"Sometimes a Light Surprises\", written in 1779, quotes Habakkuk 3:17\u201318.\nCultural references.\nIrish composer Charles Villiers Stanford set slightly revised portions of text from the first and second chapters of Habakkuk in his piece for SATB choir, Soprano and Tenor soloist and organ, \"For Lo, I Raise Up\"."}
{"id": "4459", "revid": "1008890999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4459", "title": "Backward compatibility", "text": "Backward compatibility (also known as backwards compatibility) is a property of a system, product, or technology that allows for interoperability with an older legacy system, or with input designed for such a system, especially in telecommunications and computing.\nModifying a system in a way that does not allow backward compatibility is sometimes called \"breaking\" backward compatibility.\nA complementary concept is forward compatibility. A design that is forward-compatible usually has a roadmap for compatibility with future standards and products.\nA related term from programming jargon is hysterical reasons or hysterical raisins (homophones for \"historical reasons\"), as the purpose of some software features may be solely to support older hardware or software versions.\nUsage.\nIn hardware.\nA simple example of both backward and forward compatibility is the introduction of FM radio in stereo. FM radio was initially mono, with only one audio channel represented by one signal. With the introduction of two-channel stereo FM radio, many listeners had only mono FM receivers. Forward compatibility for mono receivers with stereo signals was achieved through sending the sum of both left and right audio channels in one signal and the difference in another signal. That allows mono FM receivers to receive and decode the sum signal while ignoring the difference signal, which is necessary only for separating the audio channels. Stereo FM receivers can receive a mono signal and decode it without the need for a second signal, and they can separate a sum signal to left and right channels if both sum and difference signals are received. Without the requirement for backward compatibility, a simpler method could have been chosen.\nFull backward compatibility is particularly important in computer instruction set architectures, one of the most successful being the x86 family of microprocessors. Their full backward compatibility spans back to the 16-bit Intel 8086/8088 processors introduced in 1978. (The 8086/8088, in turn, were designed with easy machine-translatability of programs written for its predecessor in mind, although they were not instruction-set compatible with the 8-bit Intel 8080 processor as of 1974. The Zilog Z80, however, was fully backward compatible with the Intel 8080.)\nFully backward compatible processors can process the same binary executable software instructions as their predecessors, allowing the use of a newer processor without having to acquire new applications or operating systems. Similarly, the success of the Wi-Fi digital communication standard is attributed to its broad forward and backward compatibility; it became more popular than other standards that were not backward compatible.\nIn software.\nCompiler backward compatibility may refer to the ability of a compiler of a newer version of the language to accept programs or data that worked under the previous version.\nA data format is said to be backward compatible with its predecessor if every message or file that is valid under the old format is still valid, retaining its meaning under the new format.\nBackward compatibility is also employed in video games, in which certain video game systems are able to play games designed for their predecessors. The first video game console to widely support backwards compatibility without additional hardware is the third-generation Atari 7800, which could play most Atari 2600 games. The Atari 5200, the 2600's direct successor, as well as the Intellivision and ColecoVision can also play Atari 2600 games with a particular add-on. The Sega Genesis and Sega Game Gear can play games for the Sega Master System, the Genesis' predecessor, via a special add-on. The three fifth-generation handhelds whose names ended with the word \"Color\" (Game Boy Color, Neo Geo Pocket Color and the WonderSwan Color) are backwards-compatible with handhelds that are named identically without that word (Game Boy, Neo Geo Pocket and the WonderSwan), and all Nintendo handhelds following the Game Boy have at least one model that is backwards compatible with its immediate predecessor. The PlayStation 2 and PlayStation 3 are backwards compatible with the original PlayStation, and early PS3 models with the Emotion Engine installed can play PS2 games. The original Xbox's first two sequential successors, the Xbox 360 and the Xbox One, can support a fraction of games released for their respective, immediate predecessors via emulation, although some supported Xbox games may not function properly on the Xbox 360. The GameCube's two sequential disc-based successors, the Wii and Wii U, can play games released for their respective, immediate predecessors and support their controllers as well, although the Wii's subsequent model revisions are not backwards compatible. The PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S can play almost all games designed for their respective, immediate predecessors, the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, and can even optimize their performance.\nTradeoffs.\nBenefits.\nThere are several incentives for a company to implement backward compatibility. Backward compatibility can be used to preserve older software that would have otherwise been lost when a manufacturer decides to stop supporting older hardware. Classic video games are a common example used when discussing the value of supporting older software. The cultural impact of video games is a large part of their continued success, and some believe ignoring backward compatibility would cause these titles to disappear. Backward compatibility also acts as an additional selling point for new hardware, as an existing player base can more affordably upgrade to subsequent generations of a console. This also helps to make up for lack of content in the early launch of new systems, as users can pull from the previous console's large library of games while developers slowly transition to the new hardware.\nOne example of this is the Sony PlayStation 2 (PS2) which was backward compatible with games for its predecessor PlayStation (PS1). While the selection of PS2 games available at launch was small, sales of the console were nonetheless strong in 2000-2001 thanks to the large library of games for the preceding PS1. This bought time for the PS2 to grow a large installed base and developers to release more quality PS2 games for the crucial 2001 holiday season.\nAdditionally, and despite not being included at launch, Microsoft slowly incorporated backward compatibility for select titles on the Xbox One several years into its product life cycle. Players have racked up over a billion hours with backward compatible games on Xbox, and it is anticipated that next generation consoles such as PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X will also support this feature. A large part of the success and implementation of this feature is that the hardware within newer generation consoles is both powerful and similar enough to legacy systems that older titles can be broken down and re-configured to run on the Xbox One. The backward compatibility program not only supports the previous generation Xbox 360, but also titles from the original Xbox system. Some titles are even given slight visual improvements and additional levels at no cost to the user. This program has proven incredibly popular with Xbox players and goes against the recent trend of studio made remasters of classic titles, creating what some believe to be an important shift in console maker's strategies.\nCosts.\nThe literal costs of supporting old software is considered a large drawback to the usage of backward compatibility. The associated costs of backward compatibility are a higher bill of materials if hardware is required to support the legacy systems; increased complexity of the product that may lead to longer time to market, technological hindrances, and slowing innovation; and increased expectations from users in terms of compatibility. Because of this, several gaming consoles chose to phase out backward compatibility toward the end of the console generation in order to reduce cost and briefly re-invigorate sales before the arrival of newer hardware.\nA notable example is the Sony PlayStation 3, as the first PS3 iteration was expensive to manufacture in part due to including the Emotion Engine from the preceding PS2 in order to run PS2 games, since the PS3 architecture was completely different from the PS2. Subsequent PS3 hardware revisions have eliminated the Emotion Engine as it saved production costs while removing the ability to run PS2 titles, as Sony found out that backward compatibility was not a major selling point for the PS3 in contrast to the PS2. The PS3's chief competitor, the Microsoft Xbox 360, took a different approach to backward compatibility by using software emulation in order to run games from the first Xbox.\nHowever, with the current decline in physical game sales and the rise of digital storefronts and downloads, some believe backward compatibility will soon be as obsolete as the phased-out consoles it supports. Many game studios are re-mastering and re-releasing their most popular titles by improving the quality of graphics and adding new content. These remasters have found success by appealing both to nostalgic players who remember enjoying the original versions when they were younger, and to newcomers who may not have had the original system it was released on. For most consumers, digital remasters are more appealing than hanging on to bulky cartridges and obsolete hardware. For the manufacturers of consoles, digital re-releases of classic titles are a large benefit. It not only removes the financial drawbacks of supporting older hardware, but also shifts all of the costs of updating software to the developers. The manufacturer gets a new addition to their system with strong name recognition, and the studio does not have to completely develop a game from the ground up. Officially licensed, \"plug and play mini\" variations of classic consoles, with built in classic games, have also become more common in recent years, from companies like Sony, Sega and Nintendo."}
{"id": "4460", "revid": "284087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4460", "title": "Bacterial conjugation", "text": "Bacterial conjugation is the transfer of genetic material between bacterial cells by direct cell-to-cell contact or by a bridge-like connection between two cells. This takes place through a pilus. It is a parasexual mode of reproduction in bacteria.\nIt is a mechanism of horizontal gene transfer as are transformation and transduction although these two other mechanisms do not involve cell-to-cell contact.\nClassical \"E. coli\" bacterial conjugation is often regarded as the bacterial equivalent of sexual reproduction or mating since it involves the exchange of genetic material. However, it is not sexual reproduction, since no exchange of gamete occurs, and indeed no generation of a new organism: instead an existing organism is transformed. During classical \"E. coli\" conjugation the \"donor\" cell provides a conjugative or mobilizable genetic element that is most often a plasmid or transposon. Most conjugative plasmids have systems ensuring that the \"recipient\" cell does not already contain a similar element.\nThe genetic information transferred is often beneficial to the recipient. Benefits may include antibiotic resistance, xenobiotic tolerance or the ability to use new metabolites. Others elements can be detrimental and may be viewed as bacterial parasites.\nConjugation in \"Escherichia coli\" by spontaneous zygogenesis and in \"Mycobacterium smegmatis\" by distributive conjugal transfer differ from the more well studied classical \"E. coli\" conjugation in that these cases involve substantial blending of the parental genomes.\nHistory.\nThe process was discovered by Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum in 1946.\nMechanism.\nConjugation diagram\nThe F-plasmid is an episome (a plasmid that can integrate itself into the bacterial chromosome by homologous recombination) with a length of about 100 kb. It carries its own origin of replication, the \"oriV\", and an origin of transfer, or \"oriT\". There can only be one copy of the F-plasmid in a given bacterium, either free or integrated, and bacteria that possess a copy are called \"F-positive\" or \"F-plus\" (denoted F+). Cells that lack F plasmids are called \"F-negative\" or \"F-minus\" (F\u2212) and as such can function as recipient cells.\nAmong other genetic information, the F-plasmid carries a \"tra\" and \"trb\" locus, which together are about 33 kb long and consist of about 40 genes. The \"tra\" locus includes the \"pilin\" gene and regulatory genes, which together form pili on the cell surface. The locus also includes the genes for the proteins that attach themselves to the surface of F\u2212 bacteria and initiate conjugation. Though there is some debate on the exact mechanism of conjugation it seems that the pili are not the structures through which DNA exchange occurs. This has been shown in experiments where the pilus are allowed to make contact, but then are denatured with SDS and yet DNA transformation still proceeds. Several proteins coded for in the \"tra\" or \"trb\" locus seem to open a channel between the bacteria and it is thought that the traD enzyme, located at the base of the pilus, initiates membrane fusion.\nWhen conjugation is initiated by a signal the relaxase enzyme creates a nick in one of the strands of the conjugative plasmid at the \"oriT\". Relaxase may work alone or in a complex of over a dozen proteins known collectively as a relaxosome. In the F-plasmid system the relaxase enzyme is called TraI and the relaxosome consists of TraI, TraY, TraM and the integrated host factor IHF. The nicked strand, or \"T-strand\", is then unwound from the unbroken strand and transferred to the recipient cell in a 5'-terminus to 3'-terminus direction. The remaining strand is replicated either independent of conjugative action (vegetative replication beginning at the \"oriV\") or in concert with conjugation (conjugative replication similar to the rolling circle replication of lambda phage). Conjugative replication may require a second nick before successful transfer can occur. A recent report claims to have inhibited conjugation with chemicals that mimic an intermediate step of this second nicking event.\nIf the F-plasmid that is transferred has previously been integrated into the donor's genome (producing an Hfr strain [\"High Frequency of Recombination\"]) some of the donor's chromosomal DNA may also be transferred with the plasmid DNA. The amount of chromosomal DNA that is transferred depends on how long the two conjugating bacteria remain in contact. In common laboratory strains of \"E. coli\" the transfer of the entire bacterial chromosome takes about 100 minutes. The transferred DNA can then be integrated into the recipient genome via homologous recombination.\nA cell culture that contains in its population cells with non-integrated F-plasmids usually also contains a few cells that have accidentally integrated their plasmids. It is these cells that are responsible for the low-frequency chromosomal gene transfers that occur in such cultures. Some strains of bacteria with an integrated F-plasmid can be isolated and grown in pure culture. Because such strains transfer chromosomal genes very efficiently they are called Hfr (high frequency of recombination). The \"E. coli\" genome was originally mapped by interrupted mating experiments in which various Hfr cells in the process of conjugation were sheared from recipients after less than 100 minutes (initially using a Waring blender). The genes that were transferred were then investigated.\nSince integration of the F-plasmid into the \"E. coli\" chromosome is a rare spontaneous occurrence, and since the numerous genes promoting DNA transfer are in the plasmid genome rather than in the bacterial genome, it has been argued that conjugative bacterial gene transfer, as it occurs in the \"E. coli\" Hfr system, is not an evolutionary adaptation of the bacterial host, nor is it likely ancestral to eukaryotic sex.\nSpontaneous zygogenesis in \"E. coli\"\nIn addition to classical bacterial conjugation described above for \"E. coli\", a form of conjugation referred to as spontaneous zygogenesis (Z-mating for short) is observed in certain strains of \"E. coli\". In Z-mating there is complete genetic mixing, and unstable diploids are formed that throw off phenotypically haploid cells, of which some show a parental phenotype and some are true recombinants.\nConjugal transfer in mycobacteria.\nConjugation in \"Mycobacteria smegmatis\", like conjugation in \"E. coli\", requires stable and extended contact between a donor and a recipient strain, is DNase resistant, and the transferred DNA is incorporated into the recipient chromosome by homologous recombination. However, unlike \"E. coli\" Hfr conjugation, mycobacterial conjugation is chromosome rather than plasmid based. Furthermore, in contrast to \"E. coli\" Hfr conjugation, in \"M. smegmatis\" all regions of the chromosome are transferred with comparable efficiencies. The lengths of the donor segments vary widely, but have an average length of 44.2kb. Since a mean of 13 tracts are transferred, the average total of transferred DNA per genome is 575kb. This process is referred to as \"Distributive conjugal transfer.\" Gray et al. found substantial blending of the parental genomes as a result of conjugation and regarded this blending as reminiscent of that seen in the meiotic products of sexual reproduction.\nInter-kingdom transfer.\nBacteria related to the nitrogen fixing \"Rhizobia\" are an interesting case of inter-kingdom conjugation. For example, the tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid of \"Agrobacterium\" and the root-tumor inducing (Ri) plasmid of \"A. rhizogenes\" contain genes that are capable of transferring to plant cells. The expression of these genes effectively transforms the plant cells into opine-producing factories. Opines are used by the bacteria as sources of nitrogen and energy. Infected cells form crown gall or root tumors. The Ti and Ri plasmids are thus endosymbionts of the bacteria, which are in turn endosymbionts (or parasites) of the infected plant.\nThe Ti and Ri plasmids can also be transferred between bacteria using a system (the \"tra\", or transfer, operon) that is different and independent of the system used for inter-kingdom transfer (the \"vir\", or virulence, operon). Such transfers create virulent strains from previously avirulent strains.\nGenetic engineering applications.\nConjugation is a convenient means for transferring genetic material to a variety of targets. In laboratories, successful transfers have been reported from bacteria to yeast, plants, mammalian cells, diatoms and isolated mammalian mitochondria. Conjugation has advantages over other forms of genetic transfer including minimal disruption of the target's cellular envelope and the ability to transfer relatively large amounts of genetic material (see the above discussion of \"E. coli\" chromosome transfer). In plant engineering, \"Agrobacterium\"-like conjugation complements other standard vehicles such as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). While TMV is capable of infecting many plant families these are primarily herbaceous dicots. \"Agrobacterium\"-like conjugation is also primarily used for dicots, but monocot recipients are not uncommon."}
{"id": "4461", "revid": "40600116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4461", "title": "Galjoen", "text": "The galjoen, black bream, or blackfish (\"Dichistius capensis\") is a species of marine fish found only along the coast of southern Africa from Angola to South Africa. \nGaljoen is the national fish of South Africa.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe galjoen is indigenous to the coasts of southern Africa from Angola to South Africa, and is generally found around reefs at shallow depths around , often near the shore.\nDescription.\nThis species can reach in total length and a weight of . The body is compressed, and the fins are well developed, with prominent spines, 10 of them, with between 18 and 23 rays. The anal fin has three spines, and usually 13 or 14 rays, the pelvic fins have 1 spine and 5 rays, and the pectoral fins are typically shorter than the head. The body, fins, and head, with the except of the front of the snout, are covered in scales. The lips are thick, with strong curved incisors at the front of the mouth, with smaller teeth behind the front incisors.\nEcology.\nDiet.\nThe species usually feeds on red and coraline seaweed and red bait, small mussels and barnacles found off rocky shores, and appear in particular to be a partial to the white mussels residing in the sandy beaches and inlets of the rocky outcrops along the southern coast.\nHome area.\nIn 2005, the movements of the species were extensively studied. Some 25,000 galjoen were tagged at four sites in reserves in South Africa and it was concluded that their overall movement remained localised, with some 95% of fish studied seeming to indicate a funny area.\nImportance to humans.\nFishing.\nIt is important to local commercial fisheries and is also popular as a game fish.\nAs food.\nDue to their abundance in the shores off South Africa, galjoen is common in South African cuisine. A notable dish is the fish is sprinkled with pepper and lemon, or with lemon, mayonnaise and melted garlic butter and served with fresh bread and apricot jam.\nAs the national fish of South Africa.\nGaljoen is the national fish of South Africa. The suggestion to make it the national fish came from Margaret Smith, wife of the ichthyologist J. L. B. Smith, to find a marine equivalent to the Springbok.\nEtymology.\nThe scientific name of \"Coracinus capensis\" is a reference to its black colour when found in rocky areas, \"Coracinus\" meaning \"raven\" or \"black coloured\"; in sandy areas it gives off a silver-bronze colour."}
{"id": "4462", "revid": "1005439332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4462", "title": "Blue crane", "text": "The blue crane (\"Grus paradisea\"), also known as the Stanley crane and the paradise crane, is the national bird of South Africa. The species is listed as Vulnerable by the IUCN.\nDescription.\nThe blue crane is a tall, ground-dwelling bird, but is fairly small by the standards of the crane family. It is tall, with a wingspan of and weighs . Among standard measurements, the wing chord measures , the exposed culmen measures and the tarsus measures . This crane is pale blue-gray in color becoming darker on the upper head, neck and nape. From the crown to the lores, the plumage is distinctly lighter, sometimes whitish. The bill is ochre to greyish, with a pink tinge. The long wingtip feathers which trail to the ground. The primaries are black to slate grey, with dark coverts and blackish on the secondaries. Unlike most cranes, it has a relatively large head and a proportionately thin neck. Juveniles are similar but slightly lighter, with tawny coloration on the head, and no long wing plumes.\nHabitat.\nBlue cranes are birds of the dry grassy uplands, usually the pastured grasses of hills, valleys, and plains with a few scattered trees. They prefer areas in the nesting season that have access to both upland and wetland areas, though they feed almost entirely in dry areas. They are altitudinal migrants, generally nesting in the lower grasslands of an elevation of around 1,300 to 2,000 m and moving down to lower altitudes for winter.\nMovements and behaviour.\nOf the 15 species of crane, the blue crane has the most restricted distribution of all. Even species with lower population numbers now (such as Siberian or whooping cranes) are found over a considerable range in their migratory movements. The blue crane is migratory, primarily altitudinal, but details are little known.\nThe blue crane is partially social, less so during the breeding season. There is a strict hierarchy in groups, with the larger adult males being dominant. They overlap in range with 3 other crane species but interactions with these species and other \"large wader\" type birds are not known. They are relentlessly aggressive to various other animals during the nesting season, attacking non-predatory species such as cattle, tortoises, plovers and even sparrows. Humans are also attacked if they approach a nest too closely, with the aggressive male having torn clothes and drawn blood in such cases.\nFeeding.\nBlue cranes feed from the ground and appear to rarely feed near wetland areas. Most of their diet is comprised by grasses and sedges, with many types fed on based on their proximity to the nests. They are also regularly insectivorous, feeding on numerous, sizeable insects such as grasshoppers. Small animals such as crabs, snails, frogs, small lizards and snakes may supplement the diet, with such protein-rich food often being broken down and fed to the young.\nBreeding.\nThe breeding period is highly seasonal, with eggs being recorded between October and March. Pair-formation amongst groups often starts in October, beginning with both potential parents running in circles with each other. The male then engages in a \"dance\" flings various objects in the air and then jumps. Eventually, a female from the group and the male appear to \"select\" each other and both engage in the dance of throwing objects and jumping. After the dance, mating commences in around two weeks.\nIn a great majority of known nests, two eggs are laid (rarely 1 or 3). Both males and females will incubate, with the male often incubating at night and, during the day, defending the nest territory while the female incubates. The incubation stage lasts around 30 days. The young are able to walk after two days and can swim well shortly thereafter. They are fed primarily by their mothers, who regurgitates food into the mouths. The chicks fledge in the age of 3\u20135 months. The young continue to be tended to until the next breeding season, at which time they are chased off by their parents.\nDecline.\nWhile it remains common in parts of its historic range, and approx. 26\u00a0000 individuals remain, it began a sudden population decline from around 1980 and is now classified as vulnerable.\nIn the last two decades, the blue crane has largely disappeared from the Eastern Cape, Lesotho, and Swaziland. The population in the northern Free State, Limpopo, Gauteng, Mpumalanga and North West Province has declined by up to 90%. The majority of the remaining population is in eastern and southern South Africa, with a small and separate population in the Etosha Pan of northern Namibia. Occasionally, isolated breeding pairs are found in five neighbouring countries.\nThe primary causes of the sudden decline of the blue crane are human population growth, the conversion of grasslands into commercial tree plantations, and poisoning: deliberate (to protect crops) or accidental (baits intended for other species, and as a side-effect of crop dusting).\nThe South African government has stepped up legal protection for the blue crane. Other conservation measures are focusing on research, habitat management, education, and recruiting the help of private landowners.\nThe blue crane is one of the species to which the \"Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds\" (AEWA) applies.\nCultural references.\nThe blue crane is culturally significant to the Xhosa people, who call it \"indwe\" (flag). Traditionally, when a man distinguished himself in battle or otherwise, he was often decorated by a chief with blue crane feathers in a ceremony called \"ukundzabela\". Men so honoured, who would wear the feathers sticking out of their hair, were known as men of (trouble)\u2014the implication being that if trouble arose, they would reinstate peace and order.\nIt is also of significance to the Zulu people, whose kings and warriors wore a single or many feathers as a headdress.\nBecause of the association with warriors and heroism, the Isitwalandwe Medal was created to honour those who had \"made an outstanding contribution and sacrifice to the liberation struggle\", that is, those who resisted the apartheid regime in South Africa (1949\u20131991) in various ways. Isitwalandwe means \"the one who wears the plumes of the rare bird\", or blue crane.\nThe blue crane is also the national bird of South Africa.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "4463", "revid": "41461861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4463", "title": "Babrak Karmal", "text": "Babrak Karmal (Dari/, Russian: \u0411\u0430\u0431\u0440\u0430\u0301\u043a \u041a\u0430\u0440\u043c\u0430\u0301\u043b\u044c, born Sultan Hussein; 6 January 1929 \u2013 1 or 3 December 1996) was an Afghanistani politician who was installed as President of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union when they intervened in 1979. Karmal was born in Kamari and educated at Kabul University. When the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) was formed, Karmal became one of its leading members, having been introduced to Marxism by Mir Akbar Khyber during his imprisonment for activities deemed too radical by the government. He eventually became the leader of the Parcham faction when the PDPA split in 1967, with their ideological nemesis being the Khalq faction. Under Karmal's leadership, the Parchamite PDPA participated in Mohammad Daoud Khan's rise to power in 1973, and his subsequent regime. While relations were good at the beginning, Daoud began a major purge of leftist influence in the mid-1970s. This in turn led to the reformation of the PDPA in 1977, and Karmal played a major role in the 1978 Saur Revolution when the PDPA took power, though in later years he denounced it.\nKarmal was appointed Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, synonymous with vice head of state, in the communist government. The Parchamite faction found itself under significant pressure by the Khalqists soon after taking power. In June 1978, a PDPA Central Committee meeting voted in favor of giving the Khalqist faction exclusive control over PDPA policy. This decision was followed by a failed Parchamite coup, after which Hafizullah Amin, a Khalqist, initiated a purge against the Parchamites. Karmal survived this purge but was exiled to Prague and eventually dismissed from his post. Instead of returning to Kabul, he feared for his life and lived with his family in the forests protected by the Czechoslovak secret police StB. The Afghan secret police KHAD had allegedly sent members to Czechoslovakia to assassinate Karmal. In late 1979 he was brought to Moscow by the KGB and eventually, in December 1979, the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan (with the consent of Amin's government) to stabilize the country. The Soviet troops staged a coup and assassinated Amin. \nKarmal was promoted to Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers on 27 December 1979. He remained in office until 1981, when he was succeeded by Sultan Ali Keshtmand. Throughout his term, Karmal worked to establish a support base for the PDPA by introducing several reforms. Among these were the \"Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan\", introducing a general amnesty for those people imprisoned during Nur Mohammad Taraki's and Amin's rule. He also replaced the red Khalqist flag with a more traditional one. These policies failed to increase the PDPA's legitimacy in the eyes of the Afghan people and the mujahideen rebels. Karmal had always been highly critical of his Khalqist predecessors Nur Muhammad Taraki and Amin's ultra-left radicalism.\nThese policy failures, and the stalemate that ensued after the Soviet intervention, led the Soviet leadership to become highly critical of Karmal's leadership. Under Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet Union deposed Karmal in 1986 and replaced him with Mohammad Najibullah. Following his loss of power, he was again exiled, this time to Moscow. It was Anahita Ratebzad who persuaded Najibullah to allow Babrak Karmal to return to Afghanistan in 1991, where Karmal became an associate of Abdul Rashid Dostum and possibly helped remove the Najibullah government from power in 1992. He eventually left Afghanistan again for Moscow. Not long after, in 1996, Karmal died from liver cancer.\nEarly life and career.\nKarmal was born Sultan Hussein on 6 January 1929, was the son of Muhammad Hussein Hashem, a Major General in the Afghan Army and former governor of the province of Paktia, and was the second of five siblings. His family was one of the wealthier families in Kabul. His ethnic background was Tajik (Kabuli) \nKarmal was born in Kamari, a village close to Kabul. He attended Nejat High School, a German-speaking school, and graduated from it in 1948, and applied to enter the Faculty of Law and Political Science of Kabul University. Karmal's application was initially denied admission to Kabul University because of his student political activist and his openly leftist views. He was always a charismatic speaker and became involved in the student union and the Wikh-i-Zalmayan (Awakened Youth Movement), a progressive and leftist organization. He studied at the College of Law and Political Science at Kabul University from 1951 to 1953. In 1953 Karmal was arrested because of his student union activities, but was released three years later in 1956 in an amnesty by Muhammad Daoud Khan. Shortly after, in 1957, Karmal found work as an English and German translator, before quitting and leaving for military training. Karmal graduated from the College of Law and Political Science in 1960, and in 1961, he found work as an employee in the Compilation and Translation Department of the Ministry of Education. From 1961 to 1963 he worked in the Ministry of Planning. When his mother died, Karmal left with his maternal aunt to live somewhere else. His father disowned him because of his leftist views. Karmal was involved in much debauchery, which was controversial in the mostly conservative Afghan society.\nCommunist politics.\nImprisoned from 1953 to 1956, Karmal befriended fellow inmate Mir Akbar Khyber, who introduced Karmal to Marxism. Karmal changed his name from Sultan Hussein to Babrak Karmal, which means \"Comrade of the Workers'\" in Pashtun, to disassociate himself from his bourgeois background. When he was released from prison, he continued his activities in the student union, and began to promote Marxism. Karmal spent the rest of the 1950s and the early 1960s becoming involved with Marxist organizations, of which there were at least four in Afghanistan at the time; two of the four were established by Karmal. When the 1964 Afghan Provisional Constitution, which legalised the establishment of new political entities, was introduced several prominent Marxists agreed to establish a communist political party. The People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA, the Communist Party) was established in January 1965 in Nur Muhammad Taraki's home. Factionalism within the PDPA quickly became a problem; the party split into the Khalq led by Taraki alongside Hafizullah Amin, and the Parcham led by Karmal.\nDuring the 1965 parliamentary election Karmal was one of four PDPA members elected to the lower house of parliament; the three others were Anahita Ratebzad, Nur Ahmed Nur and Fezanul Haq Fezan. No Khalqists were elected; however, Amin was 50 votes short of being elected. The Parchamite victory may be explained by the simple fact that Karmal could contribute financially to the PDPA electoral campaign. Karmal became a leading figure within the student movement in the 1960s, electing Mohammad Hashim Maiwandwal as Prime Minister after a student demonstration (called for by Karmal) concluded with three deaths under the former leadership.\nIn 1967, the PDPA unofficially split into two formal parties, one Khalqist and one Parchamist. The dissolution of the PDPA was initiated by the closing down of the Khalqist newspaper, \"Khalq\". Karmal criticised the \"Khalq\" for being too communist, and believed that its leadership should have hidden its Marxist orientation instead of promoting it. According to the official version of events, the majority of the PDPA Central Committee rejected Karmal's criticism. The vote was a close one, and it is reported that Taraki expanded the Central Committee to win the vote; this plan resulted in eight of the new members becoming politically unaligned with and one switching to the Parchamite side. Karmal and half the PDPA Central Committee left the PDPA to establish a Parchamite-led PDPA. Officially the split was caused by ideological differences, but the party may have divided between the different leadership styles and plans of Taraki versus Karmal. Taraki wanted to model the party after Leninist norms while Karmal wanted to establish a democratic front. Other differences were socioeconomic. The majority of Khalqists came from rural areas; hence they were poorer, and were of Pashtun origin. The Parchamites were urban, richer, and spoke Dari more often than not. The Khalqists accused the Parchamites of having a connection with the monarchy, and because of it, referred to the Parchamite PDPA as the \"Royal Communist Party\". Both Karmal and Amin retained their seats in the lower house of parliament in the 1969 parliamentary election.\nThe Daoud era.\nMohammed Daoud Khan, in collaboration with the Parchamite PDPA and radical military officers, overthrew the monarchy and instituted the Afghan Republic in 1973. After Daoud's seizure of power, an American embassy cable stated that the new government had established a Soviet-style Central Committee, in which Karmal and Mir Akbar Khyber were given leading positions. Most ministries were given to Parchamites; Hassan Sharq became Deputy Prime Minister, Major Faiz Mohammad became Minister of Internal Affairs and Nematullah Pazhwak became Minister of Education. The Parchamites took control over the ministries of finance, agriculture, communications and border affairs. The new government quickly suppressed the opposition, and secured their power base. At first, the National Front government between Daoud and the Parchamites seemed to work. By 1975, Daoud had strengthened his position by enhancing the executive, legislative and judicial powers of the Presidency. To the dismay of the Parchamites, all parties other than the National Revolutionary Party (NRP, established by Daoud) were made illegal.\nShortly after the ban on opposition to the NRP, Daoud began a massive purge of Parchamites in government. Mohammad lost his position as interior minister, Abdul Qadir was demoted, and Karmal was put under government surveillance. To mitigate Daoud's suddenly anti-communist directives, the Soviet Union reestablished the PDPA; Taraki was elected its General Secretary and Karmal, Second Secretary. While the Saur Revolution (literally the April Revolution) was planned for August, the assassination of Khyber led to a chain of events which ended with the communists seizing power. Karmal, when taking power in 1979, accused Amin of ordering the assassination of Khyber.\nTaraki\u2013Amin rule.\nTaraki was appointed Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers, retaining his post as PDPA general secretary. Taraki initially formed a government which consisted of both Khalqists and Parchamites; Karmal became Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, while Amin became Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers.Mohammad Aslam Watanjar became Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. The two Parchamites Abdul Qadir and Mohammad Rafi, became Minister of Defence and Minister of Public Works, respectively. The appointment of Amin, Karmal and Watanjar led to splits within the Council of Ministers: the Khalqists answered to Amin; Karmal led the civilian Parchamites; and the military officers (who were Parchamites) were answerable to Watanjar (a Khalqist). The first conflict arose when the Khalqists wanted to give PDPA Central Committee membership to military officers who had participated in the Saur Revolution; Karmal opposed such a move but was overruled. A PDPA Politburo meeting voted in favour of giving Central Committee membership to the officers.\nOn 27 June, three months after the Saur Revolution, Amin outmaneuvered the Parchamites at a Central Committee meeting, giving the Khalqists exclusive right over formulating and deciding policy. A purge against the Parchamites was initiated by Amin and supported by Taraki on 1 July 1979. Karmal, fearing for his safety, went into hiding in one of his Soviet friends' homes. Karmal tried to contact Alexander Puzanov, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan, to talk about the situation. Puzanov refused, and revealed Karmal's location to Amin. The Soviets probably saved Karmal's life by sending him to the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia. In exile, Karmal established a network with the remaining Parchamites in government. A coup to overthrow Amin was planned for 4 September 1979. Its leading members in Afghanistan were Qadir and the Army Chief of Staff General Shahpur Ahmedzai. The coup was planned for the Festival of Eid, in anticipation of relaxed military vigilance. The conspiracy failed when the Afghan ambassador to India told the Afghan leadership about the plan. Another purge was initiated, and Parchamite ambassadors were recalled. Few returned to Afghanistan; Karmal and Mohammad Najibullah stayed in their respective countries. The Soviets decided that Amin should be removed to make way for a Karmal-Taraki coalition government. However Amin managed to order the arrest and later the murder of Taraki.\nAmin was informed of the Soviet decision to intervene in Afghanistan and was initially supportive, but was assassinated. Under the command of the Soviets, Karmal ascended to power. On 27 December 1979, Karmal's pre-recorded speech to the Afghan people was broadcast via Radio Kabul from Tashkent in the Uzbek SSR (the radio wavelength was changed to that of Kabul), saying: \"Today the torture machine of Amin has been smashed, his accomplices \u2013 the primitive executioners, usurpers and murderers of tens of thousand of our fellow countrymen \u2013 fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, sons and daughters, children and old people\u00a0...\" Karmal was not in Kabul when the speech was broadcast; he was in Bagram, protected by the KGB.\nThat evening Yuri Andropov, the Chairman of the KGB, congratulated Karmal on his rise to the Chairmanship of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council, some time before Karmal received an official appointment. Karmal returned to Kabul on 28 December. He travelled alongside a Soviet military column. For the next few days Karmal lived in a villa on the outskirts of Kabul under the protection of the KGB. On 1 January 1980 Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Alexei Kosygin, the Soviet Chairman of the Council of Ministers, congratulated Karmal on his \"election\" as leader.\nPresidency.\nDomestic policies.\nThe \"Fundamental Principles\" and amnesty.\nWhen he came to power, Karmal promised an end to executions, the establishment of democratic institutions and free elections, the creation of a constitution, and legalization of alternative political parties. Prisoners incarcerated under the two previous governments would be freed in a general amnesty (which occurred on 6 January). He promised the creation of a coalition government which would not espouse socialism. At the same time, he told the Afghan people that he had negotiated with the Soviet Union to give economic, military and political assistance. The mistrust most Afghans felt towards the government was a problem for Karmal. Many still remembered he had said he would protect private capital in 1978\u2014a promise later proven to be a lie.\nKarmal's three most important promises were the general amnesty of prisoners, the promulgation of the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and the adoption of a new flag containing the traditional black, red and green (the flag of Taraki and Amin was red). His government granted concessions to religious leaders and the restoration of confiscated property. Some property, which was confiscated during earlier land reforms, was also partially restored. All these measures, with the exception of the general amnesty of prisoners, were introduced gradually. Of 2,700 prisoners, 2,600 were released from prison; 600 of these were Parchamites. The general amnesty was greatly publicized by the government. While the event was hailed with enthusiasm by some, many others greeted the event with disdain, since their loved ones or associates had died during earlier purges. Amin had planned to introduce a general amnesty on 1 January 1980, to coincide with the PDPA's sixteenth anniversary.\nWork on the Fundamental Principles had started under Amin: it guaranteed democratic rights such as freedom of speech, the right to security and life, the right to peaceful association, the right to demonstrate and the right that \"no one would be accused of crime but in accord with the provisions of law\" and that the accused had the right to a fair trial. The Fundamental Principles envisaged a democratic state led by the PDPA, the only party then permitted by law. The Revolutionary Council, the organ of supreme power, would convene twice every year. The Revolutionary Council in turn elected a Presidium which would take decisions on behalf of the Revolutionary Council when it was not in session. The Presidium consisted mostly of PDPA Politburo members. The state would safeguard three kinds of property: state, cooperative and private property. The Fundamental Principles said that the state had the right to change the Afghan economy from an economy where man was exploited to an economy were man was free. Another clause stated that the state had the right to take \"families, both parents and children, under its supervision.\" While it looked democratic at the outset, the Fundamental Principles was based on contradictions.\nThe Fundamental Principles led to the establishment of two important state organs: the Special Revolutionary Court, a specialized court for crimes against national security and territorial integrity, and the Institute for Legal and Scientific Research and Legislative Affairs, the supreme legislative organ of state, This body could amend and draft laws, and introduce regulations and decrees on behalf of the government. The introduction of more Soviet-style institutions led the Afghan people to distrust the communist government even more.\nThe Fundamental Principles constitution came into power on 22 April 1980.\nDividing power: Khalq\u2013Parcham.\nWith Karmal's ascension to power, Parchamites began to \"settle old scores\". Revolutionary Troikas were created to arrest, sentence and execute people. Amin's guard were the first victims of the terror which ensued. Those commanders who had stayed loyal to Amin were arrested, filling the prisons. The Soviets protested, and Karmal replied, \"As long as you keep my hands bound and do not let me deal with the Khalq faction there will be no unity in the PDPA and the government cannot become strong\u00a0... They tortured and killed us. They still hate us! They are the enemies of the party\u00a0...\" Amin's daughter, along with her baby, was imprisoned for twelve years, until Mohammad Najibullah, then leader of the PDPA, released her. When Karmal took power, leading posts in the Party and Government bureaucracy were taken over by Parchamites. The Khalq faction was removed from power, and only technocrats, opportunists and individuals which the Soviets trusted would be appointed to the higher echelons of government. Khalqists remained in control of the Ministry of Interior, but Parchamites were given control over KHAD and the secret police. The Parchamites and the Khalqists controlled an equal share of the military. Two out of Karmal's three Council of Ministers deputy chairmen were Khalqists. Khalqists controlled the Ministry of Communications and the interior ministry. Parchamites, on the other hand, controlled the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence. In addition to the changes in government, the Parchamites held clear majority in the PDPA Central Committee. Only one Khalqi, Saleh Mohammad Zeary, was a member of the PDPA Secretariat during Karmal's rule.\nOver 14 and 15 March 1982 the PDPA held a party \"conference\" at the Kabul Polytechnic Institute instead of a party \"congress\", since a party congress would have given the Khalq faction a majority and could have led to a Khalqist takeover of the PDPA. The rules of holding a party conference were different, and the Parchamites had a three-fifths majority. This infuriated several Khalqists; the threat of expulsion did not lessen their anger. The conference was not successful, but it was portrayed as such by the official media. The conference broke up after one and a half days of a 3-day long program, because of the inter-party struggle for power between the Khalqists and the Parchamites. A \"program of action\" was introduced, and party rules were given minor changes. As an explanation of the low party membership, the official media also made it seem hard to become a member of the party.\nPDPA base.\nWhen Karmal took power, he began expanding the support base of the PDPA. Karmal tried to persuade certain groups, which had been referred to class enemies of the revolution during Taraki and Amin's rule, to support the PDPA. Karmal appointed several non-communists to top positions. Between March and May 1980, 78 out of the 191 people appointed to government posts were not members of the PDPA. Karmal reintroduced the old Afghan custom of having an Islamic invocation every time the government issued a proclamation. In his first live speech to the Afghan people, Karmal called for the establishment of the National Fatherland Front (NFF); the NFF's founding congress was held in June 1981. Unfortunately for Karmal, his policies did not lead to a notable increase in support for his regime, and it did not help Karmal that most Afghans saw the Soviet intervention as an invasion.\nBy 1981, the government gave up on political solutions to the conflict. At the fifth PDPA Central Committee plenum in June, Karmal resigned from his Council of Ministers chairmanship and was replaced by Sultan Ali Keshtmand, while Nur Ahmad Nur was given a bigger role in the Revolutionary Council. This was seen as \"base broadening\". The previous weight given to non-PDPA members in top positions ceased to be an important matter in the media by June 1981. This was significant, considering that up to five members of the Revolutionary Council were non-PDPA members. By the end of 1981, the previous contenders, who had been heavily presented in the media, were all gone; two were given ambassadorships, two ceased to be active in politics, and one continued as an advisor to the government. The other three changed sides, and began to work for the opposition.\nThe national policy of reconciliation continued: in January 1984 the land reform introduced by Taraki and Amin was drastically modified, the limits of landholdings were increased to win the support of middle class peasants, the literacy programme was continued, and concessions to women were made. In 1985 the Loya Jirga was reconvened. The 1985 Loya Jirga was followed by a tribal jirga in September. In 1986 Abdul Rahim Hatef, a non-PDPA member, was elected to the NFF chairmanship. During the 1985\u201386 elections it was said that 60 percent of the elected officials were non-PDPA members. By the end of Karmal's rule, several non-PDPA members had high-level government positions.\nCivil war and military.\nIn March 1979, the military budget was 6.4\u00a0million US$, which was 8.3 percent of the government budget, but only 2.2 of gross national product. After the Soviet intervention, the defence budget increased to 208 million US$ in 1980, and 325\u00a0million US$ by 1981. In 1982 it was reported that the government spent around 22 percent of total expenditure.\nWhen the political solution failed (see \"PDPA base\" section), the Afghan government and the Soviet military decided to solve the conflict militarily. The change from a political to a military solution did not come suddenly. It began in January 1981, as Karmal doubled wages for military personnel, issued several promotions, and decorated one general and thirteen colonels. The draft age was lowered, the obligatory length of arms duty was extended and the age for reservists was increased to thirty-five years of age. In June 1981, Assadullah Sarwari lost his seat in the PDPA Politburo, replaced by Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, a former tank commander and Minister of Communications, Major General Mohammad Rafi was madeMinister of Defence and Mohammad Najibullah appointed KHAD Chairman.\nThese measures were introduced due to the collapse of the army during the Soviet intervention. Before the invasion the army could field 100,000 troops, after the invasion only 25,000. Desertions were pandemic, and the recruitment campaigns for young people often drove them to the opposition. To better organize the military, seven military zones were established, each with its own Defence Council. The Defence Councils were established at the national, provincial and district level to empower the local PDPA. It is estimated that the Afghan government spent as much as 40 percent of government revenue on defense.\nEconomy.\nDuring the civil war and the ensuing Soviet\u2013Afghan War, most of the country's infrastructure was destroyed. Normal patterns of economic activity were disrupted. The Gross national product (GNP) fell substantially during Karmal's rule because of the conflict; trade and transport was disrupted with loss of labor and capital. In 1981 the Afghan GDP stood at 154.3\u00a0billion Afghan afghanis, a drop from 159.7\u00a0billion in 1978. GNP per capita decreased from 7,370 in 1978 to 6,852 in 1981. The dominant form of economic activity was in the agricultural sector. Agriculture accounted for 63 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1981; 56 percent of the labor force was working in agriculture in 1982. Industry accounted for 21 percent of GDP in 1982, and employed 10 percent of the labor force. All industrial enterprises were government-owned. The service sector, the smallest of the three, accounted for 10 percent of GDP in 1981, and employed an estimated one-third of the labour force. The balance of payments, which had grown in the pre-communist administration of Muhammad Daoud Khan, decreased, turning negative by 1982 at 70.3\u00a0million $US. The only economic activity which grew substantially during Karmal's rule was export and import.\nForeign policy.\nKarmal observed in early 1983 that without Soviet intervention, \"It is unknown what the destiny of the Afghan Revolution would be\u00a0... We are realists and we clearly realize that in store for us yet lie trials and deprivations, losses and difficulties.\" Two weeks before this statement Sultan Ali Keshtmand, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, lamented the fact that half the schools and three-quarters of communications had been destroyed since 1979. The Soviet Union rejected several Western-made peace plans, such as the Carrington Plan, since they did not take into consideration the PDPA government. Most Western peace plans had been made in collaboration with the Afghan opposition forces. At the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, stated;\nThe stance of the Pakistani government was clear, demanding complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and the establishment of a non-PDPA government. Karmal, summarizing his discussions with Iran and Pakistan, said \"Iran and Pakistan have so far not opted for concrete and constructive positions.\" During Karmal's rule Afghan\u2013Pakistani relations remained hostile; the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was the catalyst for the hostile relationship. The increasing numbers of Afghan refugees in Pakistan challenged the PDPA's legitimacy to rule.\nThe Soviet Union threatened in 1985 that it would support the Baloch separatist movement in Pakistan if the Pakistani government continued to aid the mujahideen in Afghanistan. Karmal, problematically for the Soviets, did not want a Soviet withdrawal, and he hampered attempts to improve relations with Pakistan since the Pakistani government had refused to recognise the PDPA government.\nFall from power and succession.\nMikhail Gorbachev, then General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said, \"The main reason that there has been no national consolidation so far is that Comrade Karmal is hoping to continue sitting in Kabul with our help.\" Karmal's position became less secure when the Soviet leadership began blaming him for the failures in Afghanistan. Gorbachev, worried over the situation, told the Soviet Politburo \"If we don't change approaches [to evacuate Afghanistan], we will be fighting there for another 20 or 30 years.\" It is not clear when the Soviet leadership began to campaign for Karmal's dismissal, but Andrei Gromyko discussed the possibility of Karmal's resignation with Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar, the Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1982. While it was Gorbachev who would dismiss Karmal, there may have been a consensus within the Soviet leadership in 1983 that Karmal should resign. Gorbachev's own plan was to replace Karmal with Mohammad Najibullah, who had joined the PDPA at its creation. Najibullah was thought highly of by Yuri Andropov, Boris Ponomarev and Dmitriy Ustinov, and negotiations for his succession may have started in 1983. Najibullah was not the Soviet leadership's only choice for Karmal's succession; a GRU report noted that the majority of the PDPA leadership would support Assadullah Sarwari's ascension to leadership. According to the GRU, Sarwari was a better candidate as he could balance between the Pashtuns, Tajiks and Uzbeks; Najibullah was a Pashtun nationalist. Another viable candidate was Abdul Qadir, who had been a participant in the Saur Revolution.\nNajibullah was appointed to the PDPA Secretariat in November 1985. During Karmal's March 1986 visit to the Soviet Union, the Soviets tried to persuade Karmal that he was too ill to govern, and that he should resign. This backfired, as a Soviet doctor attending to Karmal told him he was in good health. Karmal asked to return home to Kabul, and said that he understood and would listen to the Soviet recommendations. Before leaving, Karmal promised he would step down as PDPA General Secretary. The Soviets did not trust him and sent Vladimir Kryuchkov, the head of intelligence (FCD) in the KGB, into Afghanistan. At a meeting in Kabul, Karmal confessed his undying love for the Soviet Union, comparing his ardor to his Muslim faith. Kryuchkov, concluding that he could not persuade Karmal to resign, left the meeting. After Kryuchkov left the room, the Afghan defence minister and the state security minister visited Karmal's office, telling him that he had to resign from one of his posts. Understanding that his Soviet support had been eliminated, Karmal resigned from the office of the General Secretary at the 18th PDPA Central Committee plenum. He was succeeded in his post by Najibullah.\nKarmal still had support within the party, and used his base to curb Najibullah's powers. He began spreading rumors that he would be reappointed General Secretary. Najibullah's power base was in the KHAD, the Afghan equivalent to the KGB, and not the party. Considering the fact that the Soviet Union had supported Karmal for over six years, the Soviet leadership wanted to ease him out of power gradually. Yuli Vorontsov, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan, told Najibullah to begin undermining Karmal's power slowly. Najibullah complained to the Soviet leadership that Karmal used most of his spare time looking for errors and \"speaking against the National Reconciliation [programme]\". At a meeting of the Soviet Politburo on 13 November 1986 it was decided that Najibullah should remove Karmal; this motion was supported by Gromyko, Vorontsov, Eduard Shevardnadze, Anatoly Dobrynin and Viktor Chebrikov. A PDPA meeting in November relieved Karmal of his Revolutionary Council chairmanship, and exiled him to Moscow where he was given a state-owned apartment and a dacha. Karmal was succeeded as Revolutionary Council chairman by Haji Mohammad Chamkani, who was not a member of the PDPA.\nLater life and death.\nMany years after the end of his Presidency, he denounced the Saur Revolution of 1978 in which he took part, taking aim at the Khalq governments of Taraki and Amin. He told a Soviet reporter:\nIt was the greatest crime against the people of Afghanistan. Parcham's leaders were against armed actions because the country was not ready for a revolution... I knew that people would not support us if we decided to keep power without such support.\nFor unknown reasons, Karmal was invited back to Kabul by Najibullah, and \"for equally obscure reasons Karmal accepted\", returning on 20 June 1991. (This could have been on the recommendation of Anahita Ratebzad who was very close to Karmal &amp; also respected by Najib &amp; generally respected by great part of Left movement in Afghanestan.) If Najibullah's plan was to strengthen his position within the Watan Party (the renamed PDPA) by appeasing the pro-Karmal Parchamites, he failed \u2013 Karmal's apartment became a center for opposition to Najibullah's government. When Najibullah was toppled in 1992, Karmal became the most powerful politician in Kabul through leadership of the Parcham. However, his negotiations with the rebels collapsed quickly, and on 16 April 1992 the rebels, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, took Kabul. After the fall of Najibullah's government, Karmal was based in Hairatan. There, it is alleged, Karmal used most of his time either trying to establish a new party, or advising people to join the secular National Islamic Movement (\"Junbish-i-Milli\"). Abdul Rashid Dostum, the leader of Junbish-i-Milli, was a supporter of Karmal during his rule. It is unknown how much control Karmal had over Dostum, but there is little evidence that Karmal was in any commanding position. Karmal's influence over Dostum appeared indirect \u2013 some of his former associates supported Dostum. Those who spoke with Karmal during this period noted his lack of interest in politics. In June 1992 it was reported that he had died in a plane crash along with Dostum, although these reports later proved to be false.\nIn early December 1996, Karmal died in Moscow's Central Clinical Hospital from liver cancer. The date of his death was reported by some sources as 1 December and by others as 3 December. The Taliban summed up his rule as follows:\n[he] committed all kinds of crimes during his illegitimate rule\u00a0... God inflicted on him various kinds of hardship and pain. Eventually he died of cancer in a hospital belonging to his paymasters, the Russians."}
{"id": "4464", "revid": "1639942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4464", "title": "Book of Zecharaiah", "text": ""}
{"id": "4466", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4466", "title": "Black Sox scandal", "text": ""}
{"id": "4468", "revid": "1011656874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4468", "title": "Buddhist philosophy", "text": "Buddhist philosophy refers to the philosophical investigations and systems of inquiry that developed among various Buddhist schools in India following the parinirvana (i.e. death) of the Buddha and later spread throughout Asia. The Buddhist path combines both philosophical reasoning and meditation. The Buddhist traditions present a multitude of Buddhist paths to liberation, and Buddhist thinkers in India and subsequently in East Asia have covered topics as varied as phenomenology, ethics, ontology, epistemology, logic and philosophy of time in their analysis of these paths.\nEarly Buddhism was based on empirical evidence gained by the sense organs (\"ayatana\") and the Buddha seems to have retained a skeptical distance from certain metaphysical questions, refusing to answer them because they were not conducive to liberation but led instead to further speculation. A recurrent theme in Buddhist philosophy has been the reification of concepts, and the subsequent return to the Buddhist Middle Way.\nParticular points of Buddhist philosophy have often been the subject of disputes between different schools of Buddhism. These elaborations and disputes gave rise to various schools in early Buddhism of Abhidharma, and to the Mahayana traditions such as Prajnaparamita, Madhyamaka, Buddha-nature and Yog\u0101c\u0101ra.\nHistorical phases of Buddhist philosophy.\nEdward Conze splits the development of Indian Buddhist philosophy into three phases:\nVarious elements of these three phases are incorporated and/or further developed in the philosophy and world view of the various sects of Buddhism that then emerged.\nPhilosophical orientation.\nPhilosophy in India was aimed mainly at spiritual liberation and had soteriological goals. In his study of M\u0101dhyamaka Buddhist philosophy in India, Peter Deller Santina writes:\nFor the Indian Buddhist philosophers, the teachings of the Buddha were not meant to be taken on faith alone, but to be confirmed by logical analysis (\"pramana\") of the world. The early Buddhist texts mention that a person becomes a follower of the Buddha's teachings after having pondered them over with wisdom and the gradual training also requires that a disciple \"investigate\" (\"upaparikkhati\") and \"scrutinize\" (\"tuleti\") the teachings. The Buddha also expected his disciples to approach him as a teacher in a critical fashion and scrutinize his actions and words, as shown in the \"V\u012bma\u1e43saka Sutta.\"\nThe Buddha and early Buddhism.\nThe Buddha.\nScholarly opinion varies as to whether the Buddha himself was engaged in philosophical inquiry. The Buddha (c. 5th century BCE) was a north Indian sramana (wandering ascetic) from Magadha. He cultivated various yogic techniques and ascetic practices and taught throughout north India, where his teachings took hold. These teachings are preserved in the Pali Nikayas and in the Agamas as well as in other surviving fragmentary textual collections (collectively known as the Early Buddhist Texts). Dating these texts is difficult, and there is disagreement on how much of this material goes back to a single religious founder. While the focus of the Buddha's teachings are about attaining the highest good of nirvana, they also contain an analysis of the source of human suffering, the nature of personal identity, and the process of acquiring knowledge about the world.\nThe Middle Way.\nThe Buddha defined his teaching as \"the middle way\" (Pali: \"Majjhim\u0101pa\u1e6dipad\u0101\"). In the \"Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta\", this is used to refer to the fact that his teachings steer a middle course between the extremes of asceticism and bodily denial (as practiced by the Jains and other ascetic groups) and sensual hedonism or indulgence. Many sramanas of the Buddha's time placed much emphasis on a denial of the body, using practices such as fasting, to liberate the mind from the body. The Buddha, however, realized that the mind was embodied and causally dependent on the body, and therefore that a malnourished body did not allow the mind to be trained and developed. Thus, Buddhism's main concern is not with luxury or poverty, but instead with the human response to circumstances.\nBasic teachings.\nCertain basic teachings appear in many places throughout these early texts, so older studies by various scholars conclude that the Buddha must at least have taught some of these key teachings:\nAccording to N. Ross Reat, all of these doctrines are shared by the Theravada Pali texts and the Mahasamghika school's \"\u015a\u0101listamba S\u016btra\". A recent study by Bhikkhu Analayo concludes that the Theravada \"Majjhima Nikaya\" and Sarvastivada \"Madhyama Agama\" contain mostly the same major doctrines. Richard Salomon, in his study of the Gandharan texts (which are the earliest manuscripts containing early discourses), has confirmed that their teachings are \"consistent with non-Mahayana Buddhism, which survives today in the Theravada school of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, but which in ancient times was represented by eighteen separate schools.\"\nHowever, some scholars such as Schmithausen, Vetter, and Bronkhorst argue that critical analysis reveals discrepancies among these various doctrines. They present alternative possibilities for what was taught in early Buddhism and question the authenticity of certain teachings and doctrines.\nFor example, some scholars think that karma was not central to the teaching of the historical Buddha, while other disagree with this position. Likewise, there is scholarly disagreement on whether insight was seen as liberating in early Buddhism or whether it was a later addition to the practice of the four \"dhy\u0101na.\" According to Vetter and Bronkhorst, \"dhy\u0101na\" constituted the original \"liberating practice\", while discriminating insight into transiency as a separate path to liberation was a later development.\"\" Scholars such as Bronkhorst and Carol Anderson also think that the four noble truths may not have been formulated in earliest Buddhism but as Anderson writes \"emerged as a central teaching in a slightly later period that still preceded the final redactions of the various Buddhist canons.\"\nAccording to some scholars, the philosophical outlook of earliest Buddhism was primarily negative, in the sense that it focused on what doctrines to \"reject\" more than on what doctrines to \"accept\". Only knowledge that is useful in achieving enlightenment is valued. According to this theory, the cycle of philosophical upheavals that in part drove the diversification of Buddhism into its many schools and sects only began once Buddhists began attempting to make explicit the implicit philosophy of the Buddha and the early texts.\nThe noble truths and causation.\nThe four noble truths or \"truths of the noble one\" are a central feature of the teachings and are put forth in the \"Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta\". The first truth of dukkha, often translated as \"suffering\", is the inherent unsatisfactoriness of life. This unpleasantness is said to be not just physical pain, but also a kind of existential unease caused by the inevitable facts of our mortality and ultimately by the impermanence of all phenomena. It also arises because of contact with unpleasant events, and due to not getting what one desires. The second truth is that this unease arises out of conditions, mainly 'craving' (tanha) and ignorance (avidya). The third truth is then the fact that if you let go of craving and remove ignorance through knowledge, dukkha ceases (nirodha). The fourth is the eightfold path which are eight practices that end suffering. They are: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right samadhi (mental unification, meditation). The goal taught by the Buddha, nirvana, literally means 'extinguishing' and signified \"the complete extinguishing of greed, hatred, and delusion (i.e. ignorance), the forces which power \"samsara\". Nirvana also means that after an enlightened being's death, there is no further rebirth. In early Buddhism, the concept of dependent origination was most likely limited to processes of mental conditioning and not to all physical phenomena. The Buddha understood the world in procedural terms, not in terms of things or substances. His theory posits a flux of events arising under certain conditions which are interconnected and dependent, such that the processes in question at no time are considered to be static or independent. Craving, for example, is always dependent on, and caused by sensations. Sensations are always dependent on contact with our surroundings. Buddha's causal theory is simply descriptive: \"This existing, that exists; this arising, that arises; this not existing, that does not exist; this ceasing, that ceases.\" This understanding of causation as \"impersonal lawlike causal ordering\" is important because it shows how the processes that give rise to suffering work, and also how they can be reversed.\nThe removal of suffering, then, requires a deep understanding of the nature of reality (praj\u00f1a). While philosophical analysis of arguments and concepts is clearly necessary to develop this understanding, it is not enough to remove our unskillful mental habits and deeply ingrained prejudices, which require meditation, paired with understanding. According to the Buddha of the early texts, we need to train the mind in meditation to be able to truly see the nature of reality, which is said to have the marks of suffering, impermanence and not-self. Understanding and meditation are said to work together to 'clearly see' (vipassana) the nature of human experience and this is said to lead to liberation.\nAnatta.\nThe Buddha argued that compounded entities lacked essence, correspondingly the self is without essence. This means there is no part of a person which is unchanging and essential for continuity, and it means that there is no individual \"part of the person that accounts for the identity of that person over time\". This is in opposition to the Upanishadic concept of an unchanging ultimate self (Atman) and any view of an eternal soul. The Buddha held that attachment to the appearance of a permanent self in this world of change is the cause of suffering, and the main obstacle to liberation.\nThe most widely used argument that the Buddha employed against the idea of an unchanging ego is an empiricist one, based on the observation of the five aggregates that make up a person and the fact that these are always changing. This argument can be put in this way:\nThis argument requires the implied premise that the five aggregates are an exhaustive account of what makes up a person, or else the self could exist outside of these aggregates. This premise is affirmed in other suttas, such as SN 22.47 which states: \"whatever ascetics and brahmins regard various kinds of things as self, all regard the five grasping aggregates, or one of them.\"\nThis argument is famously expounded in the \"Anattalakkhana Sutta\". According to this text, the apparently fixed self is merely the result of identification with the temporary aggregates, the changing processes making up an individual human being. In this view a 'person' is only a convenient nominal designation on a certain grouping of processes and characteristics, and an 'individual' is a conceptual construction overlaid upon a stream of experiences just like a chariot is merely a conventional designation for the parts of a chariot and how they are put together. The foundation of this argument is empiricist, for it is based on the fact that all we observe is subject to change, especially everything observed when looking inwardly in meditation.\nAnother argument for 'non-self', the 'argument from lack of control', is based on the fact that we often seek to change certain parts of ourselves, that the 'executive function' of the mind is that which finds certain things unsatisfactory and attempts to alter them. Furthermore, it is also based on the Indian 'Anti Reflexivity Principle' which states an entity cannot operate on or control itself (a knife can cut other things but not itself, a finger can point at other things but not at itself, etc.). This means then, that the self could never desire to change itself and could not do so (another reason for this is that in most Indian traditions besides Buddhism, the true self or Atman is perfectly blissful and does not suffer). The Buddha uses this idea to attack the concept of self. This argument could be structured thus:\nThis argument then denies that there is one permanent \"controller\" in the person. Instead it views the person as a set of constantly changing processes which include volitional events seeking change and an awareness of that desire for change. According to Mark Siderits:\"What the Buddhist has in mind is that on one occasion one part of the person might perform the executive function, on another occasion another part might do so. This would make it possible for every part to be subject to control without there being any part that always fills the role of controller (and so is the self). On some occasions a given part might fall on the controller side, while on other occasions it might fall on the side of the controlled. This would explain how it's possible for us to seek to change any of the skandhas while there is nothing more to us than just those skandhas.\"As noted by K.R. Norman and Richard Gombrich, the Buddha extended his anatta critique to the Brahmanical belief expounded in the \"Brihadaranyaka Upanishad\" that the Self (Atman) was indeed the whole world, or Brahman. This is shown by the \"Alagaddupama Sutta\", where the Buddha argues that an individual cannot experience the suffering of the entire world. He used the example of someone carrying off and burning grass and sticks from the Jeta grove and how a monk would not sense or consider themselves harmed by that action. In this example the Buddha is arguing that we do not have direct experience of the entire world, and hence the Self cannot be the whole world. In this sutta (as well as in the \"Soatt\u0101 Sutta\") the Buddha outlines six wrong views about Self:\n\"There are six wrong views: An unwise, untrained person may think of the body, 'This is mine, this is me, this is my self'; he may think that of feelings; of perceptions; of volitions; or of what has been seen, heard, thought, cognized, reached, sought or considered by the mind. The sixth is to identify the world and self, to believe: 'At death I shall become permanent, eternal, unchanging, and so remain forever the same; and that is mine, that is me, that is my self.' A wise and well-trained person sees that all these positions are wrong, and so he is not worried about something that does not exist.\"\nFurthermore, the Buddha argues that the world can be observed to be a cause of suffering (Brahman was held to be ultimately blissful) and that since we cannot control the world as we wish, the world cannot be the Self. The idea that \"this cosmos is the self\" is one of the views rejected by the Buddha along with the related Monistic theory that held that \"everything is a Oneness\" (SN 12.48 \"Lokayatika Sutta\"). The Buddha also held that understanding and seeing the truth of not-self led to un-attachment, and hence to the cessation of suffering, while ignorance about the true nature of personality led to further suffering.\nEpistemology.\nAll schools of Indian philosophy recognize various sets of valid justifications for knowledge, or \"pramana\" and many see the Vedas as providing access to truth. The Buddha denied the authority of the Vedas, though, like his contemporaries, he affirmed the soteriological importance of having a proper understanding of reality (right view). However, this understanding was not conceived primarily as metaphysical and cosmological knowledge, but as a knowledge into the arising and cessation of suffering in human experience. Therefore, the Buddha's epistemic project is different than that of modern philosophy; it is primarily a solution to the fundamental human spiritual/existential problem.\nThe Buddha's epistemology has been compared to empiricism, in the sense that it was based on experience of the world through the senses. The Buddha taught that empirical observation through the six sense fields (ayatanas) was the proper way of verifying any knowledge claims. Some suttas go further, stating that \"the All\", or everything that exists (\"sabbam\"), are these six sense spheres (SN 35.23, Sabba Sutta) and that anyone who attempts to describe another \"All\" will be unable to do so because \"it lies beyond range\". This sutta seems to indicate that for the Buddha, things in themselves or noumena, are beyond our epistemological reach (\"avisaya\").\nFurthermore, in the Kalama Sutta the Buddha tells a group of confused villagers that the only proper reason for one's beliefs is verification in one's own personal experience (and the experience of the wise) and denies any verification which stems from personal authority, sacred tradition (\"anussava\") or any kind of rationalism which constructs metaphysical theories (\"takka\"). In the Tevijja Sutta (DN 13), the Buddha rejects the personal authority of Brahmins because none of them can prove they have had personal experience of Brahman. The Buddha also stressed that experience is the only criterion for verification of the truth in this passage from the Majjhima Nikaya (MN.I.265):\nFurthermore, the Buddha's standard for personal verification was a pragmatic and salvific one, for the Buddha a belief counts as truth only if it leads to successful Buddhist practice (and hence, to the destruction of craving). In the \"Discourse to Prince Abhaya\" (MN.I.392\u20134) the Buddha states this pragmatic maxim by saying that a belief should only be accepted if it leads to wholesome consequences. This tendency of the Buddha to see what is true as what was useful or 'what works' has been called by scholars such as Mrs Rhys Davids and Vall\u00e9e-Poussin a form of Pragmatism. However, K. N. Jayatilleke argues the Buddha's epistemology can also be taken to be a form of correspondence theory (as per the 'Apannaka Sutta') with elements of Coherentism and that for the Buddha, it is causally impossible for something which is false to lead to cessation of suffering and evil.\nThe Buddha discouraged his followers from indulging in intellectual disputation for its own sake, which is fruitless, and distracts one from the goal of awakening. Only philosophy and discussion which has pragmatic value for liberation from suffering is seen as important. According to the scriptures, during his lifetime the Buddha remained silent when asked several metaphysical questions which he regarded as the basis for \"unwise reflection\". These 'unanswered questions' (avy\u0101kata) regarded issues such as whether the universe is eternal or non-eternal (or whether it is finite or infinite), the unity or separation of the body and the self, the complete inexistence of a person after Nirvana and death, and others. The Buddha stated that thinking about these imponderable (Acinteyya) issues led to \"a thicket of views, a wilderness of views, a contortion of views, a writhing of views, a fetter of views\" (Aggi-Vacchagotta Sutta).\nOne explanation for this pragmatic suspension of judgment or epistemic Epoch\u00e9 is that such questions distract from activity that is practical to realizing enlightenment and bring about the danger of substituting the experience of liberation by conceptual understanding of the doctrine or by religious faith. According to the Buddha, the Dharma is not an ultimate end in itself or an explanation of all metaphysical reality, but a pragmatic set of teachings. The Buddha used two parables to clarify this point, the 'Parable of the raft' and the Parable of the Poisoned Arrow. The Dharma is like a raft in the sense that it is only a pragmatic tool for attaining nirvana (\"for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of holding onto\", MN 22); once one has done this, one can discard the raft. It is also like medicine, in that the particulars of how one was injured by a poisoned arrow (i.e. metaphysics, etc.) do not matter in the act of removing and curing the arrow wound itself (removing suffering). In this sense, the Buddha was often called 'the great physician' because his goal was to cure the human condition of suffering first and foremost, not to speculate about metaphysics.\nHaving said this, it is still clear that resisting (even refuting) a false or slanted doctrine can be useful to extricate the interlocutor, or oneself, from error; hence, to advance in the way of liberation. Witness the Buddha's confutation of several doctrines by Nigantha Nataputta and other purported sages which sometimes had large followings (e.g., Kula Sutta, Sankha Sutta, Brahmana Sutta). This shows that a virtuous and appropriate use of dialectics can take place. By implication, reasoning and argument shouldn't be disparaged by Buddhists.\nAfter the Buddha's death, some Buddhists such as Dharmakirti went on to use the sayings of the Buddha as sound evidence equal to perception and inference.\nTranscendence.\nAnother possible reason why the Buddha refused to engage in metaphysics is that he saw ultimate reality and nirvana as devoid of sensory mediation and conception and therefore language itself is \"a priori\" inadequate to explain it. Thus, the Buddha's silence does not indicate misology or disdain for philosophy. Rather, it indicates that he viewed the answers to these questions as not understandable by the unenlightened. Dependent arising provides a framework for analysis of reality that is not based on metaphysical assumptions regarding existence or non-existence, but instead on direct cognition of phenomena as they are presented to the mind in meditation.\nThe Buddha of the earliest Buddhists texts describes Dharma (in the sense of \"truth\") as \"beyond reasoning\" or \"transcending logic\", in the sense that reasoning is a subjectively introduced aspect of the way unenlightened humans perceive things, and the conceptual framework which underpins their cognitive process, rather than a feature of things as they really are. Going \"beyond reasoning\" means in this context penetrating the nature of reasoning from the inside, and removing the causes for experiencing any future stress as a result of it, rather than functioning outside the system as a whole.\nMeta-ethics.\nThe Buddha's ethics are based on the soteriological need to eliminate suffering and on the premise of the law of karma. Buddhist ethics have been termed eudaimonic (with their goal being well-being) and also compared to virtue ethics (this approach began with Damien Keown). Keown writes that Buddhist Nirvana is analogous to the Aristotelian Eudaimonia, and that Buddhist moral acts and virtues derive their value from how they lead us to or act as an aspect of the nirvanic life.\nThe Buddha outlined five precepts (no killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, or drinking alcohol) which were to be followed by his disciples, lay and monastic. There are various reasons the Buddha gave as to why someone should be ethical.\nFirst, the universe is structured in such a way that if someone intentionally commits a misdeed, a bad karmic fruit will be the result. Hence, from a pragmatic point of view, it is best to abstain from these negative actions which bring forth negative results. However, the important word here is \"intentionally\": for the Buddha, karma is nothing else but intention/volition, and hence unintentionally harming someone does not create bad karmic results. Unlike the Jains who believed that karma was a quasi-physical element, for the Buddha karma was a volitional mental event, what Richard Gombrich calls 'an ethicised consciousness'.\nThis idea leads into the second moral justification of the Buddha: intentionally performing negative actions reinforces and propagates mental defilements which keep persons bound to the cycle of rebirth and interfere with the process of liberation, and hence intentionally performing good karmic actions is participating in mental purification which leads to nirvana, the highest happiness. This perspective sees immoral acts as unskillful (\"akusala\") in our quest for happiness, and hence it is pragmatic to do good.\nThe third meta-ethical consideration takes the view of not-self and our natural desire to end our suffering to its logical conclusion. Since there is no self, there is no reason to prefer our own welfare over that of others because there is no ultimate grounding for the differentiation of \"my\" suffering and someone else's. Instead, an enlightened person would just work to end suffering \"tout court\", without thinking of the conventional concept of persons. According to this argument, anyone who is selfish does so out of ignorance of the true nature of personal identity and irrationality.\nBuddhist schools and Abhidharma.\nThe main Indian Buddhist philosophical schools practiced a form of analysis termed \"Abhidharma\" which sought to systematize the teachings of the early Buddhist discourses (sutras). Abhidharma analysis broke down human experience into momentary phenomenal events or occurrences called \"dharmas\". Dharmas are impermanent and dependent on other causal factors, they arise and pass as part of a web of other interconnected dharmas, and are never found alone. The Abhidharma schools held that the teachings of the Buddha in the sutras were merely conventional, while the Abhidharma analysis was ultimate truth (paramattha sacca), the way things really are when seen by an enlightened being. The Abhidharmic project has been likened as a form of phenomenology or process philosophy. Abhidharma philosophers not only outlined what they believed to be an exhaustive listing of \"dharmas\", or phenomenal events, but also the causal relations between them. In the Abhidharmic analysis, the only thing which is ultimately real is the interplay of dharmas in a causal stream; everything else is merely conceptual (\"pa\u00f1\u00f1atti\") and nominal.\nThis view has been termed \"mereological reductionism\" by Mark Siderits because it holds that only impartite entities are real, not wholes. Abhidharmikas such as Vasubandhu argued that conventional things (tables, persons, etc.) \"disappear under analysis\" and that this analysis reveals only a causal stream of phenomenal events and their relations. The mainstream Abhidharmikas defended this view against their main Hindu rivals, the Nyaya school, who were substance theorists and posited the existence of universals. Some Abhidharmikas such as the Praj\u00f1aptiv\u0101da were also strict nominalists, and held that all things - even dharmas - were merely conceptual.\nCompeting Abhidharma schools.\nAn important Abhidhamma work from the Therav\u0101da school is the Kath\u0101vatthu (\"Points of controversy\"), attributed to the Indian scholar-monk Moggaliputta-Tissa (ca.327\u2013247 BCE). This text is important because it attempts to refute several philosophical views which had developed after the death of the Buddha, especially the theory that 'all exists' (\"sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da\"), the theory of momentariness (\"kh\u0101\u1e47av\u0101da\") and the personalist view (\"pudgalavada\") These were the major philosophical theories which divided the Buddhist Abhidharma schools in India. After being brought to Sri Lanka in the first century BCE, the Theravada Pali language Abhidhamma tradition was heavily influenced by the works of Buddhaghosa (4-5th century AD), the most important philosopher and commentator of the Theravada school. The Theravada philosophical enterprise was mostly carried out in the genre of Atthakatha, commentaries (as well as sub-commentaries) on the Pali Abhidhamma, but also included short summaries and compendiums.\nThe Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da was one of the major Buddhist philosophical schools in India, and they were so named because of their belief that dharmas exist in all three times: past, present and future. Though the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da Abhidharma system began as a mere categorization of mental events, their philosophers and exegetes such as Dharmatrata and Katy\u0101y\u0101niputra (the compiler of the Mahavibhasa, a central text of the school) eventually refined this system into a robust realism, which also included a type of essentialism. This realism was based on a quality of dharmas, which was called svabhava or 'intrinsic existence'. Svabhava is a sort of essence, though it is not a completely independent essence, since all dharmas were said to be causally dependent. The Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da system extended this realism across time, effectively positing a type of eternalism with regards to time; hence, the name of their school means \"the view that everything exists\".\nOther Buddhist schools such as the Praj\u00f1aptivadins ('nominalists'), the Purvasailas and the Vainasikas refused to accept the concept of svabhava. The main topic of the Tattvasiddhi \u015a\u0101stra by Harivarman (3-4th century AD), an influential Abhidharma text, is the emptiness (shunyata) of dharmas.\nThe Therav\u0101dins and other schools such as the Sautr\u0101ntikas attacked the realism of the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101dins, especially their theory of time. A major figure in this argument was the scholar Vasubandhu, an ex-Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101din, who critiqued the theory of all exists and argued for philosophical presentism in his comprehensive treatise, the Abhidharmakosa. This work is the major Abhidharma text used in Tibetan and East Asian Buddhism today. The Therav\u0101da also holds that dharmas only exist in the present, and are thus also presentists. The Therav\u0101din presentation of Abhidharma is also not as concerned with ontology as the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101din view, but is more of a phenomenology and hence the concept of svabhava for the Therav\u0101dins is more of a certain characteristic or dependent feature of a dharma, than any sort of essence or metaphysical grounding. According to Y Karunadasa:\nIn the Pali tradition it is only for the sake of definition and description that each dhamma is postulated as if it were a separate entity; but in reality it is by no means a solitary phenomenon having an existence of its own...If this Abhidhammic view of existence, as seen from its doctrine of dhammas, cannot be interpreted as a radical pluralism, neither can it be interpreted as an out-and-out monism. For what are called dhammas -- the component factors of the universe, both within us and outside us -- are not fractions of an absolute unity but a multiplicity of co-ordinate factors. They are not reducible to, nor do they emerge from, a single reality, the fundamental postulate of monistic metaphysics. If they are to be interpreted as phenomena, this should be done with the proviso that they are phenomena with no corresponding noumena, no hidden underlying ground. For they are not manifestations of some mysterious metaphysical substratum, but processes taking place due to the interplay of a multitude of conditions.\nAn important theory held by some Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101dins, Therav\u0101dins and Sautr\u0101ntikas was the theory of \"momentariness\" (Skt., k\u1e63\u0101\u1e47av\u0101da, Pali, kh\u0101\u1e47av\u0101da). This theory held that dhammas only last for a minute moment (\"ksana\") after they arise. The Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101dins saw these 'moments' in an atomistic way, as the smallest length of time possible (they also developed a material atomism). Reconciling this theory with their eternalism regarding time was a major philosophical project of the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da. The Therav\u0101dins initially rejected this theory, as evidenced by the Kha\u1e47ikakath\u0101 of the Kathavatthu which attempts to refute the doctrine that \"all phenomena (dhamma) are as momentary as a single mental entity.\" However, momentariness with regards to mental dhammas (but not physical or r\u016bpa dhammas) was later adopted by the Sri Lankan Therav\u0101dins, and it is possible that it was first introduced by the scholar Buddhagosa.\nAll Abhidharma schools also developed complex theories of causation and conditionality to explain how dharmas interacted with each other. Another major philosophical project of the Abhidharma schools was the explanation of perception. Some schools such as the Sarvastivadins explained perception as a type of phenomenalist realism while others such as the Sautrantikas preferred representationalism and held that we only perceive objects indirectly. The major argument used for this view by the Sautr\u0101ntikas was the \"time lag argument.\" According to Mark Siderits: \"The basic idea behind the argument is that since there is always a tiny gap between when the sense comes in contact with the external object and when there is sensory awareness, what we are aware of can't be the external object that the senses were in contact with, since it no longer exists.\" This is related to the theory of extreme momentariness.\nOne major philosophical view which was rejected by all the schools mentioned above was the view held by the Pudgalavadin or 'personalist' schools. They seemed to have held that there was a sort of 'personhood' in some ultimately real sense which was not reducible to the five aggregates. This controversial claim was in contrast to the other Buddhists of the time who held that a personality was a mere conceptual construction (praj\u00f1apti) and only conventionally real.\nIndian Mah\u0101y\u0101na philosophy.\nFrom about the 1st century BCE, a new textual tradition began to arise in Indian Buddhist thought called Mah\u0101y\u0101na (Great Vehicle), which would slowly come to dominate Indian Buddhist philosophy. Buddhist philosophy thrived in large monastery-university complexes such as Nalanda and Vikramasila, which became centres of learning in North India. Mah\u0101y\u0101na philosophers continued the philosophical projects of Abhidharma while at the same time critiquing them and introducing new concepts and ideas. Since the Mah\u0101y\u0101na held to the pragmatic concept of truth which states that doctrines are regarded as conditionally \"true\" in the sense of being spiritually beneficial, the new theories and practices were seen as 'skillful means' (Upaya). The Mahayana also promoted the Bodhisattva ideal, which included an attitude of compassion for all sentient beings. The Bodhisattva is someone who chooses to remain in \"samsara\" (the cycle of birth and death) to benefit all other beings who are suffering.\nMajor Mahayana philosophical schools and traditions include the Prajnaparamita, Madhyamaka, Tathagatagarbha, the Epistemological school of Dignaga, Yog\u0101c\u0101ra, Huayan, Tiantai and the Chan/Zen schools.\nPraj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101 and Madhyamaka.\nThe earliest Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101-sutras (\"perfection of insight\" sutras) (circa 1st century BCE) emphasize the shunyata (emptiness) of phenomena and dharmas. The Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101 is said to be true knowledge of the nature of ultimate reality, which is illusory and empty of essence.\nThe \"Diamond Sutra\" states that: \nThe \"Heart Sutra\" famously affirms the shunyata of phenomena:\n\"Oh, Sariputra, form does not differ from shunyata,and shunyata does not differ from form.\nForm is shunyata and shunyata is form;\nthe same is true for feelings,\nperceptions, volitions and consciousness\".\nThe Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101 teachings are associated with the work of the Buddhist philosopher N\u0101g\u0101rjuna (c. 150 \u2013 c. 250 CE) and the Madhyamaka (Middle way) school. N\u0101g\u0101rjuna was one of the most influential Indian Buddhist thinkers; he gave the classical arguments for the empty nature of phenomena and attacked the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da and Pudgalavada schools' essentialism in his magnum opus, \"The Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way\" (\"M\u016blamadhyamakak\u0101rik\u0101\"). In the \"M\u016blamadhyamakak\u0101rik\u0101\", Nagarjuna relies on reductio ad absurdum arguments to refute various theories which assume svabhava (an inherent essence or \"own being\"). In this work, he covers topics such as causation, motion, and the sense faculties.\nNagarjuna asserted a direct connection between, even identity of, dependent origination, non-self (\"anatta\"), and emptiness (\"\u015b\u016bnyat\u0101\"). He pointed out that implicit in the early Buddhist concept of dependent origination is the lack of anatta (substantial being) underlying the participants in origination, so that they have no independent existence, a state identified as \u015b\u016bnyat\u0101 (i.e., emptiness of a nature or essence (\"svabh\u0101va sunyam\").\nLater philosophers of the Madhyamaka school built upon Nagarjuna's analysis and defended Madhyamaka against their opponents. These included \u0100ryadeva (3rd century CE), N\u0101g\u0101rjuna's pupil; Candrak\u012brti (600\u2013c. 650), who wrote an important commentary on the M\u016blamadhyamakak\u0101rik\u0101; and Shantideva (8th century). Buddhap\u0101lita (470\u2013550) has been understood as the originator of the 'pr\u0101sa\u1e45gika' approach which is based on critiquing essentialism only through \"reductio ad absurdum\" arguments. He was criticized by Bh\u0101vaviveka (c. 500 \u2013 c. 578), who argued for the use of syllogisms \"to set one's own doctrinal stance\". These two approaches were later termed the Pr\u0101sa\u1e45gika and the Sv\u0101tantrika approaches to Madhyamaka by Tibetan philosophers and commentators.\nInfluenced by the work of Dignaga, Bh\u0101vaviveka's Madhyamika philosophy makes use of Buddhist epistemology. Candrak\u012brti, on the other hand, critiqued Bh\u0101vaviveka's adoption of the epistemological (\"pramana\") tradition on the grounds that it contained a subtle essentialism. He quotes Nagarjuna's famous statement in the \"Vigrahavyavartani\" which says \"I have no thesis\" for his rejection of positive epistemic Madhyamaka statements. Candrak\u012brti held that a true Madhyamika could only use \"consequence\" (\"prasanga\"), in which one points out the inconsistencies of their opponent's position without asserting an \"autonomous inference\" (\"svatantra\"), for no such inference can be ultimately true from the point of view of Madhyamaka.\nIn China, the Madhyamaka school (known as S\u0101nl\u00f9n) was founded by Kum\u0101raj\u012bva (344\u2013413 CE), who translated the works of Nagarjuna to Chinese. Other Chinese Madhymakas include Kum\u0101raj\u012bva 's pupil Sengzhao, Jizang (549\u2013623), who wrote over 50 works on Madhyamaka, and Hyegwan, a Korean monk who brought Madhyamaka teachings to Japan.\nYog\u0101c\u0101ra.\nThe Yog\u0101c\u0101ra school (\"Yoga practice\") was a Buddhist philosophical tradition which arose in between the 2nd century CE and the 4th century CE and is associated with the philosophers Asanga and Vasubandhu and with various sutras such as the Sandhinirmocana Sutra and the Lankavatara Sutra. The central feature of Yog\u0101c\u0101ra thought is the concept of \"Vij\u00f1apti-m\u0101tra\", often translated as \"impressions only\" or \"appearance only\" and this has been interpreted as a form of Idealism or as a form of Phenomenology. Other names for the Yogacara school are 'Vij\u00f1anavada' (the doctrine of consciousness) and 'Cittamatra' (mind-only).\nYogacara thinkers like Vasubandhu argued against the existence of external objects by pointing out that we only ever have access to our own mental impressions, and hence our inference of the existence of external objects is based on faulty logic. Vasubandhu's \"Vijnaptimatratasiddhi\", or \"The Proof that There Are Only Impressions\" (20 verses), begins thus:\"I. This [world] is nothing but impressions, since it manifests itself as an unreal object, \nJust like the case of those with cataracts seeing unreal hairs in the moon and the like.\"According to Vasubandhu then, all our experiences are like seeing hairs on the moon when we have cataracts, that is, we project our mental images into something \"out there\" when there are no such things. Vasubandhu then goes on to use the dream argument to argue that mental impressions do not require external objects to (1) seem to be spatio-temporally located, (2) to seem to have an inter-subjective quality, and (3) to seem to operate by causal laws. The fact that purely mental events can have causal efficacy and be intersubjective is proved by the event of a wet dream and by the mass or shared hallucinations created by the karma of certain types of beings.\nAfter having argued that impressions-only is a theory which can explain our everyday experience, Vasubandhu then appeals to parsimony - since we do not need the concept of external objects to explain reality, then we can do away with those superfluous concepts altogether as they are most likely just mentally superimposed on our concepts of reality by the mind. Inter-subjective reality for Vasubandhu is then the causal interaction between various mental streams and their karma, and does not include any external physical objects. The soteriological importance of this theory is that, by removing the concept of an external world, it also weakens the 'internal' sense of self as observer which is supposed to be separate from the external world. To dissolve the dualism of inner and outer is also to dissolve the sense of self and other. The later Yogacara commentator Sthiramati explains this thus:\"There is a grasper if there is something to be grasped, but not in the absence of what is to be grasped. Where there is no thing to be grasped, the absence of a grasper also follows, there is not just the absence of the thing to be grasped. Thus there arises the extra-mundane non-conceptual cognition that is alike without object and without cognizer.\"Vasubandhu also attacked the realist theories of Buddhist atomism and the Abhidharma theory of svabhava. He argued that atoms as conceived by the atomists (un-divisible entities) would not be able to come together to form larger aggregate entities, and hence that they were illogical concepts.\nLater Yogacara thinkers include Dharmapala of Nalanda, Sthiramati, Chandragomin (who debated Candrakirti), and \u015a\u012blabhadra. Yogacarins such as Paramartha and Gu\u1e47abhadra brought the school to China and translated Yogacara works there, where it is known as W\u00e9ish\u00ed-z\u014dng or F\u01cexi\u00e0ng-z\u014dng. An important contribution to East Asian Yog\u0101c\u0101ra is Xuanzang's \"Cheng Weishi Lun\", or \"Discourse on the Establishment of Consciousness Only\".\nYog\u0101c\u0101ra-M\u0101dhyamika synthesis.\nJ\u00f1\u0101nagarbha (8th century) and his student \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita (725\u2013788) brought together Yogacara, Madhyamaka and the Dignaga school of epistemology into a philosophical synthesis known as the \"Yog\u0101c\u0101ra-Svatantrika-M\u0101dhyamika\". \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita was also instrumental in the introduction of Buddhism and the Sarvastivadin monastic ordination lineage to Tibet, which was conducted at Samye. \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita's disciples included Haribhadra and Kamala\u015b\u012bla. This philosophical tradition is influential in Tibetan Buddhist thought.\nTathagatagarbha.\nThe \"tath\u0101gathagarbha sutras\", in a departure from mainstream Buddhist language, insist that the potential for awakening is inherent to every sentient being. They marked a shift from a largely apophatic (negative) philosophical trend within Buddhism to a decidedly more cataphatic (positive) modus.\nPrior to the period of these scriptures, Mah\u0101y\u0101na metaphysics had been dominated by teachings on emptiness in the form of Madhyamaka philosophy. The language used by this approach is primarily negative, and the \"tath\u0101gatagarbha\" genre of sutras can be seen as an attempt to state orthodox Buddhist teachings of dependent origination using positive language instead, to prevent people from being turned away from Buddhism by a false impression of nihilism.\nIn these sutras, the perfection of the wisdom of not-self is stated to be the true self; the ultimate goal of the path is then characterized using a range of positive language that had been used previously in Indian philosophy by essentialist philosophers, but which was now transmuted into a new Buddhist vocabulary to describe a being who has successfully completed the Buddhist path.\nThe word \"self\" (\"atman\") is used in a way idiosyncratic to these sutras; the \"true self\" is described as the perfection of the wisdom of not-self in the \"Buddha-Nature Treatise\", for example. Language that had previously been used by essentialist non-Buddhist philosophers was now adopted, with new definitions, by Buddhists to promote orthodox teachings.\nThe \"tath\u0101gatagarbha\" does not, according to some scholars, represent a substantial self; rather, it is a positive language expression of emptiness and represents the potentiality to realize Buddhahood through Buddhist practices. In this interpretation, the intention of the teaching of \"tath\u0101gatagarbha\" is soteriological rather than theoretical.\nThe \"tath\u0101gathagarbha\", the Therav\u0101da doctrine of \"bhava\u1e45ga\", and the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra store consciousness were all identified at some point with the luminous mind of the Nik\u0101yas.\nIn the Mahayana \"Mahaparinirvana Sutra\", the Buddha insists that while pondering upon Dharma is vital, one must then relinquish fixation on words and letters, as these are utterly divorced from liberation and the Buddha-nature.\nThe Dign\u0101ga-Dharmak\u012brti tradition.\nDign\u0101ga (c. 480\u2013540) and Dharmak\u012brti (c. 6-7th century) were Buddhist philosophers who developed a system of epistemology (pramana) and logic in their debates with the Brahminical philosophers in order to defend Buddhist doctrine. This tradition is called \"those who follow reasoning\" (Tibetan: \"rigs pa rjes su 'brang ba\"); in modern literature it is sometimes known by the Sanskrit \"pram\u0101\u1e47av\u0101da\", or \"the Epistemological School.\" They were associated with the Yogacara and Sautrantika schools, and defended theories held by both of these schools. Dignaga's influence was profound and led to an \"epistemological turn\" among all Buddhist and also all Sanskrit language philosophers in India after his death. In the centuries following Dignaga's work, Sanskrit philosophers became much more focused on defending all of their propositions with fully developed theories of knowledge.\nThe \"School of Dign\u0101ga\" includes later philosophers and commentators like Santabhadra, Dharmottara (8th century), J\u00f1anasrimitra (975\u20131025), Ratnak\u012brti (11th century) and Samkarananda. The epistemology they developed defends the view that there are only two 'instruments of knowledge' or 'valid cognitions' (\"pramana\"): \"perception\" (pratyaksa) and \"inference\" (anum\u0101\u1e47a). Perception is a non-conceptual awareness of particulars which is bound by causality, while inference is reasonable, linguistic and conceptual.\nThese Buddhist philosophers argued in favor of the theory of momentariness, the Yogacara \"awareness only\" view, the reality of particulars (svalak\u1e63a\u1e47a), atomism, nominalism and the self-reflexive nature of consciousness (svasa\u1e43vedana). They attacked Hindu theories of God (Isvara), universals, the authority of the Vedas, and the existence of a permanent soul (\"atman\").\nTantra.\nThe tradition associated with a group of texts known as the Buddhist Tantras, known as Vajrayana, developed by the eighth century in North India. By this time Tantra was a key feature of Indian Buddhism, and Indian Tantric scholars developed philosophical defenses, hermeneutics and explanations of the Buddhist tantric systems, especially through commentaries on key tantras such as the Guhyasam\u0101ja Tantra and the Guhyagarbha Tantra.\nWhile the view of the Vajrayana was based on Madhyamaka, Yogacara and Buddha-nature theories, it saw itself as being a faster vehicle to liberation containing many skillful methods (upaya) of tantric ritual. The need for an explication and defense of the Tantras arose out of the unusual nature of the rituals associated with them, which included the use of secret mantras, alcohol, sexual yoga, complex visualizations of mandalas filled with wrathful deities and other practices and injunctions which were discordant with or at least novel in comparison to traditional Buddhist thought. The Guhyasam\u0101ja Tantra, for example, states: \"you should kill living beings, speak lying words, take things that are not given and have sex with many women\". Other features of tantra included a focus on the physical body as the means to liberation and a reaffirmation of feminine elements, feminine deities and sexuality.\nThe defense of these practices is based on the theory of transformation which states that negative mental factors and physical actions can be cultivated and transformed in a ritual setting. The Hevajra tantra states:\nThose things by which evil men are bound, others turn into means and gain thereby release from the bonds of existence. By passion the world is bound, by passion too it is released, but by heretical Buddhists this practice of reversals is not known.\nAnother hermeneutic of Buddhist Tantric commentaries such as the Vimalaprabha of Pundarika (a commentary on the Kalacakra Tantra) is one of interpreting taboo or unethical statements in the Tantras as metaphorical statements about tantric practice. For example, in the Vimalaprabha, \"killing living beings\" refers to stopping the prana at the top of the head. In the Tantric Candrakirti's \"Pradipoddyotana\", a commentary to the Guhyasamaja Tantra, killing living beings is glossed as \"making them void\" by means of a \"special samadhi\" which according to Bus-ton is associated with completion stage tantric practice.\nDouglas Duckworth notes that Vajrayana philosophical outlook is one of embodiment, which sees the physical and cosmological body as already containing wisdom and divinity. Liberation (nirvana) and Buddhahood are not seen as something outside or an event in the future, but as imminently present and accessible right now through unique tantric practices like deity yoga, and hence Vajrayana is also called the \"resultant vehicle\". Duckworth names the philosophical view of Vajrayana as a form of pantheism, by which he means the belief that every existing entity is in some sense divine and that all things express some form of unity.\nMajor Indian Tantric Buddhist philosophers such as Buddhaguhya, Padmavajra (author of the \"Guhyasiddhi\"), Nagarjuna (7th-century disciple of Saraha), Indrabhuti (author of the \"J\u00f1\u0101nasiddhi\"), Anangavajra, Dombiheruka, Durjayacandra, Ratn\u0101kara\u015b\u0101nti and Abhayakaragupta wrote tantric texts and commentaries systematizing the tradition. Others such as Vajrabodhi and \u015aubhakarasi\u1e43ha brought Tantra to Tang China (716 to 720), and tantric philosophy continued to be developed in Chinese and Japanese by thinkers such as Yi Xing and K\u016bkai. In Tibet, philosophers such as Sakya Pandita (1182-28 \u2013 1251), Longchenpa (1308\u20131364) and Tsongkhapa (1357\u20131419) continued the tradition of Buddhist Tantric philosophy in Tibetan.\nTibetan Buddhist philosophy.\nTibetan Buddhist philosophy is mainly a continuation and refinement of the Indian traditions of Madhyamaka, Yogacara and the Dignaga-Dharmak\u012brti school of epistemology or \"reliable cognition\" (Sanskrit: \"pramana\", Tib. \"tshad ma\"). The initial efforts of \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita and Kamala\u015b\u012bla brought their eclectic scholarly tradition to Tibet. Other influences include Buddhist Tantras and the Buddha nature texts.\nThe initial work of early Tibetan Buddhist philosophers was in translation of classical Indian philosophical treatises and the writing of commentaries. This initial period is from the 8th to the 10th century. Early Tibetan commentator philosophers were heavily influenced by the work of Dharmakirti and these include Ngok Lo-dza-wa (1059-1109) and Cha-ba (1182-1251). Their works are now lost. The 12th and 13th centuries saw the translation of the works of Chandrakirti, the promulgation of his views in Tibet by scholars such as Patsab Nyima Drakpa, Kanakavarman and Jayananda (12th century) and the development of the Tibetan debate between the prasangika and svatantrika views which continues to this day among Tibetan Buddhist schools. The main disagreement between these views is the use of reasoned argument. For \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita, Kamala\u015b\u012bla and their defenders, reason is useful in establishing arguments that lead one to a correct understanding of emptiness, then, through the use of meditation, one can reach non-conceptual gnosis that does not rely on reason. For Chandrakirti, however, this is wrong, because meditation on emptiness cannot possibly involve any object. Reason's role here is to negate any essence or essentialist views, and then eventually negate itself along with any Conceptual proliferation.\nThere are various Tibetan Buddhist schools or monastic orders. According to Georges B.J. Dreyfus, within Tibetan thought, the Sakya school holds a mostly anti-realist philosophical position, while the Gelug school tends to defend a form of realism. The Kagyu and Nyingma schools also tend to follow Sakya anti-realism (with some differences).\nShengtong and Buddha nature.\nThe 14th century saw increasing interest in the Buddha nature texts and doctrines. This can be seen in the work of the third Kagyu Karmapa Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339), especially his treatise \"Profound Inner Meaning\". This treatise describes ultimate nature or suchness as Buddha nature which is the basis for nirvana and samsara, radiant in nature and empty in essence, surpassing thought.\nDolpopa (\"Dol-bo-ba\", 1292\u20131361), founder of the Jonang school, developed a view called shentong (Wylie: gzhan ) (other empty), which is closely tied to Yogacara and Buddha-nature theories. This view holds that the qualities of Buddhahood or Buddha nature are already present in the mind, and that it is empty of all conventional reality which occludes its own nature as Buddhahood or Dharmakaya. According to Dolpopa, all beings are said to have Buddha nature, which is real, unchanging, permanent, non-conditioned, eternal, blissful and compassionate. Dolpopa's shentong view taught that ultimate reality was truly a \"Great Self\" or \"Supreme Self\" referring to works such as the \"Mah\u0101y\u0101na Mah\u0101parinirv\u0101\u1e47a S\u016btra\", the \"A\u1e45gulim\u0101l\u012bya S\u016btra\" and the \"\u015ar\u012bm\u0101l\u0101dev\u012b Si\u1e43han\u0101da S\u016btra.\" This view had an influence on philosophers of other schools, such as Nyingma and Kagyu thinkers, and was also widely criticized in some circles as being similar to the Hindu notions of Atman. The Shentong philosophy was also expounded in Tibet and Mongolia by the later Jonang scholar T\u0101ran\u0101tha (1575\u20131634).\nIn the late 17th century, the Jonang order and its teachings came under attack by the 5th Dalai Lama, who converted the majority of their monasteries in Tibet to the Gelug order, although several survived in secret.\nGelug.\nJe Tsongkhapa (Dzong-ka-ba) (1357\u20131419) founded the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism, which came to dominate the country through the office of the Dalai Lama and is the major defender of the Prasa\u1e45gika Madhyamaka view. His work is influenced by the philosophy of Candrakirti and Dharmakirti. Tsongkhapa's magnum opus is \"The Ocean of Reasoning\", a Commentary on Nagarjuna's Mulamadhyamakakarika. Gelug philosophy is based upon study of Madhyamaka texts and Tsongkhapa's works as well as formal debate (rtsod pa).\nTsongkhapa defended Prasangika Madhyamaka as the highest view and critiqued the Svatantrika. Tsongkhapa argued that, because the Svatantrika conventionally establish things by their own characteristics, they fail to completely understand the emptiness of phenomena and hence do not achieve the same realization. Drawing on Chandrakirti, Tsongkhapa rejected the Yogacara teachings, even as a provisional stepping point to the Madhyamaka view. Tsongkhapa was also critical of the Shengtong view of Dolpopa, which he saw as dangerously absolutist and hence outside the middle way. Tsongkhapa identified two major flaws in interpretations of Madhyamika, under-negation (of svabhava or own essence), which could lead to Absolutism, and over-negation, which could lead to Nihilism. Tsongkhapa's solution to this dilemma was the promotion of the use of inferential reasoning only within the conventional realm of the two truths framework, allowing for the use of reason for ethics, conventional monastic rules and promoting a conventional epistemic realism, while holding that, from the view of ultimate truth (\"paramarthika satya\"), all things (including Buddha nature and Nirvana) are empty of inherent existence (svabhava), and that true enlightenment is this realization of emptiness.\nSakya scholars such as Rongt\u00f6n and Gorampa disagreed with Tsongkhapa, and argued that the prasangika svatantrika distinction was merely pedagogical. Gorampa also critiqued Tsongkhapa's realism, arguing that the structures which allow an empty object to be presented as conventionally real eventually dissolve under analysis and are thus unstructured and non-conceptual (spros bral). Tsongkhapa's students Gyel-tsap, Kay-drup, and Ge-dun-drup set forth an epistemological realism against the Sakya scholars' anti-realism.\nSakya.\nSakya Pandita (1182\u20131251) was a 13th-century head of the Sakya school and ruler of Tibet. He was also one of the most important Buddhist philosophers in the Tibetan tradition, writing works on logic and epistemology and promoting Dharmakirti's \"Pramanavarttika\" (Commentary on Valid Cognition) as central to scholastic study. Sakya Pandita's 'Treasury of Logic on Valid Cognition' (\"Tshad ma rigs pa'i gter\") set forth the classic Sakya epistemic anti-realist position, arguing that concepts such as universals are not known through valid cognition and hence are not real objects of knowledge. Sakya Pandita was also critical of theories of sudden enlightenment, which were held by some teachers of the \"Chinese Great Perfection\" in Tibet.\nLater Sakyas such as Gorampa (1429\u20131489) and Sakya Chokden (1428\u20131507) would develop and defend Sakya anti-realism, and they are seen as the major interpreters and critics of Sakya Pandita's philosophy. Sakya Chokden also critiqued Tsongkhapa's interpretation of Madhyamaka and Dolpopa's Shentong. In his \"Definite ascertainment of the middle way\", Chokden criticized Tsongkhapa's view as being too logo-centric and still caught up in conceptualization about the ultimate reality which is beyond language. Sakya Chokden's philosophy attempted to reconcile the views of the Yogacara and Madhyamaka, seeing them both as valid and complementary perspectives on ultimate truth. Madhyamaka is seen by Chokden as removing the fault of taking the unreal as being real, and Yogacara removes the fault of the denial of Reality. Likewise, the Shentong and Rangtong views are seen as complementary by Sakya Chokden; Rangtong negation is effective in cutting through all clinging to wrong views and conceptual rectification, while Shentong is more amenable for describing and enhancing meditative experience and realization. Therefore, for Sakya Chokden, the same realization of ultimate reality can be accessed and described in two different but compatible ways.\nNyingma and Rim\u00e9.\nThe Nyingma school is strongly influenced by the view of Dzogchen (Great Perfection) and the Dzogchen Tantric literature. Longchenpa (1308\u20131364) was a major philosopher of the Nyingma school and wrote an extensive number of works on the Tibetan practice of Dzogchen and on Buddhist Tantra. These include the \"Seven Treasures\", the \"Trilogy of Natural Ease\", and his \"Trilogy of Dispelling Darkness\". Longchenpa's works provide a philosophical understanding of Dzogchen, a defense of Dzogchen in light of the sutras, as well as practical instructions. For Longchenpa, the ground of reality is luminous clarity, rigpa, or Buddha nature, and this ground is also the bridge between sutra and tantra. Longchenpa's philosophy sought to establish the positive aspects of Buddha nature thought against the totally negative theology of Madhyamika without straying into the absolutism of Dolpopa. For Longchenpa, the basis for Dzogchen and Tantric practice in Vajrayana is the \"Ground\" (\"gzhi\"), the immanent Buddha nature, \"the primordially luminous reality that is unconditioned and spontaneously present\" which is \"free from all elaborated extremes\".\nThe 19th century saw the rise of the Rim\u00e9 movement (non-sectarian, unbiased) which sought to push back against the politically dominant Gelug school's criticisms of the Sakya, Kagyu, Nyingma and Bon philosophical views, and develop a more eclectic or universal system of textual study. Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (1820-1892) and Jamg\u00f6n Kongtr\u00fcl (1813-1899) were the founders of Rim\u00e9. The Rim\u00e9 movement came to prominence at a point in Tibetan history when the religious climate had become partisan. The aim of the movement was \"a push towards a middle ground where the various views and styles of the different traditions were appreciated for their individual contributions rather than being refuted, marginalized, or banned.\" Philosophically, Jamg\u00f6n Kongtr\u00fcl defended Shentong as being compatible with Madhyamaka while another Rim\u00e9 scholar Jamgon Ju Mipham Gyatso (1846\u20131912) criticized Tsongkhapa from a Nyingma perspective. Mipham argued that the view of the middle way is Unity (zung 'jug), meaning that from the ultimate perspective the duality of sentient beings and Buddhas is also dissolved. Mipham also affirmed the view of \"rangtong\" (self emptiness). The later Nyingma scholar Botrul (1894\u20131959) classified the major Tibetan Madhyamaka positions as shentong (other emptiness), Nyingma rangtong (self emptiness) and Gelug bdentong (emptiness of true existence). The main difference between them is their \"object of negation\"; shengtong states that inauthentic experience is empty, rangtong negates any conceptual reference and bdentong negates any true existence.\nThe 14th Dalai Lama was also influenced by this eclectic approach. Having studied under teachers from all major Tibetan Buddhist schools, his philosophical position tends to be that the different perspectives on emptiness are complementary:\nThere is a tradition of making a distinction between two different perspectives on the nature of emptiness: one is when emptiness is presented within a philosophical analysis of the ultimate reality of things, in which case it ought to be understood in terms of a non-affirming negative phenomena. On the other hand, when it is discussed from the point of view of experience, it should be understood more in terms of an affirming negation \u2013 14th Dalai Lama\nEast Asian Buddhism.\nTiantai.\nThe schools of Buddhism that had existed in China prior to the emergence of the Tiantai are generally believed to represent direct transplantations from India, with little modification to their basic doctrines and methods. The Tiantai school, founded by Zhiyi (538\u2013597), was the first truly unique Chinese Buddhist philosophical school. The doctrine of Tiantai was based on the ekayana or \"one vehicle\" doctrine taught in the Lotus sutra and sought to bring together all Buddhist teachings and texts into a comprehensively inclusive hierarchical system, which placed the Lotus sutra at the top of this hierarchy.\nTiantai's metaphysics is an immanent holism, which sees every phenomenon, moment or event as conditioned and manifested by the whole of reality. Every instant of experience is a reflection of every other, and hence, suffering and nirvana, good and bad, Buddhahood and evildoing, are all \"inherently entailed\" within each other. Each moment of consciousness is simply the Absolute itself, infinitely immanent and self reflecting.\nThis metaphysics is entailed in the Tiantai teaching of the \"three truths\", which is an extension of the M\u0101dhyamaka two truths doctrine. The three truths are: the conventional truth of appearance, the truth of emptiness (shunyata) and the third truth of 'the exclusive Center' (\u4f46\u4e2d \"danzhong\") or middle way, which is beyond conventional truth and emptiness. This third truth is the Absolute and expressed by the claim that nothing is \"Neither-Same-Nor-Different\" than anything else, but rather each 'thing' is the absolute totality of all things manifesting as a particular, everything is mutually contained within each thing. Everything is a reflection of 'The Ultimate Reality of All Appearances'(\u8af8\u6cd5\u5be6\u76f8 zhufashixiang) and each thought \"contains three thousand worlds\". This perspective allows the Tiantai school to state such seemingly paradoxical things as \"evil is ineradicable from the highest good, Buddhahood.\" Moreover, in Tiantai, nirvana and samsara are ultimately the same; as Zhiyi writes, \"A single, unalloyed reality is all there is \u2013 no entities whatever exist outside of it.\"\nThough Zhiyi did write \"One thought contains three thousand worlds\", this does not entail idealism. According to Zhiyi, \"The objects of the [true] aspects of reality are not something produced by Buddhas, gods, or men. They exist inherently on their own and have no beginning\" (The Esoteric Meaning, 210). This is then a form of realism, which sees the mind as real as the world, interconnected with and inseparable from it. In Tiantai thought, ultimate reality is simply the phenomenal world of interconnected events or dharmas.\nOther key figures of Tiantai thought are Zhanran (711\u2013782) and Siming Zhili (960\u20131028). Zhanran developed the idea that non-sentient beings have Buddha nature, since they are also a reflection of the Absolute. In Japan, this school was known as Tendai and was first brought to the island by Saicho.\nHuayan.\nThe Huayan developed the doctrine of \"interpenetration\" or \"coalescence\" (Wylie: \"zung-'jug\"; Sanskrit: \"yuganaddha\"), based on the \"Avata\u1e43saka S\u016btra\" (Flower Garland sutra), a Mah\u0101y\u0101na scripture. Huayan holds that all phenomena (Sanskrit: \"dharmas\") are deeply interconnected, mutually arising and that every phenomenon contains all other phenomena. Various metaphors and images are used to illustrate this idea. The first is known as Indra's net. The net is set with jewels which have the extraordinary property that they reflect all of the other jewels, while the reflections also contain every other reflection, ad infinitum. The second image is that of the world text. This image portrays the world as consisting of an enormous text which is as large as the universe itself. The words of the text are composed of the phenomena that make up the world. However, every atom of the world contains the whole text within it. It is the work of a Buddha to let out the text so that beings can be liberated from suffering.\nFazang (Fa-tsang, 643\u2013712), one of the most important Huayan thinkers, wrote 'Essay on the Golden Lion' and 'Treatise on the Five Teachings', which contain other metaphors for the interpenetration of reality. He also used the metaphor of a House of mirrors. Fazang introduced the distinction of \"the Realm of Principle\" and \"the Realm of Things\". This theory was further developed by Cheng-guan (738\u2013839) into the major Huayan thesis of \"the fourfold Dharmadhatu\" (dharma realm): the Realm of Principle, the Realm of Things, the Realm of the Noninterference between Principle and Things, and the Realm of the Noninterference of All Things. The first two are the universal and the particular, the third is the interpenetration of universal and particular, and the fourth is the interpenetration of all particulars. The third truth was explained by the metaphor of a golden lion: the gold is the universal and the particular is the shape and features of the lion. \nWhile both Tiantai and Huayan hold to the interpenetration and interconnection of all things, their metaphysics have some differences. Huayan metaphysics is influenced by Yogacara thought and is closer to idealism. The Avatamsaka sutra compares the phenomenal world to a dream, an illusion, and a magician's conjuring. The sutra states nothing has true reality, location, beginning and end, or substantial nature. The Avatamsaka also states that \"The triple world is illusory \u2013 it is only made by one mind\", and Fazang echoes this by writing, \"outside of mind there is not a single thing that can be apprehended.\" Furthermore, according to Huayan thought, each mind creates its own world \"according to their mental patterns\", and \"these worlds are infinite in kind\" and constantly arising and passing away. However, in Huayan, mind is not real either, but also empty. The true reality in Huayan, the noumenon, or \"Principle\", is likened to a mirror, while phenomena are compared to reflections in the mirror. It is also compared to the ocean, and phenomena to waves.\nIn Korea, this school was known as Hwaeom and is represented in the work of Wonhyo (617\u2013686), who also wrote about the idea of essence-function, a central theme in Korean Buddhist thought. In Japan, Huayan is known as Kegon and one of its major proponents was My\u014de, who also introduced Tantric practices.\nChan and Japanese Buddhism.\nThe philosophy of Chinese Chan Buddhism and Japanese Zen is based on various sources; these include Chinese Madhyamaka (\"S\u0101nl\u00f9n\"), Yogacara (\"W\u00e9ish\u00ed\"), the La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra, and the Buddha nature texts. An important issue in Chan is that of subitism or \"sudden enlightenment\", the idea that enlightenment happens all at once in a flash of insight. This view was promoted by Shenhui and is a central issue discussed in the Platform Sutra, a key Chan scripture composed in China.\nHuayan philosophy also had an influence on Chan. The theory of the Fourfold Dharmadhatu influenced the Five Ranks of Dongshan Liangjie (806-869), the founder of the Caodong Chan lineage. Guifeng Zongmi, who was also a patriarch of Huayan Buddhism, wrote extensively on the philosophy of Chan and on the Avatamsaka sutra.\nJapanese Buddhism during the 6th and 7th centuries saw an increase in the proliferation of new schools and forms of thought, a period known as the six schools of Nara (\"Nanto Rokush\u016b\"). The Kamakura Period (1185\u20131333) also saw another flurry of intellectual activity. During this period, the influential figure of Nichiren (1222\u20131282) made the practice and universal message of the Lotus Sutra more readily available to the population. He is of particular importance in the history of thought and religion, as his teachings constitute a separate sect of Buddhism, one of the only major sects to have originated in Japan\nAlso during the Kamakura period, the founder of Soto Zen, Dogen (1200\u20131253), wrote many works on the philosophy of Zen, and the \"Shobogenzo\" is his magnum opus. In Korea, Chinul was an important exponent of Seon Buddhism at around the same time.\nEsoteric Buddhism.\nTantric Buddhism arrived in China in the 7th century, during the Tang Dynasty. In China, this form of Buddhism is known as M\u00ecz\u014dng (\u5bc6\u5b97), or \"Esoteric School\", and \"Zhenyan\" (true word, Sanskrit: Mantrayana). K\u016bkai (AD774\u2013835) is a major Japanese Buddhist philosopher and the founder of the Tantric Shingon (true word) school in Japan. He wrote on a wide variety of topics such as public policy, language, the arts, literature, music and religion. After studying in China under Huiguo, K\u016bkai brought together various elements into a cohesive philosophical system of Shingon.\nK\u016bkai's philosophy is based on the Mahavairocana Tantra and the Vajrasekhara Sutra (both from the seventh century). His \"Benkenmitsu nikky\u00f4ron\" (Treatise on the Differences Between Esoteric and Exoteric Teachings) outlines the difference between exoteric, mainstream Mahayana Buddhism (kengy\u00f4) and esoteric Tantric Buddhism (mikky\u00f4). K\u016bkai provided the theoretical framework for the esoteric Buddhist practices of Mantrayana, bridging the gap between the doctrine of the sutras and tantric practices. At the foundation of K\u016bkai's thought is the Trikaya doctrine, which holds there are three \"bodies of the Buddha\".\nAccording to K\u016bkai, esoteric Buddhism has the Dharmakaya (Jpn: \"hosshin\", embodiment of truth) as its source, which is associated with Vairocana Buddha (Dainichi). Hosshin is embodied absolute reality and truth. Hosshin is mostly ineffable but can be experienced through esoteric practices such as mudras and mantras. While Mahayana is taught by the historical Buddha (nirmankaya), it does not have ultimate reality as its source or the practices to experience the esoteric truth. For Shingon, from an enlightened perspective, the whole phenomenal world itself is also the teaching of Vairocana. The body of the world, its sounds and movements, is the body of truth (dharma) and furthermore it is also identical with the personal body of the cosmic Buddha. For K\u016bkai, world, actions, persons and Buddhas are all part of the cosmic monologue of Vairocana, they are the truth being preached, to its own self manifestations. This is \"hosshin sepp\u00f4\" (literally: \"the dharmak\u00e2ya's expounding of the Dharma\") which can be accessed through mantra which is the cosmic language of Vairocana emanating through cosmic vibration concentrated in sound. In a broad sense, the universe itself a huge text expressing ultimate truth (Dharma) which must be \"read\".\nDainichi means \"Great Sun\" and K\u016bkai uses this as a metaphor for the great primordial Buddha, whose teaching and presence illuminates and pervades all, like the light of the sun. This immanent presence also means that every being already has access to enlightenment (hongaku) and Buddha nature, and that, because of this, there is the possibility of \"becoming Buddha in this very embodied existence\" (\"sokushinj\u00f4butsu\"). This is achieved because of the non-dual relationship between the macrocosm of Hosshin and the microcosm of the Shingon practitioner.\nK\u016bkai's exposition of what has been called Shingon's \"metaphysics\" is based on the three aspects of the cosmic truth or Hosshin \u2013 body, appearance and function. The body is the physical and mental elements, which are the body and mind of the cosmic Buddha and which is also empty (Shunyata). The physical universe for Shingon contains the interconnected mental and physical events. The appearance aspect is the form of the world, which appears as mandalas of interconnected realms and is depicted in mandala art such as the Womb Realm mandala. The function is the movement and change which happens in the world, which includes change in forms, sounds and thought. These forms, sounds and thoughts are expressed by the Shingon practitioner in various rituals and tantric practices which allow them to connect with and inter-resonate with Dainichi and hence reach enlightenment here and now.\nModern philosophy.\nIn Sri Lanka, Buddhist modernists such as Anagarika Dharmapala (1864-1933) and the American convert Henry Steel Olcott sought to show that Buddhism was rational and compatible with modern Scientific ideas such as the theory of evolution. Dharmapala also argued that Buddhism included a strong social element, interpreting it as liberal, altruistic and democratic. K. N. Jayatilleke wrote the classic modern account of Buddhist epistemology (\"Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge\", 1963) and his student David Kalupahana wrote on the history of Buddhist thought and psychology. Other important Sri Lankan Buddhist thinkers include Ven \u00d1\u0101\u1e47ananda (\"Concept and Reality\"), Walpola Rahula, Hammalawa Saddhatissa (\"Buddhist Ethics\", 1987), Gunapala Dharmasiri (\"A Buddhist critique of the Christian concept of God\", 1988), P. D. Premasiri and R. G. de S. Wettimuny.\nIn 20th-century China, the modernist Taixu (1890-1947) advocated a reform and revival of Buddhism. He promoted an idea of a Buddhist Pure Land, not as a metaphysical place in Buddhist cosmology but as something possible to create here and now in this very world, which could be achieved through a \"Buddhism for Human Life\" () which was free of supernatural beliefs. Taixu also wrote on the connections between modern science and Buddhism, ultimately holding that \"scientific methods can only corroborate the Buddhist doctrine, they can never advance beyond it\". Like Taixu, Yin Shun (1906\u20132005) advocated a form of Humanistic Buddhism grounded in concern for humanitarian issues, and his students and followers have been influential in promoting Humanistic Buddhism in Taiwan. This period also saw a revival of the study of Weishi (Yogachara), by Yang Rensan (1837-1911), Ouyang Jinwu (1871-1943) and Liang Shuming (1893\u20131988).\nOne of Tibetan Buddhism's most influential modernist thinkers is Gend\u00fcn Ch\u00f6phel (1903\u20131951), who, according to Donald S. Lopez Jr., \"was arguably the most important Tibetan intellectual of the twentieth century.\" Gend\u00fcn Ch\u00f6phel traveled throughout India with the Indian Buddhist Rahul Sankrityayan and wrote a wide variety of material, including works promoting the importance of modern science to his Tibetan countrymen and also Buddhist philosophical texts such as \"Adornment for Nagarjuna\u2019s Thought\". Another very influential Tibetan Buddhist modernist was Ch\u00f6gyam Trungpa, whose Shambhala Training was meant to be more suitable to modern Western sensitivities by offering a vision of \"secular enlightenment\".\nIn Southeast Asia, thinkers such as Buddhadasa, Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh, Sulak Sivaraksa and Aung San Suu Kyi have promoted a philosophy of socially Engaged Buddhism and have written on the socio-political application of Buddhism. Likewise, Buddhist approaches to economic ethics (Buddhist economics) have been explored in the works of E. F. Schumacher, Prayudh Payutto, Neville Karunatilake and Padmasiri de Silva. The study of the Pali Abhidhamma tradition continued to be influential in Myanmar, where it was developed by monks such as Ledi Sayadaw and Mahasi Sayadaw.\nJapanese Buddhist philosophy was heavily influenced by the work of the Kyoto School which included Kitaro Nishida, Keiji Nishitani, Hajime Tanabe and Masao Abe. These thinkers brought Buddhist ideas in dialogue with Western philosophy, especially European phenomenologists and existentialists. The most important trend in Japanese Buddhist thought after the formation of the Kyoto school is Critical Buddhism, which argues against several Mahayana concepts such as Buddha nature and original enlightenment. In Nichiren Buddhism, the work of Daisaku Ikeda has also been popular.\nThe Japanese Zen Buddhist D.T. Suzuki (1870\u20131966) was instrumental in bringing Zen Buddhism to the West and his Buddhist modernist works were very influential in the United States. Suzuki's worldview was a Zen Buddhism influenced by Romanticism and Transcendentalism, which promoted a spiritual freedom as \"a spontaneous, emancipatory consciousness that transcends rational intellect and social convention.\" This idea of Buddhism influenced the Beat writers, and a contemporary representative of Western Buddhist Romanticism is Gary Snyder. The American Theravada Buddhist monk Thanissaro Bhikkhu has critiqued 'Buddhist Romanticism' in his writings.\nWestern Buddhist monastics and priests such as Nanavira Thera, Bhikkhu Bodhi, Nyanaponika Thera, Robert Aitken, Taigen Dan Leighton, and Matthieu Ricard have written texts on Buddhist philosophy. A feature of Buddhist thought in the West has been a desire for dialogue and integration with modern science and psychology, and various modern Buddhists such as Alan Wallace, James H. Austin, Mark Epstein and the 14th Dalai Lama have worked and written on this issue. Another area of convergence has been Buddhism and environmentalism, which is explored in the work of Joanna Macy. Another Western Buddhist philosophical trend has been the project to secularize Buddhism, as seen in the works of Stephen Batchelor.\nIn the West, Comparative philosophy between Buddhist and Western thought began with the work of Charles A. Moore, who founded the journal Philosophy East and West. Contemporary Western Academics such as Mark Siderits, Jan Westerhoff, Jonardon Ganeri, Miri Albahari, Owen Flanagan, Damien Keown, Tom Tillemans, David Loy, Evan Thompson and Jay Garfield have written various works which interpret Buddhist ideas through Western philosophy.\nComparison with other philosophies.\nScholars such as Thomas McEvilley, Christopher I. Beckwith, and Adrian Kuzminski have identified cross influences between ancient Buddhism and the ancient Greek philosophy of Pyrrhonism. The Greek philosopher Pyrrho spent 18 months in India as part of Alexander the Great's court on Alexander's conquest of western India, where ancient biographers say his contact with the gymnosophists caused him to create his philosophy. Because of the high degree of similarity between N\u0101g\u0101rjuna's philosophy and Pyrrhonism, particularly the surviving works of Sextus Empiricus Thomas McEvilley suspects that N\u0101g\u0101rjuna was influenced by Greek Pyrrhonist texts imported into India.\nBaruch Spinoza, though he argued for the existence of a permanent reality, asserts that all phenomenal existence is transitory. In his opinion sorrow is conquered \"by finding an object of knowledge which is not transient, not ephemeral, but is immutable, permanent, everlasting.\" The Buddha taught that the only thing which is eternal is Nirvana. David Hume, after a relentless analysis of the mind, concluded that consciousness consists of fleeting mental states. Hume's Bundle theory is a very similar concept to the Buddhist \"skandhas\", though his skepticism about causation lead him to opposite conclusions in other areas. Arthur Schopenhauer's philosophy parallels Buddhism in his affirmation of asceticism and renunciation as a response to suffering and desire (cf. Schopenhauer's \"The World as Will and Representation\", 1818).\nLudwig Wittgenstein's \"language-game\" closely parallel the warning that intellectual speculation or papa\u00f1ca is an impediment to understanding, as found in the Buddhist \"Parable of the Poison Arrow\". Friedrich Nietzsche, although himself dismissive of Buddhism as yet another nihilism, had a similar impermanent view of the self. Heidegger's ideas on being and nothingness have been held by some to be similar to Buddhism today. \nAn alternative approach to the comparison of Buddhist thought with Western philosophy is to use the concept of the Middle Way in Buddhism as a critical tool for the assessment of Western philosophies. In this way Western philosophies can be classified in Buddhist terms as eternalist or nihilist. In a Buddhist view all philosophies are considered non-essential views (ditthis) and not to be clung to."}
{"id": "4471", "revid": "1011100051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4471", "title": "Billy Bob Thornton", "text": "Billy Bob Thornton (born August 4, 1955) is an American actor, filmmaker, and musician. He had his first break when he co-wrote and starred in the 1992 thriller \"One False Move\", and received international attention after writing, directing, and starring in the independent drama film \"Sling Blade\" (1996), for which he won an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor. He appeared in several major film roles in the 1990s following \"Sling Blade\", including Oliver Stone's neo-noir \"U Turn\" (1997), political drama \"Primary Colors\" (1998), science fiction disaster film \"Armageddon\" (1998), the highest-grossing film of that year, and the crime drama \"A Simple Plan\" (1998), which earned him his third Oscar nomination.\nIn the 2000s, Thornton achieved further success in starring dramas \"Monster's Ball\" (2001), \"The Man Who Wasn't There\" (2001), and \"Friday Night Lights\" (2004); comedies \"Bandits\" (2001), \"Intolerable Cruelty\" (2003), and \"Bad Santa\" (2003); and action films \"Eagle Eye\" (2008) and \"Faster\" (2010). In 2014, Thornton starred as Lorne Malvo in the first season of the anthology series \"Fargo\", earning a nomination for the Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or TV Movie at the Emmy Awards and won Best Actor in a Miniseries or TV Film at the 72nd Golden Globe Awards. In 2016, he starred in an Amazon original series, \"Goliath,\" which earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Television Series Drama.\nThornton has written a variety of films, usually set in the Southern United States and mainly co-written with Tom Epperson, including \"A Family Thing\" (1996) and \"The Gift\" (2000). After \"Sling Blade\", he directed several other films, including \"Daddy and Them\" (2001), \"All the Pretty Horses\" (2000), and \"Jayne Mansfield's Car\" (2012).\nThornton has received the President's Award from the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy &amp; Horror Films, a Special Achievement Award from the National Board of Review, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. He has also been nominated for an Emmy Award, four Golden Globes, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. In addition to film work, Thornton began a career as a singer-songwriter. He has released four solo albums and is the vocalist of the blues rock band The Boxmasters.\nThornton has been vocal about his distaste for celebrity culture, choosing to keep his life out of the public eye. The attention of the media has proven unavoidable in certain cases, his marriage to Angelina Jolie being a notable example.\nEarly life.\nBilly Bob Thornton was born on August 4, 1955, in Hot Springs, Arkansas, the son of Virginia Roberta (\"n\u00e9e\" Faulkner; died July 29, 2017), a self-proclaimed psychic, and William Raymond \"Billy Ray\" Thornton (November 1929 \u2013 August 1974), a high school history teacher and basketball coach. His brother Jimmy Don (April 1958 \u2013 October 1988) wrote a number of songs; Thornton recorded two of them (\"Island Avenue\" and \"Emily\") on his solo albums. He is of part Irish descent. He has another brother, John David Thornton.\nThornton lived in numerous places in Arkansas during his childhood, including Alpine, Malvern, and Mount Holly. He was raised Methodist in an extended family in a shack that had no electricity or plumbing. He graduated from Malvern High School in 1973. A good high school baseball player, he tried out for the Kansas City Royals, but was released after an injury. After a short period laying asphalt for the Arkansas State Transportation Department, he attended Henderson State University to pursue studies in psychology but dropped out after two semesters.\nIn the mid-1980s, Thornton settled in Los Angeles to pursue his career as an actor, with future writing partner Tom Epperson. He had a difficult time succeeding as an actor and worked in telemarketing, offshore wind farming, and fast food management between auditioning for acting jobs. He also played the drums and sang with South African rock band Jack Hammer. While working as a waiter for an industry event, he served film director and screenwriter Billy Wilder. He struck up a conversation with Wilder, who advised Thornton to consider a career as a screenwriter.\nCareer.\nActing and filmmaking.\nThornton's first screen role was in 1988 \"South of Reno\", where he played a small role as a counter man in a restaurant. He also made an appearance as a pawn store clerk in the 1987 \"Matlock\" episode \"The Photographer\". Another one of his early screen roles was as a cast member on the CBS sitcom Hearts Afire and in 1989 he appeared as an angry heckler in Adam Sandler's debut film \"Going Overboard\". His role as the villain in 1992's \"One False Move\", which he also co-wrote, brought him to the attention of critics. He also had small roles in the 1990s films \"Indecent Proposal\", \"On Deadly Ground\", \"Bound by Honor\", and \"Tombstone\". He went on to write, direct, and star in the 1996 independent film \"Sling Blade\". The film, an expansion of the short film \"Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade\", introduced the story of a mentally handicapped man imprisoned for a gruesome and seemingly inexplicable murder.\n\"Sling Blade\" garnered international acclaim. Thornton's screenplay earned him an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, a Writers Guild of America Award, and an Edgar Award, while his performance received Oscar and Screen Actors Guild nominations for Best Actor. In 1998, Thornton portrayed the James Carville-like Richard Jemmons in \"Primary Colors\". He adapted the book \"All the Pretty Horses\" into a 2000 film of the same name. The negative experience (he was forced to cut more than an hour of footage) led to his decision to never direct another film; a subsequent release, \"Daddy and Them\", had been filmed earlier. Also in 2000, an early script which he and Tom Epperson wrote together was made into \"The Gift\".\nIn 2000, Thornton appeared in Travis Tritt's music video for the song \"Modern Day Bonnie and Clyde\". His screen persona has been described by the press as that of a \"tattooed, hirsute man's man\". He appeared in several major film roles following the success of \"Sling Blade\", including 1998's \"Armageddon\" and \"A Simple Plan\". In 2001, he directed \"Daddy and Them\" while securing starring roles in three Hollywood films: \"Monster's Ball\", \"Bandits\", and \"The Man Who Wasn't There\", for which he received many awards.\nThornton played a malicious mall Santa in 2003's \"Bad Santa\", a black comedy that performed well at the box office and established him as a leading comic actor, and in the same year, portrayed a womanizing President of the United States in the British romantic comedy film \"Love Actually\". He stated that, following the success of \"Bad Santa\", audiences \"like to watch him play that kind of guy\" and that \"casting directors call him up when they need an asshole\". He referred to this when he said that \"it's kinda that simple... you know how narrow the imagination in this business can be\".\nIn 2004, Thornton played David Crockett in \"The Alamo\". Later that year, he received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on October 7. He appeared in the 2006 comic film \"School for Scoundrels\". In the film, he plays a self-help doctor, which was written specifically for him. More recent films include 2007 drama \"The Astronaut Farmer\" and the comedy \"Mr. Woodcock\", in which he played a sadistic gym teacher. In September 2008, he starred in the action film \"Eagle Eye\". He has also expressed an interest in directing another film, possibly a period piece about cave explorer Floyd Collins, based on the book \"Trapped! The Story of Floyd Collins\".\nIn 2014, Thornton starred as sociopathic hitman Lorne Malvo in the FX miniseries \"Fargo\", inspired by the 1996 film of the same name, for which he won a Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Mini-Series.\nThornton made a guest appearance on \"The Big Bang Theory\" in 2014, where he played a middle-aged urologist who gets excited about every woman who touches him.\n\"Goliath\", a television series by Amazon Studios, features Thornton as a formerly brilliant and personable lawyer, who is now washed up and alcoholic. It premiered on October 13, 2016, on Amazon Video. On February 15, 2017, Amazon announced the series had been renewed for a second season.\nIn 2017, Thornton starred in the music video \"Stand Down\" by Kario Salem (musically known as K.O.). It received the Best Music Video award from the Toronto Shorts International Film Festival and has had 13 million views on Facebook and counting.\nMusic.\nFrom the time he was 10 years old, Thornton has been in bands. His first performance was on drums at a school PTA meeting where his band played \"The Ballad Of The Green Berets\" instrumentally. Several bands followed, with Thornton's first recording experience coming at Widget Sound in Muscle Shoals, Alabama, in 1974. Later in the 1970s, Thornton was the drummer of a blues rock band named Tres Hombres. Guitarist Billy Gibbons referred to the band as \"the best little cover band in Texas\", and Thornton bears a tattoo with the band's name on it.\nIn 1985, Thornton joined Piet Botha in the South African rock band Jack Hammer, while Botha worked in Los Angeles. Thornton recorded one studio album with Jack Hammer, \"Death\" \"of\" \"a\" \"Gypsy\", which was released in 1986.\nIn 2001, Thornton released an album titled \"Private Radio\" on Lost Highway Records. Subsequent albums include \"The Edge of the World\" (2003), \"Hobo\" (2005) and \"Beautiful Door\" (2007). He performed the Warren Zevon song \"The Wind\" on the tribute album \"\". Thornton recorded a cover of the Johnny Cash classic \"Ring of Fire\" with Earl Scruggs, for the \"Oxford American\" magazine's Southern Music CD in 2001. The song also appeared on Scruggs' 2001 album \"Earl Scruggs and Friends\".\nIn 2007, Thornton formed The Boxmasters with J.D. Andrew.\nCBC incident.\nOn April 8, 2009, Thornton and his musical group The Boxmasters appeared on CBC Radio One program \"Q\", which was widely criticized and received international attention after Thornton was persistently unintelligible and discourteous to host Jian Ghomeshi. Thornton eventually explained he had \"instructed\" the show's producers to not ask questions about his movie career. Ghomeshi had mentioned Thornton's acting in the introduction. Thornton had also complained Canadian audiences were like \"mashed potatoes without the gravy.\" The following night, opening for Willie Nelson at Toronto's Massey Hall, Thornton said mid-set he liked Canadians but not Ghomeshi, which was greeted with boos and catcalls. The Boxmasters did not continue the tour in Canada as, according to Thornton, some of the crew and band had the flu.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\nThornton has been married six times. The first five marriages ended in divorce, and he has four children by three women.\nFrom 1978 to 1980, he was married to Melissa Lee Gatlin, who in her divorce petition cited \"incompatibility and adultery on his part\". They had a daughter, Amanda (Brumfield), who in 2008 was sentenced to 20 years in prison for the death of her friend's 1-year-old daughter.\nThornton married actress Toni Lawrence in 1986; they separated the following year and divorced in 1988.\nFrom 1990 to 1992, he was married to actress Cynda Williams, whom he cast in his writing debut, \"One False Move\" (1992).\nIn 1993, Thornton married \"Playboy\" model Pietra Dawn Cherniak, with whom he had two sons, Harry James and William. The marriage ended in 1997, with Cherniak accusing Thornton of spousal abuse, sometimes in front of his children.\nThornton was engaged to be married to actress Laura Dern, whom he dated from 1997 to 1999, but in 2000, he married actress Angelina Jolie, with whom he starred in \"Pushing Tin\" (1999) and who was 20 years his junior. The marriage became known for the couple's eccentric displays of affection, which reportedly included wearing vials of each other's blood around their necks; Thornton later clarified that the \"vials\" were actually two small lockets, each containing only a single drop of blood. Thornton and Jolie announced the adoption of a child from Cambodia in March 2002, but it was later revealed that Jolie had adopted the child as a single parent. They separated in June 2002 and divorced the following year.\nIn 2003, Thornton began a relationship with makeup effects crew member Connie Angland, with whom he has a daughter named Bella. They reside in Los Angeles, California. Although he once said that he likely would not marry again, saying that he believes marriage \"doesn't work\" for him, his representatives confirmed that he and Angland were married on October 22, 2014, in Los Angeles.\nHealth problems.\nDuring his early years in Los Angeles, Thornton was admitted to a hospital and diagnosed with myocarditis. He has since said that he follows a vegan diet and is \"extremely healthy\", eating no junk food as he is allergic to wheat and dairy.\nThornton suffers from obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder. Various idiosyncratic behaviors have been well documented in interviews with Thornton; among these is a phobia of antique furniture, a disorder shared by Dwight Yoakam's character Doyle Hargraves in the Thornton-penned \"Sling Blade\" and by Thornton's own character in the 2001 film \"Bandits\". Additionally, he has stated that he has a fear of certain types of silverware, a trait assumed by his character in 2001's \"Monster's Ball\", in which Grotowski insists on a plastic spoon for his daily bowl of ice cream.\nIn a 2004 interview with \"The Independent\", Thornton explained, \"It's just that I won't use real silver. You know, like the big, old, heavy-ass forks and knives, I can't do that. It's the same thing as the antique furniture. I just don't like old stuff. I'm creeped out by it, and I have no explanation why ... I don't have a phobia about American antiques, it's mostly French\u2014you know, like the big, old, gold-carved chairs with the velvet cushions. The Louis XIV type. That's what creeps me out. I can spot the imitation antiques a mile off. They have a different vibe. Not as much dust.\"\nOther.\nThornton is a baseball fan, and is a devout fan of the St. Louis Cardinals. In his movie contracts, one of his demands is a television in his trailer with a satellite dish so he can watch the Cardinals play. He narrated \"The 2006 World Series Film\", the year-end retrospective DVD chronicling the Cardinals' championship season. He is also a professed fan of the Indianapolis Colts football team.\nThornton is a self-described , a male fan of \"\". He is one of the highest profile members of the fandom."}
{"id": "4472", "revid": "1007155816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4472", "title": "The Big O", "text": " is a Japanese mecha-anime television series created by designer Keiichi Sato and director Kazuyoshi Katayama for Sunrise. The writing staff was assembled by the series' head writer, Chiaki J. Konaka, who is known for his work on \"Serial Experiments Lain\" and \"Hellsing\". The story takes place forty years after a mysterious occurrence causes the residents of Paradigm City to lose their memories. The series follows Roger Smith, Paradigm City's top Negotiator. He provides this \"much needed service\" with the help of a robot named R. Dorothy Wayneright and his butler Norman Burg. When the need arises, Roger calls upon Big O, a giant relic from the city's past.\nThe television series was designed as a tribute to Japanese and Western shows from the 1960s and 1970s. The series is presented in the style of \"film noir\" and combines themes of detective fiction and mecha anime. The setpieces are reminiscent of \"tokusatsu\" productions of the 1950s and 1960s, particularly Toho's \"kaiju\" movies, and the score is an eclectic mix of styles and musical homages.\n\"The Big O\" aired on WOWOW satellite television from October 13, 1999, and January 19, 2000. The English-language version premiered on Cartoon Network on April 2, 2001, and ended on April 18, 2001. Originally planned as a 26-episode series, low viewership in Japan reduced production to the first 13. Positive international reception resulted in a second season consisting of the remaining 13 episodes; co-produced by Cartoon Network, Sunrise, and Bandai Visual. Season two premiered on Japan's SUN-TV on January 2, 2003, and the American premiere took place seven months later. Following the closure of Bandai Entertainment by parent company Bandai (owned by Bandai Namco Holdings) in 2012, Sunrise announced at Otakon 2013 that Sentai Filmworks rescued both seasons of \"The Big O\".\nSynopsis.\nSetting.\n\"The Big O\" is set in the fictional city-state of . The city is located on a seacoast and is surrounded by a vast desert wasteland. The partially domed city is wholly controlled by the monopolistic Paradigm Corporation, resulting in a corporate police state. Paradigm is known as because of forty years prior to the story, \" destroyed the world outside the city and left the survivors without any prior memories. The city is characterized by severe class inequity; the higher-income population resides inside the more pleasant domes, with the remainder left in tenements outside. Residents of the city believe that they are the last survivors of the world and no other nations exist outside the city. Androids and giant robots known as \"Megadeus\" coexist with the residents of Paradigm City and residents do not find them unusual.\nPlot.\nAfter failing to negotiate with terrorists at the cost of his client's life, Roger Smith is obligated to care for Dorothy Wayneright, a young female android. Over the course of the series, Roger Smith continues to accept negotiation work from the residents of Paradigm City, he often leads to uncovering the nature and mystery of Paradigm City and encountering megadeus or other giant enemies that require Big O. Supporting characters are Angel, a mysterious woman in search of memories; Dan Dastun, chief of the military police of Paradigm city and old friend of Roger Smith; and Norman Burg, the butler of Roger Smith and mechanic of Big O.\nThe main antagonist is Alex Rosewater, chairman of Paradigm City whose goal is to revive the megadeus \"Big Fau\" in attempts to become the god of Paradigm City. Other recurring antagonists are Jason Beck, criminal and con-artist attempting to humiliate Roger Smith; Schwarzwald, an ex-reporter obsessed with finding the truth of Paradigm City and also pilot of the megadeus \"Big Duo\"; Vera Ronstadt, leader of a group of foreigners known as the Union searching for memories and revenge against Paradigm City; and Allen Gabriel, a cyborg assassin working for Alex Rosewater and the Union.\nThe series ends with the awakening of a new megadeus, and the revelation that the world is a simulated reality. A climactic battle ensues between Big O and Big Fau, after which reality is systematically erased by the new megadeus, an incarnation of Angel, recognized as \"Big Venus\" by Dorothy. Roger implores Angel to \"let go of the past\" regardless of its existential reality, and focus only on the present and the future. In an isolated control room, the real Angel observes Roger and her past encounters with him on a series of television monitors. On the control panel lies \"Metropolis\", a book featured prominently since the thirteenth episode; the cover features an illustration of angel wings and gives the author's name as \"Angel Rosewater\". Big Venus and Big O physically merge, causing the virtual reality to reset. The final scene shows Roger Smith driving down a restored Paradigm city with Dorothy and Angel observing him from the side of the road.\nProduction and release.\nDevelopment of the retro-styled series began in 1996. Keiichi Sato came up with the concept of \"The Big O\": a giant city-smashing robot, piloted by a man in black, in a Gotham-like environment. He later met up with Kazuyoshi Katayama, who had just finished directing \"Those Who Hunt Elves\", and started work on the layouts and character designs. But when things \"were about to really start moving,\" production on Katayama's \"Sentimental Journey\" began, putting plans on hold. Meanwhile, Sato was heavily involved with his work on \"City Hunter\".\nSato admits it all started as \"a gimmick for a toy\" but the representatives at Bandai Hobby Division did not see the same potential. From there on, the dealings would be with Bandai Visual, but Sunrise still needed some safeguards and requested more robots be designed to increase prospective toy sales. In 1999, with the designs complete, Chiaki J. Konaka was brought on as head writer. Among other things, Konaka came up with the idea of \"a town without memory\" and his writing staff put together the outline for a 26-episodes series.\n\"The Big O\" premiered on 13 October 1999 on WOWOW. When the production staff was informed the series would be shortened to 13 episodes, the writers decided to end it with a cliffhanger, hoping the next 13 episodes would be picked up. In April 2001, \"The Big O\" premiered on Cartoon Network's Toonami lineup.\nThe series garnered positive fan response internationally that resulted in a second season co-produced by Cartoon Network and Sunrise. Season two premiered on Japan's SUN-TV on January 2003, with the American premiere taking place seven months later as an Adult Swim exclusive. The second season would not be seen on Toonami until July 27, 2013, 10 years after it began airing on Adult Swim.\nThe second season was scripted by Chiaki Konaka with input from the American producers. Cartoon Network raised two requests for the second season: more action and reveal the mystery in the first season, although Kazuyoshi Katayama admitted that he didn't intend to reveal it, just to make an anthology of adventures setting in the universe. Along with the 13 episodes of season two, Cartoon Network had an option for 26 additional episodes to be written by Konaka, but according to Jason DeMarco, executive producer for season two, the middling ratings and DVD sales in the United States and Japan made any further episodes impossible to be produced.\nFollowing the closure of Bandai Entertainment by parent company in 2012, Sunrise announced at Otakon 2013 that Sentai Filmworks rescued both seasons of \"The Big O\". On June 20, 2017, Sentai Filmworks released both seasons on Blu-ray.\nMusic.\n\"The Big O\" was scored by \"Geidai\" alumnus Toshihiko Sahashi. His composition is richly symphonic and classical, with a number of pieces delving into electronica and jazz. Chosen because of his \"frightening amount of musical knowledge about TV dramas overseas,\" Sahashi integrates musical homages into the soundtrack. The background music draws from \"film noir\", spy films and sci-fi television series like \"The Twilight Zone\". The battle themes are reminiscent of Akira Ifukube's compositions for the \"Godzilla\" series.\nThe first opening theme is the Queen-influenced \"Big-O!\". Composed, arranged and performed by Rui Nagai, the song resembles the theme to the \"Flash Gordon\" film. The second opening theme is \"Respect,\" composed by Sahashi. The track is an homage to the music of Gerry Anderson's \"UFO\", composed by Barry Gray. In 2007, Rui Nagai composed \"Big-O! Show Must Go On,\" a 1960s hard rock piece, for Animax's reruns of the show. The closing theme is the slow love ballad \"And Forever...\" written by Chie and composed by Ken Shima. The duet is performed by Robbie Danzie and Naoki Takao.\nAlong with Sahashi's original compositions, the soundtrack features Chopin's Prelude No. 15 and a jazz saxophone rendition of \"Jingle Bells.\" The complete score was released in two volumes by Victor Entertainment.\nDesign.\n\"The Big O\" is the brainchild of Keiichi Sato and Kazuyoshi Katayama, an homage to the shows they grew up with. The show references the works of \"tokusatsu\" produced by the Toei Company and Tsuburaya Productions, as well as shows such as \"Super Robot Red Baron\" and \"Super Robot Mach Baron\" and \"old school\" super robot anime. The series is done in the style of \"film noir\" and pulp fiction and combines the feel of a detective show with the giant robot genre.\nStyle.\n\"The Big O\" shares much of its themes, diction, archetypes and visual iconography with \"film noirs\" of the 1940s like \"The Big Sleep\" (1946). The series incorporates the use of long dark shadows in the tradition of \"chiaroscuro\" and tenebrism. \"Film noir\" is also known for its use of odd angles, such as Roger's low shot introduction in the first episode. \"Noir\" cinematographers favoured this angle because it made characters almost rise from the ground, giving them dramatic girth and symbolic overtones. Other disorientating devices like dutch angles, mirror reflection and distorting shots are employed throughout the series.\nThe characters of \"The Big O\" fit the \"noir\" and pulp fiction archetypes. Roger Smith is a protagonist in the mold of Chandler's Philip Marlowe or Hammett's Sam Spade. He is canny and cynical, a disillusioned cop-turned-negotiator whose job has more in common with detective-style work than negotiating. Big Ear is Roger's street informant and Dan Dastun is the friend on the police force. The recurring Beck is the imaginative thug compelled by delusions of grandeur while Angel fills the role of the \"femme fatale\". Minor characters include crooked cops, corrupt business men and deranged scientists.\nThe dialogue in the series is recognized for its witty, wry sense of humor. The characters come off as charming and exchange banter not often heard in anime series, as the dialogue has the tendency to be straightforward. The plot is moved along by Roger's voice-over narration, a device used in \"film noir\" to place the viewer in the mind of the protagonist so it can intimately experience the character's angst and partly identify with the narrator.\nThe tall buildings and giant domes create a sense of claustrophobia and paranoia characteristic of the style. The rural landscape, Ailesberry Farm, contrasts Paradigm City. \"Noir\" protagonists often look for sanctuary in such settings but they just as likely end up becoming a killing ground. The series score is representative of its setting. While no classic \"noir\" possesses a jazz score, the music could be heard in nightclubs within the films. Roger's recurring theme, a lone saxophone accompaniment to the protagonist's narration, best exemplifies the \"noir\" stylings of the series.\nAmnesia is a common plot device in \"film noir\". Because most of these stories focused on a character proving his innocence, authors up the ante by making him an amnesiac, unable to prove his innocence even to himself.\nInfluences.\nBefore \"The Big O\", Sunrise was a subcontractor for Warner Bros. Animation's \"\", one of the series' influences. Cartoon Network, under the Toonami flag advertised the series as \"One part Bond. One part Bruce Wayne. One part City Smashing Robot.\"\nRoger Smith is a pastiche of the Bruce Wayne persona and the Batman. The character design resembles Wayne, complete with slicked-back hair and double-breasted business suit. Like Bruce, Roger prides himself in being a rich playboy to the extent that one of his household's rules is only women may be let into his mansion without his permission. Like Batman, Roger Smith carries a no-gun policy, albeit more flexible. Unlike the personal motives of the Batman, Roger enforces this rule for \"it's all part of being a gentleman.\" Among Roger's gadgetry is the Griffon, a large, black hi-tech sedan comparable to the Batmobile, a grappling cable that shoots out his wristwatch and the giant robot that Angel calls \"Roger's alter ego.\"\n\"The Big O\"'s cast of supporting characters includes Norman, Roger's faithful mechanically-inclined butler who fills the role of Alfred Pennyworth; R. Dorothy Wayneright, who plays the role of the sidekick; and Dan Dastun, a good honest cop who, like Jim Gordon, is both a friend to the hero and greatly respected by his comrades.\nThe other major influence is Mitsuteru Yokoyama's \"Giant Robo\". Before working on \"The Big O\", Kazuyoshi Katayama and other animators worked with Yasuhiro Imagawa on \"\". The feature, a \"retro chic\" homage to Yokoyama's career, took seven years to produce and suffered low sales and high running costs. Frustrated by the experience, Katayama and his staff put all their efforts into making \"good\" with \"The Big O\".\nLike Giant Robo, the megadeuses of \"Big O\" are metal behemoths. The designs are strange and \"more macho than practical,\" sporting big stovepipe arms and exposed rivets. Unlike the giants of other mecha series, the megadeuses do not exhibit ninja-like speed nor grace. Instead, the robots are armed with \"old school\" weaponry such as missiles, piston powered punches, machine guns and laser cannons.\nKatayama also cited \"Super Robot Red Baron\" and \"Super Robot Mach Baron\" among influences on the inspiration of \"The Big O\". Believing that because \"Red Baron\" had such a low budget and the big fights always happened outside of a city setting, he wanted \"Big O\" to be the show he felt \"Red Baron\" could be with a bigger budget. He also spoke of how he first came up with designs for the robots first as if they were making designs to appeal to toy companies, rather than how \"Gundam\" was created with a toy company wanting an anime to represent their new product. Big O's large pumping piston \"Sudden Impact\" arms, for example, he felt would be cool gimmicks in a toy.\nRelated media.\nPublications.\n\"The Big O\" was conceived as a media franchise. To this effect, Sunrise requested a manga be produced along with the animated series. \"The Big O\" manga started serialization in Kodansha's \"Magazine Z\" on July 1999, three months before the anime premiere. Authored by Hitoshi Ariga, the manga uses Keiichi Sato's concept designs in an all-new story. The series ended on October 2001. The issues were later collected in six volumes. The English version of the manga is published by Viz Media.\nIn anticipation of the broadcast of the second season, a new manga series was published. , authored by Hitoshi Ariga. \"Lost Memory\" takes place between volumes five and six of the original manga. The issues were serialized in \"Magazine Z\" from November 2002 to September 2003 and were collected in two volumes. , a novel by Yuki Taniguchi, was released 16 July 2003 by Tokuma Shoten.\n\"The Big O Visual: The official companion to the TV series\" () was published by Futabasha in 2003. The book contains full-color artwork, character bios and concept art, mecha sketches, video/LD/DVD jacket illustrations, history on the making of The Big O, staff interviews, \"Roger's Monologues\" comic strip and the original script for the final episode of the series.\nAudio drama.\n\"Walking Together On The Yellow Brick Road\" was released by Victor Entertainment on 21 September 2000. The drama CD was written by series head writer Chiaki J. Konaka and featured the series' voice cast. An English translation, written by English dub translator David Fleming, was posted on Konaka's website.\nVideo games.\nThe first season of Big O is featured in \"Super Robot Wars D\" for the Game Boy Advance in 2003. The series, including its second season, is also featured in \"Super Robot Wars Z\", released in 2008. \"The Big O\" became a mainstay of the \"Z\" games, appearing in each entry of the subseries.\nToys and model kits.\nBandai released a non-scale model kit of Big O in 2000. Though it was an easy snap-together kit, it required painting, as all of the parts (except the clear orange crown and canopy) were molded in dark gray. The kit included springs that enabled the slide-action Side Piles on the forearms to simulate Big O's Sudden Impact maneuver. Also included was an unpainted Roger Smith figure.\nPVC figures of Big O and Big Duo (Schwarzwald's Megadeus) were sold by Bandai America. Each came with non-poseable figures of Roger, Dorothy and Angel. Mini-figure sets were sold in Japan and America during the run of the second season. The characters included Big O (standard and attack modes), Roger, Dorothy &amp; Norman, Griffon (Roger's car), Dorothy-1 (Big O's first opponent), Schwarzwald and Big Duo.\nIn 2009, Bandai released a plastic/diecast figure of the Big O under their Soul of Chogokin line. The figure has the same features as the model kit, but with added detail and accessories. Its design was closely supervised by original designer Keiichi Sato.\nIn 2011, Max Factory released action figures of Roger and Dorothy through their Figma toyline. Like most Figmas, they are very detailed, articulated and come with accessories and interchangeable faces. In the same year, Max Factory also released a 12-inch, diecast figure of Big O under their Max Gokin line. The figure contained most of the accessories as the Soul of Chogokin figure but also included some others that could be bought separately from the SOC figure, such as the Mobydick (hip) Anchors and Roger Smith's car: the Griffon. Like the Soul of Chogokin figure, its design was also supervised by Keiichi Sato. As well, in that same year, Max Factory released soft vinyl figures of Big Duo and Big Fau, in-scale with the Max Gokin Big O. These figures are high in detail but limited in articulation, such as the arms and legs being the only things to move. To date, this is the only action figure of Big Fau.\nReception.\n\"The Big O\" premiered on 13 October 1999. The show was not a hit in its native Japan, rather it was reduced from an outlined 26 episodes to 13 episodes. Western audiences were more receptive and the series achieved the success its creators were looking for. In an interview with AnimePlay, Keiichi Sato said \"This is exactly as we had planned\", referring to the success overseas.\nSeveral words appear constantly in the English-language reviews; adjectives like \"hip\", \"sleek,\" \"stylish\",\n \"classy\", and, above all, \"cool\" serve to describe the artwork, the concept, and the series itself. Reviewers have pointed out references and homages to various works of fiction, namely \"Batman\", Giant Robo, the works of Isaac Asimov, Fritz Lang's \"Metropolis\", James Bond, and \"Cowboy Bebop\". But \"while saying that may cause one to think the show is completely derivative\", reads an article at Anime on DVD, \"\"The Big O\" still manages to stand out as something original amongst the other numerous cookie-cutter anime shows.\" One reviewer cites the extensive homages as one of the series problems and calls to unoriginality on the creators' part.\nThe first season's reception was positive. Anime on DVD recommends it as an essential series. Chris Beveridge of the aforementioned site gave an A\u2212 to Vols. 1 and 2, and a B+ to Vols. 3 and 4. Mike Toole of Anime Jump gave it 4.5 (out of a possible 5) stars, while the review at the Anime Academy gave it a grade of 83, listing the series' high points as being \"unique\", the characters \"interesting,\" and the action \"nice.\" Reviewers, and fans alike, agree the season's downfall was the ending, or its lack thereof. The dangling plot threads frustrated the viewers and prompted Cartoon Network's involvement in the production of further episodes.\nThe look and feel of the show received a big enhancement in the second season. This time around, the animation is \"near OVA quality\" and the artwork \"far more lush and detailed.\" Also enhanced are the troubles of the first season. The giant robot battles still seem out of place to some, while others praise the \"over-the-top-ness\" of their execution.\nFor some reviewers, the second season \"doesn't quite match the first\" addressing to \"something\" missing in these episodes. Andy Patrizio of IGN points out changes in Roger Smith's character, who \"lost some of his cool and his very funny side in the second season.\" Like a repeat of season one, this season's ending is considered its downfall. Chris Beveridge of Anime on DVD wonders if this was head writer \"Konaka's attempt to throw his hat into the ring for creating one of the most confusing and oblique endings of any series.\" Patrizio states \"the creators watched \"The Truman Show\" and \"The Matrix\" a few times too many.\"\nThe series continues to have a strong cult following into the 2010s. In 2014 BuzzFeed writer Ryan Broderick ranked \"The Big O\" as one of the best anime series to binge-watch. Dan Casey host of The Nerdist's \"Dan Cave\" stated \"The Big O\" was the anime series he was most eager to see rebooted or remade, along with \"Trigun\" and \"Soul Eater\". In 2017, Ollie Barder of Forbes wrote,\"From the classic and retro styled mecha design of Keiichi Sato to the overall film noir visual tone of the series, The Big O was a fascinating and visually very different kind of show. It also had a fantastic voice cast, with probably the most notable of these being Akiko Yajima as the voice of Roger's disapproving android Dorothy.\" In 2019, Crunchyroll writer Thomas Zoth ranked \"The Big O\" as his top 10 anime since the 1990s."}
{"id": "4473", "revid": "28254202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4473", "title": "BIOS", "text": "In computing, BIOS (, ; an acronym for Basic Input/Output System and also known as the System BIOS, ROM BIOS or PC BIOS) is firmware used to perform hardware initialization during the booting process (power-on startup), and to provide runtime services for operating systems and programs. The BIOS firmware comes pre-installed on a personal computer's system board, and it is the first software to run when powered on. The name originates from the Basic Input/Output System used in the CP/M operating system in 1975. The BIOS originally proprietary to the IBM PC has been reverse engineered by some companies (such as Phoenix Technologies) looking to create compatible systems. The interface of that original system serves as a \"de facto\" standard.\nThe BIOS in modern PCs initializes and tests the system hardware components, and loads a boot loader from a mass storage device which then initializes an operating system. In the era of DOS, the BIOS provided BIOS interrupt calls for the keyboard, display, storage, and other input/output (I/O) devices that standardized an interface to application programs and the operating system. More recent operating systems do not use the BIOS interrupt calls after startup.\nMost BIOS implementations are specifically designed to work with a particular computer or motherboard model, by interfacing with various devices that make up the complementary system chipset. Originally, BIOS firmware was stored in a ROM chip on the PC motherboard. In modern computer systems, the BIOS contents are stored on flash memory so it can be rewritten without removing the chip from the motherboard. This allows easy, end-user updates to the BIOS firmware so new features can be added or bugs can be fixed, but it also creates a possibility for the computer to become infected with BIOS rootkits. Furthermore, a BIOS upgrade that fails may brick the motherboard.\nUnified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) is a successor to the legacy PC BIOS, aiming to address its technical limitations.\nHistory.\nThe term BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) was created by Gary Kildall and first appeared in the CP/M operating system in 1975, describing the machine-specific part of CP/M loaded during boot time that interfaces directly with the hardware. (A CP/M machine usually has only a simple boot loader in its ROM.)\nVersions of MS-DOS, PC DOS or DR-DOS contain a file called variously \"IO.SYS\", \"IBMBIO.COM\", \"IBMBIO.SYS\", or \"DRBIOS.SYS\"; this file is known as the \"DOS BIOS\" (also known as the \"DOS I/O System\") and contains the lower-level hardware-specific part of the operating system. Together with the underlying hardware-specific but operating system-independent \"System BIOS\", which resides in ROM, it represents the analogue to the \"CP/M BIOS\".\nThe BIOS originally proprietary to the IBM PC has been reverse engineered by some companies (such as Phoenix Technologies) looking to create compatible systems.\nWith the introduction of PS/2 machines, IBM divided the System BIOS into real- and protected-mode portions. The real-mode portion was meant to provide backward compatibility with existing operating systems such as DOS, and therefore was named \"CBIOS\" (for \"Compatibility BIOS\"), whereas the \"ABIOS\" (for \"Advanced BIOS\") provided new interfaces specifically suited for multitasking operating systems such as OS/2.\nUser interface.\nThe BIOS of the original IBM PC and XT had no interactive user interface. Error codes or messages were displayed on the screen, or coded series of sounds were generated to signal errors when the power-on self-test (POST) had not proceeded to the point of successfully initializing a video display adapter. Options on the IBM PC and XT were set by switches and jumpers on the main board and on expansion cards. Starting around the mid-1990s, it became typical for the BIOS ROM to include a \"BIOS configuration utility\" (BCU) or \"BIOS setup utility\", accessed at system power-up by a particular key sequence. This program allowed the user to set system configuration options, of the type formerly set using DIP switches, through an interactive menu system controlled through the keyboard. In the interim period, IBM-compatible PCsincluding the IBM ATheld configuration settings in battery-backed RAM and used a bootable configuration program on floppy disk, not in the ROM, to set the configuration options contained in this memory. The floppy disk was supplied with the computer, and if it was lost the system settings could not be changed. The same applied in general to computers with an EISA bus, for which the configuration program was called an EISA Configuration Utility (ECU).\nA modern Wintel-compatible computer provides a setup routine essentially unchanged in nature from the ROM-resident BIOS setup utilities of the late 1990s; the user can configure hardware options using the keyboard and video display. The modern Wintel machine may store the BIOS configuration settings in flash ROM, perhaps the same flash ROM that holds the BIOS itself.\nOperation.\nSystem startup.\nEarly Intel processors started at physical address 000FFFF0h. Systems with later processors provide logic to start running the BIOS from the system ROM. \nIf the system has just been powered up or the reset button was pressed (\"cold boot\"), the full power-on self-test (POST) is run. If Ctrl+Alt+Delete was pressed (\"warm boot\"), a special flag value stored in nonvolatile BIOS memory (\"CMOS\") tested by the BIOS allows bypass of the lengthy POST and memory detection.\nThe POST identifies, tests and initializes system devices such as the CPU, chipset, RAM, motherboard, video card, keyboard, mouse, hard disk drive, optical disc drive and other hardware.\nEarly IBM PCs had a routine in the POST that would download a program into RAM through the keyboard port and run it. This feature was intended for factory test or diagnostic purposes.\nBoot process.\nAfter the option ROM scan is completed and all detected ROM modules with valid checksums have been called, or immediately after POST in a BIOS version that does not scan for option ROMs, the BIOS calls INT 19h to start boot processing. Post-boot, programs loaded can also call INT 19h to reboot the system, but they must be careful to disable interrupts and other asynchronous hardware processes that may interfere with the BIOS rebooting process, or else the system may hang or crash while it is rebooting.\nWhen INT 19h is called, the BIOS attempts to locate boot loader software on a \"boot device\", such as a hard disk, a floppy disk, CD, or DVD. It loads and executes the first boot software it finds, giving it control of the PC.\nThe BIOS uses the boot devices set in Nonvolatile BIOS memory (CMOS), or, in the earliest PCs, DIP switches. The BIOS checks each device in order to see if it is bootable by attempting to load the first sector (boot sector). If the sector cannot be read, the BIOS proceeds to the next device. If the sector is read successfully, some BIOSes will also check for the boot sector signature 0x55 0xAA in the last two bytes of the sector (which is 512 bytes long), before accepting a boot sector and considering the device bootable.\nWhen a bootable device is found, the BIOS transfers control to the loaded sector. The BIOS does not interpret the contents of the boot sector other than to possibly check for the boot sector signature in the last two bytes. Interpretation of data structures like partition tables and BIOS Parameter Blocks is done by the boot program in the boot sector itself or by other programs loaded through the boot process.\nA non-disk device such as a network adapter attempts booting by a procedure that is defined by its option ROM or the equivalent integrated into the motherboard BIOS ROM. As such, option ROMs may also influence or supplant the boot process defined by the motherboard BIOS ROM.\nWith the El Torito optical media boot standard, the optical drive actually emulates a 3.5\" high-density floppy disk to the BIOS for boot purposes. Reading the \"first sector\" of a CD-ROM or DVD-ROM is not a simply defined operation like it is on a floppy disk or a hard disk. Furthermore, the complexity of the medium makes it difficult to write a useful boot program in one sector. The bootable virtual floppy disk can contain software that provides access to the optical medium in its native format.\nBoot priority.\nThe user can select the boot priority implemented by the BIOS. For example, most computers have a hard disk that is bootable, but sometimes there is a removable-media drive that has higher boot priority, so the user can cause a removable disk to be booted.\nIn most modern BIOSes, the boot priority order can be configured by the user. In older BIOSes, limited boot priority options are selectable; in the earliest BIOSes, a fixed priority scheme was implemented, with floppy disk drives first, fixed disks (i.e. hard disks) second, and typically no other boot devices supported, subject to modification of these rules by installed option ROMs. The BIOS in an early PC also usually would only boot from the first floppy disk drive or the first hard disk drive, even if there were two drives installed.\nBoot failure.\nOn the original IBM PC and XT, if no bootable disk was found, ROM BASIC was started by calling INT 18h. Since few programs used BASIC in ROM, clone PC makers left it out; then a computer that failed to boot from a disk would display \"No ROM BASIC\" and halt (in response to INT 18h).\nLater computers would display a message like \"No bootable disk found\"; some would prompt for a disk to be inserted and a key to be pressed to retry the boot process. A modern BIOS may display nothing or may automatically enter the BIOS configuration utility when the boot process fails.\nBoot environment.\nThe environment for the boot program is very simple: the CPU is in real mode and the general-purpose and segment registers are undefined, except SS, SP, CS, and DL. CS:IP always points to physical address codice_1. What values CS and IP actually have is not well defined. Some BIOSes use a CS:IP of codice_2 while others may use codice_3. Because boot programs are always loaded at this fixed address, there is no need for a boot program to be relocatable. DL may contain the drive number, as used with INT 13h, of the boot device. SS:SP points to a valid stack that is presumably large enough to support hardware interrupts, but otherwise SS and SP are undefined. (A stack must be already set up in order for interrupts to be serviced, and interrupts must be enabled in order for the system timer-tick interrupt, which BIOS always uses at least to maintain the time-of-day count and which it initializes during POST, to be active and for the keyboard to work. The keyboard works even if the BIOS keyboard service is not called; keystrokes are received and placed in the 15-character type-ahead buffer maintained by BIOS.) The boot program must set up its own stack, because the size of the stack set up by BIOS is unknown and its location is likewise variable; although the boot program can investigate the default stack by examining SS:SP, it is easier and shorter to just unconditionally set up a new stack.\nAt boot time, all BIOS services are available, and the memory below address codice_4 contains the interrupt vector table. BIOS POST has initialized the system timers, interrupt controller(s), DMA controller(s), and other motherboard/chipset hardware as necessary to bring all BIOS services to ready status. DRAM refresh for all system DRAM in conventional memory and extended memory, but not necessarily expanded memory, has been set up and is running. The interrupt vectors corresponding to the BIOS interrupts have been set to point at the appropriate entry points in the BIOS, hardware interrupt vectors for devices initialized by the BIOS have been set to point to the BIOS-provided ISRs, and some other interrupts, including ones that BIOS generates for programs to hook, have been set to a default dummy ISR that immediately returns. The BIOS maintains a reserved block of system RAM at addresses codice_5 with various parameters initialized during the POST. All memory at and above address codice_6 can be used by the boot program; it may even overwrite itself.\nExtensions (option ROMs).\nPeripheral cards such as hard disk drive host bus adapters and video cards have their own BIOS extension option ROMs, which provide additional functionality to BIOS. Code in these extensions runs before the BIOS boots the operating system from mass storage. These ROMs typically test and initialize hardware, add new BIOS services, or replace existing BIOS services with their own services. For example, a SCSI controller usually has a BIOS extension ROM that adds support for hard drives connected through that controller. An extension ROM could in principle contain operating system, or it could implement an entirely different boot process such as network booting. Operation of an IBM-compatible computer system can be completely changed by removing or inserting an adapter card (or a ROM chip) that contains a BIOS extension ROM.\nThe motherboard BIOS typically contains code to access hardware components necessary for bootstrapping integrated display and integrated storage. In addition, plug-in adapter cards such as SCSI, RAID, network interface cards, and video cards often include their own BIOS (e.g. Video BIOS), complementing or replacing the system BIOS code for the given component. Even devices built into the motherboard can behave in this way; their option ROMs can be a part of the motherboard BIOS.\nAn add-in card requires an option ROM if the card is not supported by the motherboard BIOS and the card needs to be initialized or made accessible through BIOS services before the operating system can be loaded (usually this means it is required in the boot process). Even when it is not required, an option ROM can allow an adapter card to be used without loading driver software from a storage device after booting begins with an option ROM, no time is taken to load the driver, the driver does not take up space in RAM nor on hard disk, and the driver software on the ROM always stays with the device so the two cannot be accidentally separated. Also, if the ROM is on the card, both the peripheral hardware and the driver software provided by the ROM are installed together with no extra effort to install the software. An additional advantage of ROM on some early PC systems (notably including the IBM PCjr) was that ROM was faster than main system RAM. (On modern systems, the case is very much the reverse of this, and BIOS ROM code is usually copied (\"shadowed\") into RAM so it will run faster.)\nThere are many methods and utilities for examining the contents of various motherboard BIOS and expansion ROMs, such as Microsoft DEBUG or the Unix dd.\nBoot procedure.\nIf an expansion ROM wishes to change the way the system boots (such as from a network device or a SCSI adapter) in a cooperative way, it can use the \"BIOS Boot Specification\" (BBS) API to register its ability to do so. Once the expansion ROMs have registered using the BBS APIs, the user can select among the available boot options from within the BIOS's user interface. This is why most BBS compliant PC BIOS implementations will not allow the user to enter the BIOS's user interface until the expansion ROMs have finished executing and registering themselves with the BBS API.\nAlso, if an expansion ROM wishes to change the way the system boots unilaterally, it can simply hook INT 19h or other interrupts normally called from interrupt 19h, such as INT 13h, the BIOS disk service, to intercept the BIOS boot process. Then it can replace the BIOS boot process with one of its own, or it can merely modify the boot sequence by inserting its own boot actions into it, by preventing the BIOS from detecting certain devices as bootable, or both. Before the BIOS Boot Specification was promulgated, this was the only way for expansion ROMs to implement boot capability for devices not supported for booting by the native BIOS of the motherboard.\nInitialization.\nAfter the motherboard BIOS completes its POST, most BIOS versions search for option ROM modules, also called BIOS extension ROMs, and execute them. The motherboard BIOS scans for extension ROMs in a portion of the \"upper memory area\" (the part of the x86 real-mode address space at and above address 0xA0000) and runs each ROM found, in order. To discover memory-mapped ISA option ROMs, a BIOS implementation scans the real-mode address space from codice_7 to codice_8 on 2\u00a0KiB boundaries, looking for a two-byte ROM \"signature\": 0x55 followed by 0xAA. In a valid expansion ROM, this signature is followed by a single byte indicating the number of 512-byte blocks the expansion ROM occupies in real memory, and the next byte is the option ROM's entry point (also known as its \"entry offset\"). A checksum of the specified number of 512-byte blocks is calculated, and if the ROM has a valid checksum, the BIOS transfers control to the entry address, which in a normal BIOS extension ROM should be the beginning of the extension's initialization routine.\nAt this point, the extension ROM code takes over, typically testing and initializing the hardware it controls and registering interrupt vectors for use by post-boot applications. It may use BIOS services (including those provided by previously initialized option ROMs) to provide a user configuration interface, to display diagnostic information, or to do anything else that it requires. It is possible that an option ROM will not return to BIOS, pre-empting the BIOS's boot sequence altogether.\nAn option ROM should normally return to the BIOS after completing its initialization process. Once (and if) an option ROM returns, the BIOS continues searching for more option ROMs, calling each as it is found, until the entire option ROM area in the memory space has been scanned.\nPhysical placement.\nOption ROMs normally reside on adapter cards. However, the original PC, and perhaps also the PC XT, have a spare ROM socket on the motherboard (the \"system board\" in IBM's terms) into which an option ROM can be inserted, and the four ROMs that contain the BASIC interpreter can also be removed and replaced with custom ROMs which can be option ROMs. The IBM PCjr is unique among PCs in having two ROM cartridge slots on the front. Cartridges in these slots map into the same region of the upper memory area used for option ROMs, and the cartridges can contain option ROM modules that the BIOS would recognize. The cartridges can also contain other types of ROM modules, such as BASIC programs, that are handled differently. One PCjr cartridge can contain several ROM modules of different types, possibly stored together in one ROM chip.\nOperating system services.\nThe BIOS ROM is customized to the particular manufacturer's hardware, allowing low-level services (such as reading a keystroke or writing a sector of data to diskette) to be provided in a standardized way to programs, including operating systems. For example, an IBM PC might have either a monochrome or a color display adapter (using different display memory addresses and hardware), but a single, standard, BIOS system call may be invoked to display a character at a specified position on the screen in text mode or graphics mode.\nThe BIOS provides a small library of basic input/output functions to operate peripherals (such as the keyboard, rudimentary text and graphics display functions and so forth). When using MS-DOS, BIOS services could be accessed by an application program (or by MS-DOS) by executing an INT 13h interrupt instruction to access disk functions, or by executing one of a number of other documented BIOS interrupt calls to access video display, keyboard, cassette, and other device functions.\nOperating systems and executive software that are designed to supersede this basic firmware functionality provide replacement software interfaces to application software. Applications can also provide these services to themselves. This began even in the 1980s under MS-DOS, when programmers observed that using the BIOS video services for graphics display was very slow. To increase the speed of screen output, many programs bypassed the BIOS and programmed the video display hardware directly. Other graphics programmers, particularly but not exclusively in the demoscene, observed that there were technical capabilities of the PC display adapters that were not supported by the IBM BIOS and could not be taken advantage of without circumventing it. Since the AT-compatible BIOS ran in Intel real mode, operating systems that ran in protected mode on 286 and later processors required hardware device drivers compatible with protected mode operation to replace BIOS services.\nIn modern PCs running modern operating systems (such as Windows and Linux) the BIOS interrupt calls is used only during booting and initial loading of operating systems. Before the operating system's first graphical screen is displayed, input and output are typically handled through BIOS. A boot menu such as the textual menu of Windows, which allows users to choose an operating system to boot, to boot into the safe mode, or to use the last known good configuration, is displayed through BIOS and receives keyboard input through BIOS.\nMany modern PCs can still boot and run legacy operating systems such as MS-DOS or DR-DOS that rely heavily on BIOS for their console and disk I/O, providing that the system has a BIOS, or a CSM-capable UEFI firmware.\nProcessor microcode updates.\nIntel processors have reprogrammable microcode since the P6 microarchitecture. AMD processors have reprogrammable microcode since the K7 microarchitecture. The BIOS contain patches to the processor microcode that fix errors in the initial processor microcode; microcode is loaded into processor's SRAM so reprogramming is not persistent, thus loading of microcode updates is performed each time the system is powered up. Without reprogrammable microcode, an expensive processor swap would be required; for example, the Pentium FDIV bug became an expensive fiasco for Intel as it required a product recall because the original Pentium processor's defective microcode could not be reprogrammed. Operating systems can update main processor microcode also.\nIdentification.\nSome BIOSes contain a software licensing description table (SLIC), a digital signature placed inside the BIOS by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM), for example Dell. The SLIC is inserted into the ACPI data table and contains no active code.\nComputer manufacturers that distribute OEM versions of Microsoft Windows and Microsoft application software can use the SLIC to authenticate licensing to the OEM Windows Installation disk and system recovery disc containing Windows software. Systems with a SLIC can be preactivated with an OEM product key, and they verify an XML formatted OEM certificate against the SLIC in the BIOS as a means of self-activating (see System Locked Preinstallation, SLP). If a user performs a fresh install of Windows, they will need to have possession of both the OEM key (either SLP or COA) and the digital certificate for their SLIC in order to bypass activation. This can be achieved if the user performs a restore using a pre-customised image provided by the OEM. Power users can copy the necessary certificate files from the OEM image, decode the SLP product key, then perform SLP activation manually. Cracks for non-genuine Windows distributions usually edit the SLIC or emulate it in order to bypass Windows activation.\nOverclocking.\nSome BIOS implementations allow overclocking, an action in which the CPU is adjusted to a higher clock rate than its manufacturer rating for guaranteed capability. Overclocking may, however, seriously compromise system reliability in insufficiently cooled computers and generally shorten component lifespan. Overclocking, when incorrectly performed, may also cause components to overheat so quickly that they mechanically destroy themselves.\nModern use.\nSome older operating systems, for example MS-DOS, rely on the BIOS to carry out most input/output tasks within the PC.\nCalling real mode BIOS services directly is inefficient for protected mode (and long mode) operating systems. BIOS interrupt calls are not used by modern multitasking operating systems after they initially load.\nIn 1990s, BIOS provided some protected mode interfaces for Microsoft Windows, Linux and BSD operating systems, such as Advanced Power Management (APM), Legacy Plug and Play (Legacy PnP), Desktop Management Interface (DMI), PCI BIOS, VESA BIOS Extensions (VBE) and MultiProcessor Specification (MPS). Starting from the 2000s, most BIOSes provide ACPI, SMBIOS and VBE interfaces for modern operating systems. Modern operating systems load the e820 memory map at startup.\nAfter operating systems load, the System Management Mode code is still running in SMRAM. Since 2010, BIOS technology is in a transitional process toward UEFI.\nConfiguration.\nSetup utility.\nHistorically, the BIOS in the IBM PC and XT had no built-in user interface. The BIOS versions in earlier PCs (XT-class) were not software configurable; instead, users set the options via DIP switches on the motherboard. Later computers, including all IBM-compatibles with 80286 CPUs, had a battery-backed nonvolatile BIOS memory (CMOS RAM chip) that held BIOS settings. These settings, such as video-adapter type, memory size, and hard-disk parameters, could only be configured by running a configuration program from a disk, not built into the ROM. A special \"reference diskette\" was inserted in an IBM AT to configure settings such as memory size.\nEarly BIOS versions did not have passwords or boot-device selection options. The BIOS was hard-coded to boot from the first floppy drive, or, if that failed, the first hard disk. Access control in early AT-class machines was by a physical keylock switch (which was not hard to defeat if the computer case could be opened). Anyone who could switch on the computer could boot it.\nLater, 386-class computers started integrating the BIOS setup utility in the ROM itself, alongside the BIOS code; these computers usually boot into the BIOS setup utility if a certain key or key combination is pressed, otherwise the BIOS POST and boot process are executed.\nA modern BIOS setup utility has a text user interface (TUI) accessed by pressing a certain key on the keyboard when the PC starts. Usually, the key is advertised for short time during the early startup, for example \"Press DEL to enter Setup\". The actual key depends on specific hardware. Features present in the BIOS setup utility typically include:\nHardware monitoring.\nA modern BIOS setup screen often features a PC Health Status or a Hardware Monitoring tab, which directly interfaces with a Hardware Monitor chip of the mainboard. This makes it possible to monitor CPU and chassis temperature, the voltage provided by the power supply unit, as well as monitor and control the speed of the fans connected to the motherboard.\nOnce the system is booted, hardware monitoring and computer fan control is normally done directly by the Hardware Monitor chip itself, which can be a separate chip, interfaced through I\u00b2C or SMBus, or come as a part of a Super I/O solution, interfaced through Low Pin Count (LPC). Some operating systems, like NetBSD with envsys and OpenBSD with sysctl hw.sensors, feature integrated interfacing with hardware monitors.\nHowever, in some circumstances, the BIOS also provides the underlying information about hardware monitoring through ACPI, in which case, the operating system may be using ACPI to perform hardware monitoring.\nReprogramming.\nIn modern PCs the BIOS is stored in rewritable EEPROM or NOR flash memory, allowing the contents to be replaced and modified. This rewriting of the contents is sometimes termed \"flashing\". It can be done by a special program, usually provided by the system's manufacturer, or at POST, with a BIOS image in a hard drive or USB flash drive. A file containing such contents is sometimes termed \"a BIOS image\". A BIOS might be reflashed in order to upgrade to a newer version to fix bugs or provide improved performance or to support newer hardware.\nHardware.\nThe original IBM PC BIOS (and cassette BASIC) was stored on mask-programmed read-only memory (ROM) chips in sockets on the motherboard. ROMs could be replaced, but not altered, by users. To allow for updates, many compatible computers used re-programmable BIOS memory devices such as EPROM, EEPROM and later flash memory (usually NOR flash) devices. According to Robert Braver, the president of the BIOS manufacturer Micro Firmware, Flash BIOS chips became common around 1995 because the electrically erasable PROM (EEPROM) chips are cheaper and easier to program than standard ultraviolet erasable PROM (EPROM) chips. Flash chips are programmed (and re-programmed) in-circuit, while EPROM chips need to be removed from the motherboard for re-programming. BIOS versions are upgraded to take advantage of newer versions of hardware and to correct bugs in previous revisions of BIOSes.\nBeginning with the IBM AT, PCs supported a hardware clock settable through BIOS. It had a century bit which allowed for manually changing the century when the year 2000 happened. Most BIOS revisions created in 1995 and nearly all BIOS revisions in 1997 supported the year 2000 by setting the century bit automatically when the clock rolled past midnight, 31 December 1999.\nThe first flash chips were attached to the ISA bus. Starting in 1998, the BIOS flash moved to the LPC bus, a functional replacement for ISA, following a new standard implementation known as \"firmware hub\" (FWH). In 2006, the first systems supporting a Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) appeared, and the BIOS flash memory moved again.\nThe size of the BIOS, and the capacity of the ROM, EEPROM, or other media it may be stored on, has increased over time as new features have been added to the code; BIOS versions now exist with sizes up to 32 megabytes. For contrast, the original IBM PC BIOS was contained in an 8 KiB mask ROM. Some modern motherboards are including even bigger NAND flash memory ICs on board which are capable of storing whole compact operating systems, such as some Linux distributions. For example, some ASUS notebooks included Splashtop OS embedded into their NAND flash memory ICs. However, the idea of including an operating system along with BIOS in the ROM of a PC is not new; in the 1980s, Microsoft offered a ROM option for MS-DOS, and it was included in the ROMs of some PC clones such as the Tandy 1000 HX.\nAnother type of firmware chip was found on the IBM PC AT and early compatibles. In the AT, the keyboard interface was controlled by a microcontroller with its own programmable memory. On the IBM AT, that was a 40-pin socketed device, while some manufacturers used an EPROM version of this chip which resembled an EPROM. This controller was also assigned the A20 gate function to manage memory above the one-megabyte range; occasionally an upgrade of this \"keyboard BIOS\" was necessary to take advantage of software that could use upper memory. \nThe BIOS may contain components such as the Memory Reference Code (MRC), which is responsible for the memory initialization (e.g. SPD and memory timings initialization).\nModern BIOS includes Intel Management Engine or AMD Platform Security Processor firmware.\nVendors and products.\nIBM published the entire listings of the BIOS for its original PC, PC XT, PC AT, and other contemporary PC models, in an appendix of the \"IBM PC Technical Reference Manual\" for each machine type. The effect of the publication of the BIOS listings is that anyone can see exactly what a definitive BIOS does and how it does it.\nIn May 1984 Phoenix Software Associates released its first ROM-BIOS, which enabled OEMs to build essentially fully compatible clones without having to reverse-engineer the IBM PC BIOS themselves, as Compaq had done for the Portable, helping fuel the growth in the PC-compatibles industry and sales of non-IBM versions of DOS. And the first American Megatrends (AMI) BIOS was released on 1986.\nNew standards grafted onto the BIOS are usually without complete public documentation or any BIOS listings. As a result, it is not as easy to learn the intimate details about the many non-IBM additions to BIOS as about the core BIOS services.\nMost PC motherboard suppliers license a BIOS \"core\" and toolkit from a commercial third party, known as an \"independent BIOS vendor\" or IBV. The motherboard manufacturer then customizes this BIOS to suit its own hardware. For this reason, updated BIOSes are normally obtained directly from the motherboard manufacturer. Major BIOS vendors include American Megatrends (AMI), Insyde Software, Phoenix Technologies and Byosoft. Former vendors include Award Software and Microid Research that were acquired by Phoenix Technologies in 1998; Phoenix later phased out the Award brand name. General Software, which was also acquired by Phoenix in 2007, sold BIOS for embedded systems based on Intel processors.\nThe open-source community increased their effort to develop a replacement for proprietary BIOSes and their future incarnations with an open-sourced counterpart through the libreboot, coreboot and OpenBIOS/Open Firmware projects. AMD provided product specifications for some chipsets, and Google is sponsoring the project. Motherboard manufacturer Tyan offers coreboot next to the standard BIOS with their Opteron line of motherboards.\nSecurity.\nEEPROM and Flash memory chips are advantageous because they can be easily updated by the user; it is customary for hardware manufacturers to issue BIOS updates to upgrade their products, improve compatibility and remove bugs. However, this advantage had the risk that an improperly executed or aborted BIOS update could render the computer or device unusable. To avoid these situations, more recent BIOSes use a \"boot block\"; a portion of the BIOS which runs first and must be updated separately. This code verifies if the rest of the BIOS is intact (using hash checksums or other methods) before transferring control to it. If the boot block detects any corruption in the main BIOS, it will typically warn the user that a recovery process must be initiated by booting from removable media (floppy, CD or USB flash drive) so the user can try flashing the BIOS again. Some motherboards have a \"backup\" BIOS (sometimes referred to as DualBIOS boards) to recover from BIOS corruptions.\nThere are at least five known BIOS attack viruses, two of which were for demonstration purposes. The first one found in the wild was \"Mebromi\", targeting Chinese users.\nThe first BIOS virus was BIOS Meningitis, which instead of erasing BIOS chips it infected them. BIOS Meningitis has relatively harmless, compared to a virus like CIH.\nThe second BIOS virus was CIH, also known as the \"Chernobyl Virus\", which was able to erase flash ROM BIOS content on compatible chipsets. CIH appeared in mid-1998 and became active in April 1999. Often, infected computers could no longer boot, and people had to remove the flash ROM IC from the motherboard and reprogram it. CIH targeted the then-widespread Intel i430TX motherboard chipset and took advantage of the fact that the Windows 9x operating systems, also widespread at the time, allowed direct hardware access to all programs.\nModern systems are not vulnerable to CIH because of a variety of chipsets being used which are incompatible with the Intel i430TX chipset, and also other flash ROM IC types. There is also extra protection from accidental BIOS rewrites in the form of boot blocks which are protected from accidental overwrite or dual and quad BIOS equipped systems which may, in the event of a crash, use a backup BIOS. Also, all modern operating systems such as FreeBSD, Linux, macOS, Windows NT-based Windows OS like Windows 2000, Windows XP and newer, do not allow user-mode programs to have direct hardware access.\nAs a result, as of 2008, CIH has become essentially harmless, at worst causing annoyance by infecting executable files and triggering antivirus software. Other BIOS viruses remain possible, however; since most Windows home users without Windows Vista/7's UAC run all applications with administrative privileges, a modern CIH-like virus could in principle still gain access to hardware without first using an exploit. The operating system OpenBSD prevents all users from having this access and the grsecurity patch for the Linux kernel also prevents this direct hardware access by default, the difference being an attacker requiring a much more difficult kernel level exploit or reboot of the machine.\nThe second BIOS virus was a technique presented by John Heasman, principal security consultant for UK-based Next-Generation Security Software. In 2006, at the Black Hat Security Conference, he showed how to elevate privileges and read physical memory, using malicious procedures that replaced normal ACPI functions stored in flash memory.\nThe third BIOS virus was a technique called \"Persistent BIOS infection.\" It appeared in 2009 at the CanSecWest Security Conference in Vancouver, and at the SyScan Security Conference in Singapore. Researchers Anibal Sacco and Alfredo Ortega, from Core Security Technologies, demonstrated how to insert malicious code into the decompression routines in the BIOS, allowing for nearly full control of the PC at start-up, even before the operating system is booted. The proof-of-concept does not exploit a flaw in the BIOS implementation, but only involves the normal BIOS flashing procedures. Thus, it requires physical access to the machine, or for the user to be root. Despite these requirements, Ortega underlined the profound implications of his and Sacco's discovery: \"We can patch a driver to drop a fully working rootkit. We even have a little code that can remove or disable antivirus.\"\nMebromi is a trojan which targets computers with AwardBIOS, Microsoft Windows, and antivirus software from two Chinese companies: Rising Antivirus and Jiangmin KV Antivirus. Mebromi installs a rootkit which infects the master boot record.\nIn a December 2013 interview with \"60 Minutes\", Deborah Plunkett, Information Assurance Director for the US National Security Agency claimed the NSA had uncovered and thwarted a possible BIOS attack by a foreign nation state, targeting the US financial system. The program cited anonymous sources alleging it was a Chinese plot. However follow-up articles in \"The Guardian,\" \"The Atlantic,\" \"Wired\" and \"The Register\" refuted the NSA's claims.\nNewer Intel platforms have Intel Boot Guard (IBG) technology enabled, this technology will check the BIOS digital signature at startup, and the IBG public key is fused into motherboard PCH. End users can't disable this function.\nAlternatives and successors.\n, the legacy PC BIOS is being replaced by the more complex Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) in many new machines. UEFI is a specification which replaces the runtime interface of the legacy BIOS. Initially written for the Intel Itanium architecture, UEFI is now available for x86 and x86-64 platforms; the specification development is driven by the Unified EFI Forum, an industry Special Interest Group. EFI booting has been supported in only Microsoft Windows versions supporting GPT, the Linux kernel 2.6.1 and later, and macOS on Intel-based Macs. , new PC hardware predominantly ships with UEFI firmware. The architecture of the rootkit safeguard can also prevent the system from running the user's own software changes, which makes UEFI controversial as a legacy BIOS replacement in the open hardware community.\nOther alternatives to the functionality of the \"Legacy BIOS\" in the x86 world include coreboot and libreboot.\nSome servers and workstations use a platform-independent Open Firmware (IEEE-1275) based on the Forth programming language; it is included with Sun's SPARC computers, IBM's RS/6000 line, and other PowerPC systems such as the CHRP motherboards, along with the x86-based OLPC XO-1.\nAs of at least 2015, Apple has removed legacy BIOS support from MacBook Pro computers. As such the BIOS utility no longer supports the legacy option, and prints \"Legacy mode not supported on this system\". In 2017, Intel announced that it would remove legacy BIOS support by 2020. Since 2019, new Intel platform OEM PCs no longer support the legacy option."}
{"id": "4474", "revid": "4898300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4474", "title": "Bose\u2013Einstein condensate", "text": "In condensed matter physics, a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate (BEC) is a state of matter (also called the fifth state of matter) which is typically formed when a gas of bosons at low densities is cooled to temperatures very close to absolute zero (-273.15\u00a0\u00b0C, -459.67\u00a0\u00b0F). Under such conditions, a large fraction of bosons occupy the lowest quantum state, at which point microscopic quantum mechanical phenomena, particularly wavefunction interference, become apparent macroscopically. A BEC is formed by cooling a gas of extremely low density (about one-hundred-thousandth (1/100,000) the density of normal air) to ultra-low temperatures.\nThis state was first predicted, generally, in 1924\u20131925 by Albert Einstein following and crediting a pioneering paper by Satyendra Nath Bose on the new field now known as quantum statistics.\nHistory.\nBose first sent a paper to Einstein on the quantum statistics of light quanta (now called photons), in which he derived Planck's quantum radiation law without any reference to classical physics. Einstein was impressed, translated the paper himself from English to German and submitted it for Bose to the \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Physik\", which published it in 1924. (The Einstein manuscript, once believed to be lost, was found in a library at Leiden University in 2005.) Einstein then extended Bose's ideas to matter in two other papers. The result of their efforts is the concept of a Bose gas, governed by Bose\u2013Einstein statistics, which describes the statistical distribution of identical particles with integer spin, now called bosons. Bosons, particles that include the photon as well as atoms such as helium-4 (), are allowed to share a quantum state. Einstein proposed that cooling bosonic atoms to a very low temperature would cause them to fall (or \"condense\") into the lowest accessible quantum state, resulting in a new form of matter.\nIn 1938, Fritz London proposed the BEC as a mechanism for superfluidity in and superconductivity.\nThe quest to produce a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate in the laboratory was stimulated by a paper published in 1976 by two Program Directors at the National Science Foundation (William Stwalley and Lewis Nosanow). This led to the immediate pursuit of the idea by four independent research groups; these were led by Isaac Silvera (University of Amsterdam), Walter Hardy (University of British Columbia), Thomas Greytak (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and David Lee (Cornell University).\nOn 5 June 1995, the first gaseous condensate was produced by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman at the University of Colorado at Boulder NIST\u2013JILA lab, in a gas of rubidium atoms cooled to 170 nanokelvins (nK). Shortly thereafter, Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT produced a Bose-Einstein Condensate in a gas of sodium atoms. For their achievements Cornell, Wieman, and Ketterle received the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics. These early studies founded the field of ultracold atoms, and hundreds of research groups around the world now routinely produce BECs of dilute atomic vapors in their labs.\nSince 1995, many other atomic species have been condensed, and BECs have also been realized using molecules, quasi-particles, and photons.\nCritical temperature.\nThis transition to BEC occurs below a critical temperature, which for a uniform three-dimensional gas consisting of non-interacting particles with no apparent internal degrees of freedom is given by:\nwhere:\nInteractions shift the value and the corrections can be calculated by mean-field theory.\nThis formula is derived from finding the gas degeneracy in the Bose gas using Bose\u2013Einstein statistics.\nDerivation.\nIdeal Bose gas.\nFor an ideal Bose gas we have the equation of state:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the per particle volume, formula_4 the thermal wavelength, formula_5 the fugacity and formula_6. It is noticeable that formula_7 is a monotonically growing function of formula_5 in formula_9, which are the only values for which the series converge.\nRecognizing that the second term on the right-hand side contains the expression for the average occupation number of the fundamental state formula_10, the equation of state can be rewritten as\nformula_11\nBecause the left term on the second equation must always be positive, formula_12 and because formula_13, a stronger condition is\nformula_14\nwhich defines a transition between a gas phase and a condensed phase. On the critical region it is possible to define a critical temperature and thermal wavelength:\nformula_15\nformula_16\nrecovering the value indicated on the previous section. The critical values are such that if formula_17 or formula_18 we are in the presence of a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate.\nUnderstanding what happens with the fraction of particles on the fundamental level is crucial. As so, write the equation of state for formula_19, obtaining\nformula_20 and equivalently formula_21.\nSo, if formula_22 the fraction formula_23 and if formula_24 the fraction formula_25. At temperatures near to absolute 0, particles tend to condensate in the fundamental state (state with momentum formula_26).\nModels.\nBose Einstein's non-interacting gas.\nConsider a collection of \"N\" non-interacting particles, which can each be in one of two quantum states, formula_27 and formula_28. If the two states are equal in energy, each different configuration is equally likely.\nIf we can tell which particle is which, there are formula_29 different configurations, since each particle can be in formula_27 or formula_28 independently. In almost all of the configurations, about half the particles are in formula_27 and the other half in formula_28. The balance is a statistical effect: the number of configurations is largest when the particles are divided equally.\nIf the particles are indistinguishable, however, there are only \"N\"+1 different configurations. If there are \"K\" particles in state formula_28, there are particles in state formula_27. Whether any particular particle is in state formula_27 or in state formula_28 cannot be determined, so each value of \"K\" determines a unique quantum state for the whole system.\nSuppose now that the energy of state formula_28 is slightly greater than the energy of state formula_27 by an amount \"E\". At temperature \"T\", a particle will have a lesser probability to be in state formula_28 by formula_41. In the distinguishable case, the particle distribution will be biased slightly towards state formula_27. But in the indistinguishable case, since there is no statistical pressure toward equal numbers, the most-likely outcome is that most of the particles will collapse into state formula_27.\nIn the distinguishable case, for large \"N\", the fraction in state formula_27 can be computed. It is the same as flipping a coin with probability proportional to \"p\"\u00a0=\u00a0exp(\u2212\"E\"/\"T\") to land tails.\nIn the indistinguishable case, each value of \"K\" is a single state, which has its own separate Boltzmann probability. So the probability distribution is exponential:\nFor large \"N\", the normalization constant \"C\" is . The expected total number of particles not in the lowest energy state, in the limit that formula_46, is equal to formula_47. It does not grow when \"N\" is large; it just approaches a constant. This will be a negligible fraction of the total number of particles. So a collection of enough Bose particles in thermal equilibrium will mostly be in the ground state, with only a few in any excited state, no matter how small the energy difference.\nConsider now a gas of particles, which can be in different momentum states labeled formula_48. If the number of particles is less than the number of thermally accessible states, for high temperatures and low densities, the particles will all be in different states. In this limit, the gas is classical. As the density increases or the temperature decreases, the number of accessible states per particle becomes smaller, and at some point, more particles will be forced into a single state than the maximum allowed for that state by statistical weighting. From this point on, any extra particle added will go into the ground state.\nTo calculate the transition temperature at any density, integrate, over all momentum states, the expression for maximum number of excited particles, :\nWhen the integral (also known as Bose-Einstein integral) is evaluated with factors of formula_51 and \u210f restored by dimensional analysis, it gives the critical temperature formula of the preceding section. Therefore, this integral defines the critical temperature and particle number corresponding to the conditions of negligible chemical potential formula_52. In Bose\u2013Einstein statistics distribution, formula_52 is actually still nonzero for BECs; however, formula_52 is less than the ground state energy. Except when specifically talking about the ground state, formula_52 can be approximated for most energy or momentum states as\u00a0formula_56.\nBogoliubov theory for weakly interacting gas.\nNikolay Bogoliubov considered perturbations on the limit of dilute gas, finding a finite pressure at zero temperature and positive chemical potential. This leads to corrections for the ground state. The Bogoliubov state has pressure (\"T\"\u00a0=\u00a00): formula_57.\nThe original interacting system can be converted to a system of non-interacting particles with a dispersion law.\nGross\u2013Pitaevskii equation.\nIn some simplest cases, the state of condensed particles can be described with a nonlinear Schr\u00f6dinger equation, also known as Gross\u2013Pitaevskii or Ginzburg\u2013Landau equation. The validity of this approach is actually limited to the case of ultracold temperatures, which fits well for the most alkali atoms experiments.\nThis approach originates from the assumption that the state of the BEC can be described by the unique wavefunction of the condensate formula_58. For a system of this nature, formula_59 is interpreted as the particle density, so the total number of atoms is formula_60\nProvided essentially all atoms are in the condensate (that is, have condensed to the ground state), and treating the bosons using mean field theory, the energy (E) associated with the state formula_58 is:\nMinimizing this energy with respect to infinitesimal variations in formula_58, and holding the number of atoms constant, yields the Gross\u2013Pitaevski equation (GPE) (also a non-linear Schr\u00f6dinger equation):\nwhere:\nIn the case of zero external potential, the dispersion law of interacting Bose\u2013Einstein-condensed particles is given by so-called Bogoliubov spectrum (for formula_65):\nThe Gross-Pitaevskii equation (GPE) provides a relatively good description of the behavior of atomic BEC's. However, GPE does not take into account the temperature dependence of dynamical variables, and is therefore valid only for formula_65.\nIt is not applicable, for example, for the condensates of excitons, magnons and photons, where the critical temperature is comparable to room temperature.\nNumerical solution.\nThe Gross-Pitaevskii equation is a partial differential equation in space and time variables. Usually it does not have analytic solution and\ndifferent numerical methods, such as split-step\nCrank-Nicolson\nand Fourier spectral methods, are used for its solution. There are different Fortran and C programs for its solution for contact interaction\nand long-range dipolar interaction which can be freely used.\nWeaknesses of Gross\u2013Pitaevskii model.\nThe Gross\u2013Pitaevskii model of BEC is a physical approximation valid for certain classes of BECs. By construction, the GPE uses the following simplifications: it assumes that interactions between condensate particles are of the contact two-body type and also neglects anomalous contributions to self-energy. These assumptions are suitable mostly for the dilute three-dimensional condensates. If one relaxes any of these assumptions, the equation for the condensate wavefunction acquires the terms containing higher-order powers of the wavefunction. Moreover, for some physical systems the amount of such terms turns out to be infinite, therefore, the equation becomes essentially non-polynomial. The examples where this could happen are the Bose\u2013Fermi composite condensates, effectively lower-dimensional condensates, and dense condensates and superfluid clusters and droplets. It is found that one has to go beyond the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. For example, the logarithmic term formula_68 found in the Logarithmic Schr\u00f6dinger equation must be added to the Gross-Pitaevskii equation along with a Ginzburg-Sobyanin contribution to correctly determine that the speed of sound scales as the cubic root of pressure for Helium-4 at very low temperatures in close agreement with experiment.\nOther.\nHowever, it is clear that in a general case the behaviour of Bose\u2013Einstein condensate can be described by coupled evolution equations for condensate density, superfluid velocity and distribution function of elementary excitations. This problem was in 1977 by Peletminskii et al. in microscopical approach. The Peletminskii equations are valid for any finite temperatures below the critical point. Years after, in 1985, Kirkpatrick and Dorfman obtained similar equations using another microscopical approach. The Peletminskii equations also reproduce Khalatnikov hydrodynamical equations for superfluid as a limiting case.\nSuperfluidity of BEC and Landau criterion.\nThe phenomena of superfluidity of a Bose gas and superconductivity of a strongly-correlated Fermi gas (a gas of Cooper pairs) are tightly connected to Bose\u2013Einstein condensation. Under corresponding conditions, below the temperature of phase transition, these phenomena were observed in helium-4 and different classes of superconductors. In this sense, the superconductivity is often called the superfluidity of Fermi gas. In the simplest form, the origin of superfluidity can be seen from the weakly interacting bosons model.\nExperimental observation.\nSuperfluid helium-4.\nIn 1938, Pyotr Kapitsa, John Allen and Don Misener discovered that helium-4 became a new kind of fluid, now known as a superfluid, at temperatures less than 2.17 K (the lambda point). Superfluid helium has many unusual properties, including zero viscosity (the ability to flow without dissipating energy) and the existence of quantized vortices. It was quickly believed that the superfluidity was due to partial Bose\u2013Einstein condensation of the liquid. In fact, many properties of superfluid helium also appear in gaseous condensates created by Cornell, Wieman and Ketterle (see below). Superfluid helium-4 is a liquid rather than a gas, which means that the interactions between the atoms are relatively strong; the original theory of Bose\u2013Einstein condensation must be heavily modified in order to describe it. Bose\u2013Einstein condensation remains, however, fundamental to the superfluid properties of helium-4. Note that helium-3, a fermion, also enters a superfluid phase (at a much lower temperature) which can be explained by the formation of bosonic Cooper pairs of two atoms (see also fermionic condensate).\nDilute atomic gases.\nThe first \"pure\" Bose\u2013Einstein condensate was created by Eric Cornell, Carl Wieman, and co-workers at JILA on 5 June 1995. They cooled a dilute vapor of approximately two thousand rubidium-87 atoms to below 170 nK using a combination of laser cooling (a technique that won its inventors Steven Chu, Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, and William D. Phillips the 1997 Nobel Prize in Physics) and magnetic evaporative cooling. About four months later, an independent effort led by Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT condensed sodium-23. Ketterle's condensate had a hundred times more atoms, allowing important results such as the observation of quantum mechanical interference between two different condensates. Cornell, Wieman and Ketterle won the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics for their achievements.\nA group led by Randall Hulet at Rice University announced a condensate of lithium atoms only one month following the JILA work. Lithium has attractive interactions, causing the condensate to be unstable and collapse for all but a few atoms. Hulet's team subsequently showed the condensate could be stabilized by confinement quantum pressure for up to about 1000 atoms. Various isotopes have since been condensed.\nVelocity-distribution data graph.\nIn the image accompanying this article, the velocity-distribution data indicates the formation of a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate out of a gas of rubidium atoms. The false colors indicate the number of atoms at each velocity, with red being the fewest and white being the most. The areas appearing white and light blue are at the lowest velocities. The peak is not infinitely narrow because of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle: spatially confined atoms have a minimum width velocity distribution. This width is given by the curvature of the magnetic potential in the given direction. More tightly confined directions have bigger widths in the ballistic velocity distribution. This anisotropy of the peak on the right is a purely quantum-mechanical effect and does not exist in the thermal distribution on the left. This graph served as the cover design for the 1999 textbook \"Thermal Physics\" by Ralph Baierlein.\nQuasiparticles.\nBose\u2013Einstein condensation also applies to quasiparticles in solids. Magnons, excitons, and polaritons have integer spin which means they are bosons that can form condensates.\nMagnons, electron spin waves, can be controlled by a magnetic field. Densities from the limit of a dilute gas to a strongly interacting Bose liquid are possible. Magnetic ordering is the analog of superfluidity. In 1999 condensation was demonstrated in antiferromagnetic , at temperatures as great as 14 K. The high transition temperature (relative to atomic gases) is due to the magnons' small mass (near that of an electron) and greater achievable density. In 2006, condensation in a ferromagnetic yttrium-iron-garnet thin film was seen even at room temperature, with optical pumping.\nExcitons, electron-hole pairs, were predicted to condense at low temperature and high density by Boer et al., in 1961. Bilayer system experiments first demonstrated condensation in 2003, by Hall voltage disappearance. Fast optical exciton creation was used to form condensates in sub-kelvin in 2005 on.\nPolariton condensation was first detected for exciton-polaritons in a quantum well microcavity kept at 5 K.\nIn zero gravity.\nIn June 2020, the Cold Atom Laboratory experiment on board the International Space Station successfully created a BEC. Although initially just a proof of function, early results showed that, in the microgravity of the ISS, about half of the atoms formed into a halo-like cloud around the main body of the BEC.\nPeculiar properties.\nVortices.\nAs in many other systems, vortices can exist in BECs. These can be created, for example, by \"stirring\" the condensate with lasers, or rotating the confining trap. The vortex created will be a quantum vortex. These phenomena are allowed for by the non-linear formula_59 term in the GPE. As the vortices must have quantized angular momentum the wavefunction may have the form formula_70 where formula_71 and formula_72 are as in the cylindrical coordinate system, and formula_73 is the angular quantum number (a.k.a. the \"charge\" of the vortex). Since the energy of a vortex is proportional to the square of its angular momentum, in trivial topology only formula_74 vortices can exist in the steady state; Higher-charge vortices will have a tendency to split into formula_74 vortices, if allowed by the topology of the geometry.\nAn axially symmetric (for instance, harmonic) confining potential is commonly used for the study of vortices in BEC. To determine formula_76, the energy of formula_58 must be minimized, according to the constraint formula_70. This is usually done computationally, however, in a uniform medium, the following analytic form demonstrates the correct behavior, and is a good approximation:\nHere, formula_80 is the density far from the vortex and formula_81, where formula_82 is the healing length of the condensate.\nA singly charged vortex (formula_74) is in the ground state, with its energy formula_84 given by\nwhere formula_86\u00a0is\u00a0the farthest distance from the vortices considered.(To obtain an energy which is well defined it is necessary to include this boundary formula_87.)\nFor multiply charged vortices (formula_88) the energy is approximated by\nwhich is greater than that of formula_73 singly charged vortices, indicating that these multiply charged vortices are unstable to decay. Research has, however, indicated they are metastable states, so may have relatively long lifetimes.\nClosely related to the creation of vortices in BECs is the generation of so-called dark solitons in one-dimensional BECs. These topological objects feature a phase gradient across their nodal plane, which stabilizes their shape even in propagation and interaction. Although solitons carry no charge and are thus prone to decay, relatively long-lived dark solitons have been produced and studied extensively.\nAttractive interactions.\nExperiments led by Randall Hulet at Rice University from 1995 through 2000 showed that lithium condensates with attractive interactions could stably exist up to a critical atom number. Quench cooling the gas, they observed the condensate to grow, then subsequently collapse as the attraction overwhelmed the zero-point energy of the confining potential, in a burst reminiscent of a supernova, with an explosion preceded by an implosion.\nFurther work on attractive condensates was performed in 2000 by the JILA team, of Cornell, Wieman and coworkers. Their instrumentation now had better control so they used naturally \"attracting\" atoms of rubidium-85 (having negative atom\u2013atom scattering length). Through Feshbach resonance involving a sweep of the magnetic field causing spin flip collisions, they lowered the characteristic, discrete energies at which rubidium bonds, making their Rb-85 atoms repulsive and creating a stable condensate. The reversible flip from attraction to repulsion stems from quantum interference among wave-like condensate atoms.\nWhen the JILA team raised the magnetic field strength further, the condensate suddenly reverted to attraction, imploded and shrank beyond detection, then exploded, expelling about two-thirds of its 10,000 atoms. About half of the atoms in the condensate seemed to have disappeared from the experiment altogether, not seen in the cold remnant or expanding gas cloud. Carl Wieman explained that under current atomic theory this characteristic of Bose\u2013Einstein condensate could not be explained because the energy state of an atom near absolute zero should not be enough to cause an implosion; however, subsequent mean field theories have been proposed to explain it. Most likely they formed molecules of two rubidium atoms; energy gained by this bond imparts velocity sufficient to leave the trap without being detected.\nThe process of creation of molecular Bose condensate during the sweep of the magnetic field throughout the Feshbach resonance, as well as the reverse process, are described by the exactly solvable model that can explain many experimental observations.\nCurrent research.\nCompared to more commonly encountered states of matter, Bose\u2013Einstein condensates are extremely fragile. The slightest interaction with the external environment can be enough to warm them past the condensation threshold, eliminating their interesting properties and forming a normal gas.\nNevertheless, they have proven useful in exploring a wide range of questions in fundamental physics, and the years since the initial discoveries by the JILA and MIT groups have seen an increase in experimental and theoretical activity. Examples include experiments that have demonstrated interference between condensates due to wave\u2013particle duality, the study of superfluidity and quantized vortices, the creation of bright matter wave solitons from Bose condensates confined to one dimension, and the slowing of light pulses to very low speeds using electromagnetically induced transparency. Vortices in Bose\u2013Einstein condensates are also currently the subject of analogue gravity research, studying the possibility of modeling black holes and their related phenomena in such environments in the laboratory. Experimenters have also realized \"optical lattices\", where the interference pattern from overlapping lasers provides a periodic potential. These have been used to explore the transition between a superfluid and a Mott insulator, and may be useful in studying Bose\u2013Einstein condensation in fewer than three dimensions, for example the Tonks\u2013Girardeau gas. Further, the sensitivity of the pinning transition of strongly interacting bosons confined in a shallow one-dimensional optical lattice originally observed by Haller has been explored via a tweaking of the primary optical lattice by a secondary weaker one. Thus for a resulting weak bichromatic optical lattice, it has been found that the pinning transition is robust against the\nintroduction of the weaker secondary optical lattice. Studies of vortices in nonuniform Bose\u2013Einstein condensates as well as excitatons of these systems by the application of moving repulsive or attractive obstacles, have also been undertaken. Within this context, the conditions for order and chaos in the dynamics of a trapped Bose\u2013Einstein condensate have been explored by the application of moving blue and red-detuned laser beams via the time-dependent Gross-Pitaevskii equation.\nBose\u2013Einstein condensates composed of a wide range of isotopes have been produced.\nCooling fermions to extremely low temperatures has created degenerate gases, subject to the Pauli exclusion principle. To exhibit Bose\u2013Einstein condensation, the fermions must \"pair up\" to form bosonic compound particles (e.g. molecules or Cooper pairs). The first molecular condensates were created in November 2003 by the groups of Rudolf Grimm at the University of Innsbruck, Deborah S. Jin at the University of Colorado at Boulder and Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT. Jin quickly went on to create the first fermionic condensate, working with the same system but outside the molecular regime.\nIn 1999, Danish physicist Lene Hau led a team from Harvard University which slowed a beam of light to about 17 meters per second using a superfluid. Hau and her associates have since made a group of condensate atoms recoil from a light pulse such that they recorded the light's phase and amplitude, recovered by a second nearby condensate, in what they term \"slow-light-mediated atomic matter-wave amplification\" using Bose\u2013Einstein condensates: details are discussed in \"Nature\".\nAnother current research interest is the creation of Bose\u2013Einstein condensates in microgravity in order to use its properties for high precision atom interferometry. The first demonstration of a BEC in weightlessness was achieved in 2008 at a drop tower in Bremen, Germany by a consortium of researchers led by Ernst M. Rasel from Leibniz University Hannover. The same team demonstrated in 2017 the first creation of a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate in space and it is also the subject of two upcoming experiments on the International Space Station.\nResearchers in the new field of atomtronics use the properties of Bose\u2013Einstein condensates when manipulating groups of identical cold atoms using lasers.\nIn 1970, BECs were proposed by Emmanuel David Tannenbaum for anti-stealth technology.\nIn 2020 researchers reported the development of superconducting BEC and that there appears to be a \"smooth transition between\" BEC and Bardeen-Cooper-Shrieffer regimes.\nDark matter.\nP. Sikivie and Q. Yang showed that cold dark matter axions form a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate by thermalisation because of gravitational self-interactions. Axions have not yet been confirmed to exist. However the important search for them has been greatly enhanced with the completion of upgrades to the Axion Dark Matter Experiment (ADMX) at the University of Washington in early 2018.\nIn 2014 a potential dibaryon was detected at the J\u00fclich Research Center at about 2380 MeV. The center claimed that the measurements confirm results from 2011, via a more replicable method. The particle existed for 10\u221223 seconds and was named d*(2380). This particle is hypothesized to consist of three up and three down quarks. It is theorized that groups of d-stars could form Bose\u2013Einstein condensates due to prevailing low temperatures in the early universe, and that BECs made of such hexaquarks with trapped electrons could behave like dark matter.\nIsotopes.\nThe effect has mainly been observed on alkaline atoms which have nuclear properties particularly suitable for working with traps. As of 2012, using ultra-low temperatures of formula_91 or below, Bose\u2013Einstein condensates had been obtained for a multitude of isotopes, mainly of alkali metal, alkaline earth metal,\nand lanthanide atoms (, , , , , , , , , , , , , , and ). Research was finally successful in hydrogen with the aid of the newly developed method of 'evaporative cooling'. In contrast, the superfluid state of below is not a good example, because the interaction between the atoms is too strong. Only 8% of atoms are in the ground state near absolute zero, rather than the 100% of a true condensate.\nThe bosonic behavior of some of these alkaline gases appears odd at first sight, because their nuclei have half-integer total spin. It arises from a subtle interplay of electronic and nuclear spins: at ultra-low temperatures and corresponding excitation energies, the half-integer total spin of the electronic shell and half-integer total spin of the nucleus are coupled by a very weak hyperfine interaction. The total spin of the atom, arising from this coupling, is an integer lower value. The chemistry of systems at room temperature is determined by the electronic properties, which is essentially fermionic, since room temperature thermal excitations have typical energies much higher than the hyperfine values."}
{"id": "4475", "revid": "41077267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4475", "title": "B (programming language)", "text": "B is a programming language developed at Bell Labs circa 1969. It was developed by Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie.\nB was derived from BCPL, and its name may possibly be a contraction of BCPL. Thompson's coworker Dennis Ritchie speculated that the name might be based on Bon, an earlier, but unrelated, programming language that Thompson designed for use on Multics.\nB was designed for recursive, non-numeric, machine-independent applications, such as system and language software. It was a typeless language, with the only data type being the underlying machine's natural memory word format, whatever that might be. Depending on the context, the word was treated either as an integer or a memory address.\nAs machines with ASCII processing became common, notably the DEC PDP-11 that arrived at Bell, support for character data stuffed in memory words became important. The typeless nature of the language was seen as a disadvantage, which led Thompson and Ritchie to develop an expanded version of the language supporting new internal and user-defined types, which became the C programming language.\nHistory.\nCirca 1969, Ken Thompson and later Dennis Ritchie developed B basing it mainly on the BCPL language Thompson used in the Multics project. B was essentially the BCPL system stripped of any component Thompson felt he could do without in order to make it fit within the memory capacity of the minicomputers of the time. The BCPL to B transition also included changes made to suit Thompson's preferences (mostly along the lines of reducing the number of non-whitespace characters in a typical program). Much of the typical ALGOL-like syntax of BCPL was rather heavily changed in this process. The assignment operator codice_1 changed to codice_2 and the equality operator codice_2 was replaced by codice_4.\nThompson added \"two-address assignment operators\" using codice_5 syntax to add y to x (in C the operator is written codice_6). This syntax came from Douglas McIlroy's implementation of TMG, in which B's compiler was first implemented (and it came to TMG from ALGOL 68's codice_7 syntax). Thompson went further by inventing the increment and decrement operators (codice_8 and codice_9). Their prefix or postfix position determines whether the value is taken before or after alteration of the operand. This innovation was not in the earliest versions of B. According to Dennis Ritchie, people often assumed that they were created for the auto-increment and auto-decrement address modes of the DEC PDP-11, but this is historically impossible as the machine didn't exist when B was first developed.\nThe semicolon version of the for loop was borrowed by Ken Thompson from the work of Stephen Johnson.\nB is typeless, or more precisely has one data type: the computer word. Most operators (e.g. codice_10, codice_11, codice_12, codice_13) treated this as an integer, but others treated it as a memory address to be dereferenced. In many other ways it looked a lot like an early version of C. There are a few library functions, including some that vaguely resemble functions from the standard I/O library in C. \nIn Thompson's words: \"B and the old old C were very very similar languages except for all the types [in C]\".\nEarly implementations were for the DEC PDP-7 and PDP-11 minicomputers using early Unix, and Honeywell 36-bit mainframes running the operating system GCOS. The earliest PDP-7 implementations compiled to threaded code, and Ritchie wrote a compiler using TMG which produced machine code. In 1970 a PDP-11 was acquired and threaded code was used for the port; an assembler, , and the B language itself were written in B to bootstrap the computer. An early version of yacc was produced with this PDP-11 configuration. Ritchie took over maintenance during this period.\nThe typeless nature of B made sense on the Honeywell, PDP-7 and many older computers, but was a problem on the PDP-11 because it was difficult to elegantly access the character data type that the PDP-11 and most modern computers fully support. Starting in 1971 Ritchie made changes to the language while converting its compiler to produce machine code, most notably adding data typing for variables. During 1971 and 1972 B evolved into \"New B\" (NB) and then C.\nB is almost extinct, having been superseded by the C language. However, it continues to see use on GCOS mainframes () \nand on certain embedded systems () for a variety of reasons: limited hardware in small systems, extensive libraries, tooling, licensing cost issues, and simply being good enough for the job. The highly influential AberMUD was originally written in B.\nExamples.\nThe following examples are from the \"Users' Reference to B\" by Ken Thompson:\n/* The following function will print a non-negative number, n, to\n the base b, where 2&lt;=b&lt;=10. This routine uses the fact that\n in the ASCII character set, the digits 0 to 9 have sequential\n code values. */\nprintn(n, b) {\n extrn putchar;\n auto a;\n /* Wikipedia note: auto declares a variable with automatic\n storage (lifetime is function scope), not \"automatic typing\"\n as in C++11. */\n if (a = n / b) /* assignment, not test for equality */\n printn(a, b); /* recursive */\n putchar(n % b + '0');\n/* The following program will calculate the constant e-2 to about\n 4000 decimal digits, and print it 50 characters to the line in\n groups of 5 characters. The method is simple output conversion\n of the expansion\n 1/2! + 1/3! + ... = .111...\n where the bases of the digits are 2, 3, 4, . . . */\nmain() {\n extrn putchar, n, v;\n auto i, c, col, a;\n i = col = 0;\n while(i&lt;n)\n v[i++] = 1;\n while(col&lt;2*n) {\n a = n+1 ;\n c = i = 0;\n while (i&lt;n) {\n c =+ v[i] *10;\n v[i++] = c%a;\n c =/ a--;\n putchar(c+'0');\n if(!(++col%5))\n putchar(col%50?' ': '*n');\n putchar('*n*n');\nv[2000];\nn 2000;"}
{"id": "4476", "revid": "33358156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4476", "title": "Beer\u2013Lambert law", "text": "The Beer\u2013Lambert law, also known as Beer's law, the Lambert\u2013Beer law, or the Beer\u2013Lambert\u2013Bouguer law relates the attenuation of light to the properties of the material through which the light is travelling. The law is commonly applied to chemical analysis measurements and used in understanding attenuation in physical optics, for photons, neutrons, or rarefied gases. In mathematical physics, this law arises as a solution of the BGK equation.\nHistory.\nThe law was discovered by Pierre Bouguer before 1729, while looking at red wine, during a brief vacation in Alentejo, Portugal. It is often attributed to Johann Heinrich Lambert, who cited Bouguer's \"Essai d'optique sur la gradation de la lumi\u00e8re\" (Claude Jombert, Paris, 1729)\u2014and even quoted from it\u2014in his \"Photometria\" in 1760. Lambert's law stated that the loss of light intensity when it propagates in a medium is directly proportional to intensity and path length. Much later, August Beer discovered another attenuation relation in 1852. Beer's law stated that the transmittance of a solution remains constant if the product of concentration and path length stays constant. The modern derivation of the Beer\u2013Lambert law combines the two laws and correlates the absorbance, which is the negative decadic logarithm of the transmittance, to both the concentrations of the attenuating species and the thickness of the material sample.\nMathematical formulation.\nA common and practical expression of the Beer\u2013Lambert law relates the optical attenuation of a physical material containing a single attenuating species of uniform concentration to the optical path length through the sample and absorptivity of the species. This expression is:\nWhere\nA more general form of the Beer\u2013Lambert law states that, for formula_6 attenuating species in the material sample,\nor equivalently that\nwhere\nIn the above equations, the transmittance formula_19 of material sample is related to its optical depth formula_20 and to its absorbance \"A\" by the following definition\nwhere\nAttenuation cross section and molar attenuation coefficient are related by\nand number density and amount concentration by\nwhere formula_26 is the Avogadro constant.\nIn case of \"uniform\" attenuation, these relations become\nor equivalently\nCases of \"non-uniform\" attenuation occur in atmospheric science applications and radiation shielding theory for instance.\nThe law tends to break down at very high concentrations, especially if the material is highly scattering. Absorbance within range of 0.2 to 0.5 is ideal to maintain linearity in the Beer\u2013Lambart law. If the radiation is especially intense, nonlinear optical processes can also cause variances. The main reason, however, is that the concentration dependence is in general non-linear and Beer's law is valid only under certain conditions as shown by derivation below. For strong oscillators and at high concentrations the deviations are stronger. If the molecules are closer to each other interactions can set in. These interactions can be roughly divided into physical and chemical interactions. Physical interaction do not alter the polarizability of the molecules as long as the interaction is not so strong that light and molecular quantum state intermix (strong coupling), but cause the attenuation cross sections to be non-additive via electromagnetic coupling. Chemical interactions in contrast change the polarizability and thus absorption. \nExpression with attenuation coefficient.\nThe Beer\u2013Lambert law can be expressed in terms of attenuation coefficient, but in this case is better called Lambert's law since amount concentration, from Beer's law, is hidden inside the attenuation coefficient. The (Napierian) attenuation coefficient formula_30 and the decadic attenuation coefficient formula_31 of a material sample are related to its number densities and amount concentrations as\nrespectively, by definition of attenuation cross section and molar attenuation coefficient. Then the Beer\u2013Lambert law becomes\nand\nIn case of \"uniform\" attenuation, these relations become\nor equivalently\nIn many cases, the attenuation coefficient does not vary with formula_40, in which case one does not have to perform an integral and can express the law as:\nwhere the attenuation is usually an addition of absorption coefficient formula_42 (creation of electron-hole pairs) or scattering (for example Rayleigh scattering if the scattering centers are much smaller than the incident wavelength). Also note that for some systems we can put formula_43 (1 over inelastic mean free path) in place of formula_30.\nDerivation.\nAssume that a beam of light enters a material sample. Define \"z\" as an axis parallel to the direction of the beam. Divide the material sample into thin slices, perpendicular to the beam of light, with thickness d\"z\" sufficiently small that one particle in a slice cannot obscure another particle in the same slice when viewed along the \"z\" direction. The radiant flux of the light that emerges from a slice is reduced, compared to that of the light that entered, by , where \"\u03bc\" is the (Napierian) attenuation coefficient, which yields the following first-order linear ODE:\nThe attenuation is caused by the photons that did not make it to the other side of the slice because of scattering or absorption. The solution to this differential equation is obtained by multiplying the integrating factor\nthroughout to obtain\nwhich simplifies due to the product rule (applied backwards) to\nIntegrating both sides and solving for \u03a6e for a material of real thickness \"\u2113\", with the incident radiant flux upon the slice and the transmitted radiant flux gives\nand finally\nSince the decadic attenuation coefficient \"\u03bc\"10 is related to the (Napierian) attenuation coefficient by , one also have\nTo describe the attenuation coefficient in a way independent of the number densities \"n\"\"i\" of the \"N\" attenuating species of the material sample, one introduces the attenuation cross section . \"\u03c3\"\"i\" has the dimension of an area; it expresses the likelihood of interaction between the particles of the beam and the particles of the specie \"i\" in the material sample:\nOne can also use the molar attenuation coefficients , where NA is the Avogadro constant, to describe the attenuation coefficient in a way independent of the amount concentrations of the attenuating species of the material sample:\nThe above assumption that the attenuation cross sections are additive is generally incorrect since electromagnetic coupling occurs if the distances between the absorbing entities is small. \nThe derivation of the concentration dependence of the absorbance is based on electromagnetic theory. Accordingly, the macroscopic polarization of a medium formula_54 derives from the microscopic dipole moments formula_55 in the absence of interaction according to\nwhere formula_57 is the dipole moment and formula_58 the number of absorbing entities per unit volume. On the other hand, macroscopic polarization is given by:\nHere formula_60represents the relative dielectric function, formula_61 the vacuum permittivity and formula_62 the electric field. After equating and solving for the relative dielectric function the result is:\nIf we take into account that the polarizability formula_64 is defined by formula_65 and that for the number of absorbers per unit volume formula_66holds, it follows that:\nAccording to Maxwell's wave equation the following relation between the complex dielectric function and the complex index of refraction function holds formula_68for isotropic and homogeneous media. Therefore:\nThe imaginary part of the complex index of refraction is the index of absorption formula_70. Employing the imaginary part of the polarizability formula_71and the approximation formula_72 it follows that:\nTaking into account the relation between formula_70 and formula_75, formula_76 it eventually follows that\nAs a consequence, the linear relation between concentration and absorbance is generally an approximation, and holds in particular only for small polarisabilities and weak absorptions, i.e. oscillator strengths. If we do not introduce the approximation formula_72, and employ instead the following relation between the imaginary part of the relative dielectric function and index of refraction and absorption formula_79 it can be seen that the molar attenuation coefficient depends on the index of refraction (which is itself concentration dependent):\nValidity.\nUnder certain conditions the Beer\u2013Lambert law fails to maintain a linear relationship between attenuation and concentration of analyte. These deviations are classified into three categories:\nThere are at least six conditions that need to be fulfilled in order for the Beer\u2013Lambert law to be valid. These are:\nIf any of these conditions are not fulfilled, there will be deviations from the Beer\u2013Lambert law.\nThe Beer\u2013Lambert law is not compatible with Maxwell's equations. Being strict, the law does not describe the transmittance through a medium, but the propagation within that medium. It can be made compatible with Maxwell's equations if the transmittance of a sample with solute is ratioed against the transmittance of the pure solvent which explains why it works so well in spectrophotometry. As this is not possible for pure media, the uncritical employment of the Beer\u2013Lambert law can easily generate errors of the order of 100% or more. In such cases it is necessary to apply the Transfer-matrix method. A detailed discussion of the incompatibility between the Beer\u2013Lambert law and Maxwell's equations can be found in the review The Bouguer\u2010Beer\u2010Lambert law: Shining light on the obscure.\nRecently it has also been demonstrated that Beer's law is a limiting law, since the absorbance is only approximately linearly depending on concentration. The reason is that the attenuation coefficient also depends on concentration and density, even in the absence of any interactions. These changes are, however, usually negligible except for high concentrations and large oscillator strength. For high concentrations and/or oscillator strengths, it is the integrated absorbance which is linearly depending on concentration, at least as long as there are no local field effects. If there are local field effects, they can be approximately taken into account by applying the Lorentz-Lorenz relation. In fact, Beer's law, i.e. the concentration dependence of absorbance, can be derived directly from the Lorentz-Lorenz relation (or, equivalently, the Clausius-Mossotti relation). Correspondingly, it can be demonstrated that there is a twin law according to which the change of the refractive index is approximately linear to the molar concentration for diluted solutions. This twin law can also be derived from the Lorentz-Lorenz relation.\nChemical analysis by spectrophotometry.\nThe Beer\u2013Lambert law can be applied to the analysis of a mixture by spectrophotometry, without the need for extensive pre-processing of the sample. An example is the determination of bilirubin in blood plasma samples. The spectrum of pure bilirubin is known, so the molar attenuation coefficient \"\u03b5\" is known. Measurements of decadic attenuation coefficient \"\u03bc\"10 are made at one wavelength \"\u03bb\" that is nearly unique for bilirubin and at a second wavelength in order to correct for possible interferences. The amount concentration \"c\" is then given by\nFor a more complicated example, consider a mixture in solution containing two species at amount concentrations \"c\"1 and \"c\"2. The decadic attenuation coefficient at any wavelength \"\u03bb\" is, given by\nTherefore, measurements at two wavelengths yields two equations in two unknowns and will suffice to determine the amount concentrations \"c\"1 and \"c\"2 as long as the molar attenuation coefficient of the two components, \"\u03b5\"1 and \"\u03b5\"2 are known at both wavelengths. This two system equation can be solved using Cramer's rule. In practice it is better to use linear least squares to determine the two amount concentrations from measurements made at more than two wavelengths. Mixtures containing more than two components can be analyzed in the same way, using a minimum of \"N\" wavelengths for a mixture containing \"N\" components.\nThe law is used widely in infra-red spectroscopy and near-infrared spectroscopy for analysis of polymer degradation and oxidation (also in biological tissue) as well as to measure the concentration of various compounds in different food samples. The carbonyl group attenuation at about 6 micrometres can be detected quite easily, and degree of oxidation of the polymer calculated.\nApplication for the atmosphere.\nThis law is also applied to describe the attenuation of solar or stellar radiation as it travels through the atmosphere. In this case, there is scattering of radiation as well as absorption. The optical depth for a slant path is , where \"\u03c4\" refers to a vertical path, \"m\" is called the relative airmass, and for a plane-parallel atmosphere it is determined as where \"\u03b8\" is the zenith angle corresponding to the given path. The Beer\u2013Lambert law for the atmosphere is usually written\nwhere each \"\u03c4\"\"x\" is the optical depth whose subscript identifies the source of the absorption or scattering it describes:\n\"m\" is the \"optical mass\" or \"airmass factor\", a term approximately equal (for small and moderate values of \"\u03b8\") to 1/cos \"\u03b8\", where \"\u03b8\" is the observed object's zenith angle (the angle measured from the direction perpendicular to the Earth's surface at the observation site). This equation can be used to retrieve \"\u03c4\"a, the aerosol optical thickness, which is necessary for the correction of satellite images and also important in accounting for the role of aerosols in climate."}
{"id": "4477", "revid": "18934599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4477", "title": "The Beach Boys", "text": "The Beach Boys are an American rock band formed in Hawthorne, California in 1961. The group's original lineup consisted of brothers Brian, Dennis, and Carl Wilson, their cousin Mike Love, and friend Al Jardine. Distinguished by their vocal harmonies, adolescent-oriented themes, and musical ingenuity, they are one of the most influential acts of the rock era. They drew on the music of older pop vocal groups, 1950s rock and roll, and black R&amp;B to create their unique sound, and under Brian's direction, often incorporated classical or jazz elements and unconventional recording techniques in innovative ways.\nOne of the first self-contained rock groups, the Beach Boys began as a garage band, managed by the Wilsons' father Murry, and with Brian as composer, arranger, producer, and \"de facto\" leader. In 1963, they had their first national hit with \"Surfin' U.S.A.\", beginning a string of top-ten singles that reflected a southern California youth culture of surfing, cars, and romance, dubbed the \"California sound\". They were one of the few American rock bands to sustain their commercial standing during the British Invasion. Starting with 1965's \"The Beach Boys Today!\", they abandoned beachgoing themes for more personal lyrics and ambitious orchestrations. In 1966, the \"Pet Sounds\" album and \"Good Vibrations\" single raised the group's prestige as rock innovators; they also formed Brother Records, Inc., a corporation that continues to oversee affairs related to the band's legacy. After scrapping the \"Smile\" album in 1967, Brian's contributions diminished due to his mental health issues.\nIn the late 1960s, the group's commercial momentum faltered in the US, and despite efforts to maintain an experimental sound, they were widely dismissed by the early rock music press. Carl took over as the band's musical leader, with records from this period later enjoying a cult following among fans. Following the mid-1970s, as their concerts drew larger audiences, the band transitioned into an oldies act. Dennis drowned in 1983 and Brian soon became estranged from the group. Following Carl's death from lung cancer in 1998, the band granted Love legal rights to tour under the group's name. In the early 2010s, the members briefly reunited for the band's 50th anniversary. , Brian and Jardine do not perform with Love's edition of the Beach Boys, but remain official members of the band.\nThe Beach Boys are one of the most critically acclaimed and commercially successful bands of all time, selling over 100 million records worldwide. They helped legitimize popular music as a recognized art form and influenced the development of music genres and movements such as psychedelia, power pop, progressive rock, punk, alternative, and lo-fi. Between the 1960s and 2010s, the group had 36 songs reach the US Top 40 (the most by an American band), with four topping the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the Beach Boys number 12 on its list of the greatest artists of all time. The founding members were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988. \nHistory.\n1958\u20131961: Formation.\nAt the time of his 16th birthday on June 20, 1958, Brian Wilson shared a bedroom with his brothers, Dennis and Carlaged 13 and 11, respectivelyin their family home in Hawthorne. He had watched his father, Murry Wilson, play piano, and had listened intently to the harmonies of vocal groups such as the Four Freshmen. After dissecting songs such as \"Ivory Tower\" and \"Good News\", Brian would teach family members how to sing the background harmonies. For his birthday that year, Brian received a reel-to-reel tape recorder. He learned how to overdub, using his vocals and those of Carl and their mother. Brian played piano with Carl and David Marks, an eleven-year-old longtime neighbor, playing guitars they had each received as Christmas presents.\nSoon Brian and Carl were avidly listening to Johnny Otis' KFOX radio show. Inspired by the simple structure and vocals of the rhythm and blues songs he heard, Brian changed his piano-playing style and started writing songs. Family gatherings brought the Wilsons in contact with cousin Mike Love. Brian taught Love's sister Maureen and a friend harmonies. Later, Brian, Love and two friends performed at Hawthorne High School. Brian also knew Al Jardine, a high school classmate. Brian suggested to Jardine that they team up with his cousin and brother Carl. Love gave the fledgling band its name: \"The Pendletones\", a pun on \"Pendleton\", a style of woolen shirt popular at the time. Dennis was the only avid surfer in the group, and he suggested that the group write songs that celebrated the sport and the lifestyle that it had inspired in Southern California. Brian finished the song, titled \"Surfin\", and with Mike Love, wrote \"Surfin' Safari\". Murry recalled, \"They had written a song called 'Surfin', which I never did like and still don't like, it was so rude and crude.\"\nMurry Wilson, who was a sometime songwriter, arranged for the Pendletones to meet his publisher Hite Morgan. He said: \"Finally, [Hite] agreed to hear it, and Mrs. Morgan said 'Drop everything, we're going to record your song. I think it's good.' And she's the one responsible.\" On September 15, 1961, the band recorded a demo of \"Surfin with the Morgans. A more professional recording was made on October 3, at World Pacific Studio in Hollywood. David Marks was not present at the session as he was in school that day. Murry brought the demos to Herb Newman, owner of Candix Records and Era Records, and he signed the group on December 8. When the single was released a few weeks later, the band found that they had been renamed \"the Beach Boys\". Candix wanted to name the group the Surfers until Russ Regan, a young promoter with Era Records, noted that there already existed a group by that name. He suggested calling them the Beach Boys. \"Surfin was a regional success for the West Coast, and reached number 75 on the national \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart. It was so successful that the number of unpaid orders for the single bankrupted Candix.\n1962\u20131967: Peak years.\n\"Surfin' Safari\", \"Surfin' U.S.A.\", \"Surfer Girl\", and \"Little Deuce Coupe\".\nBy this time the de facto manager of the Beach Boys, Murry landed the group's first paying gig (for which they earned $300) on New Year's Eve, 1961, at the Ritchie Valens Memorial Dance in Long Beach. In their earliest public appearances, the band wore heavy wool jacket-like shirts that local surfers favored before switching to their trademark striped shirts and white pants. In early 1962, Morgan requested that some of the members add vocals to a couple of instrumental tracks that he had recorded with other musicians. This led to the creation of the short-lived group Kenny &amp; the Cadets, which Brian led under the pseudonym \"Kenny\". The other members were Carl, Jardine, and the Wilsons' mother Audree. In February, Jardine left the Beach Boys to study dentistry and was replaced by David Marks. Murry remembered that after \"Surfin, the group had a difficult time being picked up by another label; \"they [all] thought [the group was] a one-shot record.\"\nAfter being turned down by Dot and Liberty, the Beach Boys signed a seven-year contract with Capitol Records. This was at the urging of Capitol executive and staff producer Nick Venet who signed the group, seeing them as the \"teenage gold\" he had been scouting for. On June 4, 1962, the Beach Boys debuted on Capitol with their second single, \"Surfin' Safari\" backed with \"409\". The release prompted national coverage in the June 9 issue of \"Billboard\", which praised Love's lead vocal and said the song had potential. \"Surfin' Safari\" rose to number 14 and found airplay in New York and Phoenix, a surprise for the label.\nThe Beach Boys completed their first album, \"Surfin' Safari\", with production credited to Nick Venet. Carl later denied that Venet had any significant role in the group's early music, saying that Venet \"would be in the booth, and he would call the take number, and that was about it. I wouldn't call him a musical heavy by any ... Brian didn't want anything to do with Venet.\" \"Surfin' Safari\", released in October 1962, was different from other rock albums of the time in that it consisted almost entirely of original songs, primarily written by Brian with Mike Love and friend Gary Usher. Another unusual feature of the Beach Boys was that, although they were marketed as \"surf music\", their repertoire bore little resemblance to the music of other surf bands, which was mainly instrumental and incorporated heavy use of spring reverb. For this reason, some of the Beach Boys' early local performances had young audience members throwing vegetables at the band, believing that the group were poseurs.\nIn January 1963, the Beach Boys recorded their first top-ten single, \"Surfin' U.S.A.\", which began their long run of highly successful recording efforts. It was during the sessions for this single that Brian made the production decision from that point on to use double tracking on the group's vocals, resulting in a deeper and more resonant sound. The album of the same name followed in March and reached number 2 on the \"Billboard\" charts. Its success propelled the group into a nationwide spotlight, and was vital to launching surf music as a national craze, albeit the Beach Boys' vocal approach to the genre, not the original instrumental style pioneered by Dick Dale. Biographer Luis Sanchez highlights the \"Surfin' U.S.A.\" single as a turning point for the band, \"creat[ing] a direct passage to California life for a wide teenage audience ... [and] a distinct Southern California sensibility that exceeded its conception as such to advance right to the front of American consciousness.\"\nThroughout 1963, and for the next few years, Brian produced a variety of singles for outside artists. Among these were the Honeys, a surfer trio that comprised sisters Diane and Marilyn Rovell with cousin Ginger Blake. Brian was convinced that they could potentially be a successful female counterpart to the Beach Boys, and he produced a number of singles for them, although they could not replicate the Beach Boys' popularity. He also attended some of Phil Spector's sessions at Gold Star Studios. His creative and songwriting interests were revamped upon hearing the Ronettes' 1963 song \"Be My Baby\", which was produced by Spector. The first time he heard the song was while driving, and was so overwhelmed that he had to pull over to the side of the road and analyze the chorus. Later, he reflected: \"I was unable to really think as a producer up until the time where I really got familiar with Phil Spector's work. That was when I started to design the experience to be a record rather than just a song.\"\n\"Surfer Girl\" marked the first time the group used outside musicians on a substantial portion of an LP. Many of them were the musicians Spector used for his Wall of Sound productions. To close 1963, the band released a standalone Christmas-themed single, \"Little Saint Nick\", backed with an a cappella rendition of the scriptural song \"The Lord's Prayer\". The A-side peaked at No. 3 on the US \"Billboard\" Christmas chart.\nBritish Invasion, \"Shut Down\", \"All Summer Long\", and \"Christmas Album\".\nThe surf music craze, along with the careers of nearly all surf acts, was slowly replaced by the British Invasion. Following a successful Australasian tour in January and February 1964, the Beach Boys returned home to face their new competition, the Beatles. Both groups shared the same record label in the US, and Capitol's support for the Beach Boys immediately began waning. This caused Murry to fight for the band at the label more than before, often visiting their offices without warning to \"twist executive arms\". Carl said that Phil Spector \"was Brian's favorite kind of rock; he liked [him] better than the early Beatles stuff. He loved the Beatles' later music when they evolved and started making intelligent, masterful music, but before that Phil was it.\" According to Mike Love, Carl followed the Beatles closer than anyone else in the band, while Brian was the most \"rattled\" by the Beatles and felt tremendous pressure to \"keep pace\" with them. For Brian, the Beatles ultimately \"eclipsed a lot [of what] we'd worked for ... [they] eclipsed the whole music world.\"\nBrian wrote his last surf song in April 1964. That month, during recording of the single \"I Get Around\", Murry was relieved of his duties as manager. He remained in close contact with the group and attempted to continue advising on their career decisions. When \"I Get Around\" was released in May, it would climb to No. 1 in the US and Canada, their first single to do so (also reaching the Top 10 in Sweden and the UK), proving that the Beach Boys could compete with contemporary British pop groups. In July, the album that the song appeared on, \"All Summer Long\", reached No. 4 in the US. \"All Summer Long\" introduced exotic textures to the Beach Boys' sound exemplified by the piccolos and xylophones of its title track. The album was a swan-song to the surf and car music the Beach Boys built their commercial standing upon. Later albums took a different stylistic and lyrical path. Before this, a live album, \"Beach Boys Concert\", was released in October to a four-week chart stay at No. 1, containing a set list of previously recorded songs and covers that they had not yet recorded.\nIn June 1964, Brian recorded the bulk of \"The Beach Boys' Christmas Album\" with a forty-one-piece studio orchestra in collaboration with Four Freshmen arranger Dick Reynolds. The album was a response to Phil Spector's \"A Christmas Gift for You\" (1963). Released in December, the Beach Boys' album was divided between five new, original Christmas-themed songs, and seven reinterpretations of traditional Christmas songs. It would be regarded as one of the finest holiday albums of the rock era. One single from the album, \"The Man with All the Toys\", was released, peaking at No. 6 on the US \"Billboard\" Christmas chart. On October 29, the Beach Boys performed for \"The T.A.M.I. Show\", a concert film intended to bring together a wide range of musicians for a one-off performance. The result was released to movie theaters one month later.\n\"Today!\", \"Summer Days\", and \"Party!\".\nBy the end of 1964, the stress of road travel, writing, and producing became too much for Brian. On December 23, while on a flight from Los Angeles to Houston, he suffered a panic attack. In January 1965, he announced his withdrawal from touring to concentrate entirely on songwriting and record production. For the rest of 1964 and into 1965, session musician Glen Campbell served as Brian's temporary replacement in concert. Carl took over as the band's musical director onstage.\nNow a full-time studio artist, Brian wanted to move the Beach Boys beyond their surf aesthetic, believing that their image was antiquated and distracting the public from his talents as a producer and songwriter. In the period following his resignation from touring, Brian put more distance between him and his bandmates, and began expanding his social circle to include a mix of worldly-minded friends, musicians, mystics and business advisers. He also took an increasing interest in the developing Los Angeles \"hip\" scene and in recreational drugs (particularly marijuana, LSD, and Desbutal). Musically, he said he began to \"take the things I learned from Phil Spector and use more instruments whenever I could. I doubled up on basses and tripled up on keyboards, which made everything sound bigger and deeper.\"\nReleased in March 1965, \"The Beach Boys Today!\" marked the first time the group experimented with the \"album-as-art\" form. The tracks on side one feature an uptempo sound that contrasts side two, which consists mostly of emotional ballads. Music writer Scott Schinder referenced its \"suite-like structure\" as an early example of the rock album format being used to make a cohesive artistic statement. Brian also established his new lyrical approach toward the autobiographical; journalist Nick Kent wrote that the subjects of Brian's songs \"were suddenly no longer simple happy souls harmonizing their sun-kissed innocence and dying devotion to each other over a honey-coated backdrop of surf and sand. Instead, they'd become highly vulnerable, slightly neurotic and riddled with telling insecurities.\" In the book \"Yeah Yeah Yeah: The Story of Modern Pop\", Bob Stanley remarked that \"Brian was aiming for Johnny Mercer but coming up proto-indie.\" In 2012, the album was voted 271 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.\nIn April 1965, Campbell's own career success pulled him from touring with the group. Columbia Records staff producer Bruce Johnston was asked to locate a replacement for Campbell; having failed to find one, Johnston himself became a full-time member of the band on May 19, 1965, first replacing Brian on the road and later contributing in the studio, beginning with the June 4 vocal sessions for \"California Girls\", which first appeared in the band's next album \"Summer Days (And Summer Nights!!)\" and eventually charted at number three in the US while the album went to number two. The album also included a reworked arrangement of \"Help Me, Rhonda\" which became the band's second number one US single in the spring of 1965.\nTo appease Capitol's demands for a Beach Boys LP for the 1965 Christmas season, Brian conceived \"Beach Boys' Party!\", a live-in-the-studio album consisting mostly of acoustic covers of 1950s rock and R&amp;B songs, in addition to covers of three Beatles songs, Bob Dylan's \"The Times They Are a-Changin'\", and idiosyncratic rerecordings of the group's earlier songs. The album was an early precursor of the \"unplugged\" trend. It included a cover of the Regents' song \"Barbara Ann\" which unexpectedly reached number two when released several weeks later. In November, the group released another top-twenty single, \"The Little Girl I Once Knew\". It was considered the band's most experimental statement thus far. The single continued Brian's ambitions for daring arrangements, featuring unexpected tempo changes and numerous false endings. It was the band's second single not to reach the US top ten since their 1962 breakthrough, peaking at number 20. According to Luis Sanchez, in 1965, Bob Dylan was \"rewriting the rules for pop success\" with his music and image, and it was at this juncture that Wilson \"led The Beach Boys into a transitional phase in an effort to win the pop terrain that had been thrown up for grabs.\"\n\"Pet Sounds\".\nIn January 1966, Wilson commenced recording sessions for the Beach Boys' forthcoming album \"Pet Sounds\", which was largely a collaboration with jingle writer Tony Asher. The album was a refinement of the themes and ideas that were introduced in \"Today!\". In some ways, the music was a jarring departure from their earlier style. Jardine explained that \"it took us quite a while to adjust to [the new material] because it wasn't music you could necessarily dance to\u2014it was more like music you could make love to.\" In \"The Journal on the Art of Record Production\", Marshall Heiser writes that \"Pet Sounds\" \"diverges from previous Beach Boys' efforts in several ways: its sound field has a greater sense of depth and 'warmth;' the songs employ even more inventive use of harmony and chord voicings; the prominent use of percussion is a key feature (as opposed to driving drum backbeats); whilst the orchestrations, at times, echo the quirkiness of 'exotica' bandleader Les Baxter, or the 'cool' of Burt Bacharach, more so than Spector's teen fanfares.\"\nFor \"Pet Sounds\", Brian desired to make \"a complete statement\", similar to what he believed the Beatles had done with their newest album \"Rubber Soul\", released in December 1965. Brian was immediately enamored with the album, given the impression that it had no filler tracks, a feature that was mostly unheard of at a time when 45\u00a0rpm singles were considered more noteworthy than full-length LPs. He later said: \"It didn't make me want to copy them but to be as good as them. I didn't want to do the same kind of music, but on the same level.\" Thanks to mutual connections, Brian was introduced to the Beatles' former press officer Derek Taylor, who was subsequently employed as the Beach Boys' publicist. Responding to Brian's request to reinvent the band's image, Taylor devised a promotion campaign with the tagline \"Brian Wilson is a genius\", a belief Taylor sincerely held. Taylor's prestige was crucial in offering a credible perspective to those on the outside, and his efforts are widely recognized as instrumental in the album's success in Britain.\nReleased on May 16, 1966, \"Pet Sounds\" was widely influential and raised the band's prestige as an innovative rock group. Early reviews for the album in the US ranged from negative to tentatively positive, and its sales numbered approximately 500,000 units, a drop-off from the run of albums that immediately preceded it. It was assumed that Capitol considered \"Pet Sounds\" a risk, appealing more to an older demographic than the younger, female audience upon which the Beach Boys had built their commercial standing. Within two months, the label capitulated by releasing the group's first greatest hits compilation, \"Best of the Beach Boys\", which was quickly certified gold by the RIAA. By contrast, \"Pet Sounds\" met a highly favorable critical response in Britain, where it reached number 2 and remained among the top-ten positions for six months. Responding to the hype, \"Melody Maker\" ran a feature in which many pop musicians were asked whether they believed that the album was truly revolutionary and progressive, or \"as sickly as peanut butter\". The author concluded that \"the record's impact on artists and the men behind the artists has been considerable.\"\nIn its evaluation of \"Pet Sounds\", the book \"101 Albums that Changed Popular Music\" (2009) calls it \"one of the most innovative recordings in rock\", and states that it \"elevated Brian Wilson from talented bandleader to studio genius\". In 1995, a panel of numerous musicians, songwriters and producers assembled by \"Mojo\" voted \"Pet Sounds\" the greatest record ever made. Paul McCartney frequently spoke of his affinity with the album, citing \"God Only Knows\" as his favorite song of all time, and crediting it with furthering his interest in devising melodic bass lines. He said that \"Pet Sounds\" was the primary impetus for the Beatles' 1967 album \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\". According to author Carys Wyn Jones, the interplay between the two groups during the \"Pet Sounds\" era remains one of the most noteworthy episodes in rock history. In 2003, when \"Rolling Stone\" magazine created its list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", the publication placed \"Pet Sounds\" second to honour its influence on the highest-ranked album, \"Sgt. Pepper\".\n\"Good Vibrations\" and \"Smile\".\nThroughout the summer of 1966, Brian concentrated on finishing the group's next single, \"Good Vibrations\". During the making of \"Pet Sounds\", Wilson started changing his writing process. Rather than going to the studio with a completed song, he would record a track containing a series of chord changes he liked, take an acetate disc home, and then compose the song's melody and write its lyrics. With \"Good Vibrations\", Wilson said, \"I had a lot of unfinished ideas, fragments of music I called 'feels.' Each feel represented a mood or an emotion I'd felt, and I planned to fit them together like a mosaic.\" Most of the song's structure and arrangement was written as it was recorded. Instead of working on whole songs with clear large-scale syntactical structures, Brian limited himself to recording short interchangeable fragments (or \"modules\"). Through the method of tape splicing, each fragment could then be assembled into a linear sequence, allowing any number of larger structures and divergent moods to be produced at a later time. Coming at a time when pop singles were usually recorded in under two hours, it was one of the most complex pop productions ever undertaken, with sessions for the song stretching over several months in four major Hollywood studios. It was also the most expensive single ever recorded to that point, with production costs estimated to be in the tens of thousands;\nIn the midst of \"Good Vibrations\" sessions, Wilson invited session musician and songwriter Van Dyke Parks to collaborate as lyricist for the Beach Boys' next album project, soon titled \"Smile\". Parks agreed. Wilson and Parks intended \"Smile\" to be a continuous suite of songs linked both thematically and musically, with the main songs linked together by small vocal pieces and instrumental segments that elaborated on the major songs' musical themes. It was explicitly American in style and subject, a conscious reaction to the overwhelming British dominance of popular music at the time. Some of the music incorporated chanting, cowboy songs, explorations in Indian and Hawaiian music, jazz, classical tone poems, cartoon sound effects, \"musique concr\u00e8te\", and yodeling. \"Saturday Evening Post\" writer Jules Siegel recalled that, on one October evening, Brian announced to his wife and friends that he was \"writing a teenage symphony to God\".\nRecording for \"Smile\" lasted about a year, from mid-1966 to mid-1967, and followed the same modular production approach as \"Good Vibrations\". Concurrently, Wilson planned many different multimedia side projects, such as a sound effects collage, a comedy album, and a \"health food\" album. Capitol did not support all these ideas, which led to the Beach Boys' desire to form their own label, Brother Records. According to biographer Steven Gaines, Wilson employed his newfound \"best friend\" David Anderle as head of the label.\nThroughout 1966, EMI flooded the UK market with previously unreleased Beach Boys albums, including \"Beach Boys' Party!\", \"The Beach Boys Today!\" and \"Summer Days (and Summer Nights!!)\", and \"Best of the Beach Boys\" was number two there for several weeks at the end of the year.&lt;ref name=\"Mawer/OCC\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Over the final quarter of 1966, the Beach Boys were the highest-selling album act in the UK, where for the first time in three years American artists broke the chart dominance of British acts. In 1971, \"Cue\" magazine wrote that, from mid-1966 to late 1967, the Beach Boys \"were among the vanguard in practically every aspect of the counter culture\".\nReleased on October 10, 1966, \"Good Vibrations\" was the Beach Boys' third US number-one single, reaching the top of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in December, and became their first number one in Britain. That month, the record was their first single certified gold by the RIAA. It came to be widely acclaimed as one of the greatest masterpieces of rock music. In December 1966, the Beach Boys were voted the top band in the world in the \"NME\"s annual readers' poll, ahead of the Beatles, the Walker Brothers, the Rolling Stones, and the Four Tops.\nThroughout the first half of 1967, the album's release date was repeatedly postponed as Brian tinkered with the recordings, experimenting with different takes and mixes, unable or unwilling to supply a final version. Meanwhile, he suffered from delusions and paranoia, believing on one occasion that the would-be album track \"\" caused a building to burn down. On January 3, 1967, Carl Wilson refused to be drafted for military service, leading to indictment and criminal prosecution, which he challenged as a conscientious objector. The FBI arrested him in April, and it took several years for courts to resolve the matter.\nAfter months of recording and media hype, \"Smile\" was shelved for personal, technical, and legal reasons. A February 1967 lawsuit seeking $255,000 (equivalent to $ in ) was launched against Capitol Records over neglected royalty payments. Within the lawsuit was an attempt to terminate the band's contract with Capitol before its November 1969 expiry. Many of Wilson's associates, including Parks and Anderle, disassociated themselves from the group by April 1967. Brian later said: \"Time can be spent in the studio to the point where you get so next to it, you don't know where you are with it\u2014you decide to just chuck it for a while.\"\nIn the decades following \"Smile\"s non-release, it became the subject of intense speculation and mystique and the most legendary unreleased album in pop music history. Many of the album's advocates believe that had it been released, it would have altered the group's direction and cemented them at the vanguard of rock innovators. In 2011, \"Uncut\" magazine staff voted \"Smile\" the \"greatest bootleg recording of all time\".\n1967\u20131969: Faltered popularity and Brian's reduced involvement.\nMonterey Pop cancellation.\nIn May 1967, the Beach Boys attempted to tour Europe with four extra musicians brought from the US, but were stopped by the British musicians' union. The tour went on without the extra support, and critics described their performances as \"amateurish\" and \"floundering\". Days after announcing that \"Smile\" was \"scrapped\", Derek Taylor terminated his employment with the group to focus his attention on organizing the Monterey Pop Festival, an event held in June that the Beach Boys declined to headline at the last minute. According to David Leaf, \"Monterey was a gathering place for the 'far out' sounds of the 'new' rock, and the Beach Boys in concert really had no exotic sounds (excepting 'Good Vibrations') to display. The net result of all this internal and external turmoil was that the Beach Boys didn't go to Monterey, and it is thought that this non-appearance was what really turned the 'underground' tide against them.\" Fan magazines speculated that the group was on the verge of breaking up.\nPublicly, the band said that they could not play Monterey because of Carl's military draft, but many of the people involved with the festival thought the group was simply too scared to compete with the \"new music\". Love later said, \"Carl was to appear in federal court the Tuesday after the concert, but for all we knew, they were going to arrest him again if he performed onstage. ... None of us were afraid to perform at Monterey.\" Steven Gaines wrote that the decision \"had a snowballing effect\" that came to represent \"a damning admission that [the Beach Boys] were washed up\". A controversy involving whether the band was to be taken as a serious rock group developed among critics and fans. Detractors called the band the \"Bleach Boys\" and \"the California Hypes\" as media focus shifted from Los Angeles to the happenings in San Francisco. On December 14, 1967, \"Rolling Stone\" co-founder and editor Jann Wenner printed an influential article that denounced the Beach Boys as \"just one prominent example of a group that has gotten hung up on trying to catch The Beatles. It's a pointless pursuit.\" The article had the effect of excluding the group among serious rock fans.\n\"Smiley Smile\" and \"Wild Honey\".\nThe Beach Boys were still under pressure and a contractual obligation to record and present an album to Capitol. Carl remembered: \"Brian just said, 'I can't do this. We're going to make a homespun version of [\"Smile\"] instead. We're just going to take it easy. I'll get in the pool and sing. Or let's go in the gym and do our parts.' That was \"Smiley Smile\".\" Sessions for the new album lasted from June to July 1967 at Brian's new makeshift home studio. Most of the album featured the Beach Boys playing their own instruments, rather than the session musicians employed in much of their previous work. It was the first album for which production was credited to the entire group instead of Brian alone. When asked if Brian was \"still the producer of \"Smiley Smile\"\", Carl answered, \"Most definitely.\"\nIn July, lead single \"Heroes and Villains\" was issued, arriving after months of public anticipation, and reached number 12 in US. It was met with general confusion and underwhelming reviews, and in the \"NME\", Jimi Hendrix famously dismissed it as a \"psychedelic barbershop quartet\". By then, the group's lawsuit with Capitol was resolved, and it was agreed that \"Smile\" would not be the band's next album. In August, the group embarked on a two-date tour of Hawaii. Bruce Johnston, who was absent for most of the \"Smiley Smile\" recording, did not accompany the group, but Brian did. The performances were filmed and recorded with the intention of releasing a live album, \"Lei'd in Hawaii\", which was also left unfinished and unreleased. In an interview that month, Brian said, \"I think rock n' roll\u2014the pop scene\u2014is happening. It's great. But I think basically the Beach Boys are squares. We're not happening.\"\n\"Smiley Smile\" was released on September 18, 1967, and peaked at number 41 in the US, making it their worst-selling album to that date. It began a string of underperforming Beach Boys albums that lasted until 1974. When released in the UK in November, it performed better, reaching number 9. Critics and fans were generally underwhelmed by the album. According to Scott Schinder, the album was released to \"general incomprehension. While \"Smile\" may have divided the Beach Boys' fans had it been released, \"Smiley Smile\" merely baffled them.\" Over the years, the album gathered a reputation as one of the best \"chill-out\" albums to listen to during an LSD comedown. In 1974, \"NME\" voted it the 64th-greatest album of all time.\nThe Beach Boys immediately recorded a new album, \"Wild Honey\", an excursion into soul music. Carl described it as \"music for Brian to cool out by. He was still very spaced.\" The album was a self-conscious attempt by the Beach Boys to \"regroup\" themselves as a rock band in opposition to their more orchestral affairs of the past. Its music differs in many ways from previous Beach Boys records: it contains very little group singing compared to previous albums, and mainly features Brian singing at his piano. Again, the Beach Boys recorded mostly at his home studio. Love reflected that \"Wild Honey\" was \"completely out of the mainstream for what was going on at that time, which was all hard rock/psychedelic music. It just didn't have anything to do with what was going on, and that was the idea.\"\n\"Wild Honey\" was released on December 18, 1967, in competition with the Beatles' \"Magical Mystery Tour\" and the Rolling Stones' \"Their Satanic Majesties Request\". It had a lower chart placing than \"Smiley Smile\" and remained on the charts for only 15 weeks. As with \"Smiley Smile\", contemporary critics viewed it as inconsequential, and it alienated fans whose expectations had been raised by \"Smile\". That month, Mike Love told a British journalist: \"Brian has been rethinking our recording program and in any case we all have a much greater say nowadays in what we turn out in the studio.\" \"Wild Honey\" remained the last Beach Boys album to feature Brian as a primary composer until 1977. Over the coming months, its non-conforming approach was echoed in albums released by Bob Dylan (\"John Wesley Harding\"), the Kinks (\"Village Green Preservation Society\"), and the Byrds (\"The Notorious Byrd Brothers\").\n\"Friends\", \"20/20\", and Manson affair.\nThe Beach Boys were at their lowest popularity in the late 1960s, and their cultural standing was especially worsened by their public image, which remained incongruous with their peers' \"heavier\" music. Capitol continued to bill them as \"America's Top Surfin' Group!\" and expected Brian to write more beachgoing songs for the yearly summer markets. From 1968 onward, his songwriting output declined substantially, but the public narrative of \"Brian as leader\" continued. The group also stopped wearing their longtime striped-shirt stage uniforms in favor of matching white, polyester suits that resembled a Las Vegas show band's.\nAfter meeting Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at a UNICEF Variety Gala in Paris, Love and other high-profile celebrities such as the Beatles and Donovan traveled to Rishikesh, India, in February\u2013March 1968. The following Beach Boys album, \"Friends\", had songs influenced by the Transcendental Meditation the Maharishi taught. In support of \"Friends\", Love arranged for the Beach Boys to tour with the Maharishi in the U.S.. Starting on May 3, 1968, the tour lasted five shows and was canceled when the Maharishi withdrew to fulfill film contracts. Because of disappointing audience numbers and the Maharishi's withdrawal, 24 tour dates were canceled at a cost estimated at $250,000. \"Friends\", released on June 24, peaked at number 126 in the US. In August, Capitol issued a collection of Beach Boys backing tracks, \"Stack-o-Tracks\". It was the first Beach Boys LP that failed to chart in the US and UK.\nIn June 1968, Dennis befriended Charles Manson, an aspiring singer-songwriter, and their relationship lasted for several months. Dennis bought him time at Brian's home studio, where recording sessions were attempted while Brian stayed in his room. Dennis then proposed that Manson be signed to Brother Records. Brian reportedly disliked Manson, and a deal was never made. In July 1968, the group released a standalone single, \"Do It Again\", in the style of their earlier songs. Around this time, Brian admitted himself to a psychiatric hospital. His bandmates wrote and produced material in his absence. To complete their contract with Capitol, they produced one more album, \"20/20\", released in January 1969. It consisted mostly of outtakes and leftovers from recent albums; Brian produced virtually none of the newer recordings. In 1976, Dennis called it \"the only letdown of the Beach Boys' career that embarrassed me through and through ... we had to find things that Brian worked on and try and piece it together. That's when [he had] no involvement at all.\"\nThe Beach Boys recorded one song by Manson without his involvement: \"Cease to Exist\", rewritten as \"Never Learn Not to Love\", which was on \"20/20\" but first released as the B-side of a single one month earlier. Manson was enthused by the idea of the group recording one of his songs, but after Manson accrued a large monetary debt to the group, Dennis deliberately omitted his credit on its release while also altering the song's arrangement and lyrics, which angered Manson. As his cult of followers took over Dennis's home, Dennis gradually distanced himself from Manson. According to Leaf, \"The entire Wilson family reportedly feared for their lives.\"\nIn August, the Manson Family committed the Tate\u2013LaBianca murders. According to Jon Parks, the band's tour manager, it was widely suspected in the Hollywood community that Manson was responsible for the murders, and it had been known that Manson had been involved with the Beach Boys, causing the band to be viewed as pariahs for a time. In November, police apprehended Manson, and his connection with the Beach Boys received media attention. He was later convicted for several counts of murder and conspiracy to murder.\nSelling of the band's publishing.\nIn April 1969, the band revisited its 1967 lawsuit against Capitol after it alleged an audit revealed the band was owed over $2 million for unpaid royalties and production duties. In May, Brian told the music press that the group's funds were depleted to the point that it was considering filing for bankruptcy at the end of the year, which \"Disc &amp; Music Echo\" called \"stunning news\" and a \"tremendous shock on the American pop scene\". Brian hoped that the success of a forthcoming single, \"Break Away\", would mend the financial issues. The song, written and produced by Brian and Murry, reached number 63 in the US and number 6 in the UK, and Brian's remarks to the press ultimately thwarted long-simmering contract negotiations with Deutsche Grammophon. The group's Capitol contract expired two weeks later with one more album still due, after which the label deleted the Beach Boys' catalog from print, effectively cutting off their royalty flow. The lawsuit was later settled in their favor and they acquired the rights to their post-1965 catalog.\nIn August, Sea of Tunes, the Beach Boys' catalog, was sold to Irving Almo Music for $700,000 (equivalent to $ in ). According to his wife, Marilyn Wilson, Brian was devastated by the sale. Over the years, the catalog generated more than $100 million in publishing royalties, none of which Murry or the band members ever received.\n1970\u20131978: Reprise era.\n\"Sunflower\" and \"Surf's Up\".\nThe group was signed to Reprise Records in 1970. Scott Schinder described the label as \"probably the hippest and most artist-friendly major label of the time.\" The deal was brokered by Van Dyke Parks, who was then employed as a multimedia executive at Warner Music Group. Reprise's contract stipulated Brian's proactive involvement with the band in all albums By the time the Beach Boys' tenure ended with Capitol in 1969, they had sold 65 million records worldwide, closing the decade as the most commercially successful American group in popular music.\nAfter recording over 30 different songs and going through several album titles, their first LP for Reprise, \"Sunflower\", was released on August 31, 1970. \"Sunflower\" featured a strong group presence with significant writing contributions from all band members. Brian was active during this period, writing or co-writing seven of \"Sunflower\"'s 12 songs and performing at half of the band's domestic concerts in 1970. The album received critical acclaim in both the US and the UK. This was offset by the album reaching only number 151 on US record charts during a four-week stay, becoming the worst-selling Beach Boys album at that point. In his \"Rolling Stone\" review, Jim Miller praised the album as \"without doubt the best Beach Boys album in recent memory, a stylistically coherent \"tour de force\"\", but mused, \"It makes one wonder though whether anyone still listens to their music, or could give a shit about it.\" In the UK, the album reached 29. Fans generally regard the LP as the Beach Boys' finest post-\"Pet Sounds\" album. In 2003, it placed at number 380 on \"Rolling Stone\"s \"Greatest Albums of All Time\" list.\nIn 1969, Brian opened a short-lived health food store, the Radiant Radish. While working there, he met journalist and radio presenter Jack Rieley. Rieley spoke with Brian for a radio interview, with the subject eventually turning to the unreleased song \"Surf's Up\", a track that had taken on notoriety since \"Smile\"'s demise three years earlier. Brian did not feel it should be released. In August 1970, Rieley offered a six-page memo ruminating on how to stimulate \"increased record sales and popularity for The Beach Boys.\" Within the next few months, the Beach Boys hired him as their manager. One of his initiatives was to encourage the band to record songs featuring more socially conscious lyrics. He also requested the completion of \"Surf's Up\" and arranged a guest appearance at a Grateful Dead concert at Bill Graham's Fillmore East in April 1971 to foreground the Beach Boys' transition into the counterculture. During this time, the group ceased wearing matching uniforms on stage.\nIn July 1971, the Beach Boys filmed a concert for ABC-TV in Central Park. It aired as \"Good Vibrations from Central Park\" on August 19, 1971. The concert also featured performances by Boz Scaggs, Kate Taylor, Carly Simon, and Ike &amp; Tina Turner.\nOn August 30, 1971, the band released \"Surf's Up\", which included the title track. The album was moderately successful, reaching the US top 30, a marked improvement over their recent releases. While the record charted, the Beach Boys added to their renewed fame by performing a near-sellout set at Carnegie Hall; their live shows during this era included reworked arrangements of many of their previous songs, with their set lists culling from \"Pet Sounds\" and \"Smile\". Music writer Domenic Priore noted, \"They basically played what they could have played at the Monterey Pop Festival in the summer of 1967.\" Dennis injured his hand during the \"Surf's Up\" sessions, leaving him temporarily unable to play the drums.\n\"So Tough\", \"Holland\", and greatest hits LPs.\nJohnston left the band in 1972. Ricky Fataar and Blondie Chaplin joined the band, and in the new line up they released Carl and the Passions - So Tough, followed by Holland. Reprise felt the album \"Holland\" needed a strong single. This resulted in \"Sail On, Sailor\", a collaboration between Brian, Tandyn Almer, Ray Kennedy, Rieley and Parks, featuring a soulful lead vocal by Chaplin. Reprise approved, and the resulting album was released in January 1973, peaking at number 37. Brian's musical children's story, \"Mount Vernon and Fairway (A Fairy Tale)\", was included as a bonus EP.\nIn August 1973, the 41-song soundtrack to \"American Graffiti\" was released, including the band's early songs \"Surfin' Safari\" and \"All Summer Long\". The album was a catalyst in creating a wave of nostalgia that reintroduced the Beach Boys into contemporary American consciousness. Chaplin also left in late 1973 after an argument with Steve Love, the band's business manager (and Mike's brother). In June 1974, Capitol issued \"Endless Summer\", the band's first major pre-\"Pet Sounds\" greatest hits package. It rose to the top of the \"Billboard\" charts, staying on the charts for two years, the longest of any Beach Boys release. Capitol followed up with a second compilation, \"Spirit of America\", which also sold well. With these compilations, the Beach Boys became one of the most popular acts in rock, propelling themselves from opening for Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young to headliners selling out basketball arenas in a matter of weeks. \"Rolling Stone\" named the Beach Boys the \"Band of the Year\" for 1974.\nFataar remained with the band until 1974, when he was offered a chance to join a new group led by future Eagles member Joe Walsh. Chaplin's replacement, James William Guercio, started offering the group career advice that resulted in his becoming their new manager. A new album was attempted, with sessions held at Guercio's Caribou Ranch recording studio in Colorado and at the band's Brother Studios in L.A. Only a scattering of material from these sessions saw eventual release. The impetus had shifted from recording new material to large venue touring, and under Guercio, the Beach Boys staged a successful 1975 joint concert tour with Chicago, with each group performing some of the other's songs, including their previous year's collaboration on Chicago's single \"Wishing You Were Here\". While their concerts continuously sold out, the stage act slowly changed from a contemporary presentation followed by oldies encores to an show made up of mostly pre-1967 music.\n\"Brian's Back!\", \"15 Big Ones\", and \"Love You\".\nBrian spent the majority of two years secluded in the chauffeur's quarters of his home, abusing alcohol, taking drugs (including heroin), overeating, and exhibiting other self-destructive behavior. Although increasingly reclusive during the day, he spent many nights at singer Danny Hutton's house, fraternizing with colleagues such as Alice Cooper and Iggy Pop. In 1975, Brian attempted to join California Music, a Los Angeles collective that included Gary Usher, Curt Boettcher, and Bruce Johnston. The Beach Boys' recent \"Endless Summer\" compilation was selling well, and the band was touring nonstop, making them the biggest live draw in the US. Guercio was then fired by the group and replaced by Steve Love, who urged the group to encourage Brian to return to the production helm. According to Steve, \"We were under contract with Warner Bros. and we couldn't have him going on a tangent. If he was going to be productive, it's gotta be for the Beach Boys.\" Already tired of working with the Beach Boys, Brian was then legally ousted from California Music to focus his attention on the band. In October, Marilyn persuaded him to admit himself to the care of psychotherapist Eugene Landy, who kept him from indulging in substance abuse with constant supervision.\nAt the end of January 1976, the Beach Boys returned to the studio with an apprehensive Brian producing once again. At the time, he felt, \"It was a little scary because [the Beach Boys and I] weren't as close. We had drifted apart personality-wise. A lot of the guys had developed new personalities through meditation. ... But we went into the studio with the attitude that we had to get it done.\" Landy supervised group meetings, and discussions over each song for the record reportedly lasted up to eight hours. Brian decided the band should do an album of rock and roll and doo wop standards. Carl and Dennis disagreed, feeling that an album of originals was far more ideal, while Love and Jardine wanted the album out as quickly as possible. Brian's production role was undermined as group members overdubbed and remixed tracks without his knowledge, to fight against his desire for a rough, unfinished sound. He later attributed his hoarse voice on the album to a bout of laryngitis.\nReleased on July 5, 1976, \"15 Big Ones\" was generally disliked by fans and critics upon release. Its lead single, a cover of Chuck Berry's \"Rock and Roll Music\", peaked at number five. Carl and Dennis disparaged the album to the press. Dennis said, \"It was a great mistake to put Brian in full control. He was always the absolute producer, but little did he know that in his absence, people grew up, people became as sensitive as the next guy. Why do I relinquish my rights as an artist? The whole process was a little bruising.\" Brian said, \"the new album is nothing too deep\", but remained hopeful that their next release would be on a par with \"Good Vibrations\". An August 1976 NBC-TV special, \"The Beach Boys\", was produced by \"Saturday Night Live\" creator Lorne Michaels, and featured appearances by \"SNL\" cast members John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd. In December, Brian was released from Landy's program due to disputes over Landy's fee.\nFrom late 1976 to early 1977, Brian made sporadic public appearances and produced the band's next album, \"The Beach Boys Love You\", a collection of 14 songs mostly written, arranged and produced alone. He later called \"Love You\" one of his favorite Beach Boys releases, saying, \"That's when it all happened for me. That's where my heart lies.\" \nThe album's engineer, Earle Mankey, compared it to the surrealist film \"Eraserhead\", and said that while it was \"lighthearted\" on the surface, it was intended to be a \"serious, autobiographical work\". In \"Pitchfork\", D. Erik Kempke wrote that the album \"stands in sharp contrast to the albums that preceded and followed it, because it was a product of genuine inspiration on Brian Wilson's part, with little outside interference.\" Al Jardine credited Carl and Dennis with having \"the most to do with that album ... [they were] paying tribute to their brother.\"\nReleased on April 11, 1977, \"Love You\" peaked at number 53 in the US and number 28 in the UK. It was divided between fans and critics. Some saw the album as a work of \"eccentric genius\" whereas others dismissed it as \"childish and trivial\". In a review for \"Circus\", Lester Bangs called the Beach Boys \"a diseased bunch of motherfuckers if ever there was one ... But the miracle is that the Beach Boys have made that disease sound like the literal babyflesh pink of health.\" The album was released weeks after the band signed a new record deal with CBS. Gaines hypothesized that the lack of promotion Reprise put into \"Love You\" was a byproduct of the falling out between artist and label.\nBand tensions, solo careers, and scrapped albums.\nAfter \"Love You\" was released, Brian assembled \"Adult/Child\", an unreleased effort largely consisting of songs written by Brian from 1976 and 1977 with select big band arrangements by Dick Reynolds. Although publicized as the Beach Boys' next release, \"Adult/Child\" caused tension within the group and was ultimately shelved. Following this period, his concert appearances with the band gradually diminished and their performances were occasionally erratic. The internal wrangling came to a head after a show at Central Park on September 1, 1977, when the band effectively split into two camps; Dennis and Carl Wilson on one side, Mike Love and Al Jardine on the other with Brian remaining neutral. Following a confrontation on an airport tarmac, Dennis declared to \"Rolling Stone\" on September 3 that he had left the band: \"It was Al Jardine who really knifed me in the heart when he said they didn't need me. That was the clincher. And all I told him was that he couldn't play more than four chords. They kept telling me I had my solo album now [\"Pacific Ocean Blue\"], like I should go off in a corner and leave the Beach Boys to them. The album really bothers them. They don't like to admit it's doing so well; they never even acknowledge it in interviews.\"\nThe band broke up for two and a half weeks, until a meeting on September 17 at Brian's house. In light of a potential new Caribou Records contract the parties negotiated a settlement resulting in Love gaining control of Brian's vote in the group, allowing Love and Jardine to outvote Carl and Dennis Wilson on any matter. Dennis started to withdraw from the group to focus on his second solo album, \"Bambu\". The album was shelved just as alcoholism and marital problems overcame all three Wilson brothers. Carl appeared intoxicated during concerts (especially at appearances for their 1978 Australia tour) and Brian gradually slid back into addiction and an unhealthy lifestyle.\nTheir last album for Reprise, \"M.I.U. Album\" (1978), was recorded at Maharishi International University in Iowa at the suggestion of Love. Dennis and Carl made limited contributions; the album was mostly produced by Jardine and Ron Altbach, with Brian credited as \"executive producer\". \"M.I.U.\" was largely a contractual obligation to finish out their association with Reprise, who likewise did not promote the result.\n1980s: Dennis' death, Brian's estrangement, and \"Kokomo\".\nIn an April 1980 interview, Carl reflected that \"the last two years have been the most important and difficult time of our career. We were at the ultimate crossroads. We had to decide whether what we had been involved in since we were teenagers had lost its meaning. We asked ourselves and each other the difficult questions we'd often avoided in the past.\" By the next year, he left the touring group because of unhappiness with the band's nostalgia format and lackluster live performances, subsequently pursuing a solo career. He stated: \"I haven't quit the Beach Boys but I do not plan on touring with them until they decide that 1981 means as much to them as 1961.\"\nCarl returned in May 1982, after approximately 14 months of being away, on the condition that the group reconsider their rehearsal and touring policies and refrain from \"Las Vegas-type\" engagements. Later that year, Brian overdosed on a combination of alcohol, cocaine, and other psychoactive drugs. His former therapist Eugene Landy was once more employed, and a more radical program was undertaken to try to restore Brian to health. This involved removing him from the group on November 5, 1982, at the behest of Carl, Love, and Jardine, in addition to putting him on a rigorous diet and health regimen. Coupled with long, extreme counseling sessions, this therapy was successful in bringing Brian back to physical health, slimming down from to .\nFrom 1980 through 1982, the Beach Boys and the Grass Roots performed Independence Day concerts at the National Mall in Washington, D.C., attracting large crowds. However, in April 1983, James G. Watt, President Ronald Reagan's Secretary of the Interior, banned Independence Day concerts on the Mall by such groups. Watt said that \"rock bands\" that had performed on the Mall on Independence Day in 1981 and 1982 had encouraged drug use and alcoholism and had attracted \"the wrong element\", who would steal from attendees. During the ensuing uproar, which included over 40,000 complaints to the Department of the Interior, the Beach Boys stated that the Soviet Union, which had invited them to perform in Leningrad in 1978, \"...obviously ... did not feel that the group attracted the wrong element.\" Vice President George H. W. Bush said of the Beach Boys, \"They're my friends and I like their music\". Watt later apologized to the band after learning that President Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan were fans. White House staff presented Watt with a plaster foot with a hole in it, showing that he had \"shot himself in the foot\".\nIn 1983, tensions between Dennis and Love escalated so high that each obtained a restraining order against the other. With the rest of the band fearing that he would end up like Brian, Dennis was given an ultimatum after his last performance in November 1983 to check into rehab for his alcohol problems or be banned from performing live with them. Dennis checked into rehab for his chance to get sober, but on December 28, 1983, he drowned at the age of 39 in Marina del Rey while diving from a friend's boat trying to recover items that he had previously thrown overboard in fits of rage.\nBetween 1983 and 1986, Landy charged Brian about $430,000 annually. When he requested more money, Carl was obliged to give away a quarter of Brian's publishing royalties. As Brian's recovery consolidated, he stopped working with the Beach Boys on a regular basis. Commenting on his relationship to the band in 1988, Brian said that he avoided his family at Landy's suggestion, and that \"Although we stay together as a group, as people we're a far cry from friends.\" In the mid 1980s, Landy stated, \"I influence all of [Brian]'s thinking. I'm practically a member of the band\u00a0... [We're] partners in life.\" Brian later responded to allegations with, \"People say that Dr. Landy runs my life, but the truth is, I'm in charge.\" Mike Love denied Landy's accusation that he and the band were keeping Brian from participating with the group, and later wrote that Landy's \"goal ... was to destroy us ... [and become] the sole custodian of Brian's career and legacy.\"\nThe Beach Boys spent the next several years touring, often playing in front of large audiences, and recording songs for film soundtracks and various artists compilations. In 1988, they unexpectedly claimed their first U.S. number one single in 22 years with \"Kokomo\", which topped the chart for one week. It appeared in the film \"Cocktail\". They released the album \"Still Cruisin\"', which went platinum in the US.\n1990s: Lawsuits and death of Carl.\nLove filed a defamation lawsuit against Brian due to how he was presented in Brian's 1992 memoir \"\". Its publisher HarperCollins settled the suit for $1.5 million. He said that the suit allowed his lawyer \"to gain access to the transcripts of Brian's interviews with his [book] collaborator, Todd Gold. Those interviews affirmed\u2014according to Brian\u2014that I had been the inspiration of the group and that I had written many of the songs that [would soon be] in dispute.\" Other defamation lawsuits were filed by Carl, Brother Records, and the Wilsons' mother Audree.\nWith Love and Brian unable to determine exactly what Love was properly owed, Love sued Brian in 1992, winning $13\u00a0million in 1994 for lost royalties. 35 of the group's songs were then amended to credit Love. He later called it \"almost certainly the largest case of fraud in music history\".\nThe day after California courts issued a restraining order between Brian and Landy, Brian phoned Sire Records staff producer Andy Paley to collaborate on new material tentatively for the Beach Boys. After losing the songwriting credits lawsuit with Love, Brian told \"MOJO\" in February 1995: \"Mike and I are just cool. There's a lot of shit Andy and I got written for him. I just had to get through that goddamn trial!\" In April, it was unclear whether the project would turn into a Wilson solo album, a Beach Boys album, or a combination of the two. The project ultimately disintegrated. Instead, Brian and his bandmates recorded \"Stars and Stripes Vol. 1\", an album of country music stars covering Beach Boys songs, with co-production helmed by River North Records owner Joe Thomas. Afterward, the group discussed finishing the album \"Smile\", but Carl rejected the idea, fearing that it would cause Brian another nervous breakdown.\nIn early 1997, Carl was diagnosed with lung and brain cancer after years of heavy smoking. Despite his terminal condition, Carl continued to perform with the band on its 1997 summer tour (a double-bill with the band Chicago) while undergoing chemotherapy. During performances, he sat on a stool and needed oxygen after every song. Carl died on February 6, 1998, at the age of 51, two months after the death of the Wilsons' mother, Audree.\n2000s: Band split.\nIn turn, Jardine left the band and began to tour regularly with his band \"Beach Boys: Family &amp; Friends\" until he ran into legal issues for using the name without license. Meanwhile, Jardine sued Love, claiming that he had been excluded from their concerts, BRI, through its longtime attorney, Ed McPherson, sued Jardine in Federal Court. Jardine, in turn, counter-claimed against BRI for wrongful termination. BRI ultimately prevailed. Love and Johnston continued to tour as \"The Beach Boys\" with supporting musicians. Marks left the touring band in 1999 because of his health.\nIn 2000, ABC-TV premiered a two-part television miniseries, \"\", that dramatized the Beach Boys' story. It was produced by John Stamos, and was criticized for historical inaccuracies. Brian Wilson said that he \"didn't like the second part. It wasn't really true to the way things were. I'd like to see another movie if it was done right.\"\nIn 2004, Wilson recorded and released his solo album \"Brian Wilson Presents Smile\", a reinterpretation of the unfinished \"Smile\" project. That September, Wilson issued a free CD through the \"Mail On Sunday\" that included Beach Boys songs he had recently rerecorded, five of which he co-authored with Love. The 10 track compilation had 2.6 million copies distributed and prompted Love to file a lawsuit in November 2005; he claimed the promotion hurt the sales of the original recordings. Love's suit was dismissed in 2007 when a judge determined that there were no triable issues.\n2010s: \"That's Why God Made the Radio\" and brief reunion tour.\nOn October 31, Capitol released a compilation and box set dedicated to \"Smile\" in the form of \"The Smile Sessions\". The album garnered universal critical acclaim and charted in both the US \"Billboard\" and UK top 30. It went on to win Best Historical Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards.\nOn December 16, 2011, it was announced that Wilson, Love, Jardine, Johnston and David Marks would reunite for a new album and 50th anniversary tour. On February 12, 2012, the Beach Boys performed at the 2012 Grammy Awards, in what was billed as a \"special performance\" by organizers. It marked the group's first live performance to include Wilson since 1996, Jardine since 1998, and Marks since 1999. Released on June 5, \"That's Why God Made the Radio\" debuted at number 3 on the U.S. charts, expanding the group's span of \"Billboard\" 200 top-ten albums across 49 years and one week, passing the Beatles with 47 years of top-ten albums. Critics generally regarded the album as an \"uneven\" collection, with most of the praise centered on its closing musical suite.\nThe reunion tour ended in September 2012 as planned, but amid erroneous rumors that Love had dismissed Wilson from the Beach Boys. Love and Johnston continued to perform under the Beach Boys name, while Wilson, Jardine, and Marks continued to tour as a trio, and a subsequent tour with guitarist Jeff Beck also included Blondie Chaplin at select dates.\nResponding to a new European Union copyright law that extended copyright to 70 years for recordings that were published within 50 years after they were made, Capitol began issuing annual 50-year anniversary \"copyright extension\" releases of Beach Boys recordings, starting with \"The Big Beat 1963\" (2013).\nJardine, Marks, Johnston and Love appeared together at the 2014 Ella Awards Ceremony, where Love was honored for his work as a singer. In 2015, \"Soundstage\" aired an episode featuring Wilson performing with Jardine, Chaplin, and Fataar at The Venetian in Las Vegas. In April, when asked if he was interested in making music with Love again, Wilson replied: \"I don't think so, no,\" adding in July that he \"doesn't talk to the Beach Boys [or] Mike Love.\"\nIn 2016, Love and Wilson published memoirs, \"\" and \"I Am Brian Wilson\", respectively. Love was asked about negative comments that Wilson made about him in the book and said: \"He's not in charge of his life like I am mine. His every move is orchestrated and a lot of things he's purported to say, there's not tape of it. But I don't like to put undue pressure on him either, because I know he has a lot of issues. Out of compassion, I don't respond to everything that is purportedly said by him.\" In an interview with \"Rolling Stone\" conducted in June 2016, Wilson said he would like to try to repair his relationship with Love and collaborate with him again. In January 2017, Love said, \"If it were possible to make it just Brian and I, and have it under control and done better than what happened in 2012, then yeah, I'd be open to something.\"\nIn July 2018, Wilson, Jardine, Love, Johnston, and Marks reunited for a one-off Q&amp;A session moderated by director Rob Reiner at the Capitol Records Tower in Los Angeles. It was the first time the band had appeared together in public since their 2012 tour. That December, Love described his new holiday album, \"Reason for the Season\", as a \"message to Brian\" and said that he \"would love nothing more than to get together with Brian and do some music.\"\n2020s.\nIn February 2020, Wilson's official social media pages encouraged fans to boycott the band's music after it was announced that Love's Beach Boys would perform at the Safari Club International Convention in Reno, Nevada on animal rights grounds. The concert proceeded despite online protests, as Love issued a statement that said his group has always supported \"freedom of thought and expression as a fundamental tenet of our rights as Americans.\" In October, Love and Johnston\u2019s Beach Boys performed at a fundraiser for Donald Trump\u2019s presidential re-election campaign; Wilson and Jardine again issued a statement that they had not been informed about this performance and did not support it.\nIn March 2020, Jardine was asked about a possible reunion and responded that the band will reunite for a string of live performances in 2021, although he believed a new album was unlikely. In response to reunion rumors, Love said in May that he was open to a 60th anniversary tour, although Wilson has \"some serious health issues\", while Wilson's manager Jean Sievers commented that no one had spoken to Wilson about such a tour. In February 2021, it was announced that Brian Wilson, Love, Jardine, and the estate of Carl Wilson had sold a majority stake in the band's intellectual property to Irving Azoff and his new company Iconic Artists Group; rumors of a 60th anniversary reunion were again discussed.\n\"Feel Flows\", an archival release dedicated to the band's \"Sunflower\" and \"Surf's Up\" period, was assembled in early 2020. As of September, the set had not been officially announced. After band insiders said that plans for its release had stalled, fans started a petition calling for the compilation's release.\nMusical style and development.\nIn \"Understanding Rock: Essays in Musical Analysis\", musicologist Daniel Harrison writes:\nThe Beach Boys began as a garage band playing 1950s style rock and roll, reassembling styles of music such as surf to include vocal jazz harmony, which created their unique sound. In addition, they introduced their signature approach to common genres such as the pop ballad by applying harmonic or formal twists not native to rock and roll. Among the distinct elements of the Beach Boys' style were the nasal quality of their singing voices, their use of a falsetto harmony over a driving, locomotive-like melody, and the sudden chiming in of the whole group on a key line. Brian Wilson handled most stages of the group's recording process from the beginning, even though he was not properly credited on most of the early recordings.\nEarly on, Mike Love sang lead vocals in the rock-oriented songs, while Carl contributed guitar lines on the group's ballads. Jim Miller commented: \"On straight rockers they sang tight harmonies behind Love's lead ... on ballads, Brian played his falsetto off against lush, jazz-tinged voicings, often using (for rock) unorthodox harmonic structures.\" Harrison adds that \"even the least distinguished of the Beach Boys' early uptempo rock 'n' roll songs show traces of structural complexity at some level; Brian was simply too curious and experimental to leave convention alone.\" Although Brian was often dubbed a perfectionist, he was an inexperienced musician, and his understanding of music was mostly self-taught. At the lyric stage, he usually worked with Love, whose assertive persona provided youthful swagger that contrasted Brian's explorations in romanticism and sensitivity. Luis Sanchez noted a pattern where Brian would spare surfing imagery when working with collaborators outside of his band's circle, in the examples \"Lonely Sea\" and \"In My Room\".\nBrian's bandmates resented the notion that he was the sole creative force in the group. In a 1966 article that asked if \"the Beach Boys rely too much on sound genius Brian\", Carl said that although Brian was the most responsible for their music, every member of the group contributed ideas. Mike Love wrote, \"As far as I was concerned, Brian \"was\" a genius, deserving of that recognition. But the rest of us were seen as nameless components in Brian's music machine ... It didn't feel to us as if we were just riding on Brian's coattails.\" Conversely, Dennis defended Brian's stature in the band, stating: \"Brian Wilson \"is\" the Beach Boys. He is the band. We're his fucking messengers. He is all of it. Period. We're nothing. He's everything.\"\nInfluences.\nThe band's earliest influences came primarily from the work of Chuck Berry and the Four Freshmen. Performed by the Four Freshmen, \"Their Hearts Were Full of Spring\" (1961) was a particular favorite of the group. By analyzing their arrangements of pop standards, Brian educated himself on jazz harmony. Bearing this in mind, Philip Lambert noted, \"If Bob Flanigan helped teach Brian how to sing, then Gershwin, Kern, Porter, and the other members of this pantheon helped him learn how to craft a song.\" Other general influences on the group included the Hi-Los, the Penguins, the Robins, Bill Haley &amp; His Comets, Otis Williams, the Cadets, the Everly Brothers, the Shirelles, the Regents, and the Crystals.\nThe eclectic mix of white and black vocal group influences \u2013 ranging from the rock and roll of Berry, the jazz harmonies of the Four Freshmen, the pop of the Four Preps, the folk of the Kingston Trio, the R&amp;B of groups like the Coasters and the Five Satins, and the doo wop of Dion and the Belmonts \u2013 helped contribute to the Beach Boys' uniqueness in American popular music. Carl remembered: \"Most of [Mike's] classmates were black. He was the only white guy on his track team. He was really immersed in doo-wop and that music and I think he influenced Brian to listen to it. The black artists were so much better in terms of rock records in those days that the white records almost sounded like put-ons.\" On Jimi Hendrix and \"heavy\" music, Brian said he felt no pressure to go in that direction: \"We never got into the heavy musical level trip. We never needed to. It's already been done.\"\nAnother significant influence on Brian's work was Burt Bacharach. He said in the 1960s: \"Burt Bacharach and Hal David are more like me. They're also the best pop team \u2013 per se \u2013 today. As a producer, Bacharach has a very fresh, new approach.\" Regarding surf rock pioneer Dick Dale, Brian said that his influence on the group was limited to Carl and his style of guitar playing. Carl credited Chuck Berry, the Ventures, and John Walker with shaping his guitar style, and that the Beach Boys had learned to play all of the Ventures' songs by ear early in their career.\nIn 1967, Lou Reed wrote in \"Aspen\" that the Beach Boys created a \"hybrid sound\" out of old rock and the Four Freshmen, explaining that such songs as \"Let Him Run Wild\", \"Don't Worry Baby\", \"I Get Around\", and \"Fun, Fun, Fun\" were not unlike \"Peppermint Stick\" by the Elchords. Similarly, John Sebastian of the Lovin' Spoonful noted, \"Brian had control of this vocal palette of which we had no idea. We had never paid attention to the Four Freshmen or doo-wop combos like the Crew Cuts. Look what gold he mined out of that.\"\nVocals.\nBrian identified each member individually for their vocal range, once detailing the ranges for Carl, Dennis, Jardine (\"[they] progress upwards through G, A, and B\"), Love (\"can go from bass to the E above middle C\"), and himself (\"I can take the second D in the treble clef\"). He declared in 1966 that his greatest interest was to expand modern vocal harmony, owing his fascination with voice to the Four Freshmen, which he considered a \"groovy sectional sound.\" He added, \"The harmonies that we are able to produce give us a uniqueness which is really the only important thing you can put into records \u2013 some quality that no one else has got. I love peaks in a song \u2013 and enhancing them on the control panel. Most of all, I love the human voice for its own sake.\" For a period, Brian avoided singing falsetto for the group, saying \"I thought people thought I was a fairy...the band told me, 'If that's the way you sing, don't worry about it.'\"\nFrom lowest intervals to highest, the group's vocal harmony stack usually began with Love or Dennis, followed by Jardine or Carl, and finally Brian on top, according to Jardine, while Carl said that the blend was Love on bottom, Carl above, followed by Dennis or Jardine, and then Brian on top. Jardine explains, \"We always sang the same vocal intervals. ... As soon as we heard the chords on the piano we'd figure it out pretty easily. If there was a vocal move [Brian] envisioned, he'd show that particular singer that move. We had somewhat photographic memory as far as the vocal parts were concerned so that [was] never a problem for us.\" Striving for perfection, Brian insured that his intricate vocal arrangements exercised the group's calculated blend of intonation, attack, phrasing, and expression. Sometimes, he would sing each vocal harmony part alone through multi-track tape.\nOn the group's blend, Carl said: \"[Love] has a beautifully rich, very full-sounding bass voice. Yet his lead singing is real nasal, real punk. [Jardine]'s voice has a bright timbre to it; it really cuts. My voice has a kind of calm sound. We're big oooh-ers; we love to oooh. It's a big, full sound, that's very pleasing to us; it opens up the heart.\" Rock critic Erik Davis wrote, \"The 'purity' of tone and genetic proximity that smoothed their voices was almost creepy, pseudo-castrato, [and] a 'barbershop' sound.\" Jimmy Webb said, \"They used very little vibrato and sing in very straight tones. The voices all lie down beside each other very easily \u2013 there's no bumping between them because the pitch is very precise.\" According to Brian: \"Jack Good once told us, 'You sing like eunuchs in a Sistine Chapel,' which was a pretty good quote.\" Writer Richard Goldstein reported that, according to a fellow journalist who asked Brian about the black roots of his music, Brian's response was: \"We're white and we sing white.\" Goldstein added that when he asked where his approach to vocal harmonies had derived from, Wilson answered: 'Barbershop'.\"\nUse of studio musicians.\nNine months after forming, the group achieved national success, and demand for their personal appearance skyrocketed. Biographer James Murphy said, \"By most contemporary accounts, they were not a very good live band when they started. ... The Beach Boys learned to play as a band in front of live audiences\", eventually to become \"one of the best and enduring live bands\". For the recording of the Beach Boys' instrumental tracks, Brian arranged many of his compositions for a conglomerate of session musicians later known as \"the Wrecking Crew\". Their assistance was needed because of the increasingly complicated nature of the material. Afterward, the members only performed the instrumental tracks to certain recordings. It is the belief of Richie Unterberger that, \"Before session musicians took over most of the parts, the Beach Boys could play respectably gutsy surf rock as a self-contained unit.\"\nCarl was an exception among the group in that he played alongside these musicians whenever he was available to attend sessions. In archivist Craig Slowinski's view, \"One should not sell short Carl's own contributions; the youngest Wilson had developed as a musician sufficiently to play alongside the horde of high-dollar session pros that big brother was now bringing into the studio. Carl's guitar playing [was] a key ingredient.\"\nA common misconception is that Dennis' drumming in the Beach Boys' recordings was filled in exclusively by studio musicians. His drumming is documented on a number of the group's singles, including \"I Get Around\", \"Fun, Fun Fun\", and \"Don't Worry Baby\".\nSpirituality.\nThe band members often reflected on the spiritual nature of their music (and music in general), particularly for the recording of \"Pet Sounds\" and \"Smile\". Even though the Wilsons did not grow up in a particularly religious household, Carl was described as \"the most truly religious person I know\" by Brian, and Carl was forthcoming about the group's spiritual beliefs stating: \"We believe in God as a kind of universal consciousness. God is love. God is you. God is me. God is everything right here in this room. It's a spiritual concept which inspires a great deal of our music.\" Carl told \"Rave\" magazine in 1967 that the group's influences are of a \"religious nature\", but not any religion in specific, only \"an idea based upon that of Universal Consciousness. ... The spiritual concept of happiness and doing good to others is extremely important to the lyric of our songs, and the religious element of some of the better church music is also contained within some of our new work.\"\nBrian is quoted during the \"Smile\" era: \"I'm very religious. Not in the sense of churches, going to church; but like the essence of \"all\" religion.\" During the recording of \"Pet Sounds\", Brian held prayer meetings, later reflecting that \"God was with us the whole time we were doing this record ... I could feel that feeling in my brain.\" In 1966, he explained that he wanted to move into a white spiritual sound, and predicted that the rest of the music industry would follow suit. In 2011, Brian maintained the spirituality was important to his music, and that he did not follow any particular religion.\nCarl said that \"Smile\" was chosen as an album title because of its connection to the group's spiritual beliefs. Brian referred to \"Smile\" as his \"teenage symphony to God\", composing a hymn, \"Our Prayer\", as the album's opening spiritual invocation. Experimentation with psychotropic substances also proved pivotal to the group's development as artists. He spoke of his LSD trips as a \"religious experience\", and during a session for \"Our Prayer\", Brian can be heard asking the other Beach Boys: \"Do you guys feel any acid yet?\". In 1968, the group's interest in transcendental meditation led them to record the original song, \"Transcendental Meditation\".\nLegacy and cultural influence.\nAchievements and accolades.\nThe Beach Boys are one of the most critically acclaimed, commercially successful, and influential bands of all time. They have sold over 100 million records worldwide. The group's early songs made them major pop stars in the US, the UK, Australia and other countries, having seven top 10 singles between April 1963 and November 1964. They were one of the first American groups to exhibit the definitive traits of a self-contained rock band, playing their own instruments and writing their own songs, and they were one of the few American bands formed prior to the 1964 British Invasion to continue their success. Among artists of the 1960s, they are one of few central figures in the histories of rock. Between the 1960s and 2010s, they had 36 songs reach the US Top 40 (the most by an American group) with four topping the \"Billboard\" Hot 100; they also hold Nielsen SoundScan's record as the top-selling American band for albums and singles.\nBrian Wilson's artistic control over the Beach Boys' records was unprecedented for the time. Carl Wilson elaborated: \"Record companies were used to having absolute control over their artists. It was especially nervy, because Brian was a 21-year-old kid with just two albums. It was unheard of. But what could they say? Brian made good records.\" This made the Beach Boys one of the first rock groups to exert studio control. Music producers after the mid 1960s would draw on Brian's influence, setting a precedent that allowed bands and artists to enter a recording studio and act as producers, either autonomously, or in conjunction with other like minds.\nThe band routinely appears in the upper reaches of ranked lists such as \"The Top 1000 Albums of All Time.\" Many of the group's songs and albums, including \"The Beach Boys Today!\", \"Smiley Smile\", \"Sunflower\", and \"Surf's Up\"\u2014and especially \"Pet Sounds\" and \"Good Vibrations\"\u2014are featured in numerous lists devoted to the greatest albums or singles of all time. The latter two frequently appear on the number one spot. On Acclaimed Music, which aggregates the rankings of decades of critics' lists, \"Pet Sounds\" is ranked as the greatest album of all time, while \"Good Vibrations\" is the third-greatest song of all time (\"God Only Knows\" is also ranked 21). The group itself is ranked number 11 in its 1000 most recommended artists of all time. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the band number 12 on the magazine's list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\".\nIn 1988, the core quintet of the Wilson brothers, Love, and Jardine were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Ten years later, they were selected for the Vocal Group Hall of Fame. In 2004, \"Pet Sounds\" was preserved in the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress for being \"culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant.\" Their recordings of \"In My Room\", \"Good Vibrations\", \"California Girls\" and the entire \"Pet Sounds\" album have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.\nThe Beach Boys are one of the most influential acts of the rock era. In 2017, a study of AllMusic's catalog indicated the Beach Boys as the 6th most frequently cited artist influence in its database. For the 50th anniversary of \"Pet Sounds\", 26 artists contributed to a \"Pitchfork\" retrospective on its influence, which included comments from members of Talking Heads, Yo La Tengo, Chairlift, and Deftones. The editor noted that the \"wide swath of artists assembled for this feature represent but a modicum of the album's vast measure of influence. Its scope transcends just about all lines of age, race, and gender. Its impact continues to broaden with each passing generation.\"\nCalifornia sound.\nProfessor of cultural studies James M. Curtis wrote in 1987, \"We can say that the Beach Boys represent the outlook and values of white Protestant Anglo-Saxon teenagers in the early sixties. Having said that, we immediately realize that they must mean much more than this. Their stability, their staying power, and their ability to attract new fans prove as much.\" Cultural historian Kevin Starr explains that the group first connected with young Americans specifically for their lyrical interpretation of a mythologized landscape: \"Cars and the beach, surfing, the California Girl, all this fused in the alembic of youth: Here was a way of life, an iconography, already half-released into the chords and multiple tracks of a new sound.\" in Robert Christgau's opinion, \"the Beach Boys were a touchstone for real rock and rollers, all of whom understood that the music had its most essential roots in an innocently hedonistic materialism.\"\nThe group's \"California sound\" grew to national prominence through the success of their 1963 album \"Surfin' U.S.A.\", which helped turn the surfing subculture into a mainstream youth-targeted advertising image widely exploited by the film, television, and food industry. The group's surf music was not entirely of their own invention, being preceded by artists such as Dick Dale. However, previous surf musicians did not project a world view as the Beach Boys did. The band's earlier surf music helped raise the profile of the state of California, creating its first major regional style with national significance, and establishing a musical identity for Southern California, as opposed to Hollywood. California ultimately supplanted New York as the center of popular music thanks to the success of Brian's productions.\nA 1966 article discussing new trends in rock music writes that the Beach Boys popularized a type of drum beat heard in Jan and Dean's \"Surf City\", which sounds like \"a locomotive getting up speed\", in addition to the method of \"suddenly stopping in between the chorus and verse\". Pete Townshend of the Who is credited with coining the term \"power pop\", which he defined as \"what we play\u2014what the Small Faces used to play, and the kind of pop the Beach Boys played in the days of 'Fun, Fun, Fun' which I preferred.\"\nThe California sound gradually evolved to reflect a more musically ambitious and mature world view, becoming less to do with surfing and cars and more about social consciousness and political awareness. Between 1964 and 1969, it fueled innovation and transition, inspiring artists to tackle largely unmentioned themes such as sexual freedom, black pride, drugs, oppositional politics, other countercultural motifs, and war. Soft pop (later known as \"sunshine pop\") derived in part from this movement. Sunshine pop producers widely imitated the orchestral style of \"Pet Sounds\"; however, the Beach Boys themselves were rarely representative of the genre, which was rooted in easy-listening and advertising jingles.\nBy the end of the 1960s, the California sound declined due to a combination of the West Coast's cultural shifts, Wilson's professional and psychological downturn, and the Manson murders, with David Howard calling it the \"sunset of the original California Sunshine Sound ... [the] sweetness advocated by the California Myth had led to chilling darkness and unsightly rot\". Drawing from the Beach Boys' associations with Charles Manson and former California governor Ronald Reagan, Erik Davis remarked, \"The Beach Boys may be the only bridge between those deranged poles. There is a wider range of political and aesthetic sentiments in their records than in any other band in those heady times\u2014like the state [of California], they expand and bloat and contradict themselves.\"\nDuring the 1970s, advertising jingles and imagery were predominately based on the Beach Boys' early music and image. The group also inspired the development of the West Coast style later dubbed \"yacht rock\". According to \"Jacobin\"s Dan O'Sullivan, the band's aesthetic was the first to be \"scavenged\" by yacht rock acts like Rupert Holmes. O'Sullivan also cites the Beach Boys' recording of \"Sloop John B\" as the origin of yacht rock's preoccupation with the \"sailors and beachgoers\" aesthetic that was \"lifted by everyone, from Christopher Cross to Eric Carmen, from 'Buffalo Springfield' folksters like Jim Messina to 'Philly Sound' rockers like Hall &amp; Oates.\"\nInnovations.\n\"Pet Sounds\" came to inform the developments of genres such as pop, rock, jazz, electronic, experimental, punk, and hip hop. Similar to subsequent experimental rock LPs by Frank Zappa, the Beatles, and the Who, \"Pet Sounds\" featured countertextural aspects that called attention to the very recordedness of the album. Professor of American history John Robert Greene stated that the album broke new ground and took rock music away from its casual lyrics and melodic structures into what was then uncharted territory. He furthermore called it one factor which spawned the majority of trends in post-1965 rock music, the only others being \"Rubber Soul\", the Beatles' \"Revolver\", and the contemporary folk movement. The album was the first piece in popular music to incorporate the Electro-Theremin, an easier-to-play version of the theremin, as well as the first in rock music to feature a theremin-like instrument. With \"Pet Sounds\", they were also the first group to make an entire album that departed from the usual small-ensemble electric rock band format.\nAccording to David Leaf in 1978, \"Pet Sounds\" and \"Good Vibrations\" \"established the group as the leaders of a new type of pop music, Art Rock.\" Academic Bill Martin states that the band opened a path in rock music \"that went from \"Sgt. Pepper's\" to \"Close to the Edge\" and beyond\". He argues that the advancing technology of multitrack recording and mixing boards were more influential to experimental rock than electronic instruments such as the synthesizer, allowing the Beatles and the Beach Boys to become the first crop of non-classically trained musicians to create extended and complex compositions. In \"Strange Sounds: Offbeat Instruments and Sonic Experiments in Pop\", Mark Brend writes:\nThe making of \"Good Vibrations\", according to Domenic Priore, was \"unlike anything previous in the realms of classical, jazz, international, soundtrack, or any other kind of recording\", while biographer Peter Ames Carlin wrote that it \"sounded like nothing that had ever been played on the radio before.\" It contained previously untried mixes of instruments, and was the first successful pop song to have cellos in a juddering rhythm. Musicologist Charlie Gillett called it \"one of the first records to flaunt studio production as a quality in its own right, rather than as a means of presenting a performance\". Again, Brian employed the use of Electro-Theremin for the track. Upon release, the single prompted an unexpected revival in theremins while increasing awareness of analog synthesizers, leading Moog Music to produce their own brand of ribbon-controlled instruments. In a 1968 editorial for \"Jazz &amp; Pop\", Gene Sculatti predicted that the song \"may yet prove to be the most significantly revolutionary piece of the current rock renaissance ... In no minor way, 'Good Vibrations' is a primary influential piece for all producing rock artists; everyone has felt its import to some degree\".\nDiscussing \"Smiley Smile\", Daniel Harrison argues that the album could \"almost\" be considered art music in the Western classical tradition, and that the group's innovations in the musical language of rock can be compared to those that introduced atonal and other nontraditional techniques into that classical tradition. He explains, \"The spirit of experimentation is just as palpable ... as it is in, say, Schoenberg's op. 11 piano pieces.\" However, such notions were not widely acknowledged by rock audiences nor by the classically minded at the time. Harrison concludes: \"What influences could these innovations then have? The short answer is, not much. \"Smiley Smile\", \"Wild Honey\", \"Friends\", and \"20/20\" sound like few other rock albums; they are \"sui generis\". ... It must be remembered that the commercial failure of the Beach Boys' experiments was hardly motivation for imitation.\" Musicologist David Toop, who included the \"Smiley Smile\" track \"Fall Breaks and Back to Winter\" on a companion CD for his book \"Ocean of Sound\", placed the Beach Boys' effect on sound pioneering in league with Les Baxter, Aphex Twin, Herbie Hancock, King Tubby, and My Bloody Valentine.\n\"Sunflower\" marked an end to the experimental songwriting and production phase initiated by \"Smiley Smile\". After \"Surf's Up\", Harrison wrote, their albums \"contain a mixture of middle-of-the-road music entirely consonant with pop style during the early 1970s with a few oddities that proved that the desire to push beyond conventional boundaries was not dead,\" until 1974, \"the year in which the Beach Boys ceased to be a rock 'n' roll act and became an oldies act.\"\nPunk, alternative, and indie.\nIn the 1970s, the Beach Boys served a \"totemic influence\" on punk rock that later gave way to indie rock. Brad Shoup of Stereogum surmised that, thanks to the Ramones' praise for the group, many punk, pop punk, or \"punk-adjacent\" artists showed influence from the Beach Boys, noting cover versions of the band's songs recorded by Slickee Boys, Agent Orange, Bad Religion, Shonen Knife, the Queers, Hi-Standard, the Descendents, the Donnas, M.O.D., and the Vandals. \"The Beach Boys Love You\" is sometimes considered the group's \"punk album\", and \"Pet Sounds\" is sometimes advanced as the first emo album.\nIn the 1990s, the Beach Boys experienced a resurgence of popularity with the alternative rock generation. According to Sean O'Hagan, leader of the High Llamas and former member of Stereolab, a younger generation of record-buyers \"stopped listening to indie records\" in favor of the Beach Boys. Bands who advocated for the Beach Boys included founding members of the Elephant 6 Collective (Neutral Milk Hotel, the Olivia Tremor Control, the Apples in Stereo, and of Montreal). United by a shared love of the group's music, they named Pet Sounds Studio in honor of the band. \"Rolling Stone\" writer Barry Walters wrote in 2000 that albums such as \"Surf's Up\" and \"Love You\" \"are becoming sonic blueprints, akin to what early Velvet Underground LPs meant to the previous indie peer group.\" The High Llamas, Eric Matthews and St. Etienne are among the \"alt heroes\" who contributed cover versions of \"unreleased, overlooked or underappreciated Wilson/Beach Boys obscurities\" on the tribute album \"Caroline Now!\" (2000).\n\"Smile\" became a touchstone for many bands who were labelled \"chamber pop\", a term used for artists influenced by the lush orchestrations of Brian Wilson, Lee Hazlewood, and Burt Bacharach. \"Pitchfork\" writer Mark Richardson cited \"Smiley Smile\" as the origin point of \"the kind of lo-fi bedroom pop that would later propel Sebadoh, Animal Collective, and other characters.\" The \"Sunflower\" track \"All I Wanna Do\" is also cited as one of the earliest precursors to chillwave, a microgenre that developed in the 2000s.\nCritical perspective.\nBetween 1965 and 1967, the Beach Boys developed a musical and lyrical sophistication that contrasted their work from before and after. This divide was further solidified by the difference in sound between their albums and their stage performances. When the band's studio recordings grew more complex, they were unable to effectively reproduce them in their live show. Starting in 1966, band publicist Derek Taylor was instrumental in campaigning the idea of Brian Wilson as a \"genius\" to members of the burgeoning rock press, painting him as a mastermind who stays at home composing while the rest of the band tour. All of these elements combined to create a split fanbase corresponding to two distinct musical markets. One group is the conservative audience who enjoys the band's early singles as a wholesome representation of American popular culture from before the political and social movements brought on in the mid 1960s. The other group also appreciates the early songs for their energy and complexity, but not as much as the band's ambitious work that was created during the formative psychedelic era.\nInitially, rock music journalists valued the Beach Boys' early records over their experimental work. Real surfers were critical of the band for not being true adherents of the sport. As authenticity became a higher concern among critics, the group's legitimacy in rock music became an oft-repeated criticism, especially since their early songs appeared to celebrate a politically unconscious youth culture. Music critic Kenneth Partridge blamed the lack of \"edginess\" on the group's early records for why they're \"rarely talked about in the same breath as the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, and when they are, it's really only because of two albums\". The \"particular appeal\" of Wilson's genius, according to music critic Barney Hoskyns, was \"the fact that the Beach Boys were the very obverse of hip \u2013 the unlikeliness of these songs growing out of disposable surf pop \u2013 and in the singular naivety and ingenuousness of his personality.\" Luis Sanchez argued that despite the immaturity of their early songs, \"what matters is that it captured a lack of self-consciousness\u2014a \"genuineness\"\u2014that set them apart from their peers. And it was this quality that came to define Brian's oeuvre as he moved beyond and into bigger pop productions that would culminate in \"Smile\".\"\nGenerally, the record-buying public came to view the music made after \"Smile\" as the point marking their artistic decline. After \"Smiley Smile\", the group was virtually blacklisted by the music press, to the extent that reviews of the group's records were either withheld from publication or published long after the release dates. Mike Love said that, unlike Brian, he was never concerned about being taken seriously by critics, and considered the negatively described \"simplicity\" of their early songs as \"elitism at its worst: because so many people loved our music, there must be something wrong with it.\" In a review of \"The Smile Sessions\" for \"NewMusicBox\", Frank Oteri argued that the popular caricature of the Beach Boys' as a \"light-hearted party band\" ensured that they will never earn themselves \"the same pride of place in American music history held by other great innovators\". Peter Ames Carlin summarized the group's various phases: \"Once surfin' pin-ups, they remade themselves as avant-garde pop artists, then psychedelic oracles. After that they were down-home hippies, then retro-hip icons. Eventually they devolved into none of the above: a kind of perpetual-motion nostalgia machine.\"\nSince the 1990s, there has been an increasing tendency to recontextualize the Beach Boys outside of their typical iconography, with academic Kirk Curnutt citing such examples as the use of \"Sloop John B\" as Vietnam allegory in the film \"Forrest Gump\" (1994) and \"I Just Wasn't Made for These Times\" as an LSD-inspired underscore for one episode of the television drama \"Mad Men\" (2012).\nAwards and commemorations.\nThe Wilsons' California house, where the Wilson brothers grew up and the group began, was demolished in 1986 to make way for Interstate 105, the Century Freeway. A Beach Boys Historic Landmark (California Landmark No.\u00a01041 at 3701 West 119th Street), dedicated on May 20, 2005, marks the location. On December 30, 1980, the Beach Boys were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, located at 1500 Vine Street. On September 2, 1977, the group performed before an audience of 40,000 at Narragansett Park in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, which remains the largest concert audience in Rhode Island history. In 2017, the street where the concert stage formerly stood was officially renamed to \"Beach Boys Way\".\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nTimeline\nNotable supporting musicians for both the Beach Boys' live performances and studio recordings included guitarist Glen Campbell, keyboardists Daryl Dragon and Toni Tennille (Captain &amp; Tennille), and saxophonist Charles Lloyd.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nSelected archival releases \nSee also\nReferences.\nBibliography\nFurther reading.\nArticles\nBooks"}
{"id": "4479", "revid": "16944783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4479", "title": "BCE (disambiguation)", "text": "BCE or B.C.E. may stand for:"}
{"id": "4480", "revid": "39526041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4480", "title": "BC", "text": "BC most often refers to:\nBC may also refer to: "}
{"id": "4481", "revid": "40506421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4481", "title": "Beatrix Potter", "text": "Helen Beatrix Potter (, US , 28 July 186622 December 1943) was an English writer, illustrator, natural scientist and conservationist; she was best known for her children's books featuring animals, such as \"The Tale of Peter Rabbit\".\nBorn into an upper-middle-class household, Potter was educated by governesses and grew up isolated from other children. She had numerous pets and spent holidays in Scotland and the Lake District, developing a love of landscape, flora and fauna, all of which she closely observed and painted.\nPotter's study and watercolours of fungi led to her being widely respected in the field of mycology. In her thirties, Potter self-published the highly successful children's book \"The Tale of Peter Rabbit\". Following this, Potter began writing and illustrating children's books full-time.\nPotter wrote thirty books; the best known being her twenty-three children's tales. With the proceeds from the books and a legacy from an aunt, Potter bought Hill Top Farm in Near Sawrey in 1905; this is a village in the Lake District in Cumbria. Over the following decades, she purchased additional farms to preserve the unique hill country landscape. In 1913, at the age of 47, she married William Heelis, a respected local solicitor from Hawkshead. Potter was also a prize-winning breeder of Herdwick sheep and a prosperous farmer keenly interested in land preservation. She continued to write and illustrate, and to design spin-off merchandise based on her children's books for British publisher Warne until the duties of land management and her diminishing eyesight made it difficult to continue.\nPotter died of pneumonia and heart disease on 22 December 1943 at her home in Near Sawrey at the age of 77, leaving almost all her property to the National Trust. She is credited with preserving much of the land that now constitutes the Lake District National Park. Potter's books continue to sell throughout the world in many languages with her stories being retold in songs, films, ballet, and animations, and her life depicted in a two films and a television series.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nPotter's paternal grandfather, Edmund Potter, from Glossop in Derbyshire, owned what was then the largest calico printing works in England, and later served as a Member of Parliament.\nBeatrix's father, Rupert William Potter (1832\u20131914), was educated at Manchester College by the Unitarian philosopher James Martineau. He then trained as a barrister in London. Rupert practised law, specialising in equity law and conveyancing. He married Helen Leech (1839\u20131932) on 8 August 1863 at Hyde Unitarian Chapel, Gee Cross. Helen was the daughter of Jane Ashton (1806\u20131884) and John Leech, a wealthy cotton merchant and shipbuilder from Stalybridge. Helen's first cousins were siblings Harriet Lupton (\"n\u00e9e\" Ashton) and Thomas Ashton, 1st Baron Ashton of Hyde. It was reported in July 2014 that Beatrix had personally given a number of her own original hand-painted illustrations to the two daughters of Arthur and Harriet Lupton, who were cousins to both Beatrix and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge.\nBeatrix's parents lived comfortably at 2 Bolton Gardens, West Brompton, where Helen Beatrix was born on 28 July 1866 and her brother Walter Bertram on 14 March 1872. Beatrix lived in the house until her marriage in 1913. The house was destroyed in the Blitz. Bousfield Primary School now stands where the house once was. A blue plaque on the school building testifies to the former site of the Potter home.\nBoth parents were artistically talented, and Rupert was an adept amateur photographer. Rupert had invested in the stock market, and by the early 1890s, he was extremely wealthy.\nPotter's family on both sides were from the Manchester area. They were English Unitarians, associated with dissenting Protestant congregations, influential in 19th century England, that affirmed the oneness of God and that rejected the doctrine of the Trinity.\nBeatrix was educated by three governesses, the last of whom was Annie Moore (\"n\u00e9e\" Carter), just three years older than Beatrix, who tutored Beatrix in German as well as acting as lady's companion. She and Beatrix remained friends throughout their lives, and Annie's eight children were the recipients of many of Potter's picture letters. It was Annie who later suggested that these letters might make good children's books.\nShe and her younger brother Walter Bertram (1872\u20131918) grew up with few friends outside their large extended family. Her parents were artistic, interested in nature, and enjoyed the countryside. As children, Beatrix and Bertram had numerous small animals as pets which they observed closely and drew endlessly. In their schoolroom, Beatrix and Bertram kept a variety of small pets -- mice, rabbits, a hedgehog and some bats, along with collections of butterflies and other insects -- which they drew and studied. Beatrix was devoted to the care of her small animals, often taking them with her on long holidays. In most of the first fifteen years of her life, Beatrix spent summer holidays at Dalguise, an estate on the River Tay in Perthshire, Scotland. There she sketched and explored an area that nourished her imagination and her observation. Beatrix and her brother were allowed great freedom in the country, and both children became adept students of natural history. In 1882, when Dalguise was no longer available, the Potters took their first summer holiday in the Lake District, at Wray Castle near Lake Windermere. Here Beatrix met Hardwicke Rawnsley, vicar of Wray and later the founding secretary of the National Trust, whose interest in the countryside and country life inspired the same in Beatrix and who was to have a lasting impact on her life.\nAt about the age of 14, Beatrix began to keep a diary. It was written in a code of her own devising which was a simple letter for letter substitution. Her \"Journal\" was important to the development of her creativity, serving as both sketchbook and literary experiment: in tiny handwriting, she reported on society, recorded her impressions of art and artists, recounted stories and observed life around her. The \"Journal\", decoded and transcribed by Leslie Linder in 1958, does not provide an intimate record of her personal life, but it is an invaluable source for understanding a vibrant part of British society in the late 19th century. It describes Potter's maturing artistic and intellectual interests, her often amusing insights on the places she visited, and her unusual ability to observe nature and to describe it. Started in 1881, her journal ends in 1897 when her artistic and intellectual energies were absorbed in scientific study and in efforts to publish her drawings. Precocious but reserved and often bored, she was searching for more independent activities and wished to earn some money of her own while dutifully taking care of her parents, dealing with her especially demanding mother, and managing their various households.\nScientific illustrations and work in mycology.\nBeatrix Potter's parents did not discourage higher education. As was common in the Victorian era, women of her class were privately educated and rarely went to university.\nBeatrix Potter was interested in every branch of natural science save astronomy. Botany was a passion for most Victorians and nature study was a popular enthusiasm. Potter was eclectic in her tastes: collecting fossils, studying archaeological artefacts from London excavations, and interested in entomology. In all these areas, she drew and painted her specimens with increasing skill. By the 1890s, her scientific interests centred on mycology. First drawn to fungi because of their colours and evanescence in nature and her delight in painting them, her interest deepened after meeting Charles McIntosh, a revered naturalist and amateur mycologist, during a summer holiday in Dunkeld in Perthshire in 1892. He helped improve the accuracy of her illustrations, taught her taxonomy, and supplied her with live specimens to paint during the winter. Curious as to how fungi reproduced, Potter began microscopic drawings of fungus spores (the agarics) and in 1895 developed a theory of their germination. Through the connections of her uncle Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe, a chemist and vice-chancellor of the University of London, she consulted with botanists at Kew Gardens, convincing George Massee of her ability to germinate spores and her theory of hybridisation. She did not believe in the theory of symbiosis proposed by Simon Schwendener, the German mycologist, as previously thought; instead, she proposed a more independent process of reproduction.\nRebuffed by William Thiselton-Dyer, the Director at Kew, because of her sex and her amateur status, Beatrix wrote up her conclusions and submitted a paper, \"On the Germination of the Spores of the Agaricineae\", to the Linnean Society in 1897. It was introduced by Massee because, as a female, Potter could not attend proceedings or read her paper. She subsequently withdrew it, realising that some of her samples were contaminated, but continued her microscopic studies for several more years. Her paper has only recently been rediscovered, along with the rich, artistic illustrations and drawings that accompanied it. Her work is only now being properly evaluated. Potter later gave her other mycological and scientific drawings to the Armitt Museum and Library in Ambleside, where mycologists still refer to them to identify fungi. There is also a collection of her fungus paintings at the Perth Museum and Art Gallery in Perth, Scotland, donated by Charles McIntosh. In 1967, the mycologist W.P.K. Findlay included many of Potter's beautifully accurate fungus drawings in his \"Wayside &amp; Woodland Fungi\", thereby fulfilling her desire to one day have her fungus drawings published in a book. In 1997, the Linnean Society issued a posthumous apology to Potter for the sexism displayed in its handling of her research.\nArtistic and literary career.\nPotter's artistic and literary interests were deeply influenced by fairies, fairy tales and fantasy. She was a student of the classic fairy tales of Western Europe. As well as stories from the Old Testament, John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" and Harriet Beecher Stowe's \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\", she grew up with \"Aesop's Fables\", the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, Charles Kingsley's \"The Water Babies\", the folk tales and mythology of Scotland, the German Romantics, Shakespeare, and the romances of Sir Walter Scott. As a young child, before the age of eight, Edward Lear's \"Book of Nonsense\", including the much loved \"The Owl and the Pussycat\", and Lewis Carroll's \"Alice in Wonderland\" had made their impression, although she later said of \"Alice\" that she was more interested in Tenniel's illustrations than what they were about. The \"Brer Rabbit\" stories of Joel Chandler Harris had been family favourites, and she later studied his \"Uncle Remus\" stories and illustrated them. She studied book illustration from a young age and developed her own tastes, but the work of the picture book triumvirate Walter Crane, Kate Greenaway and Randolph Caldecott, the last an illustrator whose work was later collected by her father, was a great influence. When she started to illustrate, she chose first the traditional rhymes and stories, \"Cinderella\", \"Sleeping Beauty\", \"Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves\", \"Puss-in-boots\", and \"Red Riding Hood\". However, most often her illustrations were fantasies featuring her own pets: mice, rabbits, kittens, and guinea pigs.\nIn her teenage years, Potter was a regular visitor to the art galleries of London, particularly enjoying the summer and winter exhibitions at the Royal Academy in London. Her \"Journal\" reveals her growing sophistication as a critic as well as the influence of her father's friend, the artist Sir John Everett Millais, who recognised Beatrix's talent of observation. Although Potter was aware of art and artistic trends, her drawing and her prose style were uniquely her own.\nAs a way to earn money in the 1890s, Beatrix and her brother began to print Christmas cards of their own design, as well as cards for special occasions. Mice and rabbits were the most frequent subject of her fantasy paintings. In 1890, the firm of Hildesheimer and Faulkner bought several of the drawings of her rabbit Benjamin Bunny to illustrate verses by Frederic Weatherly titled \"A Happy Pair\". In 1893, the same printer bought several more drawings for Weatherly's \"Our Dear Relations\", another book of rhymes, and the following year Potter sold a series of frog illustrations and verses for \"Changing Pictures\", a popular annual offered by the art publisher Ernest Nister. Potter was pleased by this success and determined to publish her own illustrated stories.\nWhenever Potter went on holiday to the Lake District or Scotland, she sent letters to young friends, illustrating them with quick sketches. Many of these letters were written to the children of her former governess Annie Carter Moore, particularly to Moore's eldest son Noel who was often ill. In September 1893, Potter was on holiday at Eastwood in Dunkeld, Perthshire. She had run out of things to say to Noel, and so she told him a story about \"four little rabbits whose names were Flopsy, Mopsy, Cottontail and Peter\". It became one of the most famous children's letters ever written and the basis of Potter's future career as a writer-artist-storyteller.\nIn 1900, Potter revised her tale about the four little rabbits, and fashioned a dummy book of it \u2013 it has been suggested, in imitation of Helen Bannerman's 1899 bestseller \"The Story of Little Black Sambo\". Unable to find a buyer for the work, she published it for family and friends at her own expense in December 1901. It was drawn in black and white with a coloured frontispiece. Rawnsley had great faith in Potter's tale, recast it in didactic verse, and made the rounds of the London publishing houses. Frederick Warne &amp; Co had previously rejected the tale but, eager to compete in the booming small format children's book market, reconsidered and accepted the \"bunny book\" (as the firm called it) following the recommendation of their prominent children's book artist L. Leslie Brooke. The firm declined Rawnsley's verse in favour of Potter's original prose, and Potter agreed to colour her pen and ink illustrations, choosing the then-new Hentschel three-colour process to reproduce her watercolours.\nOn 2 October 1902, \"The Tale of Peter Rabbit\" was published, and was an immediate success. It was followed the next year by \"The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin\" and \"The Tailor of Gloucester\", which had also first been written as picture letters to the Moore children. Working with Norman Warne as her editor, Potter published two or three little books each year: 23 books in all. The last book in this format was \"Cecily Parsley's Nursery Rhymes\" in 1922, a collection of favourite rhymes. Although \"The Tale of Little Pig Robinson\" was not published until 1930, it had been written much earlier. Potter continued creating her little books until after the First World War when her energies were increasingly directed toward her farming, sheep-breeding and land conservation.\nThe immense popularity of Potter's books was based on the lively quality of her illustrations, the non-didactic nature of her stories, the depiction of the rural countryside, and the imaginative qualities she lent to her animal characters.\nPotter was also a canny businesswoman. As early as 1903, she made and patented a Peter Rabbit doll. It was followed by other \"spin-off\" merchandise over the years, including painting books, board games, wall-paper, figurines, baby blankets and china tea-sets. All were licensed by Frederick Warne &amp; Co and earned Potter an independent income, as well as immense profits for her publisher.\nIn 1905, Potter and Norman Warne became unofficially engaged. Potter's parents objected to the match because Warne was \"in trade\" and thus not socially suitable. The engagement lasted only one month -- Warne died of pernicious anaemia at age 37. That same year, Potter used some of her income and a small inheritance from an aunt to buy Hill Top Farm in Near Sawrey in the English Lake District near Windermere. Potter and Warne may have hoped that Hill Top Farm would be their holiday home, but after Warne's death, Potter went ahead with its purchase as she had always wanted to own that farm, and live in \"that charming village\".\nCountry life.\nThe tenant farmer John Cannon and his family agreed to stay on to manage the farm for her while she made physical improvements and learned the techniques of fell farming and of raising livestock, including pigs, cows and chickens; the following year she added sheep. Realising she needed to protect her boundaries, she sought advice from W.H. Heelis &amp; Son, a local firm of solicitors with offices in nearby Hawkshead. With William Heelis acting for her, she bought contiguous pasture, and in 1909 the Castle Farm across the road from Hill Top Farm. She visited Hill Top at every opportunity, and her books written during this period (such as \"The Tale of Ginger and Pickles\", about the local shop in Near Sawrey and \"The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse\", a wood mouse) reflect her increasing participation in village life and her delight in country living.\nOwning and managing these working farms required routine collaboration with the widely respected William Heelis. By the summer of 1912, Heelis had proposed marriage and Beatrix had accepted; although she did not immediately tell her parents, who once again disapproved because Heelis was only a country solicitor. Potter and Heelis were married on 15 October 1913 in London at St Mary Abbots in Kensington. The couple moved immediately to Near Sawrey, residing at Castle Cottage, the renovated farmhouse on Castle Farm, which was 34 acres large. Hill Top remained a working farm but was now remodelled to allow for the tenant family and Potter's private studio and workshop. At last her own woman, Potter settled into the partnerships that shaped the rest of her life: her country solicitor husband and his large family, her farms, the Sawrey community and the predictable rounds of country life. \"The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck\" and \"The Tale of Tom Kitten\" are representative of Hill Top Farm and her farming life and reflect her happiness with her country life.\nRupert Potter died in 1914 and, with the outbreak of World War I, Potter, now a wealthy woman, persuaded her mother to move to the Lake District and found a property for her to rent in Sawrey. Finding life in Sawrey dull, Helen Potter soon moved to Lindeth Howe (now a 34 bedroomed hotel) a large house the Potters had previously rented for the summer in Bowness, on the other side of Lake Windermere, Potter continued to write stories for Frederick Warne &amp; Co and fully participated in country life. She established a Nursing Trust for local villages and served on various committees and councils responsible for footpaths and other rural issues.\nSheep farming.\nSoon after acquiring Hill Top Farm, Potter became keenly interested in the breeding and raising of Herdwick sheep, the indigenous fell sheep. In 1923 she bought a large sheep farm in the Troutbeck Valley called Troutbeck Park Farm, formerly a deer park, restoring its land with thousands of Herdwick sheep. This established her as one of the major Herdwick sheep farmers in the county. She was admired by her shepherds and farm managers for her willingness to experiment with the latest biological remedies for the common diseases of sheep, and for her employment of the best shepherds, sheep breeders, and farm managers.\nBy the late 1920s, Potter and her Hill Top farm manager Tom Storey had made a name for their prize-winning Herdwick flock, which took many prizes at the local agricultural shows, where Potter was often asked to serve as a judge. In 1942 she became President-elect of the Herdwick Sheepbreeders' Association, the first time a woman had been elected but died before taking office.\nLake District conservation.\nPotter had been a disciple of the land conservation and preservation ideals of her long-time friend and mentor, Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley, the first secretary and founding member of the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty. She supported the efforts of the National Trust to preserve not just the places of extraordinary beauty but also those heads of valleys and low grazing lands that would be irreparably ruined by development. Potter was also an authority on the traditional Lakeland crafts, period furniture and stonework. She restored and preserved the farms that she bought or managed, making sure that each farm house had in it a piece of antique Lakeland furniture. Potter was interested in preserving not only the Herdwick sheep but also the way of life of fell farming. In 1930 the Heelises became partners with the National Trust in buying and managing the fell farms included in the large Monk Coniston Estate. The estate was composed of many farms spread over a wide area of north-western Lancashire, including the Tarn Hows. Potter was the \"de facto\" estate manager for the Trust for seven years until the National Trust could afford to repurchase most of the property from her. Potter's stewardship of these farms earned her full regard, but she was not without her critics, not the least of which were her contemporaries who felt she used her wealth and the position of her husband to acquire properties in advance of their being made public. She was notable in observing the problems of afforestation, preserving the intact grazing lands, and husbanding the quarries and timber on these farms. All her farms were stocked with Herdwick sheep and frequently with Galloway cattle.\nLater life.\nPotter continued to write stories and to draw, although mostly for her own pleasure. Her books in the late 1920s included the semi-autobiographical \"The Fairy Caravan\", a fanciful tale set in her beloved Troutbeck fells. It was published only in the US during Potter's lifetime, and not until 1952 in the UK. \"Sister Anne\", Potter's version of the story of Bluebeard, was written for her American readers, but illustrated by Katharine Sturges. A final folktale, \"Wag by Wall\", was published posthumously by \"The Horn Book Magazine\" in 1944. Potter was a generous patron of the Girl Guides, whose troupes she allowed to make their summer encampments on her land, and whose company she enjoyed as an older woman.\nPotter and William Heelis enjoyed a happy marriage of thirty years, continuing their farming and preservation efforts throughout the hard days of World War II. Although they were childless, Potter played an important role in William's large family, particularly enjoying her relationship with several nieces whom she helped educate, and giving comfort and aid to her husband's brothers and sisters.\nPotter died of complications from pneumonia and heart disease on 22 December 1943 at Castle Cottage, and her remains were cremated at Carleton Crematorium. She left nearly all her property to the National Trust, including over of land, sixteen farms, cottages and herds of cattle and Herdwick sheep. Hers was the largest gift at that time to the National Trust, and it enabled the preservation of the land now included in the Lake District National Park and the continuation of fell farming. The central office of the National Trust in Swindon was named \"Heelis\" in 2005 in her memory. \nWilliam Heelis continued his stewardship of their properties and of her literary and artistic work for the twenty months he survived her. When he died in August 1945, he left the remainder to the National Trust. He was a first cousin of the artist George Loraine Stampa.\nLegacy.\nPotter left almost all the original illustrations for her books to the National Trust. The copyright to her stories and merchandise was then given to her publisher Frederick Warne &amp; Co, now a division of the Penguin Group. On 1 January 2014, the copyright expired in the UK and other countries with a 70-years-after-death limit. Hill Top Farm was opened to the public by the National Trust in 1946; her artwork was displayed there until 1985 when it was moved to William Heelis's former law offices in Hawkshead, also owned by the National Trust as the Beatrix Potter Gallery.\nPotter gave her folios of mycological drawings to the Armitt Library and Museum in Ambleside before her death. \"The Tale of Peter Rabbit\" is owned by Frederick Warne and Company, \"The Tailor of Gloucester\" by the Tate Gallery and \"The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies\" by the British Museum.\nThe largest public collection of her letters and drawings is the Leslie Linder Bequest and Leslie Linder Collection at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. In the United States, the largest public collections are those in the Rare Book Department of the Free Library of Philadelphia, and the Cotsen Children's Library at Princeton University.\nIn 2015 a manuscript for an unpublished book was discovered by Jo Hanks, a publisher at Penguin Random House Children's Books, in the Victoria and Albert Museum archive. The book \"The Tale of Kitty-in-Boots\", with illustrations by Quentin Blake, was published 1 September 2016, to mark the 150th anniversary of Potter's birth.\nIn 2017, \"The Art of Beatrix Potter: Sketches, Paintings, and Illustrations\" by Emily Zach was published after San Francisco publisher Chronicle Books decided to mark the 150th anniversary of Beatrix Potter's birth by showing that she was \"far more than a 19th-century weekend painter. She was an artist of astonishing range.\"\nIn December 2017, the asteroid 13975 Beatrixpotter, discovered by Belgian astronomer Eric Elst in 1992, was named in her memory.\nAnalysis.\nThere are many interpretations of Potter's literary work, the sources of her art, and her life and times. These include critical evaluations of her corpus of children's literature and Modernist interpretations of Humphrey Carpenter and Katherine Chandler. Judy Taylor, \"That Naughty Rabbit: Beatrix Potter and Peter Rabbit\" (rev. 2002) tells the story of the first publication and many editions.\nPotter's country life and her farming have been discussed in the work of Susan Denyer and other authors in the publications of The National Trust, such as \"Beatrix Potter at Home in the Lake District\" (2004).\nPotter's work as a scientific illustrator and her work in mycology are discussed in Linda Lear's books \"Beatrix Potter: A Life in Nature\" (2006) and \"Beatrix Potter: The Extraordinary Life of a Victorian Genius\" (2008).\nAdaptations.\nIn 1971, a ballet film was released, \"The Tales of Beatrix Potter\", directed by Reginald Mills, set to music by John Lanchbery with choreography by Frederick Ashton, and performed in character costume by members of the Royal Ballet and the Royal Opera House orchestra. The ballet of the same name has been performed by other dance companies around the world.\nIn 1992, Potter's famous children's book \"The Tale of Benjamin Bunny\" was featured in the film \"Lorenzo's Oil\".\nPotter is also featured in Susan Wittig Albert's series of light mysteries called The Cottage Tales of Beatrix Potter. The first of the eight-book series is \"Tale of Hill Top Farm\" (2004), which deals with Potter's life in the Lake District and the village of Near Sawrey between 1905 and 1913.\nIn film.\nIn 1982, the BBC produced \"The Tale of Beatrix Potter\". This dramatization of her life was written by John Hawkesworth, directed by Bill Hayes, and starred Holly Aird and Penelope Wilton as the young and adult Beatrix, respectively. \"The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends\", a TV series based on her stories, which starred actress Niamh Cusack as Beatrix Potter.\nIn 1993, Weston Woods Studios made an almost hour non-story film called \"Beatrix Potter: Artist, Storyteller, and Countrywoman\" with narration by Lynn Redgrave and music by Ernest Troost.\nIn 2006, Chris Noonan directed \"Miss Potter\", a biographical film of Potter's life focusing on her early career and romance with her editor Norman Warne. The film stars Ren\u00e9e Zellweger, Ewan McGregor and Emily Watson.\nOn 9 February 2018, Columbia Pictures released \"Peter Rabbit\", directed by Will Gluck, based on the work by Potter."}
{"id": "4482", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4482", "title": "Liberal Party (UK)", "text": "The Liberal Party was one of the two major political parties in the United Kingdom with the opposing Conservative Party in the 19th and early 20th centuries. The party arose from an alliance of Whigs and free trade-supporting Peelites and the reformist Radicals in the 1850s. By the end of the 19th century, it had formed four governments under William Gladstone. Despite being divided over the issue of Irish Home Rule, the party returned to government in 1905 and then won a landslide victory in the following year's general election.\nUnder prime ministers Henry Campbell-Bannerman (1905\u20131908) and H. H. Asquith (1908\u20131916), the Liberal Party passed the welfare reforms that created a basic British welfare state. Although Asquith was the party's leader, its dominant figure was David Lloyd George. Asquith was overwhelmed by the wartime role of coalition prime minister and Lloyd George replaced him as prime minister in late 1916, but Asquith remained as Liberal Party leader. The pair fought for years over control of the party, badly weakening it in the process. In \"The Oxford Companion to British History\", historian Martin Pugh argues:\nThe government of Lloyd George was dominated by the Conservative Party, which finally deposed him in 1922. By the end of the 1920s, the Labour Party had replaced the Liberals as the Conservatives' main rival. The Liberal Party went into decline after 1918 and by the 1950s won no more than six seats at general elections. Apart from notable by-election victories, its fortunes did not improve significantly until it formed the SDP\u2013Liberal Alliance with the newly formed Social Democratic Party (SDP) in 1981. At the 1983 general election, the Alliance won over a quarter of the vote, but only 23 of the 650 seats it contested. At the 1987 general election, its share of the vote fell below 23% and the Liberals and Social Democratic Party merged in 1988 to form the Liberal Democrats. A splinter group reconstituted the Liberal Party in 1989.\nProminent intellectuals associated with the Liberal Party include the philosopher John Stuart Mill, the economist John Maynard Keynes and social planner William Beveridge.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Liberal Party grew out of the Whigs, who had their origins in an aristocratic faction in the reign of Charles II and the early 19th century Radicals. The Whigs were in favour of reducing the power of the Crown and increasing the power of Parliament. Although their motives in this were originally to gain more power for themselves, the more idealistic Whigs gradually came to support an expansion of democracy for its own sake. The great figures of reformist Whiggery were Charles James Fox (died 1806) and his disciple and successor Earl Grey. After decades in opposition, the Whigs returned to power under Grey in 1830 and carried the First Reform Act in 1832.\nThe Reform Act was the climax of Whiggism, but it also brought about the Whigs' demise. The admission of the middle classes to the franchise and to the House of Commons led eventually to the development of a systematic middle class liberalism and the end of Whiggery, although for many years reforming aristocrats held senior positions in the party. In the years after Grey's retirement, the party was led first by Lord Melbourne, a fairly traditional Whig, and then by Lord John Russell, the son of a Duke but a crusading radical, and by Lord Palmerston, a renegade Irish Tory and essentially a conservative, although capable of radical gestures.\nAs early as 1839, Russell had adopted the name of \"Liberals\", but in reality his party was a loose coalition of Whigs in the House of Lords and Radicals in the Commons. The leading Radicals were John Bright and Richard Cobden, who represented the manufacturing towns which had gained representation under the Reform Act. They favoured social reform, personal liberty, reducing the powers of the Crown and the Church of England (many Liberals were Nonconformists), avoidance of war and foreign alliances (which were bad for business) and above all free trade. For a century, free trade remained the one cause which could unite all Liberals.\nIn 1841, the Liberals lost office to the Conservatives under Sir Robert Peel, but their period in opposition was short because the Conservatives split over the repeal of the Corn Laws, a free trade issue; and a faction known as the Peelites (but not Peel himself, who died soon after) defected to the Liberal side. This allowed ministries led by Russell, Palmerston and the Peelite Lord Aberdeen to hold office for most of the 1850s and 1860s. A leading Peelite was William Ewart Gladstone, who was a reforming Chancellor of the Exchequer in most of these governments. The formal foundation of the Liberal Party is traditionally traced to 1859 and the formation of Palmerston's second government.\nHowever, the Whig-Radical amalgam could not become a true modern political party while it was dominated by aristocrats and it was not until the departure of the \"Two Terrible Old Men\", Russell and Palmerston, that Gladstone could become the first leader of the modern Liberal Party. This was brought about by Palmerston's death in 1865 and Russell's retirement in 1868. After a brief Conservative government (during which the Second Reform Act was passed by agreement between the parties), Gladstone won a huge victory at the 1868 election and formed the first Liberal government. The establishment of the party as a national membership organisation came with the foundation of the National Liberal Federation in 1877. The philosopher John Stuart Mill was also a Liberal MP from 1865 to 1868.\nGladstone era.\nFor the next thirty years Gladstone and Liberalism were synonymous. William Ewart Gladstone served as prime minister four times (1868\u201374, 1880\u201385, 1886, and 1892\u201394). His financial policies, based on the notion of balanced budgets, low taxes and \"laissez-faire\", were suited to a developing capitalist society, but they could not respond effectively as economic and social conditions changed. Called the \"Grand Old Man\" later in life, Gladstone was always a dynamic popular orator who appealed strongly to the working class and to the lower middle class. Deeply religious, Gladstone brought a new moral tone to politics, with his evangelical sensibility and his opposition to aristocracy. His moralism often angered his upper-class opponents (including Queen Victoria), and his heavy-handed control split the Liberal Party.\nIn foreign policy, Gladstone was in general against foreign entanglements, but he did not resist the realities of imperialism. For example, he ordered the occupation of Egypt by British forces in 1882. His goal was to create a European order based on co-operation rather than conflict and on mutual trust instead of rivalry and suspicion; the rule of law was to supplant the reign of force and self-interest. This Gladstonian concept of a harmonious Concert of Europe was opposed to and ultimately defeated by a Bismarckian system of manipulated alliances and antagonisms.\nAs prime minister from 1868 to 1874, Gladstone headed a Liberal Party which was a coalition of Peelites like himself, Whigs and Radicals. He was now a spokesman for \"peace, economy and reform\". One major achievement was the Elementary Education Act of 1870, which provided England with an adequate system of elementary schools for the first time. He also secured the abolition of the purchase of commissions in the army and of religious tests for admission to Oxford and Cambridge; the introduction of the secret ballot in elections; the legalization of trade unions; and the reorganization of the judiciary in the Judicature Act.\nRegarding Ireland, the major Liberal achievements were land reform, where he ended centuries of landlord oppression, and the disestablishment of the (Anglican) Church of Ireland through the Irish Church Act 1869.\nIn the 1874 general election Gladstone was defeated by the Conservatives under Benjamin Disraeli during a sharp economic recession. He formally resigned as Liberal leader and was succeeded by the Marquess of Hartington, but he soon changed his mind and returned to active politics. He strongly disagreed with Disraeli's pro-Ottoman foreign policy and in 1880 he conducted the first outdoor mass-election campaign in Britain, known as the Midlothian campaign. The Liberals won a large majority in the 1880 election. Hartington ceded his place and Gladstone resumed office.\nIreland and Home Rule.\nAmong the consequences of the Third Reform Act (1884) was the giving of the vote to many Catholics in Ireland. In the 1885 general election the Irish Parliamentary Party held the balance of power in the House of Commons, and demanded Irish Home Rule as the price of support for a continued Gladstone ministry. Gladstone personally supported Home Rule, but a strong Liberal Unionist faction led by Joseph Chamberlain, along with the last of the Whigs, Hartington, opposed it. The Irish Home Rule bill proposed to offer all owners of Irish land a chance to sell to the state at a price equal to 20 years' purchase of the rents and allowing tenants to purchase the land. Irish nationalist reaction was mixed, Unionist opinion was hostile, and the election addresses during the 1886 election revealed English radicals to be against the bill also. Among the Liberal rank and file, several Gladstonian candidates disowned the bill, reflecting fears at the constituency level that the interests of the working people were being sacrificed to finance a costly rescue operation for the landed \u00e9lite. Further, Home Rule had not been promised in the Liberals' election manifesto, and so the impression was given that Gladstone was buying Irish support in a rather desperate manner to hold on to power.\nThe result was a catastrophic split in the Liberal Party, and heavy defeat in the 1886 election at the hands of Lord Salisbury, who was supported by the breakaway Liberal Unionist Party. There was a final weak Gladstone ministry in 1892, but it also was dependent on Irish support and failed to get Irish Home Rule through the House of Lords.\nNewcastle Programme.\nHistorically, the aristocracy was divided between Conservatives and Liberals. However, when Gladstone committed to home rule for Ireland, Britain's upper classes largely abandoned the Liberal party, giving the Conservatives a large permanent majority in the House of Lords. Following the Queen, High Society in London largely ostracized home rulers and Liberal clubs were badly split. Joseph Chamberlain took a major element of upper-class supporters out of the Party and into a third party called Liberal Unionism on the Irish issue. It collaborated with and eventually merged into the Conservative party. The Gladstonian liberals in 1891 adopted The Newcastle Programme that included home rule for Ireland, disestablishment of the Church of England in Wales, tighter controls on the sale of liquor, major extension of factory regulation and various democratic political reforms. The Programme had a strong appeal to the nonconformist middle-class Liberal element, which felt liberated by the departure of the aristocracy.\nRelations with trade unions.\nA major long-term consequence of the Third Reform Act was the rise of Lib-Lab candidates, in the absence of any committed Labour Party. The Act split all county constituencies (which were represented by multiple MPs) into single-member constituencies, roughly corresponding to population patterns. In areas with working class majorities, in particular coal-mining areas, Lib-Lab candidates were popular, and they received sponsorship and endorsement from trade unions. In the first election after the Act was passed (1885), thirteen were elected, up from two in 1874. The Third Reform Act also facilitated the demise of the Whig old guard: in two-member constituencies, it was common to pair a Whig and a radical under the Liberal banner. After the Third Reform Act, fewer Whigs were selected as candidates.\nReform policies.\nA broad range of interventionist reforms were introduced by the 1892\u20131895 Liberal government. Amongst other measures, standards of accommodation and of teaching in schools were improved, factory inspection was made more stringent, and ministers used their powers to increase the wages and reduce the working hours of large numbers of male workers employed by the state.\nHistorian Walter L. Arnstein concludes:\nAfter Gladstone.\nGladstone finally retired in 1894. Gladstone's support for Home Rule deeply divided the party, and it lost its upper and upper-middle-class base, while keeping support among Protestant nonconformists and the Celtic fringe. Historian R. C. K. Ensor reports that after 1886, the main Liberal Party was deserted by practically the entire whig peerage and the great majority of the upper-class and upper-middle-class members. High prestige London clubs that had a Liberal base were deeply split. Ensor notes that, \"London society, following the known views of the Queen, practically ostracized home rulers.\" \nThe new Liberal leader was the ineffectual Lord Rosebery. He led the party to a heavy defeat in the 1895 general election.\nLiberal factions.\nThe Liberal Party lacked a unified ideological base in 1906. It contained numerous contradictory and hostile factions, such as imperialists and supporters of the Boers; near-socialists and laissez-faire classical liberals; suffragettes and opponents of women's suffrage; antiwar elements and supporters of the military alliance with France. Nonconformists \u2013 Protestants outside the Anglican fold \u2013 were a powerful element, dedicated to opposing the established church in terms of education and taxation. However, the non-conformists were losing support amid society at large and played a lesser role in party affairs after 1900. The party, furthermore, also included Irish Catholics, and secularists from the labour movement. Many Conservatives (including Winston Churchill) had recently protested against high tariff moves by the Conservatives by switching to the anti-tariff Liberal camp, but it was unclear how many old Conservative traits they brought along, especially on military and naval issues.\nThe middle-class business, professional and intellectual communities were generally strongholds, although some old aristocratic families played important roles as well. The working-class element was moving rapidly toward the newly emerging Labour Party. One uniting element was widespread agreement on the use of politics and Parliament as a device to upgrade and improve society and to reform politics. All Liberals were outraged when Conservatives used their majority in the House of Lords to block reform legislation. In the House of Lords, the Liberals had lost most of their members, who in the 1890s \"became Conservative in all but name.\" The government could force the unwilling king to create new Liberal peers, and that threat did prove decisive in the battle for dominance of Commons over Lords in 1911.\nRise of New Liberalism.\nThe late nineteenth century saw the emergence of New Liberalism within the Liberal Party, which advocated state intervention as a means of guaranteeing freedom and removing obstacles to it such as poverty and unemployment. The policies of the New Liberalism are now known as social liberalism.\nThe New Liberals included intellectuals like L. T. Hobhouse, and John A. Hobson. They saw individual liberty as something achievable only under favourable social and economic circumstances. In their view, the poverty, squalor, and ignorance in which many people lived made it impossible for freedom and individuality to flourish. New Liberals believed that these conditions could be ameliorated only through collective action coordinated by a strong, welfare-oriented, and interventionist state.\nAfter the historic 1906 victory, the Liberal Party introduced multiple reforms on range of issues, including health insurance, unemployment insurance, and pensions for elderly workers, thereby laying the groundwork for the future British welfare state. Some proposals failed, such as licensing fewer pubs, or rolling back Conservative educational policies. The People's Budget of 1909, championed by David Lloyd George and fellow Liberal Winston Churchill, introduced unprecedented taxes on the wealthy in Britain and radical social welfare programmes to the country's policies. It was the first budget with the expressed intent of redistributing wealth among the public. It imposed increased taxes on luxuries, liquor, tobacco, high incomes, and land \u2013 taxation that fell heavily on the rich. The new money was to be made available for new welfare programmes as well as new battleships. In 1911 Lloyd George succeeded in putting through Parliament his National Insurance Act, making provision for sickness and invalidism, and this was followed by his Unemployment Insurance Act.\nHistorian Peter Weiler argues:\nContrasting Old Liberalism with New Liberalism, David Lloyd George noted in a 1908 speech the following:\nLiberal zenith.\nThe Liberals languished in opposition for a decade while the coalition of Salisbury and Chamberlain held power. The 1890s were marred by infighting between the three principal successors to Gladstone, party leader William Harcourt, former prime minister Lord Rosebery, and Gladstone's personal secretary, John Morley. This intrigue finally led Harcourt and Morley to resign their positions in 1898 as they continued to be at loggerheads with Rosebery over Irish home rule and issues relating to imperialism. Replacing Harcourt as party leader was Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. Harcourt's resignation briefly muted the turmoil in the party, but the beginning of the Second Boer War soon nearly broke the party apart, with Rosebery and a circle of supporters including important future Liberal figures H. H. Asquith, Edward Grey and Richard Burdon Haldane forming a clique dubbed the Liberal Imperialists that supported the government in the prosecution of the war. On the other side, more radical members of the party formed a Pro-Boer faction that denounced the conflict and called for an immediate end to hostilities. Quickly rising to prominence among the Pro-Boers was David Lloyd George, a relatively new MP and a master of rhetoric, who took advantage of having a national stage to speak out on a controversial issue to make his name in the party. Harcourt and Morley also sided with this group, though with slightly different aims. Campbell-Bannerman tried to keep these forces together at the head of a moderate Liberal rump, but in 1901 he delivered a speech on the government's \"methods of barbarism\" in South Africa that pulled him further to the left and nearly tore the party in two. The party was saved after Salisbury's retirement in 1902 when his successor, Arthur Balfour, pushed a series of unpopular initiatives such as the Education Act 1902 and Joseph Chamberlain called for a new system of protectionist tariffs.\nCampbell-Bannerman was able to rally the party around the traditional liberal platform of free trade and land reform and led them to the greatest election victory in their history. This would prove the last time the Liberals won a majority in their own right. Although he presided over a large majority, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman was overshadowed by his ministers, most notably H. H. Asquith at the Exchequer, Edward Grey at the Foreign Office, Richard Burdon Haldane at the War Office and David Lloyd George at the Board of Trade. Campbell-Bannerman retired in 1908 and died soon after. He was succeeded by Asquith, who stepped up the government's radicalism. Lloyd George succeeded Asquith at the Exchequer, and was in turn succeeded at the Board of Trade by Winston Churchill, a recent defector from the Conservatives.\nThe 1906 general election also represented a shift to the left by the Liberal Party. According to Rosemary Rees, almost half of the Liberal MPs elected in 1906 were supportive of the 'New Liberalism' (which advocated government action to improve people's lives),) while claims were made that \u201cfive-sixths of the Liberal party are left wing.\u201d Other historians, however, have questioned the extent to which the Liberal Party experienced a leftward shift; according to Robert C. Self however, only between 50 and 60 Liberal MPs out of the 400 in the parliamentary party after 1906 were Social Radicals, with a core of 20 to 30. Nevertheless, important junior offices were held in the cabinet by what Duncan Tanner has termed \"genuine New Liberals, Centrist reformers, and Fabian collectivists,\" and much legislation was pushed through by the Liberals in government. This included the regulation of working hours, National Insurance and welfare.\nA political battle erupted over the People's Budget and resulted in the passage of an act ending the power of the House of Lords to block legislation. The cost was high, however, as the government was required by the king to call two general elections in 1910 to validate its position and ended up frittering away most of its large majority, being left once again dependent on the Irish Nationalists.\nAs a result, Asquith was forced to introduce a new third Home Rule bill in 1912. Since the House of Lords no longer had the power to block the bill, the Unionist's Ulster Volunteers led by Sir Edward Carson, launched a campaign of opposition that included the threat of armed resistance in Ulster and the threat of mass resignation of their commissions by army officers in Ireland in 1914 (\"see Curragh Incident\"). In their resistance to Home Rule the Ulster Protestants had the full support of the Conservatives, whose leader, Bonar Law, was of Ulster-Scots descent. The country seemed to be on the brink of civil war when the First World War broke out in August 1914. Historian George Dangerfield has argued that the multiplicity of crises in 1910 to 1914, before the war broke out, so weakened the Liberal coalition that it marked the \"Strange Death of Liberal England\". However, most historians date the collapse to the crisis of the First World War.\nDecline.\nThe Liberal Party might have survived a short war, but the totality of the Great War called for measures that the Party had long rejected. The result was the permanent destruction of the ability of the Liberal Party to lead a government. Historian Robert Blake explains the dilemma:\nBlake further notes that it was the Liberals, not the Conservatives who needed the moral outrage of Belgium to justify going to war, while the Conservatives called for intervention from the start of the crisis on the grounds of \"realpolitik\" and the balance of power. However, Lloyd George and Churchill were zealous supporters of the war, and gradually forced the old peace-orientated Liberals out.\nAsquith was blamed for the poor British performance in the first year. Since the Liberals ran the war without consulting the Conservatives, there were heavy partisan attacks. However, even Liberal commentators were dismayed by the lack of energy at the top. At the time, public opinion was intensely hostile, both in the media and in the street, against any young man in civilian garb and labeled as a slacker. The leading Liberal newspaper, the \"Manchester Guardian\" complained:\nAsquith's Liberal government was brought down in , due in particular to a crisis in inadequate artillery shell production and the protest resignation of Admiral Fisher over the disastrous Gallipoli Campaign against Turkey. Reluctant to face doom in an election, Asquith formed a new coalition government on 25 May, with the majority of the new cabinet coming from his own Liberal party and the Unionist (Conservative) party, along with a token Labour representation. The new government lasted a year and a half, and was the last time Liberals controlled the government. The analysis of historian A. J. P. Taylor is that the British people were so deeply divided over numerous issues, But on all sides there was growing distrust of the Asquith government. There was no agreement whatsoever on wartime issues. The leaders of the two parties realized that embittered debates in Parliament would further undermine popular morale and so the House of Commons did not once discuss the war before May 1915. Taylor argues:\nThe 1915 coalition fell apart at the end of 1916, when the Conservatives withdrew their support from Asquith and gave it instead to Lloyd George, who became prime minister at the head of a new coalition largely made up of Conservatives. Asquith and his followers moved to the opposition benches in Parliament and the Liberal Party was deeply split once again.\nLloyd George as a Liberal heading a Conservative coalition.\nLloyd George remained a Liberal all his life, but he abandoned many standard Liberal principles in his crusade to win the war at all costs. He insisted on strong government controls over business as opposed to the \"laissez-faire\" attitudes of traditional Liberals. He insisted on conscription of young men into the Army, a position that deeply troubled his old colleagues. That brought him and a few like-minded Liberals into the new coalition on the ground long occupied by Conservatives. There was no more planning for world peace or liberal treatment of Germany, nor discomfit with aggressive and authoritarian measures of state power. More deadly to the future of the party, says historian Trevor Wilson, was its repudiation by ideological Liberals, who decided sadly that it no longer represented their principles. Finally the presence of the vigorous new Labour Party on the left gave a new home to voters disenchanted with the Liberal performance.\nIn the 1918 general election, Lloyd George, hailed as \"the Man Who Won the War\", led his coalition into a khaki election. Lloyd George and the Conservative leader Bonar Law wrote a joint letter of support to candidates to indicate they were considered the official Coalition candidates\u2014this \"coupon\", as it became known, was issued against many sitting Liberal MPs, often to devastating effect, though not against Asquith himself. The coalition won a massive victory as the Asquithian Liberals and Labour were decimated. Those remaining Liberal MPs who were opposed to the Coalition Government went into opposition under the parliamentary leadership of Sir Donald MacLean who also became Leader of the Opposition. Asquith, who had appointed MacLean, remained as overall Leader of the Liberal Party even though he lost his seat in 1918. Asquith returned to parliament in 1920 and resumed leadership. Between 1919\u20131923, the anti-Lloyd George Liberals were called Asquithian Liberals, Wee Free Liberals or Independent Liberals.\nLloyd George was increasingly under the influence of the rejuvenated Conservative party who numerically dominated the coalition. In 1922, the Conservative backbenchers rebelled against the continuation of the coalition, citing, in particular, Lloyd George's plan for war with Turkey in the Chanak Crisis, and his corrupt sale of honours. He resigned as prime minister and was succeeded by Bonar Law.\nAt the 1922 and 1923 elections the Liberals won barely a third of the vote and only a quarter of the seats in the House of Commons as many radical voters abandoned the divided Liberals and went over to Labour. In 1922, Labour became the official opposition. A reunion of the two warring factions took place in 1923 when the new Conservative prime minister Stanley Baldwin committed his party to protective tariffs, causing the Liberals to reunite in support of free trade. The party gained ground in the 1923 general election but made most of its gains from Conservatives whilst losing ground to Labour\u2014a sign of the party's direction for many years to come. The party remained the third largest in the House of Commons, but the Conservatives had lost their majority. There was much speculation and fear about the prospect of a Labour government and comparatively little about a Liberal government, even though it could have plausibly presented an experienced team of ministers compared to Labour's almost complete lack of experience as well as offering a middle ground that could obtain support from both Conservatives and Labour in crucial Commons divisions. However, instead of trying to force the opportunity to form a Liberal government, Asquith decided instead to allow Labour the chance of office in the belief that they would prove incompetent and this would set the stage for a revival of Liberal fortunes at Labour's expense, but it was a fatal error.\nLabour was determined to destroy the Liberals and become the sole party of the left. Ramsay MacDonald was forced into a snap election in 1924 and although his government was defeated he achieved his objective of virtually wiping the Liberals out as many more radical voters now moved to Labour whilst moderate middle-class Liberal voters concerned about socialism moved to the Conservatives. The Liberals were reduced to a mere forty seats in Parliament, only seven of which had been won against candidates from both parties and none of these formed a coherent area of Liberal survival. The party seemed finished, and during this period some Liberals, such as Churchill, went over to the Conservatives while others went over to Labour. Several Labour ministers of later generations, such as Michael Foot and Tony Benn, were the sons of Liberal MPs.\nAsquith died in 1928 and the enigmatic figure of Lloyd George returned to the leadership and began a drive to produce coherent policies on many key issues of the day. In the 1929 general election, he made a final bid to return the Liberals to the political mainstream, with an ambitious programme of state stimulation of the economy called \"We Can Conquer Unemployment!\", largely written for him by the Liberal economist John Maynard Keynes. The Liberal Party stood in Northern Ireland for the first and only time in the 1929 general election gaining 17% of the vote but won no seats. The Liberals gained ground, but once again it was at the Conservatives' expense whilst also losing seats to Labour. Indeed, the urban areas of the country suffering heavily from unemployment, which might have been expected to respond the most to the radical economic policies of the Liberals, instead gave the party its worst results. By contrast, most of the party's seats were won either due to the absence of a candidate from one of the other parties or in rural areas on the Celtic fringe, where local evidence suggests that economic ideas were at best peripheral to the electorate's concerns. The Liberals now found themselves with 59 members, holding the balance of power in a Parliament where Labour was the largest party but lacked an overall majority. Lloyd George offered a degree of support to the Labour government in the hope of winning concessions, including a degree of electoral reform to introduce the alternative vote, but this support was to prove bitterly divisive as the Liberals increasingly divided between those seeking to gain what Liberal goals they could achieve, those who preferred a Conservative government to a Labour one and vice versa.\nThe last majority Liberal Government in Britain was elected in 1906. The years preceding the First World War were marked by worker strikes and civil unrest and saw many violent confrontations between civilians and the police and armed forces. Other issues of the period included women's suffrage and the Irish Home Rule movement. After the carnage of 1914\u20131918, the democratic reforms of the Representation of the People Act 1918 instantly tripled the number of people entitled to vote in Britain from seven to twenty-one million. The Labour Party benefited most from this huge change in the electorate, forming its first minority government in 1924.\nSplits over the National Government.\nA group of Liberal MPs led by Sir John Simon opposed the Liberal Party's support for the minority Labour government. They preferred to reach an accommodation with the Conservatives. In 1931 MacDonald's Labour government fell apart in response to the Great Depression. Macdonald agreed to lead a National Government of all parties, which passed a budget to deal with the financial crisis. When few Labour MPs backed the National government, it became clear that the Conservatives had the clear majority of government supporters. They then forced Macdonald to call a general election. Lloyd George called for the party to leave the National government but only a few MPs and candidates followed. The majority, led by Sir Herbert Samuel, decided to contest the elections as part of the government. The bulk of Liberal MPs supported the government, \u2013 the Liberal Nationals (officially the \"National Liberals\" after 1947) led by Simon, also known as \"Simonites\", and the \"Samuelites\" or \"official Liberals\", led by Samuel who remained as the official party. Both groups secured about 34 MPs but proceeded to diverge even further after the election, with the Liberal Nationals remaining supporters of the government throughout its life. There were to be a succession of discussions about them rejoining the Liberals, but these usually foundered on the issues of free trade and continued support for the National Government. The one significant reunification came in 1946 when the Liberal and Liberal National party organisations in London merged.\nThe official Liberals found themselves a tiny minority within a government committed to protectionism. Slowly they found this issue to be one they could not support. In early 1932 it was agreed to suspend the principle of collective responsibility to allow the Liberals to oppose the introduction of tariffs. Later in 1932 the Liberals resigned their ministerial posts over the introduction of the Ottawa Agreement on Imperial Preference. However, they remained sitting on the government benches supporting it in Parliament, though in the country local Liberal activists bitterly opposed the government. Finally in late 1933 the Liberals crossed the floor of the House of Commons and went into complete opposition. By this point their number of MPs was severely depleted. In the 1935 general election, just 17 Liberal MPs were elected, along with Lloyd George and three followers as independent Liberals. Immediately after the election the two groups reunited, though Lloyd George declined to play much of a formal role in his old party. Over the next ten years there would be further defections as MPs deserted to either the Liberal Nationals or Labour. Yet there were a few recruits, such as Clement Davies, who had deserted to the National Liberals in 1931 but now returned to the party during World War II and who would lead it after the war.\nNear extinction.\nSamuel had lost his seat in the 1935 election and the leadership of the party fell to Sir Archibald Sinclair. With many traditional domestic Liberal policies now regarded as irrelevant, he focused the party on opposition to both the rise of Fascism in Europe and the appeasement foreign policy of the British government, arguing that intervention was needed, in contrast to the Labour calls for pacifism. Despite the party's weaknesses, Sinclair gained a high profile as he sought to recall the Midlothian Campaign and once more revitalise the Liberals as the party of a strong foreign policy.\nIn 1940, they joined Churchill's wartime coalition government, with Sinclair serving as Secretary of State for Air, the last British Liberal to hold Cabinet rank office for seventy years. However, it was a sign of the party's lack of importance that they were not included in the War Cabinet; some leading party members founded Radical Action, a group which called for liberal candidates to break the war-time electoral pact. At the 1945 general election, Sinclair and many of his colleagues lost their seats to both Conservatives and Labour and the party returned just 12 MPs to Westminster, but this was just the beginning of the decline. In 1950, the general election saw the Liberals return just nine MPs. Another general election was called in 1951 and the Liberals were left with just six MPs and all but one of them were aided by the fact that the Conservatives refrained from fielding candidates in those constituencies.\nIn 1957, this total fell to five when one of the Liberal MPs died and the subsequent by-election was lost to the Labour Party, which selected the former Liberal Deputy Leader Megan Lloyd George as its own candidate. The Liberal Party seemed close to extinction. During this low period, it was often joked that Liberal MPs could hold meetings in the back of one taxi.\nLiberal revival.\nThrough the 1950s and into the 1960s the Liberals survived only because a handful of constituencies in rural Scotland and Wales clung to their Liberal traditions, whilst in two English towns, Bolton and Huddersfield, local Liberals and Conservatives agreed to each contest only one of the town's two seats. Jo Grimond, for example, who became Liberal leader in 1956, was MP for the remote Orkney and Shetland islands. Under his leadership a Liberal revival began, marked by the Orpington by-election of March 1962 which was won by Eric Lubbock. There, the Liberals won a seat in the London suburbs for the first time since 1935.\nThe Liberals became the first of the major British political parties to advocate British membership of the European Economic Community. Grimond also sought an intellectual revival of the party, seeking to position it as a non-socialist radical alternative to the Conservative government of the day. In particular he canvassed the support of the young post-war university students and recent graduates, appealing to younger voters in a way that many of his recent predecessors had not, and asserting a new strand of Liberalism for the post-war world.\nThe new middle-class suburban generation began to find the Liberals' policies attractive again. Under Grimond (who retired in 1967) and his successor, Jeremy Thorpe, the Liberals regained the status of a serious third force in British politics, polling up to 20% of the vote, but unable to break the duopoly of Labour and Conservative and win more than fourteen seats in the Commons. An additional problem was competition in the Liberal heartlands in Scotland and Wales from the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru who both grew as electoral forces from the 1960s onwards. Although Emlyn Hooson held on to the seat of Montgomeryshire, upon Clement Davies death in 1962, the party lost five Welsh seats between 1950 and 1966. In September 1966, the Welsh Liberal Party formed their own state party, moving the Liberal Party into a fully federal structure.\nIn local elections, Liverpool remained a Liberal stronghold, with the party taking the plurality of seats on the elections to the new Liverpool Metropolitan Borough Council in 1973. In the February 1974 general election, the Conservative government of Edward Heath won a plurality of votes cast, but the Labour Party gained a plurality of seats. The Conservatives were unable to form a government due to the Ulster Unionist MPs refusing to support the Conservatives after the Northern Ireland Sunningdale Agreement. The Liberals now held the balance of power in the Commons. Conservatives offered Thorpe the Home Office if he would join a coalition government with Heath. Thorpe was personally in favour of it, but the party insisted on a clear government commitment to introducing proportional representation and a change of prime minister. The former was unacceptable to Heath's cabinet and the latter to Heath personally, so the talks collapsed. Instead, a minority Labour government was formed under Harold Wilson but with no formal support from Thorpe. In the October 1974 general election, the Liberals slipped back slightly and the Labour government won a wafer-thin majority.\nThorpe was subsequently forced to resign after allegations that he attempted to have his homosexual lover murdered by a hitman. The party's new leader, David Steel, negotiated the Lib-Lab pact with Wilson's successor as prime minister, James Callaghan. According to this pact, the Liberals would support the government in crucial votes in exchange for some influence over policy. The agreement lasted from 1977 to 1978, but proved mostly fruitless, for two reasons: the Liberals' key demand of proportional representation was rejected by most Labour MPs, whilst the contacts between Liberal spokespersons and Labour ministers often proved detrimental, such as between finance spokesperson John Pardoe and Chancellor of the Exchequer Denis Healey, who were mutually antagonistic.\nAlliance, Liberal Democrats and reconstituted Liberal Party.\nThe Conservative Party under the leadership of Margaret Thatcher won the 1979 general election, placing the Labour Party back in opposition, which served to push the Liberals back into the margins.\nIn 1981, defectors from a moderate faction of the Labour Party, led by former Cabinet ministers Roy Jenkins, David Owen and Shirley Williams, founded the Social Democratic Party (SDP). The new party and the Liberals quickly formed the SDP\u2013Liberal Alliance, which for a while polled as high as 50% in the opinion polls and appeared capable of winning the next general election. Indeed, Steel was so confident of an Alliance victory that he told the 1981 Liberal conference, \"Go back to your constituencies, and prepare for government!\".\nHowever, the Alliance was overtaken in the polls by the Tories in the aftermath of the Falkland Islands War and at the 1983 general election the Conservatives were re-elected by a landslide, with Labour once again forming the opposition. While the SDP\u2013Liberal Alliance came close to Labour in terms of votes (a share of more than 25%), it only had 23 MPs compared to Labour's 209. The Alliance's support was spread out across the country, and was not concentrated in enough areas to translate into seats.\nIn the 1987 general election, the Alliance's share of the votes fell slightly and it now had 22 MPs. In the election's aftermath Steel proposed a merger of the two parties. Most SDP members voted in favour of the merger, but SDP leader David Owen objected and continued to lead a \"rump\" SDP.\nIn March 1988, the Liberal Party and Social Democratic Party merged to create the Social and Liberal Democrats, renamed the Liberal Democrats in October 1989. Over two-thirds of Liberal members joined the merged party, along with all sitting MPs. Steel and SDP leader Robert Maclennan served briefly as interim leaders of the merged party.\nA group of Liberal opponents of the merger with the Social Democrats, including Michael Meadowcroft (the former Liberal MP for Leeds West) and Paul Wiggin (who served on Peterborough City Council as a Liberal), continued with a new party organisation under the name of the 'Liberal Party'. Meadowcroft joined the Liberal Democrats in 2007, but the Liberal Party as reconstituted in 1989 continues to hold council seats and field candidates in Westminster Parliamentary elections.\nIdeology.\nDuring the 19th century, the Liberal Party was broadly in favour of what would today be called classical liberalism, supporting \"laissez-faire\" economic policies such as free trade and minimal government interference in the economy (this doctrine was usually termed Gladstonian liberalism after the Victorian era Liberal prime minister William Ewart Gladstone). The Liberal Party favoured social reform, personal liberty, reducing the powers of the Crown and the Church of England (many of them were nonconformists) and an extension of the electoral franchise. Sir William Harcourt, a prominent Liberal politician in the Victorian era, said this about liberalism in 1872: If there be any party which is more pledged than another to resist a policy of restrictive legislation, having for its object social coercion, that party is the Liberal party. (Cheers.) But liberty does not consist in making others do what you think right, (Hear, hear.) The difference between a free Government and a Government which is not free is principally this\u2014that a Government which is not free interferes with everything it can, and a free Government interferes with nothing except what it must. A despotic Government tries to make everybody do what it wishes; a Liberal Government tries, as far as the safety of society will permit, to allow everybody to do as he wishes. It has been the tradition of the Liberal party consistently to maintain the doctrine of individual liberty. It is because they have done so that England is the place where people can do more what they please than in any other country in the world. [...] It is this practice of allowing one set of people to dictate to another set of people what they shall do, what they shall think, what they shall drink, when they shall go to bed, what they shall buy, and where they shall buy it, what wages they shall get and how they shall spend them, against which the Liberal party have always protested.\nThe political terms of \"modern\", \"progressive\" or \"new\" Liberalism began to appear in the mid to late 1880s and became increasingly common to denote the tendency in the Liberal Party to favour an increased role for the state as more important than the classical liberal stress on self-help and freedom of choice.\nBy the early 20th century, the Liberals stance began to shift towards \"New Liberalism\", what would today be called social liberalism, namely a belief in personal liberty with a support for government intervention to provide social welfare. This shift was best exemplified by the Liberal government of H. H. Asquith and his Chancellor David Lloyd George, whose Liberal reforms in the early 1900s created a basic welfare state.\nDavid Lloyd George adopted a programme at the 1929 general election entitled \"We Can Conquer Unemployment!\", although by this stage the Liberals had declined to third-party status. The Liberals as expressed in the \"Liberal Yellow Book\" now regarded opposition to state intervention as being a characteristic of right-wing extremists.\nAfter nearly becoming extinct in the 1940s and the 1950s, the Liberal Party revived its fortunes somewhat under the leadership of Jo Grimond in the 1960s by positioning itself as a radical centrist, non-socialist alternative to the Conservative and Labour Party governments of the time.\nReligious alignment.\nSince 1660, nonconformist Protestants have played a major role in English politics. Relatively few MPs were Dissenters. However the Dissenters were a major voting bloc in many areas, such as the East Midlands. They were very well organised and highly motivated and largely won over the Whigs and Liberals to their cause. Down to the 1830s, Dissenters demanded removal of political and civil disabilities that applied to them (especially those in the Test and Corporation Acts). The Anglican establishment strongly resisted until 1828. Numerous reforms of voting rights, especially that of 1832, increased the political power of Dissenters. They demanded an end to compulsory church rates, in which local taxes went only to Anglican churches. They finally achieved the end of religious tests for university degrees in 1905. Gladstone brought the majority of Dissenters around to support for Home Rule for Ireland, putting the dissenting Protestants in league with the Irish Roman Catholics in an otherwise unlikely alliance. The Dissenters gave significant support to moralistic issues, such as temperance and sabbath enforcement. The nonconformist conscience, as it was called, was repeatedly called upon by Gladstone for support for his moralistic foreign policy. In election after election, Protestant ministers rallied their congregations to the Liberal ticket. In Scotland, the Presbyterians played a similar role to the Nonconformist Methodists, Baptists and other groups in England and Wales.\nBy the 1820s, the different Nonconformists, including Wesleyan Methodists, Baptists, Congregationalists and Unitarians, had formed the Committee of Dissenting Deputies and agitated for repeal of the highly restrictive Test and Corporation Acts. These Acts excluded Nonconformists from holding civil or military office or attending Oxford or Cambridge, compelling them to set up their own Dissenting Academies privately. The Tories tended to be in favour of these Acts and so the Nonconformist cause was linked closely to the Whigs, who advocated civil and religious liberty. After the Test and Corporation Acts were repealed in 1828, all the Nonconformists elected to Parliament were Liberals. Nonconformists were angered by the Education Act 1902, which integrated Church of England denominational schools into the state system and provided for their support from taxes. John Clifford formed the National Passive Resistance Committee and by 1906 over 170 Nonconformists had gone to prison for refusing to pay school taxes. They included 60 Primitive Methodists, 48 Baptists, 40 Congregationalists and 15 Wesleyan Methodists.\nThe political strength of Dissent faded sharply after 1920 with the secularisation of British society in the 20th century. The rise of the Labour Party reduced the Liberal Party strongholds into the nonconformist and remote \"Celtic Fringe\", where the party survived by an emphasis on localism and historic religious identity, thereby neutralising much of the class pressure on behalf of the Labour movement. Meanwhile, the Anglican church was a bastion of strength for the Conservative party. On the Irish issue, the Anglicans strongly supported unionism. Increasingly after 1850, the Roman Catholic element in England and Scotland was composed of recent immigrants from Ireland. They voted largely for the Irish Parliamentary Party until its collapse in 1918."}
{"id": "4484", "revid": "9107368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4484", "title": "Bank of England", "text": "The Bank of England is the central bank of the United Kingdom and the model on which most modern central banks have been based. Established in 1694 to act as the English Government's banker, and still one of the bankers for the Government of the United Kingdom, it is the world's eighth-oldest bank. It was privately owned by stockholders from its foundation in 1694 until it was nationalised in 1946 by the Attlee ministry.\nIn 2009, a request made to HM Treasury under the Freedom of Information Act sought details about the 3% Bank of England stock owned by unnamed shareholders whose identity the Bank is not at liberty to disclose. In a letter of reply dated 15 October 2009, HM Treasury explained that. \"'Some of the 3% Treasury stock which was used to compensate former owners of Bank stock has not been redeemed. However, interest is paid out twice a year and it is not the case that this has been accumulating and compounding.\"' \nThe Bank became an independent public organisation in 1998, wholly owned by the Treasury Solicitor on behalf of the government, but with independence in setting monetary policy.\nThe Bank is one of eight banks authorised to issue banknotes in the United Kingdom, has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales and regulates the issue of banknotes by commercial banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland.\nThe Bank's Monetary Policy Committee has a devolved responsibility for managing monetary policy. The Treasury has reserve powers to give orders to the committee \"if they are required in the public interest and by extreme economic circumstances\", but such orders must be endorsed by Parliament within 28 days. The Bank's Financial Policy Committee held its first meeting in June 2011 as a macroprudential regulator to oversee regulation of the UK's financial sector.\nThe Bank's headquarters have been in London's main financial district, the City of London, on Threadneedle Street, since 1734. It is sometimes known as \"The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street\", a name taken from a satirical cartoon by James Gillray in 1797. The road junction outside is known as Bank junction.\nAs a regulator and central bank, the Bank of England has not offered consumer banking services for many years, but it still does manage some public-facing services such as exchanging superseded bank notes. Until 2016, the bank provided personal banking services as a privilege for employees.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nEngland's crushing defeat by France, the dominant naval power, in naval engagements culminating in the 1690 Battle of Beachy Head, became the catalyst for England to rebuild itself as a global power. William III's government wanted to build a naval fleet that would rival that of France; however, the ability to construct this fleet was hampered both by a lack of available public funds and the low credit of the English government in London. This lack of credit made it impossible for the English government to borrow the \u00a31,200,000 (at 8% per annum) that it wanted for the construction of the fleet.\nTo induce subscription to the loan, the subscribers were to be incorporated by the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England. The Bank was given exclusive possession of the government's balances, and was the only limited-liability corporation allowed to issue bank notes. The lenders would give the government cash (bullion) and issue notes against the government bonds, which can be lent again. The \u00a31.2 million was raised in 12 days; half of this was used to rebuild the navy.\nAs a side effect, the huge industrial effort needed, including establishing ironworks to make more nails and advances in agriculture feeding the quadrupled strength of the navy, started to transform the economy. This helped the new Kingdom of Great Britain \u2013 England and Scotland were formally united in 1707 \u2013 to become powerful. The power of the navy made Britain the dominant world power in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.\nThe establishment of the bank was devised by Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, in 1694. The plan of 1691, which had been proposed by William Paterson three years before, had not then been acted upon. 58 years earlier, in 1636, Financier to the king, Philip Burlamachi, had proposed exactly the same idea in a letter addressed to Sir Francis Windebank. He proposed a loan of \u00a31.2 million to the government; in return the subscribers would be incorporated as The Governor and Company of the Bank of England with long-term banking privileges including the issue of notes. The royal charter was granted on 27 July through the passage of the Tonnage Act 1694. Public finances were in such dire condition at the time that the terms of the loan were that it was to be serviced at a rate of 8% per annum, and there was also a service charge of \u00a34,000 per annum for the management of the loan. The first governor was Sir John Houblon, who is depicted in the \u00a350 note issued in 1994. The charter was renewed in 1742, 1764, and 1781.\n18th century.\nThe Bank's original home was in Walbrook, a street in the City of London, where during reconstruction in 1954 archaeologists found the remains of a Roman temple of Mithras (Mithras is\u00a0\u2013 rather fittingly\u00a0\u2013 said to have been worshipped as, amongst other things, the God of Contracts); the Mithraeum ruins are perhaps the most famous of all 20th-century Roman discoveries in the City of London and can be viewed by the public.\nThe Bank moved to its current location in Threadneedle Street in 1734, and thereafter slowly acquired neighbouring land to create the site necessary for erecting the Bank's original home at this location, under the direction of its chief architect Sir John Soane, between 1790 and 1827. (Sir Herbert Baker's rebuilding of the Bank in the first half of the 20th century, demolishing most of Soane's masterpiece, was described by architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner as \"the greatest architectural crime, in the City of London, of the twentieth century\".)\nWhen the idea and reality of the national debt came about during the 18th century, this was also managed by the Bank. During the American war of independence, business for the Bank was so good that George Washington remained a shareholder throughout the period. By the charter renewal in 1781 it was also the bankers' bank\u00a0\u2013 keeping enough gold to pay its notes on demand until 26 February 1797, when war had so diminished gold reserves that \u2013 following an invasion scare caused by the Battle of Fishguard days earlier \u2013 the government prohibited the Bank from paying out in gold by the passing of the Bank Restriction Act 1797. This prohibition lasted until 1821.\n19th century.\nIn 1825-26, the bank was able to avert a liquidity crisis when Nathan Mayer Rothschild succeeded in supplying it with gold.\nThe 1844 Bank Charter Act tied the issue of notes to the gold reserves and gave the Bank sole rights with regard to the issue of banknotes. Private banks that had previously had that right retained it, provided that their headquarters were outside London and that they deposited security against the notes that they issued. A few English banks continued to issue their own notes until the last of them was taken over in the 1930s. Scottish and Northern Irish private banks still have that right.\nThe bank acted as lender of last resort for the first time in the panic of 1866.\nThe last private bank in England to issue its own notes was Thomas Fox's Fox, Fowler and Company bank in Wellington, which rapidly expanded, until it merged with Lloyds Bank in 1927. They were legal tender until 1964. There are nine notes left in circulation; one is housed at Tone Dale House, Wellington.\n20th century.\nBritain was on the gold standard until 1931, when the Bank of England unilaterally and abruptly took Britain off the gold standard.\nDuring the governorship of Montagu Norman, from 1920 to 1944, the Bank made deliberate efforts to move away from commercial banking and become a central bank. In 1946, shortly after the end of Norman's tenure, the bank was nationalised by the Labour government.\nThe Bank pursued the multiple goals of Keynesian economics after 1945, especially \"easy money\" and low interest rates to support aggregate demand. It tried to keep a fixed exchange rate, and attempted to deal with inflation and sterling weakness by credit and exchange controls.\nIn 1977, the Bank set up a wholly owned subsidiary called Bank of England Nominees Limited (BOEN), a now defunct private limited company, with two of its hundred \u00a31 shares issued. According to its Memorandum &amp; Articles of Association, its objectives were: \"To act as Nominee or agent or attorney either solely or jointly with others, for any person or persons, partnership, company, corporation, government, state, organisation, sovereign, province, authority, or public body, or any group or association of them...\" Bank of England Nominees Limited was granted an exemption by Edmund Dell, Secretary of State for Trade, from the disclosure requirements under Section 27(9) of the Companies Act 1976, because \"it was considered undesirable that the disclosure requirements should apply to certain categories of shareholders.\" The Bank of England is also protected by its royal charter status, and the Official Secrets Act. BOEN was a vehicle for governments and heads of state to invest in UK companies (subject to approval from the Secretary of State), providing they undertake \"not to influence the affairs of the company\". In its later years, BOEN was no longer exempt from company law disclosure requirements. Although a dormant company, dormancy does not preclude a company actively operating as a nominee shareholder. BOEN had two shareholders: the Bank of England, and the Secretary of the Bank of England.\nThe reserve requirement for banks to hold a minimum fixed proportion of their deposits as reserves at the Bank of England was abolished in 1981: see reserve requirement for more details. The contemporary transition from Keynesian economics to Chicago economics was analysed by Nicholas Kaldor in \"The Scourge of Monetarism\".\nOn 6 May 1997, following the 1997 general election that brought a Labour government to power for the first time since 1979, it was announced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, that the Bank would be granted operational independence over monetary policy. Under the terms of the Bank of England Act 1998 (which came into force on 1 June 1998), the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee was given sole responsibility for setting interest rates to meet the Government's Retail Prices Index (RPI) inflation target of 2.5%. The target has changed to 2% since the Consumer Price Index (CPI) replaced the Retail Prices Index as the Treasury's inflation index. If inflation overshoots or undershoots the target by more than 1%, the Governor has to write a letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining why, and how he will remedy the situation.\nThe success of inflation targeting in the United Kingdom has been attributed to the Bank's focus on transparency. The Bank of England has been a leader in producing innovative ways of communicating information to the public, especially through its Inflation Report, which has been emulated by many other central banks.\nIndependent central banks that adopt an inflation target are known as Friedmanite central banks. This change in Labour's politics was described by Skidelsky in \"The Return of the Master\" as a mistake and as an adoption of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis as promulgated by Walters. Inflation targets combined with central bank independence have been characterised as a \"starve the beast\" strategy creating a lack of money in the public sector.\nThe handing over of monetary policy to the Bank had been a key plank of the Liberal Democrats' economic policy since the 1992 general election. Conservative MP Nicholas Budgen had also proposed this as a private member's bill in 1996, but the bill failed as it had the support of neither the government nor the opposition.\n21st century.\nMark Carney assumed the post of Governor of the Bank of England on 1 July 2013. He succeeded Mervyn King, who took over on 30 June 2003. Carney, a Canadian, was to serve an initial five-year term rather than the typical eight. He became the first Governor not to be a UK citizen, but has since been granted citizenship. At Government request, his term was extended to 2019, then again to 2020. As of January 2014, the Bank also has four Deputy Governors.\nBOEN was dissolved, following liquidation, in July 2017.\nFunctions.\nTwo main areas are tackled by the Bank to ensure it carries out these functions efficiently:\nMonetary stability.\nNote: It is important to note that \"monetary\" and \"financial\" are synonyms.\nStable prices and confidence in the currency are the two main criteria for monetary stability. Stable prices are maintained by seeking to ensure that price increases meet the Government's inflation target. The Bank aims to meet this target by adjusting the base interest rate, which is decided by the Monetary Policy Committee, and through its communications strategy, such as publishing yield curves.\nThe Bank works together with other institutions to secure both monetary and financial stability, including:\nThe 1997 memorandum of understanding describes the terms under which the Bank, the Treasury and the FSA work toward the common aim of increased financial stability. In 2010, the incoming Chancellor announced his intention to merge the FSA back into the Bank. As of 2012, the current director for financial stability is Andy Haldane.\nThe Bank acts as the government's banker, and it maintains the government's Consolidated Fund account. It also manages the country's foreign exchange and gold reserves. The Bank also acts as the bankers' bank, especially in its capacity as a lender of last resort.\nThe Bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales. Scottish and Northern Irish banks retain the right to issue their own banknotes, but they must be backed one-for-one with deposits at the Bank, excepting a few million pounds representing the value of notes they had in circulation in 1845. The Bank decided to sell its banknote-printing operations to De La Rue in December 2002, under the advice of Close Brothers Corporate Finance Ltd.\nSince 1998, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has had the responsibility for setting the official interest rate. However, with the decision to grant the Bank operational independence, responsibility for government debt management was transferred in 1998 to the new Debt Management Office, which also took over government cash management in 2000. Computershare took over as the registrar for UK Government bonds (gilt-edged securities or \"gilts\") from the Bank at the end of 2004.\nThe Bank used to be responsible for the regulation and supervision of the banking and insurance industries. This responsibility was transferred to the Financial Services Authority in June 1998, but after the financial crises in 2008 new banking legislation transferred the responsibility for regulation and supervision of the banking and insurance industries back to the Bank.\nIn 2011, the interim Financial Policy Committee (FPC) was created as a mirror committee to the MPC to spearhead the Bank's new mandate on financial stability. The FPC is responsible for macro prudential regulation of all UK banks and insurance companies.\nTo help maintain economic stability, the Bank attempts to broaden understanding of its role, both through regular speeches and publications by senior Bank figures, a semiannual Financial Stability Report, and through a wider education strategy aimed at the general public. It currently maintains a free museum and ran the Target Two Point Zero competition for A-level students, closing in 2017.\nAsset purchase facility.\nThe Bank has operated, since January 2009, an Asset Purchase Facility (APF) to buy \"high-quality assets financed by the issue of Treasury bills and the DMO's cash management operations\" and thereby improve liquidity in the credit markets. It has, since March 2009, also provided the mechanism by which the Bank's policy of quantitative easing (QE) is achieved, under the auspices of the MPC. Along with the managing the \u00a3200\u00a0billion of QE funds, the APF continues to operate its corporate facilities. Both are undertaken by a subsidiary company of the Bank of England, the Bank of England Asset Purchase Facility Fund Limited (BEAPFF).\nBanknote issues.\nThe Bank has issued banknotes since 1694. Notes were originally hand-written; although they were partially printed from 1725 onwards, cashiers still had to sign each note and make them payable to someone. Notes were fully printed from 1855. Until 1928 all notes were \"White Notes\", printed in black and with a blank reverse. In the 18th and 19th centuries White Notes were issued in \u00a31 and \u00a32 denominations. During the 20th century White Notes were issued in denominations between \u00a35 and \u00a31000.\nUntil the mid-19th century, commercial banks were allowed to issue their own banknotes, and notes issued by provincial banking companies were commonly in circulation. The Bank Charter Act 1844 began the process of restricting note issue to the Bank; new banks were prohibited from issuing their own banknotes and existing note-issuing banks were not permitted to expand their issue. As provincial banking companies merged to form larger banks, they lost their right to issue notes, and the English private banknote eventually disappeared, leaving the Bank with a monopoly of note issue in England and Wales. The last private bank to issue its own banknotes in England and Wales was Fox, Fowler and Company in 1921. However, the limitations of the 1844 Act only affected banks in England and Wales, and today three commercial banks in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland continue to issue their own banknotes, regulated by the Bank.\nAt the start of the First World War, the Currency and Bank Notes Act 1914 was passed, which granted temporary powers to HM Treasury for issuing banknotes to the values of \u00a31 and 10/- (ten shillings). Treasury notes had full legal tender status and were not convertible into gold through the Bank; they replaced the gold coin in circulation to prevent a run on sterling and to enable raw material purchases for armament production. These notes featured an image of King George V (Bank of England notes did not begin to display an image of the monarch until 1960). The wording on each note was:\nTreasury notes were issued until 1928, when the Currency and Bank Notes Act 1928 returned note-issuing powers to the banks. The Bank of England issued notes for ten shillings and one pound for the first time on 22 November 1928.\nDuring the Second World War the German Operation Bernhard attempted to counterfeit denominations between \u00a35 and \u00a350, producing 500,000 notes each month in 1943. The original plan was to parachute the money into the UK in an attempt to destabilise the British economy, but it was found more useful to use the notes to pay German agents operating throughout Europe. Although most fell into Allied hands at the end of the war, forgeries frequently appeared for years afterwards, which led banknote denominations above \u00a35 to be removed from circulation.\nIn 2006, over \u00a353\u00a0million in banknotes belonging to the Bank was stolen from a depot in Tonbridge, Kent.\nModern banknotes are printed by contract with De La Rue Currency in Loughton, Essex.\nGold vault.\nThe bank is custodian to the official gold reserves of the United Kingdom and around 30 other countries. , the bank held around 400,000 bars, which is equivalent to of gold. These gold deposits were estimated in August 2018 to have a current market value of approximately \u00a3200 billion. These estimates suggest the vault could hold as much as 3% of the gold mined throughout human history.\nGovernance of the Bank of England.\nGovernors.\nFollowing is a list of the Governors of the Bank of England since the beginning of the 20th century:\nCourt of Directors.\nThe Court of Directors is a unitary board that is responsible for setting the organisation's strategy and budget and taking key decisions on resourcing and appointments. It consists of five executive members from the Bank plus up to 9 non-executive members, all of whom are appointed by the Crown. The Chancellor selects the Chairman of the Court from among the non-executive members. The Court is required to meet at least 7 times a year.\nThe Governor serves for a period of eight years, the Deputy Governors for five years, and the non-executive members for up to four years.\nOther staff.\nSince 2013, the Bank has had a chief operating officer (COO). , the Bank's COO has been Joanna Place.\n, the Bank's chief economist is Andrew Haldane."}
{"id": "4485", "revid": "8844476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4485", "title": "Bakelite", "text": "Bakelite ( ; sometimes spelled Baekelite) or polyoxybenzylmethylenglycolanhydride was the first plastic made from synthetic components. It is a thermosetting phenol formaldehyde resin, formed from a condensation reaction of phenol with formaldehyde. It was developed by the Belgian-American chemist Leo Baekeland in Yonkers, New York, in 1907.\nBakelite was patented on December 7, 1909. The creation of a synthetic plastic was revolutionary for its electrical nonconductivity and heat-resistant properties in electrical insulators, radio and telephone casings and such diverse products as kitchenware, jewelry, pipe stems, children's toys, and firearms. \nIn recent years the \"retro\" appeal of old Bakelite products has made them collectible.\nBakelite was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark on November 9, 1993, by the American Chemical Society in recognition of its significance as the world's first synthetic plastic.\nHistory.\nBaekeland was already wealthy due to his invention of Velox photographic paper when he began to investigate the reactions of phenol and formaldehyde in his home laboratory. Chemists had begun to recognize that many natural resins and fibers were polymers. Baekeland's initial intent was to find a replacement for shellac, a material in limited supply because it was made naturally from the excretion of lac insects (specifically \"Kerria lacca\"). Baekeland produced a soluble phenol-formaldehyde shellac called \"Novolak\", but it was not a market success.\nBaekeland then began experimenting on strengthening wood by impregnating it with a synthetic resin, rather than coating it. By controlling the pressure and temperature applied to phenol and formaldehyde, Baekeland produced a hard moldable material that he named \"Bakelite,\" after himself. It was the first synthetic thermosetting plastic produced, and Baekeland speculated on \"the thousand and one ... articles\" it could be used to make. Baekeland considered the possibilities of using a wide variety of filling materials, including cotton, powdered bronze, and slate dust, but was most successful with wood and asbestos fibers, though asbestos was gradually abandoned by all manufacturers due to stricter environmental laws.\nBaekeland filed a substantial number of patents in the area. Bakelite, his \"method of making insoluble products of phenol and formaldehyde,\" was filed on July 13, 1907, and granted on December 7, 1909. Baekeland also filed for patent protection in other countries, including Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Hungary, Japan, Mexico, Russia, and Spain. He announced his invention at a meeting of the American Chemical Society on February 5, 1909.\nBaekeland started semi-commercial production of his new material in his home laboratory, marketing it as a material for electrical insulators. In the summer of 1909 he licensed the continental European rights to R\u00fctger AG. The subsidiary formed at that time, Bakelite AG, was the first to produce Bakelite at an industrial scale. \nBy 1910, Baekland was producing enough material in the US to justify expansion. He formed the General Bakelite Company of Perth Amboy, NJ, as a U.S. company to manufacture and market his new industrial material. He also made overseas connections to produce materials in other countries.\nBijker gives a detailed discussion of the development of Bakelite and the Bakelite company's production of various applications of materials. As of 1911, the company's main focus was laminating varnish, whose sales volume vastly outperformed both molding material and cast resin. By 1912, molding material was gaining ground, but its sales volume for the company did not exceed that of laminating varnish until the 1930s.\nAs the sales figures also show, the Bakelite Company produced \"transparent\" cast resin (which did not include filler) for a small ongoing market during the 1910s and 1920s. Blocks or rods of cast resin, also known as \"artificial amber\", were machined and carved to create items such as pipe stems, cigarette holders and jewelry. However, the demand for molded plastics led the Bakelite company to concentrate on molding, rather than concentrating on cast solid resins.\nThe Bakelite Corporation was formed in 1922 after patent litigation favorable to Baekeland, from a merger of three companies: Baekeland's General Bakelite Company; the Condensite Company, founded by J. W. Aylesworth; and the Redmanol Chemical Products Company, founded by Lawrence V. Redman. Under director of advertising and public relations Allan Brown, who came to Bakelite from Condensite, Bakelite was aggressively marketed as \"the material of a thousand uses\". A filing for a trademark featuring the letter B above the mathematical symbol for infinity was made August 25, 1925, and claimed the mark was in use as of December 1, 1924. A wide variety of uses were listed in their trademark applications.\nThe first issue of \"Plastics\" magazine, October 1925, featured Bakelite on its cover, and included the article \"Bakelite \u2013 What It Is\" by Allan Brown. The range of colors available included \"black, brown, red, yellow, green, gray, blue, and blends of two or more of these\". The article emphasized that Bakelite came in various forms. \"Bakelite is manufactured in several forms to suit varying requirements. In all these forms the fundamental basis is the initial Bakelite resin. This variety includes clear material, for jewelry, smokers' articles, etc.; cement, using in sealing electric light bulbs in metal bases; varnishes, for impregnating electric coils, etc.; lacquers, for protecting the surface of hardware; enamels, for giving resistive coating to industrial equipment; Laminated Bakelite, used for silent gears and insulation; and molding material, from which are formed innumerable articles of utility and beauty. The molding material is prepared ordinarily by the impregnation of cellulose substances with the initial 'uncured' resin.\" In a 1925 report, the United States Tariff Commission hailed the commercial manufacture of synthetic phenolic resin as \"distinctly an American achievement\", and noted that \"the publication of figures, however, would be a virtual disclosure of the production of an individual company\".\nIn England, Bakelite Limited, a merger of three British phenol formaldehyde resin suppliers (Damard Lacquer Company Limited of Birmingham, Mouldensite Limited of Darley Dale and Redmanol Chemical Products Company of London), was formed in 1926. A new Bakelite factory opened in Tyseley, Birmingham, around 1928. It was demolished in 1998.\nA new factory opened in Bound Brook, New Jersey, in 1931. \nIn 1939, the companies were acquired by Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation.\nIn 2005 German Bakelite manufacturer Bakelite AG was acquired by Borden Chemical of Columbus, OH, now Hexion Inc.\nIn addition to the original Bakelite material, these companies eventually made a wide range of other products, many of which were marketed under the brand name \"Bakelite plastics\". These included other types of cast phenolic resins similar to Catalin, and urea-formaldehyde resins, which could be made in brighter colors than polyoxy\u00adbenzyl\u00admethylene\u00adglycol\u00adanhydride.\nOnce Baekeland's heat and pressure patents expired in 1927, Bakelite Corporation faced serious competition from other companies. Because molded Bakelite incorporated fillers to give it strength, it tended to be made in concealing dark colors. In 1927, beads, bangles and earrings were produced by the Catalin company, through a different process which enabled them to introduce 15 new colors. Translucent jewelry, poker chips and other items made of phenolic resins were introduced in the 1930s or 1940s by the Catalin company under the Prystal name. The creation of marbled phenolic resins may also be attributable to the Catalin company.\nSynthesis.\nMaking Bakelite is a multi-stage process. It begins with heating of phenol and formaldehyde in the presence of a catalyst such as hydrochloric acid, zinc chloride, or the base ammonia. This creates a liquid condensation product, referred to as \"Bakelite A\", which is soluble in alcohol, acetone, or additional phenol. Heated further, the product becomes partially soluble and can still be softened by heat. Sustained heating results in an \"insoluble hard gum\". However, the high temperatures required to create this tends to cause violent foaming of the mixture when done at standard atmospheric pressure, which results in the cooled material being porous and breakable. Baekeland's innovative step was to put his \"last condensation product\" into an egg-shaped \"Bakelizer\". By heating it under pressure, at about , Baekeland was able to suppress the foaming that would otherwise occur. The resulting substance is extremely hard and both infusible and insoluble. \nCompression molding.\nMolded Bakelite forms in a condensation reaction of phenol and formaldehyde, with wood flour or asbestos fiber as a filler, under high pressure and heat in a time frame of a few minutes of curing. The result is a hard plastic material. Asbestos was gradually abandoned as filler because many countries banned the production of asbestos.\nBakelite's molding process had a number of advantages. Bakelite resin could be provided either as powder, or as preformed partially cured slugs, increasing the speed of the casting. Thermosetting resins such as Bakelite required heat and pressure during the molding cycle, but could be removed from the molding process without being cooled, again making the molding process faster. Also, because of the smooth polished surface that resulted, Bakelite objects required less finishing. Millions of parts could be duplicated quickly and relatively cheaply.\nPhenolic sheet.\nAnother market for Bakelite resin was the creation of phenolic sheet materials. Phenolic sheet is a hard, dense material made by applying heat and pressure to layers of paper or glass cloth impregnated with synthetic resin. Paper, cotton fabrics, synthetic fabrics, glass fabrics and unwoven fabrics are all possible materials used in lamination. When heat and pressure are applied, polymerization transforms the layers into thermosetting industrial laminated plastic.\nBakelite phenolic sheet is produced in many commercial grades and with various additives to meet diverse mechanical, electrical and thermal requirements. Some common types include:\nProperties.\nBakelite has a number of important properties. It can be molded very quickly, decreasing production time. Moldings are smooth, retain their shape and are resistant to heat, scratches, and destructive solvents. It is also resistant to electricity, and prized for its low conductivity. It is not flexible.\nPhenolic resin products may swell slightly under conditions of extreme humidity or perpetual dampness. When rubbed or burnt, Bakelite has a distinctive, acrid, sickly-sweet or fishy odor.\nApplications and uses.\nThe characteristics of Bakelite made it particularly suitable as a molding compound, an adhesive or binding agent, a varnish, and a protective coating. Bakelite was particularly suitable for the emerging electrical and automobile industries because of its extraordinarily high resistance to electricity, heat, and chemical action.\nThe earliest commercial use of Bakelite in the electrical industry was the molding of tiny insulating bushings, made in 1908 for the Weston Electrical Instrument Corporation by Richard W. Seabury of the Boonton Rubber Company. Bakelite was soon used for non-conducting parts of telephones, radios and other electrical devices, including bases and sockets for light bulbs and electron tubes (vacuum tubes), supports for any type of electrical components, automobile distributor caps and other insulators. By 1912, it was being used to make billiard balls, since its elasticity and the sound it made were similar to ivory.\nDuring World War I, Bakelite was used widely, particularly in electrical systems. Important projects included the Liberty airplane engine, the wireless telephone and radio phone, and the use of micarta-bakelite propellors in the NBS-1 bomber and the DH-4B aeroplane.\nBakelite's availability and ease and speed of molding helped to lower the costs and increase product availability so that telephones and radios became common household consumer goods. It was also very important to the developing automobile industry. It was soon found in myriad other consumer products ranging from pipe stems and buttons to saxophone mouthpieces, cameras, early machine guns, and appliance casings. Bakelite was also very commonly used in making molded grip panels (stocks) on handguns, submachine guns and machineguns, as well as numerous knife handles and \"scales\" through the first half of the 20th century.\nBeginning in the 1920s, it became a popular material for jewelry. Designer Coco Chanel included Bakelite bracelets in her costume jewelry collections. Designers such as Elsa Schiaparelli used it for jewelry and also for specially designed dress buttons. Later, Diana Vreeland, editor of Vogue, was enthusiastic about Bakelite. Bakelite was also used to make presentation boxes for Breitling watches.\nBy 1930, designer Paul T. Frankl considered Bakelite a \"Materia Nova\", \"expressive of our own age\". By the 1930s, Bakelite was used for game pieces like chessmen, poker chips, dominoes and mahjong sets. Kitchenware made with Bakelite, including canisters and tableware, was promoted for its resistance to heat and to chipping. In the mid-1930s, Northland marketed a line of skis with a black \"Ebonite\" base, a coating of Bakelite. By 1935, it was used in solid-body electric guitars. Performers such as Jerry Byrd loved the tone of Bakelite guitars but found them difficult to keep in tune.\nCharles Plimpton patented BAYKO in 1933 and rushed out his first construction sets for Christmas 1934. He called the toy Bayko Light Constructional Sets, the words \"Bayko Light\" being a pun on the word \"Bakelite.\"\nDuring World War II, Bakelite was used in a variety of wartime equipment including pilot's goggles and field telephones. It was also used for patriotic wartime jewelry. In 1943, the thermosetting phenolic resin was even considered for the manufacture of coins, due to a shortage of traditional material. Bakelite and other non-metal materials were tested for usage for the one cent coin in the US before the Mint settled on zinc-coated steel.\nDuring World War II, Bakelite buttons were part of the British uniforms. They were sometimes modified to Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape purposes in case of capture. \"Following the introduction of BD (Battle Dress). MI9 was forced to adapt to meet the challenge of a number of different compass solutions were devised, both covert and overt. These included Bakelite buttons used in both Army (brown colored) and RAF (black) BD uniforms.\"\nIn 1947, Dutch art forger Han van Meegeren was convicted of forgery, after chemist and curator Paul B. Coremans proved that a purported Vermeer contained Bakelite, which van Meegeren had used as a paint hardener.\nBakelite was sometimes used in the pistol grip, hand guard, and butt stock of firearms. The AKM and some early AK-74 rifles are frequently mistakenly identified as using Bakelite, but most were made with AG-S4.\nBy the late 1940s, newer materials were superseding Bakelite in many areas. Phenolics are less frequently used in general consumer products today due to their cost and complexity of production and their brittle nature. They still appear in some applications where their specific properties are required, such as small precision-shaped components, molded disc brake cylinders, saucepan handles, electrical plugs, switches and parts for electrical irons, as well as in the area of inexpensive board and tabletop games produced in China, Hong Kong and India. Items such as billiard balls, dominoes and pieces for board games such as chess, checkers, and backgammon are constructed of Bakelite for its look, durability, fine polish, weight, and sound. Common dice are sometimes made of Bakelite for weight and sound, but the majority are made of a thermoplastic polymer such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS).\nBakelite continues to be used for wire insulation, brake pads and related automotive components, and industrial electrical-related applications. Bakelite stock is still manufactured and produced in sheet, rod and tube form for industrial applications in the electronics, power generation and aerospace industries, and under a variety of commercial brand names.\nPhenolic resins have been commonly used in ablative heat shields. Soviet heatshields for ICBM warheads and spacecraft reentry consisted of asbestos textolite, impregnated with Bakelite. Bakelite is also used in the mounting of metal samples in metallography.\nCollectible status.\nBakelite items, particularly jewelry and radios, have become a popular collectible. The term \"Bakelite\" is sometimes used in the resale market to indicate various types of early plastics, including Catalin and Faturan, which may be brightly colored, as well as items made of Bakelite material.\nPatents.\nThe United States Patent and Trademark Office granted Baekeland a patent for a \"Method of making insoluble products of phenol and formaldehyde\" on December 7, 1909. Producing hard, compact, insoluble and infusible condensation products of phenols and formaldehyde marked the beginning of the modern plastics industry.\nTrademarks.\nGeorgia-Pacific obtained the American trademark for Bakelite from Union Carbide. BAKELITE\u00ae is now a globally registered trademark of Hexion GmbH, Hexion Inc. and affiliates."}
{"id": "4486", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4486", "title": "Buckyball (molecule)", "text": ""}
{"id": "4487", "revid": "39691617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4487", "title": "Bean", "text": "A bean is the seed of one of several genera of the flowering plant family Fabaceae, which are used as vegetables for human or animal food. They can be cooked in many different ways, including boiling, frying, and baking, and are used in many traditional dishes throughout the world.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"bean\" and its Germanic cognates (e.g. German \"Bohne\") have existed in common use in West Germanic languages since before the 12th century, referring to broad beans, chickpeas, and other pod-borne seeds. This was long before the New World genus \"Phaseolus\" was known in Europe. After Columbian-era contact between Europe and the Americas, use of the word was extended to pod-borne seeds of \"Phaseolus\", such as the common bean and the runner bean, and the related genus \"Vigna\". The term has long been applied generally to many other seeds of similar form, such as Old World soybeans, peas, other vetches, and lupins, and even to those with slighter resemblances, such as coffee beans, vanilla beans, castor beans, and cocoa beans. Thus the term \"bean\" in general usage can refer to a host of different species.\nSeeds called \"beans\" are often included among the crops called \"pulses\" (legumes), although a narrower prescribed sense of \"pulses\" reserves the word for leguminous crops harvested for their dry grain. The term \"bean\" usually excludes legumes with tiny seeds and which are used exclusively for forage, hay, and silage purposes (such as clover and alfalfa). The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization defines \"BEANS, DRY\" (item code 176) as applicable only to species of \"Phaseolus\". However, in the past, several species, including \"Vigna angularis\" (adzuki bean), \"V. mungo\" (black gram), \"V. radiata\" (green gram), and \"V. aconitifolia\" (moth bean), were classified as \"Phaseolus\" and later reclassified, and general usage is not governed by that definition.\nCultivation.\nUnlike the closely related pea, beans are a summer crop that needs warm temperatures to grow. Legumes are capable of nitrogen fixation and hence need less fertiliser than most plants. Maturity is typically 55\u201360 days from planting to harvest. As the bean pods mature, they turn yellow and dry up, and the beans inside change from green to their mature colour. As a vine, bean plants need external support, which may take the form of special \"bean cages\" or poles. Native Americans customarily grew them along with corn and squash (the so-called Three Sisters), with the tall cornstalks acting as support for the beans.\nIn more recent times, the so-called \"bush bean\" has been developed which does not require support and has all its pods develop simultaneously (as opposed to pole beans which develop gradually). This makes the bush bean more practical for commercial production.\nHistory.\nBeans are one of the longest-cultivated plants. Broad beans, also called fava beans, in their wild state the size of a small fingernail, were gathered in Afghanistan and the Himalayan foothills. In a form improved from naturally occurring types, they were grown in Thailand from the early seventh millennium BCE, predating ceramics. They were deposited with the dead in ancient Egypt. Not until the second millennium BCE did cultivated, large-seeded broad beans appear in the Aegean, Iberia and transalpine Europe. In the \"Iliad\" (8th century BCE) there is a passing mention of beans and chickpeas cast on the threshing floor.\nBeans were an important source of protein throughout Old and New World history, and still are today.\nThe oldest-known domesticated beans in the Americas were found in Guitarrero Cave, an archaeological site in Peru, and dated to around the second millennium BCE. However, genetic analyses of the common bean \"Phaseolus\" show that it originated in Mesoamerica, and subsequently spread southward, along with maize and squash, traditional companion crops.\nMost of the kinds commonly eaten fresh or dried, those of the genus \"Phaseolus\", come originally from the Americas, being first seen by a European when Christopher Columbus, while exploring what may have been the Bahamas, found them growing in fields. Five kinds of \"Phaseolus\" beans were domesticated by pre-Columbian peoples: common beans (\"P. vulgaris\") grown from Chile to the northern part of what is now the United States, and lima and sieva beans (\"P. lunatus\"), as well as the less widely distributed teparies (\"P. acutifolius\"), scarlet runner beans (\"P. coccineus\") and polyanthus beans (\"P. polyanthus\") One especially famous use of beans by pre-Columbian people as far north as the Atlantic seaboard is the \"Three Sisters\" method of companion plant cultivation:\nDry beans come from both Old World varieties of broad beans (fava beans) and New World varieties (kidney, black, cranberry, pinto, navy/haricot).\nBeans are a heliotropic plant, meaning that the leaves tilt throughout the day to face the sun. At night, they go into a folded \"sleep\" position.\nTypes.\nCurrently, the world genebanks hold about 40,000 bean varieties, although only a fraction are mass-produced for regular consumption.\nSome bean types include:\nProperties.\nNutrients.\nBeans are high in protein, complex carbohydrates, folate, and iron. Beans also have significant amounts of fiber and soluble fiber, with one cup of cooked beans providing between nine and 13\u00a0grams of fiber. Soluble fiber can help lower blood cholesterol.\nThe Canadian government recommends that adults have up to two (female), and three (male) servings. 3/4 cup of cooked beans provide one serving.\nAntinutrients.\nMany types of bean contain significant amounts of antinutrients that inhibit some enzyme processes in the body. Phytic acid and phytates, present in grains, nuts, seeds and beans, interfere with bone growth and interrupt vitamin D metabolism. Pioneering work on the effect of phytic acid was done by Edward Mellanby from 1939.\nFlatulence.\nMany edible beans, including broad beans, navy beans, kidney beans and soybeans, contain oligosaccharides (particularly raffinose and stachyose), a type of sugar molecule also found in cabbage. An anti-oligosaccharide enzyme is necessary to properly digest these sugar molecules. As a normal human digestive tract does not contain any anti-oligosaccharide enzymes, consumed oligosaccharides are typically digested by bacteria in the large intestine. This digestion process produces gases such as methane as a byproduct, which are then released as flatulence.\nProcessing the beans, such as by boiling, soaking, cooking, can leach the indigestible sugars from the beans and significantly reduce, if not entirely eliminate the problem. In addition enzyme pills are available.\nHealth concerns.\nToxins.\nSome kinds of raw beans contain a harmful, tasteless toxin: the lectin phytohaemagglutinin, which must be removed by cooking. Red kidney beans are particularly toxic, but other types also pose risks of food poisoning. A recommended method is to boil the beans for at least ten minutes; undercooked beans may be more toxic than raw beans.\nCooking beans, without bringing them to a boil, in a slow cooker at a temperature well below boiling may not destroy toxins. A case of poisoning by butter beans used to make falafel was reported; the beans were used instead of traditional broad beans or chickpeas, soaked and ground without boiling, made into patties, and shallow fried.\nBean poisoning is not well known in the medical community, and many cases may be misdiagnosed or never reported; figures appear not to be available. In the case of the UK National Poisons Information Service, available only to health professionals, the dangers of beans other than red beans were not flagged .\nFermentation is used in some parts of Africa to improve the nutritional value of beans by removing toxins. Inexpensive fermentation improves the nutritional impact of flour from dry beans and improves digestibility, according to research co-authored by Emire Shimelis, from the Food Engineering Program at Addis Ababa University. Beans are a major source of dietary protein in Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.\nBacterial infection from bean sprouts.\nIt is common to make beansprouts by letting some types of bean, often mung beans, germinate in moist and warm conditions; beansprouts may be used as ingredients in cooked dishes, or eaten raw or lightly cooked. There have been many outbreaks of disease from bacterial contamination, often by \"salmonella\", \"listeria\", and \"Escherichia coli\", of beansprouts not thoroughly cooked, some causing significant mortality.\nProduction.\nThe production data for legumes are published by FAO in three categories:\nThe following is a summary of FAO data.\nMain crops of \"Pulses, Total (dry)\" are \"Beans, dry [176]\" 26.83 million tons, \"Peas, dry [187]\" 14.36 million tons, \"Chick peas [191]\" 12.09 million tons, \"Cow peas [195]\" 6.99 million tons, \"Lentils [201]\" 6.32 million tons, \"Pigeon peas [197]\" 4.49 million tons, \"Broad beans, horse beans [181]\" 4.46 million tons. In general, the consumption of pulses per capita has been decreasing since 1961. Exceptions are lentils and cowpeas.\nThe world leader in production of Dry Beans (Phaseolus spp). is Myanmar (Burma), followed by India and Brazil. In Africa, the most important producer is Tanzania.\nNo symbol = official figure, P = official figure, F = FAO estimate, * = Unofficial/Semi-official/mirror data, C = Calculated figure A = Aggregate (may include official, semi-official or estimates)\n\"Source: UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)\""}
{"id": "4489", "revid": "2131705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4489", "title": "Breast", "text": "The breast is one of two prominences located on the upper ventral region of the torso of primates. In females, it serves as the mammary gland, which produces and secretes milk to feed infants. Both females and males develop breasts from the same embryological tissues. At puberty, estrogens, in conjunction with growth hormone, cause breast development in female humans and to a much lesser extent in other primates. Breast development in other primate females generally only occurs with pregnancy.\nSubcutaneous fat covers and envelops a network of ducts that converge on the nipple, and these tissues give the breast its size and shape. At the ends of the ducts are lobules, or clusters of alveoli, where milk is produced and stored in response to hormonal signals. During pregnancy, the breast responds to a complex interaction of hormones, including estrogens, progesterone, and prolactin, that mediate the completion of its development, namely lobuloalveolar maturation, in preparation of lactation and breastfeeding.\nAlong with their major function in providing nutrition for infants, female breasts have social and sexual characteristics. Breasts have been featured in ancient and modern sculpture, art, and photography. They can figure prominently in the perception of a woman's body and sexual attractiveness. A number of cultures associate breasts with sexuality and tend to regard bare breasts in public as immodest or indecent. Breasts, especially the nipples, are an erogenous zone.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe English word \"breast\" derives from the Old English word \"br\u0113ost\" (breast, bosom) from Proto-Germanic \"breustam\" (breast), from the Proto-Indo-European base bhreus\u2013 (to swell, to sprout). The \"breast\" spelling conforms to the Scottish and North English dialectal pronunciations. The \"Merriam-Webster Dictionary\" states that \"Middle English brest, [comes] from Old English br\u0113ost; akin to Old High German brust..., Old Irish br\u00fa [belly], [and] Russian bryukho\"; the first known usage of the term was before the 12th century.\nA large number of colloquial terms for breasts are used in English, ranging from fairly polite terms to vulgar or slang. Some vulgar slang expressions may be considered to be derogatory or sexist to women.\nAnatomy.\nIn women, the breasts overlie the pectoralis major muscles and usually extend from the level of the second rib to the level of the sixth rib in the front of the human rib cage; thus, the breasts cover much of the chest area and the chest walls. At the front of the chest, the breast tissue can extend from the clavicle (collarbone) to the middle of the sternum (breastbone). At the sides of the chest, the breast tissue can extend into the axilla (armpit), and can reach as far to the back as the latissimus dorsi muscle, extending from the lower back to the humerus bone (the bone of the upper arm). As a mammary gland, the breast is composed of differing layers of tissue, predominantly two types: adipose tissue; and glandular tissue, which affects the lactation functions of the breasts.\nMorphologically the breast is tear-shaped. The superficial tissue layer (superficial fascia) is separated from the skin by 0.5\u20132.5\u00a0cm of subcutaneous fat (adipose tissue). The suspensory Cooper's ligaments are fibrous-tissue prolongations that radiate from the superficial fascia to the skin envelope. The female adult breast contains 14\u201318 irregular lactiferous lobes that converge at the nipple. The 2.0\u20134.5\u00a0mm milk ducts are immediately surrounded with dense connective tissue that support the glands. Milk exits the breast through the nipple, which is surrounded by a pigmented area of skin called the areola. The size of the areola can vary widely among women. The areola contains modified sweat glands known as Montgomery's glands. These glands secrete oily fluid that lubricate and protect the nipple during breastfeeding. Volatile compounds in these secretions may also serve as an olfactory stimulus for the newborn's appetite.\nThe dimensions and weight of the breast vary widely among women. A small-to-medium-sized breast weighs 500\u00a0grams (1.1 pounds) or less, and a large breast can weigh approximately 750 to 1,000 grams (1.7 to 2.2 pounds) or more. The tissue composition ratios of the breast also vary among women. Some women's breasts have varying proportions of glandular tissue than of adipose or connective tissues. The fat-to-connective-tissue ratio determines the density or firmness of the breast. During a woman's life, her breasts change size, shape, and weight due to hormonal changes during puberty, the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, breastfeeding, and menopause.\nGlandular structure.\nThe breast is an apocrine gland that produces the milk used to feed an infant. The nipple of the breast is surrounded by the areola (nipple-areola complex). The areola has many sebaceous glands, and the skin color varies from pink to dark brown. The basic units of the breast are the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs), which produce the fatty breast milk. They give the breast its offspring-feeding functions as a mammary gland. They are distributed throughout the body of the breast. Approximately two-thirds of the lactiferous tissue is within 30\u00a0mm of the base of the nipple. The terminal lactiferous ducts drain the milk from TDLUs into 4\u201318 lactiferous ducts, which drain to the nipple. The milk-glands-to-fat ratio is 2:1 in a lactating woman, and 1:1 in a non-lactating woman. In addition to the milk glands, the breast is also composed of connective tissues (collagen, elastin), white fat, and the suspensory Cooper's ligaments. Sensation in the breast is provided by the peripheral nervous system innervation by means of the front (anterior) and side (lateral) cutaneous branches of the fourth-, fifth-, and sixth intercostal nerves. The T-4 nerve (Thoracic spinal nerve 4), which innervates the dermatomic area, supplies sensation to the nipple-areola complex.\nLymphatic drainage.\nApproximately 75% of the lymph from the breast travels to the axillary lymph nodes on the same side of the body, whilst 25% of the lymph travels to the parasternal nodes (beside the sternum bone). A small amount of remaining lymph travels to the other breast and to the abdominal lymph nodes. The subareolar region has a lymphatic plexus known as the \"subareolar plexus of Sappey\". The axillary lymph nodes include the pectoral (chest), subscapular (under the scapula), and humeral (humerus-bone area) lymph-node groups, which drain to the central axillary lymph nodes and to the apical axillary lymph nodes. The lymphatic drainage of the breasts is especially relevant to oncology because breast cancer is common to the mammary gland, and cancer cells can metastasize (break away) from a tumour and be dispersed to other parts of the body by means of the lymphatic system.\nShape, texture, and support.\nThe morphologic variations in the size, shape, volume, tissue density, pectoral locale, and spacing of the breasts determine their natural shape, appearance, and position on a woman's chest. Breast size and other characteristics do not predict the fat-to-milk-gland ratio or the potential for the woman to nurse an infant. The size and the shape of the breasts are influenced by normal-life hormonal changes (thelarche, menstruation, pregnancy, menopause) and medical conditions (e.g. virginal breast hypertrophy). The shape of the breasts is naturally determined by the support of the suspensory Cooper's ligaments, the underlying muscle and bone structures of the chest, and by the skin envelope. The suspensory ligaments sustain the breast from the clavicle (collarbone) and the clavico-pectoral fascia (collarbone and chest) by traversing and encompassing the fat and milk-gland tissues. The breast is positioned, affixed to, and supported upon the chest wall, while its shape is established and maintained by the skin envelope. In most women, one breast is slightly larger than the other. More obvious and persistent asymmetry in breast size occurs in up to 25% of women.\nWhile it has been a common belief that breastfeeding causes breasts to sag, researchers have found that a woman's breasts sag due to four key factors: cigarette smoking, number of pregnancies, gravity, and weight loss or gain.\nThe base of each breast is attached to the chest by the deep fascia over the pectoralis major muscles. The space between the breast and the pectoralis major muscle, called retromammary space, gives mobility to the breast. \nThe chest (thoracic cavity) progressively slopes outwards from the thoracic inlet (atop the breastbone) and above to the lowest ribs that support the breasts. The inframammary fold, where the lower portion of the breast meets the chest, is an anatomic feature created by the adherence of the breast skin and the underlying connective tissues of the chest; the IMF is the lower-most extent of the anatomic breast. Normal breast tissue typically has a texture that feels nodular or granular, to an extent that varies considerably from woman to woman.\nThe study \"The Evolution of the Human Breast\" (2001) proposed that the rounded shape of a woman's breast evolved to prevent the sucking infant offspring from suffocating while feeding at the teat; that is, because of the human infant's small jaw, which did not project from the face to reach the nipple, he or she might block the nostrils against the mother's breast if it were of a flatter form (cf. common chimpanzee). Theoretically, as the human jaw receded into the face, the woman's body compensated with round breasts.\nDevelopment.\nThe breasts are principally composed of adipose, glandular, and connective tissues. Because these tissues have hormone receptors, their sizes and volumes fluctuate according to the hormonal changes particular to thelarche (sprouting of breasts), menstruation (egg production), pregnancy (reproduction), lactation (feeding of offspring), and menopause (end of menstruation).\nPuberty.\nThe morphological structure of the human breast is identical in males and females until puberty. For pubescent girls in thelarche (the breast-development stage), the female sex hormones (principally estrogens) in conjunction with growth hormone promote the sprouting, growth, and development of the breasts. During this time, the mammary glands grow in size and volume and begin resting on the chest. These development stages of secondary sex characteristics (breasts, pubic hair, etc.) are illustrated in the five-stage Tanner Scale.\nDuring thelarche the developing breasts are sometimes of unequal size, and usually the left breast is slightly larger. This condition of asymmetry is transitory and statistically normal in female physical and sexual development. Medical conditions can cause overdevelopment (e.g., virginal breast hypertrophy, macromastia) or underdevelopment (e.g., tuberous breast deformity, micromastia) in girls and women.\nApproximately two years after the onset of puberty (a girl's first menstrual cycle), estrogen and growth hormone stimulate the development and growth of the glandular fat and suspensory tissues that compose the breast. This continues for approximately four years until the final shape of the breast (size, volume, density) is established at about the age of 21. Mammoplasia (breast enlargement) in girls begins at puberty, unlike all other primates in which breasts enlarge only during lactation.\nChanges during the menstrual cycle.\nDuring the menstrual cycle, the breasts are enlarged by premenstrual water retention and temporary growth.\nPregnancy and breastfeeding.\nThe breasts reach full maturity only when a woman's first pregnancy occurs. Changes to the breasts are among the first signs of pregnancy. The breasts become larger, the nipple-areola complex becomes larger and darker, the Montgomery's glands enlarge, and veins sometimes become more visible. Breast tenderness during pregnancy is common, especially during the first trimester. By mid-pregnancy, the breast is physiologically capable of lactation and some women can express colostrum, a form of breast milk.\nPregnancy causes elevated levels of the hormone prolactin, which has a key role in the production of milk. However, milk production is blocked by the hormones progesterone and estrogen until after delivery, when progesterone and estrogen levels plummet.\nMenopause.\nAt menopause, breast atrophy occurs. The breasts can decrease in size when the levels of circulating estrogen decline. The adipose tissue and milk glands also begin to wither. The breasts can also become enlarged from adverse side effects of combined oral contraceptive pills. The size of the breasts can also increase and decrease in response to weight fluctuations. Physical changes to the breasts are often recorded in the stretch marks of the skin envelope; they can serve as historical indicators of the increments and the decrements of the size and volume of a woman's breasts throughout the course of her life.\nBreastfeeding.\nThe primary function of the breasts, as mammary glands, is the nourishing of an infant with breast milk. Milk is produced in milk-secreting cells in the alveoli. When the breasts are stimulated by the suckling of her baby, the mother's brain secretes oxytocin. High levels of oxytocin trigger the contraction of muscle cells surrounding the alveoli, causing milk to flow along the ducts that connect the alveoli to the nipple.\nFull-term newborns have an instinct and a need to suck on a nipple, and breastfed babies nurse for both nutrition and for comfort. Breast milk provides all necessary nutrients for the first six months of life, and then remains an important source of nutrition, alongside solid foods, until at least one or two years of age.\nClinical significance.\nThe breast is susceptible to numerous benign and malignant conditions. The most frequent benign conditions are puerperal mastitis, fibrocystic breast changes and mastalgia.\nLactation unrelated to pregnancy is known as galactorrhea. It can be caused by certain drugs (such as antipsychotic medications), extreme physical stress, or endocrine disorders. Lactation in newborns is caused by hormones from the mother that crossed into the baby's bloodstream during pregnancy.\nBreast cancer.\nBreast cancer is the most common cause of cancer death among women and it is one of the leading causes of death among women. Factors that appear to be implicated in decreasing the risk of breast cancer are regular breast examinations by health care professionals, regular mammograms, self-examination of breasts, healthy diet, and exercise to decrease excess body fat, and breastfeeding.\nMale breasts.\nBoth females and males develop breasts from the same embryological tissues. Normally, males produce lower levels of estrogens and higher levels of androgens, namely testosterone, which suppress the effects of estrogens in developing excessive breast tissue.\nIn boys and men, abnormal breast development is manifested as gynecomastia, the consequence of a biochemical imbalance between the normal levels of estrogen and testosterone in the male body. Around 70% of boys temporarily develop breast tissue during adolescence.\nThe condition usually resolves by itself within two years. When male lactation occurs, it is considered a symptom of a disorder of the pituitary gland.\nPlastic surgery.\nPlastic surgery can be performed to augment or reduce the size of breasts, or reconstruct the breast in cases of deformative disease, such as breast cancer. Breast augmentation and breast lift (mastopexy) procedures are done only for cosmetic reasons, whereas breast reduction is sometimes medically indicated.\nIn cases where a woman's breasts are severely asymmetrical, surgery can be performed to either enlarge the smaller breast, reduce the size of the larger breast, or both.\nBreast augmentation surgery generally does not interfere with future ability to breastfeed. Breast reduction surgery more frequently leads to decreased sensation in the nipple-areola complex, and to low milk supply in women who choose to breastfeed. Implants can interfere with mammography (breast x-rays images).\nSociety and culture.\nGeneral.\nIn Christian iconography, some works of art depict women with their breasts in their hands or on a platter, signifying that they died as a martyr by having their breasts severed; one example of this is Saint Agatha of Sicily.\nFemen is a feminist activist group which uses topless protests as part of their campaigns against sex tourism religious institutions, sexism, and homophobia.Femen activists have been regularly detained by police in response to their protests.\nThere is a long history of female breasts being used by comedians as a subject for comedy fodder (e.g., British comic Benny Hill's burlesque/slapstick routines).\nArt history.\nIn European pre-historic societies, sculptures of female figures with pronounced or highly exaggerated breasts were common. A typical example is the so-called Venus of Willendorf, one of many Paleolithic Venus figurines with ample hips and bosom. Artifacts such as bowls, rock carvings and sacred statues with breasts have been recorded from 15,000\u00a0BC up to late antiquity all across Europe, North Africa and the Middle East.\nMany female deities representing love and fertility were associated with breasts and breast milk. Figures of the Phoenician goddess Astarte were represented as pillars studded with breasts. Isis, an Egyptian goddess who represented, among many other things, ideal motherhood, was often portrayed as suckling pharaohs, thereby confirming their divine status as rulers. Even certain male deities representing regeneration and fertility were occasionally depicted with breast-like appendices, such as the river god Hapy who was considered to be responsible for the annual overflowing of the Nile.\nFemale breasts were also prominent in Minoan art in the form of the famous Snake Goddess statuettes, and a few other pieces, though most female breasts are covered. In Ancient Greece there were several cults worshipping the \"Kourotrophos\", the suckling mother, represented by goddesses such as Gaia, Hera and Artemis. The worship of deities symbolized by the female breast in Greece became less common during the first millennium. The popular adoration of female goddesses decreased significantly during the rise of the Greek city states, a legacy which was passed on to the later Roman Empire.\nDuring the middle of the first millennium BC, Greek culture experienced a gradual change in the perception of female breasts. Women in art were covered in clothing from the neck down, including female goddesses like Athena, the patron of Athens who represented heroic endeavor. There were exceptions: Aphrodite, the goddess of love, was more frequently portrayed fully nude, though in postures that were intended to portray shyness or modesty, a portrayal that has been compared to modern pin ups by historian Marilyn Yalom. Although nude men were depicted standing upright, most depictions of female nudity in Greek art occurred \"usually with drapery near at hand and with a forward-bending, self-protecting posture\". A popular legend at the time was of the Amazons, a tribe of fierce female warriors who socialized with men only for procreation and even removed one breast to become better warriors (the idea being that the right breast would interfere with the operation of a bow and arrow). The legend was a popular motif in art during Greek and Roman antiquity and served as an antithetical cautionary tale.\nBody image.\nMany women regard their breasts as important to their sexual attractiveness, as a sign of femininity that is important to their sense of self. A woman with smaller breasts may regard her breasts as less attractive.\nClothing.\nBecause breasts are mostly fatty tissue, their shape can\u2014within limits\u2014be molded by clothing, such as foundation garments. Bras are commonly worn by about 90% of Western women, and are often worn for support. The social norm in most Western cultures is to cover breasts in public, though the extent of coverage varies depending on the social context. Some religions ascribe a special status to the female breast, either in formal teachings or through symbolism. Islam forbids women from exposing their breasts in public.\nMany cultures, including Western cultures in North America, associate breasts with sexuality and tend to regard bare breasts as immodest or indecent. In some cultures, like the Himba in northern Namibia, bare-breasted women are normal. In some African cultures, for example, the thigh is regarded as highly sexualised and never exposed in public, but breast exposure is not taboo. In a few Western countries and regions female toplessness at a beach is acceptable, although it may not be acceptable in the town center.\nSocial attitudes and laws regarding breastfeeding in public vary widely. In many countries, breastfeeding in public is common, legally protected, and generally not regarded as an issue. However, even though the practice may be legal or socially accepted, some mothers may nevertheless be reluctant to expose a breast in public to breastfeed due to actual or potential objections by other people, negative comments, or harassment. It is estimated that around 63% of mothers across the world have publicly breast-fed. Bare-breasted women are legal and culturally acceptable at public beaches in Australia and much of Europe. Filmmaker Lina Esco made a film entitled \"Free the Nipple\", which is about \"...laws against female toplessness or restrictions on images of female, but not male, nipples\", which Esco states is an example of sexism in society.\nSexual characteristic.\nIn some cultures, breasts play a role in human sexual activity. In Western culture, breasts have a \"...hallowed sexual status, arguably more fetishized than either sex\u2019s genitalia\". Breasts and especially the nipples are among the various human erogenous zones. They are sensitive to the touch as they have many nerve endings; and it is common to press or massage them with hands or orally before or during sexual activity. During sexual arousal, breast size increases, venous patterns across the breasts become more visible, and nipples harden. Compared to other primates, human breasts are proportionately large throughout adult females' lives. Some writers have suggested that they may have evolved as a visual signal of sexual maturity and fertility.\nMany people regard bare female breasts to be aesthetically pleasing or erotic, and they can elicit heightened sexual desires in men in many cultures. In the ancient Indian work the \"Kama Sutra\", light scratching of the breasts with nails and biting with teeth are considered erotic. Some people show a sexual interest in female breasts distinct from that of the person, which may be regarded as a breast fetish. A number of Western fashions include clothing which accentuate the breasts, such as the use of push-up bras and decollete (plunging neckline) gowns and blouses which show cleavage. While U.S. culture prefers breasts that are youthful and upright, some cultures venerate women with drooping breasts, indicating mothering and the wisdom of experience.\nResearch conducted at the Victoria University of Wellington showed that breasts are often the first thing men look at, and for a longer time than other body parts. The writers of the study had initially speculated that the reason for this is due to endocrinology with larger breasts indicating higher levels of estrogen and a sign of greater fertility, but the researchers said that \"Men may be looking more often at the breasts because they are simply aesthetically pleasing, regardless of the size.\"\nSome women report achieving an orgasm from nipple stimulation, but this is rare. Research suggests that the orgasms are genital orgasms, and may also be directly linked to \"the genital area of the brain\". In these cases, it seems that sensation from the nipples travels to the same part of the brain as sensations from the vagina, clitoris and cervix. Nipple stimulation may trigger uterine contractions, which then produce a sensation in the genital area of the brain.\nAnthropomorphic geography.\nThere are many mountains named after the breast because they resemble it in appearance and so are objects of religious and ancestral veneration as a fertility symbol and of well-being. In Asia, there was \"Breast Mountain\", which had a cave where the Buddhist monk Bodhidharma (Da Mo) spent much time in meditation. Other such breast mountains are Mount Elgon on the Uganda-Kenya border, Beinn Ch\u00ecochan and the Maiden Paps in Scotland, the \"Bundok ng Susong Dalaga\" (Maiden's breast mountains) in Talim Island, Philippines, the twin hills known as the Paps of Anu (\"D\u00e1 Ch\u00edch Anann\" or \"the breasts of Anu\"), near Killarney in Ireland, the 2,086\u00a0m high \"Tetica de Bacares\" or \"La Tetica\" in the Sierra de Los Filabres, Spain, and Khao Nom Sao in Thailand, Cerro Las Tetas in Puerto Rico and the Breasts of Aphrodite in Mykonos, among many others. In the United States, the Teton Range is named after the French word for \"nipple\"."}
{"id": "4492", "revid": "160806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4492", "title": "Baghdad", "text": " \nBaghdad (; ) is the capital of Iraq and one of the largest cities in the Arab world, and compared to its large population it has a small area at just 673 square kilometers (260 sq mi). Located along the Tigris, near the ruins of the Akkadian city of Babylon and the ancient Iranian capital of Ctesiphon, Baghdad was founded in the 8th century and became the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate. Within a short time, Baghdad evolved into a significant cultural, commercial, and intellectual center of the Muslim world. This, in addition to housing several key academic institutions, including the House of Wisdom, as well as hosting a multiethnic and multireligious environment, garnered the city a worldwide reputation as the \"Centre of Learning\".\nBaghdad was the largest city in the world for much of the Abbasid era during the Islamic Golden Age, peaking at a population of more than a million. The city was largely destroyed at the hands of the Mongol Empire in 1258, resulting in a decline that would linger through many centuries due to frequent plagues and multiple successive empires. With the recognition of Iraq as an independent state (formerly the British Mandate of Mesopotamia) in 1932, Baghdad gradually regained some of its former prominence as a significant center of Arabic culture, with a population variously estimated at 6 or over 7\u00a0million.\nIn contemporary times, the city has often faced severe infrastructural damage, most recently due to the United States-led 2003 invasion of Iraq, and the subsequent Iraq War that lasted until December 2011. In recent years, the city has been frequently subjected to insurgent attacks, resulting in a substantial loss of cultural heritage and historical artifacts. , Baghdad was listed as one of the least hospitable places to live, ranked by Mercer as the world's worst major city for quality of life.\nName.\nThe name Baghdad is pre-Islamic, and its origin is disputed. The site where the city of Baghdad developed has been populated for millennia. By the 8th century AD, several villages had developed there, including a Persian hamlet called \"Baghdad,\" the name which would come to be used for the Abbasid metropolis.\nArab authors, realizing the pre-Islamic origins of Baghdad's name, generally looked for its roots in Middle Persian. They suggested various meanings, the most common of which was \"bestowed by God\". Modern scholars generally tend to favor this etymology, which views the word as a compound of \"bagh\" () \"god\" and \"d\u0101d\" () \"given\". In Old Persian the first element can be traced to \"boghu\" and is related to Slavic \"bog\" \"god\", A similar term in Middle Persian is the name \"Mithrad\u0101t\" (\"Mihrd\u0101d\" in New Persian), known in English by its Hellenistic form Mithridates, meaning \"Given by Mithra\" (\"d\u0101t\" is the more archaic form of \"d\u0101d\", related to Latin \"dat\" and English \"donor\"). There are a number of other locations in the wider region whose names are compounds of the word \"bagh\", including Baghlan and Bagram in Afghanistan, Baghshan in Iran, and Baghdati in Georgia, which likely share the same etymological origins.\nA few authors have suggested older origins for the name, in particular the name \"Bagdadu\" or \"Hudadu\" that existed in Old Babylonian (spelled with a sign that can represent both \"bag\" and \"hu\"), and the Babylonian Talmudic name of a place called \"Baghdatha\". Some scholars suggested Aramaic derivations.\nWhen the Abbasid caliph, Al-Mansur, founded a completely new city for his capital, he chose the name Madinat al-Salaam or \"City of Peace\". This was the official name on coins, weights, and other official usage, although the common people continued to use the old name. By the 11th century, \"Baghdad\" became almost the exclusive name for the world-renowned metropolis.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nAfter the fall of the Umayyads, the first Muslim dynasty, the victorious Abbasid rulers wanted their own capital from which they could rule. They chose a site north of the Sassanid capital of Ctesiphon, and on 30 July 762 the caliph Al-Mansur commissioned the construction of the city. It was built under the supervision of the Barmakids. Mansur believed that Baghdad was the perfect city to be the capital of the Islamic empire under the Abbasids. The Muslim historian al-Tabari reported an ancient prediction by Christian monks that a lord named Miklas would one day build a spectacular city around the area of Baghdad. When Mansur heard the story, he became very joyful, for legend has it, he was called Miklas as a child. Mansur loved the site so much he is quoted saying: \"This is indeed the city that I am to found, where I am to live, and where my descendants will reign afterward\".\nThe city's growth was helped by its excellent location, based on at least two factors: it had control over strategic and trading routes along the Tigris, and it had an abundance of water in a dry climate. Water exists on both the north and south ends of the city, allowing all households to have a plentiful supply, which was very uncommon during this time. The city of Baghdad soon became so large that it had to be divided into three judicial districts: Madinat al-Mansur (the Round City), al-Sharqiyya (Karkh) and Askar al-Mahdi (on the West Bank).\nBaghdad eclipsed Ctesiphon, the capital of the Sassanians, which was located some to the southeast. Today, all that remains of Ctesiphon is the shrine town of Salman Pak, just to the south of Greater Baghdad. Ctesiphon itself had replaced and absorbed Seleucia, the first capital of the Seleucid Empire, which had earlier replaced the city of Babylon.\nAccording to the traveler Ibn Battuta, Baghdad was one of the largest cities, not including the damage it has received. The residents are mostly Hanbal. Baghdad is also home to the grave of Abu Hanifa where there is a cell and a mosque above it. The Sultan of Baghdad, Abu Said Bahadur Khan, was a Tatar king who embraced Islam.\nIn its early years, the city was known as a deliberate reminder of an expression in the Qur'an, when it refers to Paradise. It took four years to build (764\u2013768). Mansur assembled engineers, surveyors, and art constructionists from around the world to come together and draw up plans for the city. Over 100,000 construction workers came to survey the plans; many were distributed salaries to start the building of the city. July was chosen as the starting time because two astrologers, Naubakht Ahvazi and Mashallah, believed that the city should be built under the sign of the lion, Leo. Leo is associated with fire and symbolises productivity, pride, and expansion.\nThe bricks used to make the city were on all four sides. Abu Hanifah was the counter of the bricks and he developed a canal, which brought water to the work site for both human consumption and the manufacture of the bricks. Marble was also used to make buildings throughout the city, and marble steps led down to the river's edge.\nThe basic framework of the city consists of two large semicircles about in diameter. The city was designed as a circle about in diameter, leading it to be known as the \"Round City\". The original design shows a single ring of residential and commercial structures along the inside of the city walls, but the final construction added another ring inside the first. Within the city there were many parks, gardens, villas, and promenades. There was a large sanitation department, many fountains and public baths, and unlike contemporary European cities at the time, streets were frequently washed free of debris and trash. In fact, by the time of Harun al-Rashid, Baghdad had a few thousand hammams. These baths increased public hygiene and served as a way for the religious to perform ablutions as prescribed by Islam. Moreover, entry fees were usually so low that almost everyone could afford them. In the center of the city lay the mosque, as well as headquarters for guards. The purpose or use of the remaining space in the center is unknown. The circular design of the city was a direct reflection of the traditional Persian Sasanian urban design. The Sasanian city of Gur in Fars, built 500 years before Baghdad, is nearly identical in its general circular design, radiating avenues, and the government buildings and temples at the centre of the city. This style of urban planning contrasted with Ancient Greek and Roman urban planning, in which cities are designed as squares or rectangles with streets intersecting each other at right angles.\nBaghdad was a busy city during the day and had many attractions at night. There were cabarets and taverns, halls for backgammon and chess, live plays, concerts, and acrobats. On street corners, storytellers engaged crowds with tales such as those later told in Arabian Nights.\nThe four surrounding walls of Baghdad were named Kufa, Basra, Khurasan, and Syria; named because their gates pointed in the directions of these destinations. The distance between these gates was a little less than . Each gate had double doors that were made of iron; the doors were so heavy it took several men to open and close them. The wall itself was about 44\u00a0m thick at the base and about 12\u00a0m thick at the top. Also, the wall was 30\u00a0m high, which included merlons, a solid part of an embattled parapet usually pierced by embrasures. This wall was surrounded by another wall with a thickness of 50\u00a0m. The second wall had towers and rounded merlons, which surrounded the towers. This outer wall was protected by a solid glacis, which is made out of bricks and quicklime. Beyond the outer wall was a water-filled moat.\nThe Golden Gate Palace, the residence of the caliph and his family, was in the middle of Baghdad, in the central square. In the central part of the building, there was a green dome that was 39\u00a0m high. Surrounding the palace was an esplanade, a waterside building, in which only the caliph could come riding on horseback. In addition, the palace was near other mansions and officer's residences. Near the Gate of Syria, a building served as the home for the guards. It was made of brick and marble. The palace governor lived in the latter part of the building and the commander of the guards in the front. In 813, after the death of caliph Al-Amin, the palace was no longer used as the home for the caliph and his family.\nThe roundness points to the fact that it was based on Arabic script. The two designers who were hired by Al-Mansur to plan the city's design were Naubakht, a Zoroastrian who also determined that the date of the foundation of the city would be astrologically auspicious, and Mashallah, a Jew from Khorasan, Iran.\nCenter of learning (8th to 9th centuries).\nWithin a generation of its founding, Baghdad became a hub of learning and commerce. The city flourished into an unrivaled intellectual center of science, medicine, philosophy, and education, especially with the Abbasid Translation Movement began under the second caliph Al-Mansur and thrived under the seventh caliph Al-Ma'mun. \"Baytul-Hikmah\" or the \"House of Wisdom\" was among the most well known academies, and had the largest selection of books in the world by the middle of the 9th century. Notable scholars based in Baghdad during this time include translator Hunayn ibn Ishaq, mathematician al-Khwarizmi, and philosopher Al-Kindi. Although Arabic was used as the international language of science, the scholarship involved not only Arabs, but also Persians, Syriacs, Nestorians, Jews, Arab Christians, and people from other ethnic and religious groups native to the region. These are considered among the fundamental elements that contributed to the flourishing of scholarship in the Medieval Islamic world. Baghdad was also a significant center of Islamic religious learning, with Al-Jahiz contributing to the formation of Mu'tazili theology, as well as Al-Tabari culminating in the scholarship on the Quranic exegesis. Baghdad was likely the largest city in the world from shortly after its foundation until the 930s, when it tied with C\u00f3rdoba.\nSeveral estimates suggest that the city contained over a million inhabitants at its peak. Many of the \"One Thousand and One Nights\" tales, widely known as the \"Arabian Nights\", are set in Baghdad during this period. It would surpass even Constantinople in prosperity and size.\nAmong the notable features of Baghdad during this period were its exceptional libraries. Many of the Abbasid caliphs were patrons of learning and enjoyed collecting both ancient and contemporary literature. Although some of the princes of the previous Umayyad dynasty had begun to gather and translate Greek scientific literature, the Abbasids were the first to foster Greek learning on a large scale. Many of these libraries were private collections intended only for the use of the owners and their immediate friends, but the libraries of the caliphs and other officials soon took on a public or a semi-public character. Four great libraries were established in Baghdad during this period. The earliest was that of the famous Al-Ma'mun, who was caliph from 813 to 833. Another was established by Sabur ibn Ardashir in 991 or 993 for the literary men and scholars who frequented his academy. Unfortunately, this second library was plundered and burned by the Seljuks only seventy years after it was established. This was a good example of the sort of library built up out of the needs and interests of a literary society. The last two were examples of \"madrasa\" or theological college libraries. The Nezamiyeh was founded by the Persian Nizam al-Mulk, who was vizier of two early Seljuk sultans. It continued to operate even after the coming of the Mongols in 1258. The Mustansiriyah \"madrasa\", which owned an exceedingly rich library, was founded by Al-Mustansir, the second last Abbasid caliph, who died in 1242. This would prove to be the last great library built by the caliphs of Baghdad.\nStagnation and invasions (10th to 16th centuries).\nBy the 10th century, the city's population was between 1.2\u00a0million and 2\u00a0million. Baghdad's early meteoric growth eventually slowed due to troubles within the Caliphate, including relocations of the capital to Samarra (during 808\u2013819 and 836\u2013892), the loss of the western and easternmost provinces, and periods of political domination by the Iranian Buwayhids (945\u20131055) and Seljuk Turks (1055\u20131135).\nThe Seljuks were a clan of the Oghuz Turks from Central Asia that converted to the Sunni branch of Islam. In 1040, they destroyed the Ghaznavids, taking over their land and in 1055, Tughril Beg, the leader of the Seljuks, took over Baghdad. The Seljuks expelled the Buyid dynasty of Shiites that had ruled for some time and took over power and control of Baghdad. They ruled as Sultans in the name of the Abbasid caliphs (they saw themselves as being part of the Abbasid regime). Tughril Beg saw himself as the protector of the Abbasid Caliphs.\nSieges and wars in which Baghdad was involved are listed below:\nIn 1058, Baghdad was captured by the Fatimids under the Turkish general Abu'l-\u1e24\u0101rith Arsl\u0101n al-Basasiri, an adherent of the Ismailis along with the 'Uqaylid Quraysh. Not long before the arrival of the Saljuqs in Baghdad, al-Basasiri petitioned to the Fatimid Imam-Caliph al-Mustansir to support him in conquering Baghdad on the Ismaili Imam's behalf. It has recently come to light that the famed Fatimid \"da'i\", al-Mu'ayyad al-Shirazi, had a direct role in supporting al-Basasiri and helped the general to succeed in taking Maw\u1e63il, W\u0101sit and Kufa. Soon after, by December 1058, a Shi'i \"adh\u0101n\" (call to prayer) was implemented in Baghdad and a \"khutbah\" (sermon) was delivered in the name of the Fatimid Imam-Caliph. Despite his Shi'i inclinations, Al-Basasiri received support from Sunnis and Shi'is alike, for whom opposition to the Saljuq power was a common factor.\nOn 10 February 1258, Baghdad was captured by the Mongols led by Hulegu, a grandson of Chingiz Khan (Genghis Khan), during the siege of Baghdad. Many quarters were ruined by fire, siege, or looting. The Mongols massacred most of the city's inhabitants, including the caliph Al-Musta'sim, and destroyed large sections of the city. The canals and dykes forming the city's irrigation system were also destroyed. During this time, in Baghdad, Christians and Shia were tolerated, while Sunnis were treated as enemies. The sack of Baghdad put an end to the Abbasid Caliphate. It has been argued that this marked an end to the Islamic Golden Age and served a blow from which Islamic civilisation never fully recovered.\nAt this point, Baghdad was ruled by the Ilkhanate, a breakaway state of the Mongol Empire, ruling from Iran. In August 1393, Baghdad was occupied by the Central Asian Turkic conqueror Timur (\"Tamerlane\"), by marching there in only eight days from Shiraz. Sultan Ahmad Jalayir fled to Syria, where the Mamluk Sultan Barquq protected him and killed Timur's envoys. Timur left the Sarbadar prince Khwaja Mas'ud to govern Baghdad, but he was driven out when Ahmad Jalayir returned.\nIn 1401, Baghdad was again sacked, by Timur. When his forces took Baghdad, he spared almost no one, and ordered that each of his soldiers bring back two severed human heads. Baghdad became a provincial capital controlled by the Mongol Jalayirid (1400\u20131411), Turkic Kara Koyunlu (1411\u20131469), Turkic Ak Koyunlu (1469\u20131508), and the Iranian Safavid (1508\u20131534) dynasties.\nOttoman era (16th to 19th centuries).\nIn 1534, Baghdad was captured by the Ottoman Turks. Under the Ottomans, Baghdad continued into a period of decline, partially as a result of the enmity between its rulers and Iranian Safavids, which did not accept the Sunni control of the city. Between 1623 and 1638, it returned to Iranian rule before falling back into Ottoman hands. Baghdad has suffered severely from visitations of the plague and cholera, and sometimes two-thirds of its population has been wiped out.\nFor a time, Baghdad had been the largest city in the Middle East. The city saw relative revival in the latter part of the 18th century, under a Mamluk government. Direct Ottoman rule was reimposed by Ali R\u0131za Pasha in 1831. From 1851 to 1852 and from 1861 to 1867, Baghdad was governed, under the Ottoman Empire by Mehmed Nam\u0131k Pasha. The Nuttall Encyclopedia reports the 1907 population of Baghdad as 185,000.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nBaghdad and southern Iraq remained under Ottoman rule until 1917, when captured by the British during World War I. In 1920, Baghdad became the capital of the British Mandate of Mesopotamia with several architectural and planning projects commissioned to reinforce this administration. After receiving independence in 1932, the capital of the Kingdom of Iraq. The city's population grew from an estimated 145,000 in 1900 to 580,000 in 1950. During the Mandate, Baghdad's substantial Jewish community comprised a quarter of the city's population. On 1 April 1941, members of the \"Golden Square\" and Rashid Ali staged a coup in Baghdad. Rashid Ali installed a pro-German and pro-Italian government to replace the pro-British government of Regent Abdul Ilah. On 31 May, after the resulting Anglo-Iraqi War and after Rashid Ali and his government had fled, the Mayor of Baghdad surrendered to British and Commonwealth forces. On 14 July 1958, members of the Iraqi Army, under Abd al-Karim Qasim, staged a coup to topple the Kingdom of Iraq. King Faisal II, former Prime Minister Nuri as-Said, former Regent Prince 'Abd al-Ilah, members of the royal family, and others were brutally killed during the coup. Many of the victim's bodies were then dragged through the streets of Baghdad.\nDuring the 1970s, Baghdad experienced a period of prosperity and growth because of a sharp increase in the price of petroleum, Iraq's main export. New infrastructure including modern sewerage, water, and highway facilities were built during this period. The masterplans of the city (1967, 1973) were delivered by the Polish planning office Miastoprojekt-Krak\u00f3w, mediated by Polservice. However, the Iran\u2013Iraq War of the 1980s was a difficult time for the city, as money was diverted by Saddam Hussein to the army and thousands of residents were killed. Iran launched a number of missile attacks against Baghdad in retaliation for Saddam Hussein's continuous bombardments of Tehran's residential districts. In 1991 and 2003, the Gulf War and the 2003 invasion of Iraq caused significant damage to Baghdad's transportation, power, and sanitary infrastructure as the US-led coalition forces launched massive aerial assaults in the city in the two wars. Also in 2003, a minor riot in the city (which took place on 21 July) caused some disturbance in the population. The historic \"Assyrian Quarter\" of the city, Dora, which boasted a population of 150,000 Assyrians in 2003, made up over 3% of the capital's Assyrian population then. The community has been subject to kidnappings, death threats, vandalism, and house burnings by al-Qaeda and other insurgent groups. As of the end of 2014, only 1,500 Assyrians remained in Dora. The Iraq War took place from 2003-2011, but an Islamist insurgency lasted until 2013. It was followed by another war from 2013-2017 and a low-level insurgency from 2017, which included suicide bombings in January 2018, and January 2021.\nMain sights.\nPoints of interest include the National Museum of Iraq whose collection of artifacts was looted during the 2003 invasion, and the iconic Hands of Victory arches. Multiple Iraqi parties are in discussions as to whether the arches should remain as historical monuments or be dismantled. Thousands of ancient manuscripts in the National Library were destroyed under Saddam's command.\nMutanabbi Street.\nMutanabbi Street is located near the old quarter of Baghdad; at Al Rasheed Street. It is the historic center of Baghdadi book-selling, a street filled with bookstores and outdoor book stalls. It was named after the 10th-century classical Iraqi poet Al-Mutanabbi. This street is well established for bookselling and has often been referred to as the heart and soul of the Baghdad literacy and intellectual community.\nBaghdad Zoo.\nThe zoological park used to be the largest in the Middle East. Within eight days following the 2003 invasion, however, only 35 of the 650 animals in the facility survived. This was a result of theft of some animals for human food, and starvation of caged animals that had no food. Conservationist Lawrence Anthony and some of the zoo keepers cared for the animals and fed the carnivores with donkeys they had bought locally. Eventually Paul Bremer, Director of the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq after the invasion, ordered protection for the zoo and enlisted U.S. engineers to help reopen the facility.\nGrand Festivities Square.\nGrand Festivities Square is the main square where public celebrations are held and is also the home to three important monuments commemorating Iraqi's fallen soldiers and victories in war; namely Al-Shaheed Monument, the Victory Arch and the Unknown Soldier's Monument.\nAl-Shaheed Monument.\nAl-Shaheed Monument, also known as the Martyr's Memorial, is a monument dedicated to the Iraqi soldiers who died in the Iran\u2013Iraq War. However, now it is generally considered by Iraqis to be for all of the martyrs of Iraq, especially those allied with Iran and Syria fighting ISIS, not just of the Iran\u2013Iraq War. The monument was opened in 1983, and was designed by the Iraqi architect Saman Kamal and the Iraqi sculptor and artist Ismail Fatah Al Turk. During the 1970s and 1980s, Saddam Hussein's government spent a lot of money on new monuments, which included the al-Shaheed Monument.\nQushla.\nQushla or Qishla is a public square and the historical complex located in Rusafa neighborhood at the riverbank of Tigris. Qushla and its surroundings is where the historical features and cultural capitals of Baghdad are concentrated, from the Mutanabbi Street, Abbasid-era palace and bridges, Ottoman-era mosques to the Mustansariyah Madrasa. The square developed during the Ottoman era as a military barracks. Today, it is a place where the citizens of Baghdad find leisure such as reading poetry in gazebos. It is characterized by the iconic clock tower which was donated by George V. The entire area is submitted to the UNESCO World Heritage Site Tentative list.\nFirdos Square.\nFirdos Square is a public open space in Baghdad and the location of two of the best-known hotels, the Palestine Hotel and the Sheraton Ishtar, which are both also the tallest buildings in Baghdad. The square was the site of the statue of Saddam Hussein that was pulled down by U.S. coalition forces in a widely televised event during the 2003 invasion of Iraq.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAdministratively, Baghdad Governorate is divided into districts which are further divided into sub-districts. Municipally, the governorate is divided into 9 municipalities, which have responsibility for local issues. Regional services, however, are coordinated and carried out by a mayor who oversees the municipalities. There is no single city council that singularly governs Baghdad at a municipal level. The governorate council is responsible for the governorate-wide policy. These official subdivisions of the city served as administrative centres for the delivery of municipal services but until 2003 had no political function. Beginning in April 2003, the U.S. controlled Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) began the process of creating new functions for these. The process initially focused on the election of neighbourhood councils in the official neighbourhoods, elected by neighbourhood caucuses. The CPA convened a series of meetings in each neighbourhood to explain local government, to describe the caucus election process and to encourage participants to spread the word and bring friends, relatives and neighbours to subsequent meetings. Each neighbourhood process ultimately ended with a final meeting where candidates for the new neighbourhood councils identified themselves and asked their neighbours to vote for them. Once all 88 (later increased to 89) neighbourhood councils were in place, each neighbourhood council elected representatives from among their members to serve on one of the city's nine district councils. The number of neighbourhood representatives on a district council is based upon the neighbourhood's population. The next step was to have each of the nine district councils elect representatives from their membership to serve on the 37 member Baghdad City Council. This three tier system of local government connected the people of Baghdad to the central government through their representatives from the neighbourhood, through the district, and up to the city council. The same process was used to provide representative councils for the other communities in Baghdad Province outside of the city itself. There, local councils were elected from 20 neighbourhoods (Nahia) and these councils elected representatives from their members to serve on six district councils (Qada). As within the city, the district councils then elected representatives from among their members to serve on the 35 member Baghdad Regional Council. The first step in the establishment of the system of local government for Baghdad Province was the election of the Baghdad Provincial Council. As before, the representatives to the Provincial Council were elected by their peers from the lower councils in numbers proportional to the population of the districts they represent. The 41 member Provincial Council took office in February 2004 and served until national elections held in January 2005, when a new Provincial Council was elected. This system of 127 separate councils may seem overly cumbersome; however, Baghdad Province is home to approximately seven million people. At the lowest level, the neighbourhood councils, each council represents an average of 75,000 people. The nine District Advisory Councils (DAC) are as follows:\nThe nine districts are subdivided into 89 smaller neighborhoods which may make up sectors of any of the districts above. The following is a \"selection\" (rather than a complete list) of these neighborhoods:\nGeography.\nThe city is located on a vast plain bisected by the Tigris river. The Tigris splits Baghdad in half, with the eastern half being called \"Risafa\" and the Western half known as \"Karkh\". The land on which the city is built is almost entirely flat and low-lying, being of alluvial origin due to the periodic large floods which have occurred on the river.\nClimate.\nBaghdad has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BWh\"), featuring extremely hot, prolonged, dry summers and mild to cool, slightly wet, short winters. In the summer, from June through August, the average maximum temperature is as high as and accompanied by sunshine. Rainfall has been recorded on fewer than half a dozen occasions at this time of year and has never exceeded . Even at night, temperatures in summer are seldom below . Baghdad's record highest temperature of was reached on 28 July 2020. The humidity is typically under 50% in summer due to Baghdad's distance from the marshy southern Iraq and the coasts of Persian Gulf, and dust storms from the deserts to the west are a normal occurrence during the summer.\nWinter temperatures are typical of hot desert climates. From December through February, Baghdad has maximum temperatures averaging , though highs above are not unheard of. Lows below freezing occur a couple of times per year on average.\nAnnual rainfall, almost entirely confined to the period from November through March, averages approximately , but has been as high as and as low as . On 11 January 2008, light snow fell across Baghdad for the first time in 100 years. Snowfall was again reported on 11 February 2020, with accumulations across the city.\nDemographics.\nBaghdad's population was estimated at 7.22\u00a0million in 2015. The city historically had a predominantly Sunni population, but by the early 21st century around 52% of the city's population were Iraqi Shi'ites. At the beginning of the 21st century, some 1.5\u00a0million people migrated to Baghdad. Sunni Muslims make up 45% of Iraq's population and they are still a majority in west and north Iraq. As early as 2003, about 20 percent of the population of the city was the result of mixed marriages between Shi'ites and Sunnis. Following the sectarian violence in Iraq between the Sunni and Shia militia groups during the U.S. occupation of Iraq.The Iraqi Civil War following ISIS' invasion in 2014 caused hundreds of thousands of Iraqi internally displaced people to flee to the city. The city has Shia, Sunni, Assyrian/Chaldean/Syriacs, Armenians and mixed neighborhoods. The city was also home to a large Jewish community and regularly visited by Sikh pilgrims.\nEconomy.\nBaghdad accounts for 22.2% of Iraq's population and 40% of the country's gross domestic product (PPP). Iraqi Airways, the national airline of Iraq, has its headquarters on the grounds of Baghdad International Airport in Baghdad. \nReconstruction efforts.\nMost Iraqi reconstruction efforts have been devoted to the restoration and repair of badly damaged urban infrastructure. More visible efforts at reconstruction through private development, like architect and urban designer Hisham N. Ashkouri's Baghdad Renaissance Plan and the Sindbad Hotel Complex and Conference Center have also been made. A plan was proposed by a Government agency to rebuild a tourist island in 2008. In late 2009, a construction plan was proposed to rebuild the heart of Baghdad, but the plan was never realized because corruption was involved in it.\nThe Baghdad Eye, a tall Ferris wheel, was proposed for Baghdad in August 2008. At that time, three possible locations had been identified, but no estimates of cost or completion date were given.&lt;ref name=\"msnbc.msn.com/id/26425911\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In October 2008, it was reported that Al-Zawraa Park was expected to be the site, and a wheel was installed there in March 2011.\nIraq's Tourism Board is also seeking investors to develop a \"romantic\" island on the River Tigris in Baghdad that was once a popular honeymoon spot for newlywed Iraqis. The project would include a six-star hotel, spa, an 18-hole golf course and a country club. In addition, the go-ahead has been given to build numerous architecturally unique skyscrapers along the Tigris that would develop the city's financial centre in Kadhehemiah.\nIn October 2008, the Baghdad Metro resumed service. It connects the center to the southern neighborhood of Dora.\nIn May 2010, a new residential and commercial project nicknamed Baghdad Gate was announced. This project not only addresses the urgent need for new residential units in Baghdad but also acts as a real symbol of progress in the war torn city, as Baghdad has not seen projects of this scale for decades.\nEducation.\nThe Mustansiriya Madrasah was established in 1227 by the Abbasid Caliph al-Mustansir. The name was changed to Al-Mustansiriya University in 1963. The University of Baghdad is the largest university in Iraq and the second largest in the Arab world. Prior to the Gulf War, multiple international schools operated in Baghdad, including:\nCulture.\nBaghdad has always played a significant role in the broader Arab cultural sphere, contributing several significant writers, musicians and visual artists. Famous Arab poets and singers such as Nizar Qabbani, Umm Kulthum, Fairuz, Salah Al-Hamdani, Ilham al-Madfai and others have performed for the city. The dialect of Arabic spoken in Baghdad today differs from that of other large urban centres in Iraq, having features more characteristic of nomadic Arabic dialects (Versteegh, \"The Arabic Language\"). It is possible that this was caused by the repopulating of the city with rural residents after the multiple sackings of the late Middle Ages. For poetry written about Baghdad, see Reuven Snir (ed.), \"Baghdad: The City in Verse\" (Harvard, 2013). Baghdad joined the UNESCO Creative Cities Network as a City of Literature in December 2015.\nInstitutions.\nSome of the important cultural institutions in the city include the National Theater, which was looted during the 2003 invasion of Iraq, but efforts are underway to restore the theatre. The live theatre scene received a boost during the 1990s, when UN sanctions limited the import of foreign films. As many as 30 movie theatres were reported to have been converted to live stages, producing a wide range of comedies and dramatic productions. Institutions offering cultural education in Baghdad include The Music and Ballet School of Baghdad and the Institute of Fine Arts Baghdad. The Iraqi National Symphony Orchestra is a government funded symphony orchestra in Baghdad. The INSO plays primarily classical European music, as well as original compositions based on Iraqi and Arab instruments and music. Baghdad is also home to a number of museums which housed artifacts and relics of ancient civilization; many of these were stolen, and the museums looted, during the widespread chaos immediately after United States forces entered the city.\nDuring the 2003 occupation of Iraq, AFN Iraq (\"Freedom Radio\") broadcast news and entertainment within Baghdad, among other locations. There is also a private radio station called \"Dijlah\" (named after the Arabic word for the Tigris River) that was created in 2004 as Iraq's first independent talk radio station. Radio Dijlah offices, in the Jamia neighborhood of Baghdad, have been attacked on several occasions.\nDestruction of cultural heritage.\nPriceless collection of artifacts in the National Museum of Iraq was looted by the Iraqi citizens during the 2003 US-led invasion. Thousands of ancient manuscripts in the National Library were destroyed under Saddam's command and because of neglect by the occupying coalition forces.\nSport.\nBaghdad is home to some of the most successful football (soccer) teams in Iraq, the biggest being Al-Shorta (Police), Al-Quwa Al-Jawiya (Airforce club), Al-Zawra'a, and Talaba (Students). The largest stadium in Baghdad is Al-Shaab Stadium, which was opened in 1966. The city has also had a strong tradition of horse racing ever since World War I, known to Baghdadis simply as 'Races'. There are reports of pressures by the Islamists to stop this tradition due to the associated gambling."}
{"id": "4493", "revid": "24109244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4493", "title": "Outline of biology", "text": "Biology \u2013 The natural science that involves the study of life and living organisms, including their structure, function, growth, origin, evolution, distribution, and taxonomy.\nBranches of biology.\nBranch of biology \u2013 subdiscipline of biology, also referred to as a biological science (note that biology and all its branches are also life sciences).\nEvolution.\nOutline of evolution\nEcology.\nOutline of ecology\nCellular and molecular biology.\nOutline of cell biology\nOutline of biochemistry\nOutline of genetics"}
{"id": "4495", "revid": "2974138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4495", "title": "British thermal unit", "text": "The British thermal unit (BTU or Btu) is a unit of heat; it is defined as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit. It is also part of the United States customary units. Heat is now known to be equivalent to energy. The modern SI unit for heat and energy is the joule (J);\nOne BTU equals about 1055J (depending on the exact BTU definition, see below).\nAnother legacy unit for energy in the metric system is the calorie, which is defined as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water by one degree Celsius. While units of heat are often supplanted by energy units in scientific work, they are still used in some fields. For example, in the United States the price of natural gas is quoted in dollars per million BTUs.\nDefinitions.\nA BTU was originally defined as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 avoirdupois pound of liquid water by 1 degree Fahrenheit at a constant pressure of one atmospheric unit. There are several different definitions of the BTU that are now known to differ slightly. This reflects the fact that the temperature change of a mass of water due to the addition of a specific amount of heat (calculated in energy units, usually joules) depends slightly upon the water's initial temperature. As seen in the table below, definitions of the BTU based on different water temperatures vary by up to 0.5%.\nPrefixes.\nUnits kBtu are used in building energy use tracking and heating system sizing. Energy Use Index (EUI) represents kBtu per square foot of conditioned floor area. \"k\" stands for 1,000.\nThe unit MBTU is used in natural gas and other industries to indicate 1,000 BTUs. However, there is an ambiguity in that the metric system (SI) uses the prefix \"M\" to indicate one million (1,000,000), and consequently \"MMBtu\" is often used to indicate one million BTUs.\nEnergy analysts accustomed to the metric \"k\" for 1,000 are more likely to use MBtu to represent one million, especially in documents where M represents one million in other energy or cost units, such as MW, MWh and $.\nThe unit \"therm\" is used to represent 100,000 BTUs. A decatherm is 10 therms or one MMBtu (million Btu). The unit \"quad\" is commonly used to represent one quadrillion (1015) BTUs.\nConversions.\nOne Btu is approximately:\nA Btu can be approximated as the heat produced by burning a single wooden kitchen match or as the amount of energy it takes to lift a weight .\nAs a unit of power.\nThe SI unit of power for heating and cooling systems is watt. Btu \"per hour\" (Btu/h) is often used instead, though \"Btu/h\" is sometimes wrongly abbreviated to just \"Btu\". \"MBH\"\u2014thousands of Btus per hour\u2014is also common.\nAssociated units.\nThe Btu should not be confused with the Board of Trade Unit (B.O.T.U.), an obsolete UK synonym for kilowatt hour ().\nThe Btu is often used to express the conversion-efficiency of heat into electrical energy in power plants. Figures are quoted in terms of the quantity of heat in Btu required to generate 1\u00a0kW\u22c5h of electrical energy. A typical coal-fired power plant works at , an efficiency of 32\u201333%.\nThe centigrade heat unit (CHU) is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound of water by one Celsius degree. It is equal to 1.8\u00a0BTU or 1899 joules. In 1974, this unit was \"still sometimes used\" in the United Kingdom as an alternative to BTU."}
{"id": "4497", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4497", "title": "Bugatti", "text": "Automobiles Ettore Bugatti was a French car manufacturer of high-performance automobiles, founded in 1909 in the then-German city of Molsheim, Alsace by the Italian-born industrial designer Ettore Bugatti. The cars were known for their design beauty and for their many race victories. Famous Bugattis include the Type 35 Grand Prix cars, the Type 41 \"Royale\", the Type 57 \"Atlantic\" and the Type 55 sports car.\nThe death of Ettore Bugatti in 1947 proved to be the end for the marque, and the death of his son Jean Bugatti in 1939 ensured there was not a successor to lead the factory. No more than about 8,000 cars were made. The company struggled financially, and released one last model in the 1950s, before eventually being purchased for its airplane parts business in 1963.\nIn 1987, an Italian entrepreneur bought the brand and revived it as a builder of limited production exclusive sports cars based in Modena. In 1998, the Volkswagen Group bought the rights to the Bugatti marque and set up a subsidiary based back in Molsheim, Alsace.\nUnder Ettore Bugatti.\nFounder Ettore Bugatti was born in Milan, Italy, and the automobile company that bears his name was founded in 1909 in Molsheim located in the Alsace region which was part of the German Empire from 1871 to 1919. The company was known both for the level of detail of its engineering in its automobiles, and for the artistic manner in which the designs were executed, given the artistic nature of Ettore's family (his father, Carlo Bugatti (1856\u20131940), was an important Art Nouveau furniture and jewelry designer).\nWorld War I and its aftermath.\nDuring the war Ettore Bugatti was sent away, initially to Milan and later to Paris, but as soon as hostilities had been concluded he returned to his factory at Molsheim. Less than four months after the Versailles Treaty formalised the transfer of Alsace from Germany to France, Bugatti was able to obtain, at the last minute, a stand at the 15th Paris motor show in October 1919. He exhibited three light cars, all of them closely based on their pre-war equivalents, and each fitted with the same overhead camshaft 4-cylinder 1,368cc engine with four valves per cylinder. Smallest of the three was a \"Type 13\" with a racing body (constructed by Bugatti themselves) and using a chassis with a wheelbase. The others were a \"Type 22\" and a \"Type 23\" with wheelbases of respectively.\nRacing successes.\nThe company also enjoyed great success in early Grand Prix motor racing: in 1929 a privately entered Bugatti won the first ever Monaco Grand Prix. Racing success culminated with driver Jean-Pierre Wimille winning the 24 hours of Le Mans twice (in 1937 with Robert Benoist and 1939 with Pierre Veyron).\nBugatti cars were extremely successful in racing. The little Bugatti Type 10 swept the top four positions at its first race. The 1924 Bugatti Type 35 is one of the most successful racing cars. The Type 35 was developed by Bugatti with master engineer and racing driver Jean Chassagne who also drove it in the car's first ever Grand Prix in 1924 Lyon. Bugattis swept to victory in the Targa Florio for five years straight from 1925 through 1929. Louis Chiron held the most podiums in Bugatti cars, and the modern marque revival Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. named the 1999 Bugatti 18/3 Chiron concept car in his honour. But it was the final racing success at Le Mans that is most remembered\u2014Jean-Pierre Wimille and Pierre Veyron won the 1939 race with just one car and meagre resources.\nAeroplane racing.\nIn the 1930s, Ettore Bugatti got involved in the creation of a racer airplane, hoping to beat the Germans in the Deutsch de la Meurthe prize. This would be the Bugatti 100P, which never flew. It was designed by Belgian engineer Louis de Monge who had already applied Bugatti Brescia engines in his \"Type 7.5\" lifting body.\nRailcar.\nEttore Bugatti also designed a successful motorised railcar, the \"\" (Autorail Bugatti).\nFamily tragedy.\nThe death of Ettore Bugatti's son, Jean Bugatti, on 11 August 1939 marked a turning point in the company's fortunes. Jean died while testing a Type 57 tank-bodied race car near the Molsheim factory.\nAfter World War II.\nWorld War II left the Molsheim factory in ruins and the company lost control of the property. During the war, Bugatti planned a new factory at Levallois, a northwestern suburb of Paris. After the war, Bugatti designed and planned to build a series of new cars, including the Type 73 road car and Type 73C single seat racing car, but in all Bugatti built only five Type 73 cars.\nDevelopment of a 375\u00a0cc supercharged car was stopped when Ettore Bugatti died on 21 August 1947. Following Ettore Bugatti's death, the business declined further and made its last appearance as a business in its own right at a Paris Motor Show in October 1952.\nAfter a long decline, the original incarnation of Bugatti ceased operations in 1952.\nDesign.\nBugattis are noticeably focused on design. Engine blocks were hand scraped to ensure that the surfaces were so flat that gaskets were not required for sealing, many of the exposed surfaces of the engine compartment featured \"guilloch\u00e9\" (engine turned) finishes on them, and safety wires had been threaded through almost every fastener in intricately laced patterns. Rather than bolt the springs to the axles as most manufacturers did, Bugatti's axles were forged such that the spring passed through a carefully sized opening in the axle, a much more elegant solution requiring fewer parts. He famously described his arch competitor Bentley's cars as \"the world's fastest lorries\" for focusing on durability. According to Bugatti, \"weight was the enemy\".\nGallery.\nNotable finds in the modern era.\nRelatives of Harold Carr found a rare 1937 Bugatti Type 57S Atalante when cataloguing the doctor's belongings after his death in 2009. Carr's Type 57S is notable because it was originally owned by British race car driver Earl Howe. Because much of the car's original equipment is intact, it can be restored without relying on replacement parts.\nOn 10 July 2009, a 1925 Bugatti Brescia Type 22 which had lain at the bottom of Lake Maggiore on the border of Switzerland and Italy for 75 years was recovered from the lake. The Mullin Museum in Oxnard, California bought it at auction for $351,343 at Bonham's R\u00e9tromobile sale in Paris in 2010.\nAttempts at revival.\nThe company attempted a comeback under Roland Bugatti in the mid-1950s with the mid-engined Type 251 race car. Designed with help from Gioacchino Colombo, the car failed to perform to expectations and the company's attempts at automobile production were halted.\nIn the 1960s, Virgil Exner designed a Bugatti as part of his \"Revival Cars\" project. A show version of this car was actually built by Ghia using the last Bugatti Type 101 chassis, and was shown at the 1965 Turin Motor Show. Finance was not forthcoming, and Exner then turned his attention to a revival of Stutz.\nBugatti continued manufacturing airplane parts and was sold to Hispano-Suiza, also a former auto maker turned aircraft supplier, in 1963. Snecma took over Hispano-Suiza in 1968. After acquiring Messier, Snecma merged Messier and Bugatti into Messier-Bugatti in 1977.\nModern revivals.\nBugatti Automobili S.p.A. (1987\u20131995).\nItalian entrepreneur Romano Artioli acquired the Bugatti brand in 1987, and established Bugatti Automobili S.p.A.. Artioli commissioned architect Giampaolo Benedini to design the factory which was built in Campogalliano, Modena, Italy. Construction of the plant began in 1988, alongside the development of the first model, and it was inaugurated two years later\u2014in 1990. By 1989, the plans for the new Bugatti revival were presented by Paolo Stanzani and Marcello Gandini, designers of the Lamborghini Miura and Lamborghini Countach.\nThe first production vehicle was the Bugatti EB110 GT which featured a 3.5-litre, 5-valve per cylinder, quad-turbocharged 60\u00b0 V12 engine, a six-speed gearbox, and four-wheel drive. Stanzani proposed an aluminium honeycomb chassis, which was used for all early prototypes. He and president Artioli clashed over engineering decisions so Stanzani left the project and Artioli sought Nicola Materazzi to replace him in June 1990. Materazzi, who had been the chief designer for the Ferrari 288 GTO and Ferrari F40 replaced the aluminium chassis with a carbon fibre one manufactured by Aerospatiale and also altered the torque distribution of the car from 40:60 to 27:73. He remained Director until late 1992.\nRacing car designer Mauro Forghieri served as Bugatti's technical director from 1993 through 1994. On 27 August 1993, through his holding company, ACBN Holdings S.A. of Luxembourg, Romano Artioli purchased Lotus Cars from General Motors. Plans were made to list Bugatti shares on international stock exchanges.\nBugatti presented a prototype large saloon called the EB112 in 1993.\nPerhaps the most famous Bugatti EB110 owner was seven-time Formula One World Champion racing driver Michael Schumacher who purchased an EB110 in 1994. Schumacher sold his EB110, which had been repaired after a severe 1994 crash, to Modena Motorsport, a Ferrari service and race preparation garage in Germany.\nBy the time the EB110 came to market, the North American and European economies were in recession. Poor economic conditions forced the company to fail and operations ceased in September 1995. A model specific to the US market called the \"Bugatti America\" was in the preparatory stages when the company ceased operations.\nBugatti's liquidators sold Lotus Cars to Proton of Malaysia. German firm Dauer Racing purchased the EB110 licence and remaining parts stock in 1997 in order to produce five more EB110 SS vehicles. These five SS versions of the EB110 were greatly refined by Dauer. The Campogalliano factory was sold to a furniture-making company, which became defunct prior to moving in, leaving the building unoccupied. After Dauer stopped producing cars in 2011, Toscana-Motors GmbH of Germany purchased the remaining parts stock from Dauer.\nEx vice-president Jean-Marc Borel and ex employees Federico Trombi, Gianni Sighinolfi and Nicola Materazzi established the B Engineering company and designed and built the Edonis using the chassis and engine from the Bugatti EB110 SS, but simplifying the turbocharging system and driveline (from 4WD to 2WD).\nBugatti Automobiles S.A.S. (1998\u2013present).\nPre-Veyron.\nVolkswagen Group acquired the Bugatti brand in 1998. Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. commissioned Giorgetto Giugiaro of ItalDesign to produce Bugatti Automobiles's first concept vehicle, the EB118, a coup\u00e9 that debuted at the 1998 Paris Auto Show. The EB118 concept featured a , W-18 engine. After its Paris debut, the EB118 concept was shown again in 1999 at the Geneva Auto Show and the Tokyo Motor Show. Bugatti introduced its next concepts, the EB 218 at the 1999 Geneva Motor Show and the 18/3 Chiron at the 1999 Frankfurt Motor Show (IAA).\nVeyron era (2005\u20132015).\nBugatti Automobiles S.A.S. began assembling its first regular-production vehicle, the Bugatti Veyron 16.4 (the 1001 PS super car with an 8-litre W-16 engine with four turbochargers) in September 2005 at the Bugatti Molsheim, France assembly \"studio\". On 23 February 2015, Bugatti sold its last Veyron Grand Sport Vitesse, which was named La Finale.\nChiron era (2016\u2013present).\nThe Bugatti Chiron is a mid-engined, two-seated sports car, designed by Achim Anscheidt, developed as the successor to the Bugatti Veyron. The Chiron was first revealed at the Geneva Motor Show on March 1, 2016.\nLa Voiture Noire.\nLes L\u00e9gendes de Bugatti: The Legend Vitesse car \"La Voiture Noire\" pays tribute to Jean Bugatti, and Bugatti History."}
{"id": "4498", "revid": "997597147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4498", "title": "Benchmark", "text": "Benchmark may refer to:"}
{"id": "4499", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4499", "title": "Band", "text": "Band or BAND may refer to:"}
{"id": "4501", "revid": "35433007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4501", "title": "Black Death", "text": "The Black Death (also known as the Pestilence, the Great Mortality, or the Plague) was a bubonic plague pandemic occurring in Afro-Eurasia from 1346 to 1353. It is the most fatal pandemic recorded in human history, resulting in the deaths of people in Eurasia and North Africa, peaking in Europe from 1347 to 1351. Bubonic plague is caused by the bacterium \"Yersinia pestis\", but it may also cause septicaemic or pneumonic plagues.\nThe Black Death was the beginning of the second plague pandemic. The plague created religious, social, and economic upheavals, with profound effects on the course of European history. Today, a vaccine exists, and bubonic plague is easily cured with antibiotics.\nThe Black Death's territorial origins are disputed. The pandemic originated either in Central Asia or East Asia, but its first definitive appearance was in Crimea in 1347. From there, it was most likely carried by fleas living on the black rats that travelled on Genoese merchant ships, spreading throughout the Mediterranean Basin and reaching Africa, Western Asia, and the rest of Europe via Constantinople, Sicily, and the Italian Peninsula. Current evidence indicates that once it came onshore, the Black Death was in large part spread by human fleas \u2013 which cause pneumonic plague \u2013 and the person-to-person contact via aerosols which pneumonic plague enables, thus explaining the very fast inland spread of the epidemic, which was faster than would be expected if the primary vector was rat fleas causing bubonic plague.\nThe Black Death was the second disaster affecting Europe during the Late Middle Ages (the first one being the Great Famine of 1315\u20131317) and is estimated to have killed 30% to 60% of Europe's population. In total, the plague may have reduced the world population from an estimated 475\u00a0million to 350\u2013375 million in the 14th century. There were further outbreaks throughout the Late Middle Ages, and with other contributing factors it took until 1500 for the European population to regain the levels of 1300. Outbreaks of the plague recurred at various locations around the world until the early 19th century.\nNames.\nEuropean writers contemporary with the plague described the disease in Latin as or ; ; . In English prior to the 18th century, the event was called the \"pestilence\" or \"great pestilence\", \"the plague\" or the \"great death\". Subsequent to the pandemic \"the \"furste moreyn\"\" (first murrain) or \"first pestilence\" was applied, to distinguish the mid-14th century phenomenon from other infectious diseases and epidemics of plague. The 1347 pandemic plague was not referred to specifically as \"black\" in the 14th or 15th centuries in any European language, though the expression \"black death\" had occasionally been applied to fatal disease beforehand.\n\"Black death\" was not used to describe the plague pandemic in English until the 1750s; the term is first attested in 1755, where it translated . This expression as a proper name for the pandemic had been popularised by Swedish and Danish chroniclers in the 15th and early 16th centuries, and in the 16th and 17th centuries was transferred to other languages as a calque: , , and . Previously, most European languages had named the pandemic a variant or calque of the .\nThe phrase 'black death' \u2013 describing Death as black \u2013 is very old. Homer used it in the Odyssey to describe the monstrous Scylla, with her mouths \"full of black Death\" (). Seneca the Younger may have been the first to describe an epidemic as 'black death', () but only in reference to the acute lethality and dark prognosis of disease. The 12th\u201313th century French physician Gilles de Corbeil had already used \"\" to refer to a \"pestilential fever\" () in his work \"On the Signs and Symptoms of Diseases\" (). The phrase , was used in 1350 by Simon de Covino (or Couvin), a Belgian astronomer, in his poem \"On the Judgement of the Sun at a Feast of Saturn\" (), which attributes the plague to an astrological conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn. His use of the phrase is not connected unambiguously with the plague pandemic of 1347 and appears to refer to the fatal outcome of disease.\nThe historian Cardinal Francis Aidan Gasquet wrote about the Great Pestilence in 1893 and suggested that it had been \"some form of the ordinary Eastern or bubonic plague\". In 1908, Gasquet claimed that use of the name ' for the 14th-century epidemic first appeared in a 1631 book on Danish history by J.\u00a0I. Pontanus: \"Commonly and from its effects, they called it the black death\" (').\nPrevious plague epidemics.\nRecent research has suggested plague first infected humans in Europe and Asia in the Late Neolithic-Early Bronze Age. Research in 2018 found evidence of \"Yersinia pestis\" in an ancient Swedish tomb, which may have been associated with the \"Neolithic decline\" around 3000 BCE, in which European populations fell significantly. This \"Y. pestis\" may have been different from more modern types, with bubonic plague transmissible by fleas first known from Bronze Age remains near Samara.\nThe symptoms of bubonic plague are first attested in a fragment of Rufus of Ephesus preserved by Oribasius; these ancient medical authorities suggest bubonic plague had appeared in the Roman Empire before the reign of Trajan, six centuries before arriving at Pelusium in the reign of Justinian I. In 2013, researchers confirmed earlier speculation that the cause of the Plague of Justinian (541\u2013542 CE, with recurrences until 750) was \"Y\". \"pestis\". This is known as the First plague pandemic.\n14th-century plague.\nCauses.\nEarly theory.\nThe most authoritative contemporary account is found in a report from the medical faculty in Paris to Philip VI of France. It blamed the heavens, in the form of a conjunction of three planets in 1345 that caused a \"great pestilence in the air\" (miasma theory).\nMuslim religious scholars taught that the pandemic was a \u201cmartyrdom and mercy\u201d from God, assuring the believer's place in paradise. For non-believers, it was a punishment. Some Muslim doctors cautioned against trying to prevent or treat a disease sent by God. Others adopted preventive measures and treatments for plague used by Europeans. These Muslim doctors also depended on the writings of the ancient Greeks.\nPredominant modern theory.\nDue to climate change in Asia, rodents began to flee the dried-out grasslands to more populated areas, spreading the disease. The plague disease, caused by the bacterium \"Yersinia pestis\", is enzootic (commonly present) in populations of fleas carried by ground rodents, including marmots, in various areas, including Central Asia, Kurdistan, Western Asia, North India, Uganda and the western United States.\n\"Y. pestis\" was discovered by Alexandre Yersin, a pupil of Louis Pasteur, during an epidemic of bubonic plague in Hong Kong in 1894; Yersin also proved this bacillus was present in rodents and suggested the rat was the main vehicle of transmission. The mechanism by which \"Y. pestis\" is usually transmitted was established in 1898 by Paul-Louis Simond and was found to involve the bites of fleas whose midguts had become obstructed by replicating \"Y. pestis\" several days after feeding on an infected host. This blockage starves the fleas and drives them to aggressive feeding behaviour and attempts to clear the blockage by regurgitation, resulting in thousands of plague bacteria being flushed into the feeding site, infecting the host. The bubonic plague mechanism was also dependent on two populations of rodents: one resistant to the disease, which act as hosts, keeping the disease endemic, and a second that lack resistance. When the second population dies, the fleas move on to other hosts, including people, thus creating a human epidemic.\nDNA evidence.\nDefinitive confirmation of the role of \"Y. pestis\" arrived in 2010 with a publication in \"PLOS Pathogens\" by Haensch et al. They assessed the presence of DNA/RNA with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques for \"Y. pestis\" from the tooth sockets in human skeletons from mass graves in northern, central and southern Europe that were associated archaeologically with the Black Death and subsequent resurgences. The authors concluded that this new research, together with prior analyses from the south of France and Germany, \"ends the debate about the cause of the Black Death, and unambiguously demonstrates that \"Y. pestis\" was the causative agent of the epidemic plague that devastated Europe during the Middle Ages\". In 2011, these results were further confirmed with genetic evidence derived from Black Death victims in the East Smithfield burial site in England. Schuenemann et al. concluded in 2011 \"that the Black Death in medieval Europe was caused by a variant of \"Y. pestis\" that may no longer exist.\"\nLater in 2011, Bos et al. reported in \"Nature\" the first draft genome of \"Y. pestis\" from plague victims from the same East Smithfield cemetery and indicated that the strain that caused the Black Death is ancestral to most modern strains of \"Y. pestis\".\nSince this time, further genomic papers have further confirmed the phylogenetic placement of the \"Y. pestis\" strain responsible for the Black Death as both the ancestor of later plague epidemics including the third plague pandemic and as the descendant of the strain responsible for the Plague of Justinian. In addition, plague genomes from significantly earlier in prehistory have been recovered.\nDNA taken from 25 skeletons from 14th century London have shown plague is a strain of \"Y. pestis\" almost identical to that which hit Madagascar in 2013.\nAlternative explanations.\nIt is recognised that an epidemiological account of plague is as important as an identification of symptoms, but researchers are hampered by the lack of reliable statistics from this period. Most work has been done on the spread of the disease in England, and even estimates of overall population at the start vary by over 100% as no census was undertaken in England between the time of publication of the Domesday Book of 1086 and the poll tax of the year 1377. Estimates of plague victims are usually extrapolated from figures for the clergy.\nMathematical modelling is used to match the spreading patterns and the means of transmission. A research in 2018 challenged the popular hypothesis that \"infected rats died, their flea parasites could have jumped from the recently dead rat hosts to humans\". It suggested an alternative model in which \"the disease was spread from human fleas and body lice to other people\". The second model claims to better fit the trends of death toll because the rat-flea-human hypothesis would have produced a delayed but very high spike in deaths, which contradict historical death data.\nWall\u00f8e complains that all of these authors \"take it for granted that Simond's infection model, black rat \u2192 rat flea \u2192 human, which was developed to explain the spread of plague in India, is the only way an epidemic of \"Yersinia pestis\" infection could spread\", whilst pointing to several other possibilities. Similarly, Green has argued that greater attention is needed to the range of (especially non-commensal) animals that might be involved in the transmission of plague.\nArchaeologist Barney Sloane has argued that there is insufficient evidence of the extinction of numerous rats in the archaeological record of the medieval waterfront in London and that the disease spread too quickly to support the thesis that \"Y. pestis\" was spread from fleas on rats; he argues that transmission must have been person to person. This theory is supported by research in 2018 which suggested transmission was more likely by body lice and human fleas during the second plague pandemic.\nSummary.\nAlthough academic debate continues, no single alternative solution has achieved widespread acceptance. Many scholars arguing for \"Y. pestis\" as the major agent of the pandemic suggest that its extent and symptoms can be explained by a combination of bubonic plague with other diseases, including typhus, smallpox and respiratory infections. In addition to the bubonic infection, others point to additional septicaemic (a type of \"blood poisoning\") and pneumonic (an airborne plague that attacks the lungs before the rest of the body) forms of plague, which lengthen the duration of outbreaks throughout the seasons and help account for its high mortality rate and additional recorded symptoms. In 2014, Public Health England announced the results of an examination of 25 bodies exhumed in the Clerkenwell area of London, as well as of wills registered in London during the period, which supported the pneumonic hypothesis. Currently, while osteoarcheologists have conclusively verified the presence of \"Y. pestis\" bacteria in burial sites across northern Europe through examination of bones and dental pulp, no other epidemic pathogen has been discovered to bolster the alternative explanations. In the words of one researcher: \"Finally, plague is plague.\"\nTransmission.\nThe importance of hygiene was recognised only in the nineteenth century with the development of the germ theory of disease; until then streets were commonly filthy, with live animals of all sorts around and human parasites abounding, facilitating the spread of transmissible disease.\nTerritorial origins.\nAccording to a team of medical geneticists led by Mark Achtman that analysed the genetic variation of the bacterium, \"Yersinia pestis\" \"evolved in or near China\", from which it spread around the world in multiple epidemics. Later research by a team led by Galina Eroshenko places the origins more specifically in the Tian Shan mountains on the border between Kyrgyzstan and China.\nNestorian graves dating to 1338\u20131339 near Issyk-Kul in Kyrgyzstan have inscriptions referring to plague, which has led some historians and epidemiologists to think they mark the outbreak of the epidemic. Others favour an origin in China. According to this theory, the disease may have travelled along the Silk Road with Mongol armies and traders, or it could have arrived via ship. Epidemics killed an estimated 25\u00a0million across Asia during the fifteen\u00a0years before the Black Death reached Constantinople in 1347. However, research on the Delhi Sultanate and the Yuan Dynasty shows no evidence of any serious epidemic in fourteenth-century India and no specific evidence of plague in fourteenth-century China, suggesting that the Black Death may not have reached these regions. Ole Benedictow argues that since the first clear reports of the Black Death come from Kaffa, the Black Death most likely originated in the nearby plague focus on the northwestern shore of the Caspian Sea.\nEuropean outbreak.\nPlague was reportedly first introduced to Europe via Genoese traders from their port city of Kaffa in the Crimea in 1347. During a protracted siege of the city, in 1345\u20131346 the Mongol Golden Horde army of Jani Beg, whose mainly Tatar troops were suffering from the disease, catapulted infected corpses over the city walls of Kaffa to infect the inhabitants, though it is more likely that infected rats travelled across the siege lines to spread the epidemic to the inhabitants. As the disease took hold, Genoese traders fled across the Black Sea to Constantinople, where the disease first arrived in Europe in summer 1347. The epidemic there killed the 13-year-old son of the Byzantine emperor, John VI Kantakouzenos, who wrote a description of the disease modelled on Thucydides's account of the 5th century BCE Plague of Athens, but noting the spread of the Black Death by ship between maritime cities. Nicephorus Gregoras also described in writing to Demetrios Kydones the rising death toll, the futility of medicine, and the panic of the citizens. The first outbreak in Constantinople lasted a year, but the disease recurred ten times before 1400.\nCarried by twelve Genoese galleys, plague arrived by ship in Sicily in October 1347; the disease spread rapidly all over the island. Galleys from Kaffa reached Genoa and Venice in January 1348, but it was the outbreak in Pisa a few weeks later that was the entry point to northern Italy. Towards the end of January, one of the galleys expelled from Italy arrived in Marseilles.\nFrom Italy, the disease spread northwest across Europe, striking France, Spain (which was hit due to the heat \u2013 the epidemic raged in the early weeks of July), Portugal and England by June 1348, then spread east and north through Germany, Scotland and Scandinavia from 1348 to 1350. It was introduced into Norway in 1349 when a ship landed at Ask\u00f8y, then spread to Bj\u00f8rgvin (modern Bergen) and Iceland. Finally, it spread to northwestern Russia in 1351. Plague was somewhat more uncommon in parts of Europe with less developed trade with their neighbours, including the majority of the Basque Country, isolated parts of Belgium and the Netherlands, and isolated Alpine villages throughout the continent.\nAccording to some epidemiologists, periods of unfavourable weather decimated plague-infected rodent populations and forced their fleas onto alternative hosts, inducing plague outbreaks which often peaked in the hot summers of the Mediterranean, as well as during the cool autumn months of the southern Baltic states. Among many other culprits of plague contagiousness, malnutrition, even if distantly, also contributed to such an immense loss in European population, since it weakened immune systems.\nWestern Asian and North African outbreak.\nThe disease struck various regions in the Middle East and North Africa during the pandemic, leading to serious depopulation and permanent change in both economic and social structures. As infected rodents infected new rodents, the disease spread across the region, entering also from southern Russia.\nBy autumn 1347, plague had reached Alexandria in Egypt, transmitted by sea from Constantinople; according to a contemporary witness, from a single merchant ship carrying slaves. By late summer 1348 it reached Cairo, capital of the Mamluk Sultanate, cultural centre of the Islamic world, and the largest city in the Mediterranean Basin; the Bahriyya child sultan an-Nasir Hasan fled and more than a third of the 600,000 residents died. The Nile was choked with corpses despite Cairo having a medieval hospital, the late 13th century bimaristan of the Qalawun complex. The historian al-Maqrizi described the abundant work for grave-diggers and practitioners of funeral rites, and plague recurred in Cairo more than fifty times over the following century and half.\nDuring 1347, the disease travelled eastward to Gaza by April; by July it had reached Damascus, and in October plague had broken out in Aleppo. That year, in the territory of modern Lebanon, Syria, Israel, and Palestine, the cities of Ashkelon, Acre, Jerusalem, Sidon, and Homs were all infected. In 1348\u20131349, the disease reached Antioch. The city's residents fled to the north, but most of them ended up dying during the journey. Within two years, the plague had spread throughout the Islamic world, from Arabia across North Africa. The pandemic spread westwards from Alexandria along the African coast, while in April 1348 Tunis was infected by ship from Sicily. Tunis was then under attack by an army from Morocco; this army dispersed in 1348 and brought the contagion with them to Morocco, whose epidemic may also have been seeded from the Islamic city of Almer\u00eda in al-Andalus.\nMecca became infected in 1348 by pilgrims performing the Hajj. In 1351 or 1352, the Rasulid sultan of the Yemen, al-Mujahid Ali, was released from Mamluk captivity in Egypt and carried plague with him on his return home. During 1348, records show the city of Mosul suffered a massive epidemic, and the city of Baghdad experienced a second round of the disease.\nSigns and symptoms.\nBubonic plague.\nSymptoms of the disease include fever of , headaches, painful aching joints, nausea and vomiting, and a general feeling of malaise. Left untreated, of those that contract the bubonic plague, 80 percent die within eight days.\nContemporary accounts of the pandemic are varied and often imprecise. The most commonly noted symptom was the appearance of buboes (or \"gavocciolos\") in the groin, neck, and armpits, which oozed pus and bled when opened. Boccaccio's description:\nThis was followed by acute fever and vomiting of blood. Most victims died two to seven days after initial infection. Freckle-like spots and rashes, which could have been caused by flea-bites, were identified as another potential sign of plague.\nPneumonic plague.\nLodewijk Heyligen, whose master the Cardinal Colonna died of plague in 1348, noted a distinct form of the disease, pneumonic plague, that infected the lungs and led to respiratory problems. Symptoms include fever, cough, and blood-tinged sputum. As the disease progresses, sputum becomes free-flowing and bright red. Pneumonic plague has a mortality rate of 90 to 95 percent.\nSepticaemic plague.\nSepticaemic plague is the least common of the three forms, with a mortality rate near 100%. Symptoms are high fevers and purple skin patches (purpura due to disseminated intravascular coagulation). In cases of pneumonic and particularly septicaemic plague, the progress of the disease is so rapid that there would often be no time for the development of the enlarged lymph nodes that were noted as buboes.\nConsequences.\nDeaths.\nThere are no exact figures for the death toll; the rate varied widely by locality. In urban centres, the greater the population before the outbreak, the longer the duration of the period of abnormal mortality. It killed some people in Eurasia. The mortality rate of the Black Death in the 14th century was far greater than the worst 20th-century outbreaks of \"Y. pestis\" plague, which occurred in India and killed as much as 3% of the population of certain cities. The overwhelming number of deceased bodies produced by the Black Death caused the necessity of mass burial sites in Europe, sometimes including up to several hundred or several thousand skeletons. The mass burial sites that have been excavated have allowed archaeologists to continue interpreting and defining the biological, sociological, historical, and anthropological implications of the Black Death.\nAccording to medieval historian Philip Daileader, it is likely that over four years, 45\u201350% of the European population died of plague. Norwegian historian Ole Benedictow suggests it could have been as much as 60% of the European population. In 1348, the disease spread so rapidly that before any physicians or government authorities had time to reflect upon its origins, about a third of the European population had already perished. In crowded cities, it was not uncommon for as much as 50% of the population to die. Half of Paris' population of 100,000 people died. In Italy, the population of Florence was reduced from between 110,000 and 120,000 inhabitants in 1338 down to 50,000 in 1351. At least 60% of the population of Hamburg and Bremen perished, and a similar percentage of Londoners may have died from the disease as well, with a death toll of approximately 62,000 between 1346 and 1353. Florence's tax records suggest that 80% of the city's population died within four months in 1348. Before 1350, there were about 170,000 settlements in Germany, and this was reduced by nearly 40,000 by 1450. The disease bypassed some areas, with the most isolated areas being less vulnerable to contagion. Plague did not appear in Douai in Flanders until the turn of the 15th century, and the impact was less severe on the populations of Hainaut, Finland, northern Germany, and areas of Poland. Monks, nuns, and priests were especially hard-hit since they cared for victims of the Black Death.\nThe physician to the Avignon Papacy, Raimundo Chalmel de Vinario (), observed the decreasing mortality rate of successive outbreaks of plague in 1347\u201348, 1362, 1371, and 1382 in his 1382 treatise \"On Epidemics\" (). In the first outbreak, two thirds of the population contracted the illness and most patients died; in the next, half the population became ill but only some died; by the third, a tenth were affected and many survived; while by the fourth occurrence, only one in twenty people were sickened and most of them survived. By the 1380s in Europe, it predominantly affected children. Chalmel de Vinario recognized that bloodletting was ineffective (though he continued to prescribe bleeding for members of the Roman Curia, whom he disliked), and claimed that all true cases of plague were caused by astrological factors and were incurable; he himself was never able to effect a cure.\nThe most widely accepted estimate for the Middle East, including Iraq, Iran, and Syria, during this time, is for a death toll of about a third of the population. The Black Death killed about 40% of Egypt's population. In Cairo, with a population numbering as many as 600,000, and possibly the largest city west of China, between one third and 40% of the inhabitants died inside of eight months.\nItalian chronicler Agnolo di Tura recorded his experience from Siena, where plague arrived in May 1348:\nEconomic.\nWith such a large population decline from the pandemic, wages soared in response to a labour shortage. On the other hand, in the quarter century after the Black Death in England, it is clear many labourers, artisans, and craftsmen, those living from money-wages alone, did suffer a reduction in real incomes owing to rampant inflation. Landowners were also pushed to substitute monetary rents for labour services in an effort to keep tenants.\nEnvironmental.\nSome historians believe the innumerable deaths brought on by the pandemic cooled the climate by freeing up land and triggering reforestation. This may have led to the Little Ice Age.\nPersecutions.\nRenewed religious fervour and fanaticism bloomed in the wake of the Black Death. Some Europeans targeted \"various groups such as Jews, friars, foreigners, beggars, pilgrims\", lepers, and Romani, blaming them for the crisis. Lepers, and others with skin diseases such as acne or psoriasis, were killed throughout Europe.\nBecause 14th-century healers and governments were at a loss to explain or stop the disease, Europeans turned to astrological forces, earthquakes, and the poisoning of wells by Jews as possible reasons for outbreaks. Many believed the epidemic was a punishment by God for their sins, and could be relieved by winning God's forgiveness.\nThere were many attacks against Jewish communities. In the Strasbourg massacre of February 1349, about 2,000 Jews were murdered. In August 1349, the Jewish communities in Mainz and Cologne were annihilated. By 1351, 60 major and 150 smaller Jewish communities had been destroyed. During this period many Jews relocated to Poland, where they received a warm welcome from King Casimir the Great.\nSocial.\nOne theory that has been advanced is that the devastation in Florence caused by the Black Death, which hit Europe between 1348 and 1350, resulted in a shift in the world view of people in 14th-century Italy and led to the Renaissance. Italy was particularly badly hit by the pandemic, and it has been speculated that the resulting familiarity with death caused thinkers to dwell more on their lives on Earth, rather than on spirituality and the afterlife. It has also been argued that the Black Death prompted a new wave of piety, manifested in the sponsorship of religious works of art. However, this does not fully explain why the Renaissance occurred specifically in Italy in the 14th century. The Black Death was a pandemic that affected all of Europe in the ways described, not only Italy. The Renaissance's emergence in Italy was most likely the result of the complex interaction of the above factors, in combination with an influx of Greek scholars following the fall of the Byzantine Empire.\nAs a result of the decimation in the populace the value of the working class increased, and commoners came to enjoy more freedom. To answer the increased need for labour, workers travelled in search of the most favorable position economically.\nPrior to the emergence of the Black Death, the workings of Europe were run by the Catholic Church and the continent was considered a feudalistic society, composed of fiefs and city-states. The pandemic completely restructured both religion and political forces; survivors began to turn to other forms of spirituality and the power dynamics of the fiefs and city-states crumbled. \nCairo's population, partly owing to the numerous plague epidemics, was in the early 18th century half of what it was in 1347. The populations of some Italian cities, notably Florence, did not regain their pre-14th century size until the 19th century.\nThe demographic decline due to the pandemic had economic consequences: the prices of food dropped and land values declined by 30\u201340% in most parts of Europe between 1350 and 1400. Landholders faced a great loss, but for ordinary men and women it was a windfall. The survivors of the pandemic found not only that the prices of food were lower but also that lands were more abundant, and many of them inherited property from their dead relatives, and this probably destabilized feudalism.\nThe word \"quarantine\" has its roots in this period, though the concept of isolating people to prevent the spread of disease is older. In the city-state of Ragusa (modern Dubrovnik, Croatia), a thirty-day isolation period was implemented in 1377 for new arrivals to the city from plague-affected areas. The isolation period was later extended to forty days, and given the name \"quarantino\" from the Italian word for \"forty\".\nRecurrences.\nSecond plague pandemic.\nThe plague repeatedly returned to haunt Europe and the Mediterranean throughout the 14th to 17th centuries. According to Jean-No\u00ebl Biraben, the plague was present somewhere in Europe in every year between 1346 and 1671. (Note that some researchers have cautions about the uncritical use of Biraben's data.) The second pandemic was particularly widespread in the following years: 1360\u201363; 1374; 1400; 1438\u201339; 1456\u201357; 1464\u201366; 1481\u201385; 1500\u201303; 1518\u201331; 1544\u201348; 1563\u201366; 1573\u201388; 1596\u201399; 1602\u201311; 1623\u201340; 1644\u201354; and 1664\u201367. Subsequent outbreaks, though severe, marked the retreat from most of Europe (18th\u00a0century) and northern Africa (19th\u00a0century). The historian George Sussman argued that the plague had not occurred in East Africa until the 1900s. However, other sources suggest that the Second pandemic did indeed reach Sub-Saharan Africa.\nAccording to historian Geoffrey Parker, \"France alone lost almost a million people to the plague in the epidemic of 1628\u201331.\" In the first half of the 17th century, a plague claimed some 1.7 million victims in Italy. More than 1.25 million deaths resulted from the extreme incidence of plague in 17th-century Spain.\nThe Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic world. Plague was present in at least one location in the Islamic world virtually every year between 1500 and 1850. Plague repeatedly struck the cities of North Africa. Algiers lost 30,000\u201350,000 inhabitants to it in 1620\u201321, and again in 1654\u201357, 1665, 1691, and 1740\u201342. Cairo suffered more than fifty plague epidemics within 150 years from the plague's first appearance, with the final outbreak of the second pandemic there in the 1840s. Plague remained a major event in Ottoman society until the second quarter of the 19th century. Between 1701 and 1750, thirty-seven larger and smaller epidemics were recorded in Constantinople, and an additional thirty-one between 1751 and 1800. Baghdad has suffered severely from visitations of the plague, and sometimes two-thirds of its population has been wiped out.\nThird plague pandemic.\nThe third plague pandemic (1855\u20131859) started in China in the mid-19th century, spreading to all inhabited continents and killing 10 million people in India alone. The investigation of the pathogen that caused the 19th-century plague was begun by teams of scientists who visited Hong Kong in 1894, among whom was the French-Swiss bacteriologist Alexandre Yersin, after whom the pathogen was named.\nTwelve plague outbreaks in Australia between 1900 and 1925 resulted in well over 1,000 deaths, chiefly in Sydney. This led to the establishment of a Public Health Department there which undertook some leading-edge research on plague transmission from rat fleas to humans via the bacillus \"Yersinia pestis\".\nThe first North American plague epidemic was the San Francisco plague of 1900\u20131904, followed by another outbreak in 1907\u20131908.\nModern-day.\nModern treatment methods include insecticides, the use of antibiotics, and a plague vaccine. It is feared that the plague bacterium could develop drug resistance and again become a major health threat. One case of a drug-resistant form of the bacterium was found in Madagascar in 1995. A further outbreak in Madagascar was reported in November 2014. In October 2017 the deadliest outbreak of the plague in modern times hit Madagascar, killing 170 people and infecting thousands.\nAn estimate of the case fatality rate for the modern bubonic plague, following the introduction of antibiotics, is 11%, although it may be higher in underdeveloped regions.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\nCitations\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "4502", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4502", "title": "Biotechnology", "text": "Biotechnology is a broad area of biology, involving the use of living systems and organisms to develop or make products. Depending on the tools and applications, it often overlaps with related scientific fields. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, biotechnology has expanded to include new and diverse sciences, such as genomics, recombinant gene techniques, applied immunology, and development of pharmaceutical therapies and diagnostic tests. The term \"biotechnology\" was first used by Karl Ereky in 1919, meaning the production of products from raw materials with the aid of living organisms.\nDefinition.\nThe wide concept of biotechnology encompasses a wide range of procedures for modifying living organisms according to human purposes, going back to domestication of animals, cultivation of the plants, and \"improvements\" to these through breeding programs that employ artificial selection and hybridization. Modern usage also includes genetic engineering as well as cell and tissue culture technologies. The American Chemical Society defines biotechnology as the application of biological organisms, systems, or processes by various industries to learning about the science of life and the improvement of the value of materials and organisms such as pharmaceuticals, crops, and livestock. Per the European Federation of Biotechnology, biotechnology is the integration of natural science and organisms, cells, parts thereof, and molecular analogues for products and services. Biotechnology is based on the basic biological sciences (e.g. molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology, embryology, genetics, microbiology) and conversely provides methods to support and perform basic research in biology.\nBiotechnology is the research and development in the laboratory using bioinformatics for exploration, extraction, exploitation and production from any living organisms and any source of biomass by means of biochemical engineering where high value-added products could be planned (reproduced by biosynthesis, for example), forecasted, formulated, developed, manufactured, and marketed for the purpose of sustainable operations (for the return from bottomless initial investment on R &amp; D) and gaining durable patents rights (for exclusives rights for sales, and prior to this to receive national and international approval from the results on animal experiment and human experiment, especially on the pharmaceutical branch of biotechnology to prevent any undetected side-effects or safety concerns by using the products). The utilization of biological processes, organisms or systems to produce products that are anticipated to improve human lives is termed biotechnology.\nBy contrast, bioengineering is generally thought of as a related field that more heavily emphasizes higher systems approaches (not necessarily the altering or using of biological materials \"directly\") for interfacing with and utilizing living things. Bioengineering is the application of the principles of engineering and natural sciences to tissues, cells and molecules. This can be considered as the use of knowledge from working with and manipulating biology to achieve a result that can improve functions in plants and animals. Relatedly, biomedical engineering is an overlapping field that often draws upon and applies \"biotechnology\" (by various definitions), especially in certain sub-fields of biomedical or chemical engineering such as tissue engineering, biopharmaceutical engineering, and genetic engineering.\nHistory.\nAlthough not normally what first comes to mind, many forms of human-derived agriculture clearly fit the broad definition of \"'utilizing a biotechnological system to make products\". Indeed, the cultivation of plants may be viewed as the earliest biotechnological enterprise.\nAgriculture has been theorized to have become the dominant way of producing food since the Neolithic Revolution. Through early biotechnology, the earliest farmers selected and bred the best suited crops, having the highest yields, to produce enough food to support a growing population. As crops and fields became increasingly large and difficult to maintain, it was discovered that specific organisms and their by-products could effectively fertilize, restore nitrogen, and control pests. Throughout the history of agriculture, farmers have inadvertently altered the genetics of their crops through introducing them to new environments and breeding them with other plants \u2014 one of the first forms of biotechnology.\nThese processes also were included in early fermentation of beer. These processes were introduced in early Mesopotamia, Egypt, China and India, and still use the same basic biological methods. In brewing, malted grains (containing enzymes) convert starch from grains into sugar and then adding specific yeasts to produce beer. In this process, carbohydrates in the grains broke down into alcohols,e such as ethanol. Later, other cultures produced the process of lactic acid fermentation, which produced other preserved foods, such as soy sauce. Fermentation was also used in this time period to produce leavened bread. Although the process of fermentation was not fully understood until Louis Pasteur's work in 1857, it is still the first use of biotechnology to convert a food source into another form.\nBefore the time of Charles Darwin's work and life, animal and plant scientists had already used selective breeding. Darwin added to that body of work with his scientific observations about the ability of science to change species. These accounts contributed to Darwin's theory of natural selection.\nFor thousands of years, humans have used selective breeding to improve the production of crops and livestock to use them for food. In selective breeding, organisms with desirable characteristics are mated to produce offspring with the same characteristics. For example, this technique was used with corn to produce the largest and sweetest crops.\nIn the early twentieth century scientists gained a greater understanding of microbiology and explored ways of manufacturing specific products. In 1917, Chaim Weizmann first used a pure microbiological culture in an industrial process, that of manufacturing corn starch using \"Clostridium acetobutylicum,\" to produce acetone, which the United Kingdom desperately needed to manufacture explosives during World War I.\nBiotechnology has also led to the development of antibiotics. In 1928, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold \"Penicillium\". His work led to the purification of the antibiotic compound formed by the mold by Howard Florey, Ernst Boris Chain and Norman Heatley \u2013 to form what we today know as penicillin. In 1940, penicillin became available for medicinal use to treat bacterial infections in humans.\nThe field of modern biotechnology is generally thought of as having been born in 1971 when Paul Berg's (Stanford) experiments in gene splicing had early success. Herbert W. Boyer (Univ. Calif. at San Francisco) and Stanley N. Cohen (Stanford) significantly advanced the new technology in 1972 by transferring genetic material into a bacterium, such that the imported material would be reproduced. The commercial viability of a biotechnology industry was significantly expanded on June 16, 1980, when the United States Supreme Court ruled that a genetically modified microorganism could be patented in the case of \"Diamond v. Chakrabarty\". Indian-born Ananda Chakrabarty, working for General Electric, had modified a bacterium (of the genus \"Pseudomonas\") capable of breaking down crude oil, which he proposed to use in treating oil spills. (Chakrabarty's work did not involve gene manipulation but rather the transfer of entire organelles between strains of the \"Pseudomonas\" bacterium.\nThe MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor) was invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng in 1959. Two years later, Leland C. Clark and Champ Lyons invented the first biosensor in 1962. Biosensor MOSFETs were later developed, and they have since been widely used to measure physical, chemical, biological and environmental parameters. The first BioFET was the ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET), invented by Piet Bergveld in 1970. It is a special type of MOSFET, where the metal gate is replaced by an ion-sensitive membrane, electrolyte solution and reference electrode. The ISFET is widely used in biomedical applications, such as the detection of DNA hybridization, biomarker detection from blood, antibody detection, glucose measurement, pH sensing, and genetic technology.\nBy the mid-1980s, other BioFETs had been developed, including the gas sensor FET (GASFET), pressure sensor FET (PRESSFET), chemical field-effect transistor (ChemFET), reference ISFET (REFET), enzyme-modified FET (ENFET) and immunologically modified FET (IMFET). By the early 2000s, BioFETs such as the DNA field-effect transistor (DNAFET), gene-modified FET (GenFET) and cell-potential BioFET (CPFET) had been developed.\nA factor influencing the biotechnology sector's success is improved intellectual property rights legislation\u2014and enforcement\u2014worldwide, as well as strengthened demand for medical and pharmaceutical products to cope with an ageing, and ailing, U.S. population.\nRising demand for biofuels is expected to be good news for the biotechnology sector, with the Department of Energy estimating ethanol usage could reduce U.S. petroleum-derived fuel consumption by up to 30% by 2030. The biotechnology sector has allowed the U.S. farming industry to rapidly increase its supply of corn and soybeans\u2014the main inputs into biofuels\u2014by developing genetically modified seeds that resist pests and drought. By increasing farm productivity, biotechnology boosts biofuel production.\nExamples.\nBiotechnology has applications in four major industrial areas, including health care (medical), crop production and agriculture, non-food (industrial) uses of crops and other products (e.g. biodegradable plastics, vegetable oil, biofuels), and environmental uses.\nFor example, one application of biotechnology is the directed use of microorganisms for the manufacture of organic products (examples include beer and milk products). Another example is using naturally present bacteria by the mining industry in bioleaching. Biotechnology is also used to recycle, treat waste, clean up sites contaminated by industrial activities (bioremediation), and also to produce biological weapons.\nA series of derived terms have been coined to identify several branches of biotechnology, for example:\nMedicine.\nIn medicine, modern biotechnology has many applications in areas such as pharmaceutical drug discoveries and production, pharmacogenomics, and genetic testing (or genetic screening).\nPharmacogenomics (a combination of pharmacology and genomics) is the technology that analyses how genetic makeup affects an individual's response to drugs. Researchers in the field investigate the influence of genetic variation on drug responses in patients by correlating gene expression or single-nucleotide polymorphisms with a drug's efficacy or toxicity. The purpose of pharmacogenomics is to develop rational means to optimize drug therapy, with respect to the patients' genotype, to ensure maximum efficacy with minimal adverse effects. Such approaches promise the advent of \"personalized medicine\"; in which drugs and drug combinations are optimized for each individual's unique genetic makeup.\nBiotechnology has contributed to the discovery and manufacturing of traditional small molecule pharmaceutical drugs as well as drugs that are the product of biotechnology \u2013 biopharmaceutics. Modern biotechnology can be used to manufacture existing medicines relatively easily and cheaply. The first genetically engineered products were medicines designed to treat human diseases. To cite one example, in 1978 Genentech developed synthetic humanized insulin by joining its gene with a plasmid vector inserted into the bacterium \"Escherichia coli\". Insulin, widely used for the treatment of diabetes, was previously extracted from the pancreas of abattoir animals (cattle or pigs). The genetically engineered bacteria are able to produce large quantities of synthetic human insulin at relatively low cost. Biotechnology has also enabled emerging therapeutics like gene therapy. The application of biotechnology to basic science (for example through the Human Genome Project) has also dramatically improved our understanding of biology and as our scientific knowledge of normal and disease biology has increased, our ability to develop new medicines to treat previously untreatable diseases has increased as well.\nGenetic testing allows the genetic diagnosis of vulnerabilities to inherited diseases, and can also be used to determine a child's parentage (genetic mother and father) or in general a person's ancestry. In addition to studying chromosomes to the level of individual genes, genetic testing in a broader sense includes biochemical tests for the possible presence of genetic diseases, or mutant forms of genes associated with increased risk of developing genetic disorders. Genetic testing identifies changes in chromosomes, genes, or proteins. Most of the time, testing is used to find changes that are associated with inherited disorders. The results of a genetic test can confirm or rule out a suspected genetic condition or help determine a person's chance of developing or passing on a genetic disorder. As of 2011 several hundred genetic tests were in use. Since genetic testing may open up ethical or psychological problems, genetic testing is often accompanied by genetic counseling.\nAgriculture.\nGenetically modified crops (\"GM crops\", or \"biotech crops\") are plants used in agriculture, the DNA of which has been modified with genetic engineering techniques. In most cases, the main aim is to introduce a new trait that does not occur naturally in the species. Biotechnology firms can contribute to future food security by improving the nutrition and viability of urban agriculture. Furthermore, the protection of intellectual property rights encourages private sector investment in agrobiotechnology. For example, in Illinois FARM Illinois (Food and Agriculture RoadMap for Illinois) is an initiative to develop and coordinate farmers, industry, research institutions, government, and nonprofits in pursuit of food and agriculture innovation. In addition, the Illinois Biotechnology Industry Organization (iBIO) is a life sciences industry association with more than 500 life sciences companies, universities, academic institutions, service providers and others as members. The association describes its members as \"dedicated to making Illinois and the surrounding Midwest one of the world\u2019s top life sciences centers.\"\nExamples in food crops include resistance to certain pests, diseases, stressful environmental conditions, resistance to chemical treatments (e.g. resistance to a herbicide), reduction of spoilage, or improving the nutrient profile of the crop. Examples in non-food crops include production of pharmaceutical agents, biofuels, and other industrially useful goods, as well as for [[bioremediation]].\nFarmers have widely adopted GM technology. Between 1996 and 2011, the total surface area of land cultivated with GM crops had increased by a factor of 94, from to 1,600,000\u00a0km2 (395 million acres). 10% of the world's crop lands were planted with GM crops in 2010. As of 2011, 11 different transgenic crops were grown commercially on 395 million acres (160 million hectares) in 29 countries such as the US, [[Brazil]], [[Argentina]], [[India]], Canada, China, Paraguay, Pakistan, South Africa, Uruguay, Bolivia, Australia, Philippines, Myanmar, Burkina Faso, Mexico and Spain.\n[[Genetically modified food]]s are foods produced from [[organism]]s that have had specific changes introduced into their [[DNA]] with the methods of [[genetic engineering]]. These techniques have allowed for the introduction of new crop traits as well as a far greater control over a food's genetic structure than previously afforded by methods such as [[selective breeding]] and [[mutation breeding]]. Commercial sale of genetically modified foods began in 1994, when [[Calgene]] first marketed its [[Flavr Savr]] delayed ripening tomato. To date most genetic modification of foods have primarily focused on [[cash crop]]s in high demand by farmers such as [[Transgenic soybean|soybean]], [[Transgenic maize|corn]], [[canola]], and [[cotton seed oil]]. These have been engineered for resistance to pathogens and herbicides and better nutrient profiles. GM livestock have also been experimentally developed; in November 2013 none were available on the market, but in 2015 the FDA approved the first GM salmon for commercial production and consumption.\nThere is a [[scientific consensus]] that currently available food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food, but that each GM food needs to be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction. Nonetheless, members of the public are much less likely than scientists to perceive GM foods as safe. The legal and regulatory status of GM foods varies by country, with some nations banning or restricting them, and others permitting them with widely differing degrees of regulation.\nGM crops also provide a number of ecological benefits, if not used in excess. However, opponents have objected to GM crops per se on several grounds, including environmental concerns, whether food produced from GM crops is safe, whether GM crops are needed to address the world's food needs, and economic concerns raised by the fact these organisms are subject to intellectual property law.\nIndustrial biotechnology (known mainly in Europe as white biotechnology) is the application of biotechnology for industrial purposes, including [[industrial fermentation]]. It includes the practice of using [[Cell (biology)|cells]] such as [[microorganism]]s, or components of cells like [[enzyme]]s, to generate [[Industry (manufacturing)|industrially]] useful products in sectors such as chemicals, food and feed, detergents, paper and pulp, textiles and [[biofuel]]s. In the current decades, significant progress has been done in creating [[Genetically modified organism|genetically modified organisms (GMOs)]] that enhance the diversity of applications and economical viability of industrial biotechnology. By using renewable raw materials to produce a variety of chemicals and fuels, industrial biotechnology is actively advancing towards lowering greenhouse gas emissions and moving away from a petrochemical-based economy.\nEnvironmental.\nThe environment can be affected by biotechnologies, both positively and adversely. Vallero and others have argued that the difference between beneficial biotechnology (e.g.bioremediation is to clean up an oil spill or hazard chemical leak) versus the adverse effects stemming from biotechnological enterprises (e.g. flow of genetic material from transgenic organisms into wild strains) can be seen as applications and implications, respectively. Cleaning up environmental wastes is an example of an application of environmental biotechnology; whereas [[Biodiversity loss|loss of biodiversity]] or loss of containment of a harmful microbe are examples of environmental implications of biotechnology.\nRegulation.\nThe regulation of genetic engineering concerns approaches taken by governments to assess and manage the [[Biotechnology risk|risks]] associated with the use of [[genetic engineering]] technology, and the development and release of genetically modified organisms (GMO), including [[genetically modified crops]] and [[genetically modified fish]]. There are differences in the regulation of GMOs between countries, with some of the most marked differences occurring between the US and Europe. Regulation varies in a given country depending on the intended use of the products of the genetic engineering. For example, a crop not intended for food use is generally not reviewed by authorities responsible for food safety. The European Union differentiates between approval for cultivation within the EU and approval for import and processing. While only a few GMOs have been approved for cultivation in the EU a number of GMOs have been approved for import and processing. The cultivation of GMOs has triggered a debate about coexistence of GM and non GM crops. Depending on the coexistence regulations, incentives for cultivation of GM crops differ.\nLearning.\nIn 1988, after prompting from the [[United States Congress]], the [[National Institute of General Medical Sciences]] ([[National Institutes of Health]]) (NIGMS) instituted a funding mechanism for biotechnology training. Universities nationwide compete for these funds to establish Biotechnology Training Programs (BTPs). Each successful application is generally funded for five years then must be competitively renewed. [[Graduate students]] in turn compete for acceptance into a BTP; if accepted, then stipend, tuition and health insurance support is provided for two or three years during the course of their [[Ph.D.]] thesis work. Nineteen institutions offer NIGMS supported BTPs. Biotechnology training is also offered at the undergraduate level and in community colleges.\nExternal links.\n[[Category:Biotechnology| ]]\n[[Category:Life sciences industry]]"}
{"id": "4503", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4503", "title": "Battle of Poitiers", "text": "The Battle of Poitiers was a major English victory in the Hundred Years' War. It was fought on 19 September 1356 in Nouaill\u00e9, near the city of Poitiers in Aquitaine, western France. Edward, the Black Prince, led an army of English, Welsh, Breton and Gascon troops, many of them veterans of the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy. They were attacked by a larger French force led by King John II of France, which included allied Scottish forces. The French were heavily defeated; an English counter-attack captured King John, along with his youngest son, and much of the French nobility who were present.\nThe effect of the defeat on France was catastrophic, leaving Dauphin Charles to rule the country. Charles faced populist revolts across the kingdom in the wake of the battle, which had destroyed the prestige of the French upper-class. The Edwardian phase of the war ended four years later in 1360, on favourable terms for England.\nPoitiers was the second major English victory of the Hundred Years' War, coming a decade after the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy and about half a century before the Battle of Agincourt. The town and battle were often referred to as \"Poictiers\" in contemporaneous recordings, a name commemorated by several warships of the Royal Navy.\nCampaign background.\nFollowing the death of Charles IV of France in 1328, Philip, Count of Valois, had been chosen as his successor and crowned King Philip VI of France, superseding his closest male relative and legal successor, Edward III of England. Edward had been reluctant to pay homage to Philip in his role as Duke of Aquitaine, resulting in Philip's confiscation of those lands in 1337, an act which provoked war between the two nations. Three years later, Edward declared himself King of France. The war had begun well for the English. They had achieved naval domination early in the conflict at the Battle of Sluys in 1340, devastated the south west of France during the Gascon campaign of 1345 and Lancaster's chevauch\u00e9e the following year, inflicted a severe defeat on the French army at Cr\u00e9cy in 1346, and captured Calais in 1347.\nIn the late 1340s and early 1350s, the Black Death had devastated the population of Western Europe, even claiming Philip's wife, Queen Joan, as well as one of Edward's daughters, also named Joan; due to the disruption caused by the plague, all significant military campaigning was brought to a halt. Philip himself died in 1350, and was succeeded by his son, who was crowned King John II. In 1355, Edward III laid out plans for a second major campaign. His eldest son, Edward, the Black Prince, now an experienced soldier following the Cr\u00e9cy campaign, landed at Bordeaux in Aquitaine, leading his army on a march through southern France to Carcassonne. Unable to take the heavily fortified settlement, Edward withdrew back to Bordeaux. In early 1356, the Duke of Lancaster led an army through Normandy, while Edward led his army on a great chevauch\u00e9e from Bordeaux on 8 August 1356.\nEdward's forces met little resistance, sacking numerous settlements, until they reached the Loire river at Tours. They were unable to take the castle or burn the town due to a heavy rainstorm. This delay allowed King John to attempt to pin down and destroy Edward's army. John, who had been besieging Breteuil in Normandy, organised the bulk of his army at Chartres to the north of Tours. In order to increase the speed of his army's march, he dismissed between 15,000 and 20,000 of his lower quality infantry, just as Edward turned back to Bordeaux. The French rode hard and cut in front of the English army, crossing the bridge over the Vienne at Chauvigny. Learning of this, the Black Prince quickly moved his army south. Historians disagree over whether the outnumbered English commander was seeking battle or trying to avoid it. In any case, after preliminary manoeuvres and failed negotiations for a truce, the two armies faced-off, both ready for battle, near Poitiers on Monday, 19 September 1356.\nBattle.\nPreparations.\nEdward arrayed his army in a defensive posture among the hedges and orchards of the area, in front of the forest of Nouaill\u00e9. He deployed his front line of longbowmen behind a particularly prominent thick hedge, through which the road ran at right angles. The Earl of Douglas, commanding the Scottish division in the French army, advised King John that the attack should be delivered on foot, with horses being particularly vulnerable to English arrows. John heeded this advice, his army leaving its baggage behind and forming up on foot in front of the English. The English gained vantage points on the natural high ground in order for their longbowmen to have an advantage over the heavily armoured French troops.\nEnglish army.\nThe English army was led by Edward, the Black Prince, and composed primarily of English and Welsh troops, though there was a large contingent of Gascon and Breton soldiers with the army. Edward's army consisted of approximately 2,000 longbowmen, 3,000 men-at-arms, and a force of 1,000 Gascon infantry.\nLike the earlier engagement at Cr\u00e9cy, the power of the English army lay in the longbow, a tall, thick self-bow made of yew. Longbows had demonstrated their effectiveness against massed infantry and cavalry in several battles, such as Falkirk in 1298, Halidon Hill in 1333, and Cr\u00e9cy in 1346. Poitiers was the second of three major English victories of the Hundred Years' War attributed to the longbow, though its effectiveness against armoured French knights and men-at-arms has been disputed.\nGeoffrey the Baker wrote that the English archers under the Earl of Salisbury \"made their arrows prevail over the [French] knights' armour\", but the bowmen on the other flank, under Warwick, were initially ineffective against the mounted French men-at-arms who enjoyed the double protection of steel plate armour and large leather shields. Once Warwick's archers redeployed to a position where they could hit the unarmored sides and backs of the horses, however, they quickly routed the cavalry force opposing them. The archers were also unquestionably effective against common infantry, who did not have the wealth to afford plate armour.\nThe English army was an experienced force; many archers were veterans of the earlier Battle of Cr\u00e9cy, and two of the key commanders, Sir John Chandos, and Captal de Buch were both experienced soldiers. The English army's divisions were led by Edward, the Black Prince, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Salisbury, Sir John Chandos and Captal de Buch.\nFrench army.\nThe French army was led by King John, and was composed largely of native French soldiers, though there was a contingent of German knights, and a large force of Scottish soldiers. The latter force was led by the Earl of Douglas and fought in the King's own division. The French army at the battle comprised approximately 8,000 men-at-arms and 3,000 common infantry, though John had made the decision to leave behind the vast majority of his infantry, numbering up to 20,000, in order to overtake and force the English to battle.\nThe French army was arrayed in three \"battles\" or divisions. The vanguard was led by the Dauphin Charles, the second by the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, while the third, the largest, was led by the King himself.\nNegotiations.\nPrior to the battle, the local prelate, Cardinal H\u00e9lie de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord attempted to broker a truce between the two sides, as recorded in the writings of the English commander, Sir John Chandos. Attending the conference on the French side were King John, the Count of Tankerville, the Archbishop of Sens, and Jean de Talaru. Representing the English were the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Suffolk, Bartholomew de Burghersh, James Audley, and Sir John Chandos. The English offered to hand over all of the war booty they had taken on their raids throughout France, as well as a seven-year truce. John, who believed his force could easily overwhelm the English, declined their proposal. John's counter suggestion that the Black Prince and his army should surrender was flatly rejected. An account of the meeting was recorded in the writings of the life of Sir John Chandos and were made in the final moments of a meeting of both sides in an effort to avoid the bloody conflict at Poitiers during The Hundred Years' War. The extraordinary narrative occurred just before that battle and reads as follows: \nFighting begins.\nAt the start of the battle, the English removed their baggage train from the field, prompting a hasty assault by the French, who believed the English to be retreating. The fighting began with a charge by a forlorn hope of 300 German knights, led by Jean de Clermont. The attack was a disaster, with many of the knights shot down or killed by English soldiery. According to Froissart, the English archers then shot their bows at the massed French infantry. The Dauphin's division reached the English line. Exhausted by a long march in heavy equipment and harassed by the hail of arrows, the division was repulsed after approximately two hours of combat.\nThe retreating vanguard collided with the advancing division of the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, throwing the French army into chaos. Seeing the Dauphin's troops falling back, Orl\u00e9ans' division fell back in confusion. The third, and strongest, division led by the King advanced, and the two withdrawing divisions coalesced and resumed their advance against the English. Believing that the retreat of the first two French divisions marked the withdrawal of the French, Edward had ordered a force under Captal de Buch to pursue. Sir John Chandos urged the Prince to launch this force upon the main body of the French army under the King. Seizing upon this idea, Edward ordered all his men-at-arms and knights to mount for the charge, while de Buch's men, already mounted, were instructed to advance around the French left flank and rear.\nCapture of King John II.\nAs the French advanced, the English launched their charge. With the French stunned by the attack, the impetus carried the English and Gascon forces right into their line. Simultaneously, de Buch's mobile reserve of mounted troops fell upon the French left flank and rear. With the French army fearful of encirclement, their cohesion disintegrated as many soldiers attempted to flee the field. Low on arrows, the English and Welsh archers abandoned their bows and ran forward to join the mel\u00e9e. Around this time, King John and his son, Philip the Bold, found themselves surrounded. As written by Froissart, an exiled French knight fighting with the English, Sir Denis Morbeke of Artois approached the king, requesting the King's surrender. The King is said to have replied, \"To whom shall I yield me? Where is my cousin the Prince of Wales? If I might see him, I would speak with him\". Denis replied; \"Sir, he is not here; but yield you to me and I shall bring you to him\". The king handed him his right gauntlet, saying; \"I yield me to you\".\nFollowing the surrender of the King and his son Philip, the French army broke up and left the field, ending the battle.\nAftermath.\nFollowing the battle, Edward resumed his march back to the English stronghold at Bordeaux. Jean de Venette, a Carmelite friar, vividly describes the chaos that ensued following the battle. The demise of the French nobility at the battle, only ten years from the catastrophe at Cr\u00e9cy, threw the kingdom into chaos. The realm was left in the hands of the Dauphin Charles, who faced popular rebellion across the kingdom in the wake of the defeat. Jean writes that the French nobles brutally repressed the rebellions, robbing, despoiling, and pillaging the peasants' goods. Mercenary companies hired by both sides added to the destruction, plundering the peasants and the churches.\nCharles, to the misery of the French peasantry, began to raise additional funds to pay for the ransom of his father, and to continue the war effort. Capitalising on the discontent in France, King Edward assembled his army at Calais in 1359 and led his army on a campaign against Rheims. Unable to take Rheims or the French capital, Paris, Edward moved his army to Chartres. Later, the Dauphin Charles offered to open negotiations, and Edward agreed.\nThe Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny was ratified on 24 October 1360, ending the Edwardian phase of the Hundred Years' War. In it, Edward agreed to renounce his claims to the French throne, in exchange for full sovereign rights over an expanded Aquitaine and Calais, essentially restoring the former Angevin Empire.\nNobles and men-at-arms present.\nEnglish.\nFroissart states that these men fought with the Black Prince:\nAnother account states that John of Ghistelles perished at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy so there is some ambiguity as to this individual.\nFrench.\nFroissart states that these men fought with King John II:\nIn popular culture.\nArthur Conan Doyle's novel \"Sir Nigel\" features the Battle of Poitiers. The impoverished young squire Nigel Loring captures King John II of France in the melee. He fails to realise that he has accepted the surrender of the King of France, and so does not gain the King's ransom. However King John admits that Nigel was his vanquisher, so as reward Nigel is knighted by Edward, the Black Prince.\nThe battle appears in passing in \"A Knight's Tale\" when Count Adhemar is called back to the war.\nBernard Cornwell's novel \"1356\", the final novel in \"The Grail Quest\" series telling the story of Thomas of Hookton, dramatises the battle of Poitiers.\nMichael Jecks's novel \"Blood of the Innocents\", the final novel in \"The Hundred Years War\" trilogy, dramatises the campaign that culminates with the battle of Poitiers.\nColdplay\u2019s 2008 EP \"Prospekt's March\" uses the \"Battle of Poitiers\" painting by Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix as its album cover."}
{"id": "4505", "revid": "21386896", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4505", "title": "Backbone cabal", "text": "The backbone cabal was an informal organization of large-site news server administrators of the worldwide distributed newsgroup-based discussion system Usenet. It existed from about 1983 at least into the 2000s.\nThe cabal was created in an effort to facilitate reliable propagation of new Usenet posts. While in the 1970s and 1980s many news servers only operated during night time to save on the cost of long distance communication, servers of the backbone cabal were available 24 hours a day. The administrators of these servers gained sufficient influence in the otherwise anarchic Usenet community to be able to push through controversial changes, for instance the Great Renaming of Usenet newsgroups during 1987.\nHistory.\nAs Usenet has few technologically or legally enforced hierarchies, just about the only ones that formed were social. People acquired power through persuasion (both publicly and privately), public debate, force of will (often via aggressive flames), garnering authority and respect by spending much time and effort contributing to the community (by being a maintainer of a FAQ, for example; see also Kibo, etc.).\nMary Ann Horton recruited membership in and designed the original physical topology of the Usenet Backbone in 1983. Gene \"Spaf\" Spafford then created an email list of the backbone administrators, plus a few influential posters. This list became known as the Backbone Cabal and served as a \"political (i.e. decision making) backbone\". Other prominent members of the cabal were Brian Reid, Bob Allisat, Chuq von Rospach and Rick Adams.\nIn Internet culture.\nDuring most of its existence, the cabal (sometimes capitalized) steadfastly denied its own existence; those involved would often respond \"There is no Cabal\" (sometimes abbreviated as \"TINC\"'), whenever the existence or activities of the group were speculated on in public. It is sometimes used humorously to dispel cabal-like organizational conspiracy theories, or as an ironic statement, indicating one who knows the existence of \"the cabal\" will invariably deny there is one.\nThis belief became a model for various conspiracy theories about various Cabals with dark nefarious objectives beginning with taking over Usenet or the Internet. Spoofs include the \"Eric Conspiracy\" of moustachioed hackers named \"Eric\"; ex-members of the P.H.I.R.M.; and the Lumber Cartel putatively funding anti-spam efforts to support the paper industry.\nThe result of this policy was an aura of mystery, even a decade after the cabal mailing list disbanded in late 1988 following an internal fight."}
{"id": "4506", "revid": "41368065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4506", "title": "Bongo (antelope)", "text": "The bongo (\"Tragelaphus eurycerus\") is a herbivorous, mostly nocturnal forest ungulate. \nBongos are characterised by a striking reddish-brown coat, black and white markings, white-yellow stripes and long slightly spiralled horns. Bongos are the only tragelaphid in which both sexes have horns. They have a complex social interaction and are found in African dense forest mosaics. Native to Africa, they are the third-largest antelope in the world.\nThe western or lowland bongo, \"T. e. eurycerus\", faces an ongoing population decline, and the IUCN Antelope Specialist Group considers it to be Near Threatened on the conservation status scale. \nThe eastern or mountain bongo, \"T. e. isaaci\", of Kenya, has a coat even more vibrant than that of \"T. e. eurycerus\". The mountain bongo is only found in the wild in a few mountain regions of central Kenya. This bongo is classified by the IUCN Antelope Specialist Group as Critically Endangered, with fewer individuals in the wild than in captivity (where it breeds readily). \nIn 2000, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums in the USA (AZA) upgraded the bongo to a Species Survival Plan participant and in 2006 added the Bongo Restoration to Mount Kenya Project to its list of the Top Ten Wildlife Conservation Success Stories of the year. However, in 2013, it seems, these successes have been compromised by reports of possibly only 100 mountain bongos left in the wild due to logging and poaching.\nTaxonomy.\nThe scientific name of the bongo is \"Tragelaphus eurycerus\", and it belongs to the genus \"Tragelaphus\" and family Bovidae. It was first described by Irish naturalist William Ogilby in 1837. The generic name \"Tragelaphus\" is composed of two Greek words: \"trag-\", meaning a goat; and \"elaphos\", meaning deer. The specific name \"eurycerus\" originated from the fusion of \"eurus\" (broad, widespread) and \"keras\" (an animal's horn). The common name \"bongo\" originated probably from the Kele language of Gabon. The first known use of the name \"bongo\" in English dates to 1861.\nBongos are further classified into two subspecies: \"T. e. eurycerus\", the lowland or western bongo, and the far rarer \"T. e. isaaci\", the mountain or eastern bongo, restricted to the mountains of Kenya only. The eastern bongo is larger and heavier than the western bongo. Two other subspecies are described from West and Central Africa, but taxonomic clarification is required. They have been observed to live up to 19 years.\nAppearance.\nBongos are one of the largest of the forest antelopes. In addition to the deep chestnut colour of their coats, they have bright white stripes on their sides to help with camouflage.\nAdults of both sexes are similar in size. Adult height is about at the shoulder and length is , including a tail of . Females weigh around , while males weigh about . Its large size puts it as the third-largest in the Bovidae tribe of Strepsicerotini, behind both the common and greater elands by about , and above the greater kudu by about .\nBoth sexes have heavy spiral horns; those of the male are longer and more massive. All bongos in captivity are from the isolated Aberdare Mountains of central Kenya.\nCoat and body.\nThe bongo sports a bright auburn or chestnut coat, with the neck, chest, and legs generally darker than the rest of the body. Coats of male bongos become darker as they age until they reach a dark mahogany-brown colour. Coats of female bongos are usually more brightly coloured than those of males. The eastern bongo is darker in color than the western and this is especially pronounced in older males which tend to be chestnut brown, especially on the forepart of their bodies.\nThe pigmentation in the coat rubs off quite easily; anecdotal reports suggest rain running off a bongo may be tinted red with pigment. The smooth coat is marked with 10\u201315 vertical white-yellow stripes, spread along the back from the base of the neck to the rump. The number of stripes on each side is rarely the same. It also has a short, bristly, brown ridge of dorsal hair from the shoulder to the rump; the white stripes run into this ridge.\nA white chevron appears between the eyes, and two large white spots grace each cheek. Another white chevron occurs where the neck meets the chest. The large ears are to sharpen hearing, and the distinctive coloration may help bongos identify one another in their dark forest habitats. Bongos have no special secretion glands, so rely less on scent to find one another than do other similar antelopes. The lips of a bongo are white, topped with a black muzzle.\nHorns.\nBongos have two heavy and slightly spiralled horns that slope over their backs, and like many other antelope species, both male and female bongos have horns. Bongos are the only tragelaphids in which both sexes have horns. The horns of bongos are in the form of a lyre and bear a resemblance to those of the related antelope species of nyalas, sitatungas, bushbucks, kudus and elands.\nUnlike deer, which have branched antlers shed annually, bongos and other antelopes have pointed horns they keep throughout their lives. Males have massive backswept horns, while females have smaller, thinner, and more parallel horns. The size of the horns range between . The horns twist once.\nLike all other horns of antelopes, the core of a bongo's horn is hollow and the outer layer of the horn is made of keratin, the same material that makes up human fingernails, toenails and hair. The bongo runs gracefully and at full speed through even the thickest tangles of lianas, laying its heavy spiralled horns on its back so the brush cannot impede its flight. Bongos are hunted for their horns by humans.\nSocial organization and behavior.\nLike other forest ungulates, bongos are seldom seen in large groups. Males, called bulls, tend to be solitary, while females with young live in groups of six to eight. Bongos have seldom been seen in herds of more than 20. Gestation is about 285\u00a0days (9.5\u00a0months), with one young per birth, and weaning occurs at six months. Sexual maturity is reached at 24\u201327\u00a0months. The preferred habitat of this species is so dense and difficult to operate in, that few Europeans or Americans observed this species until the 1960s.\nAs young males mature and leave their maternal groups, they most often remain solitary, although rarely they join an older male. Adult males of similar size/age tend to avoid one another. Occasionally, they meet and spar with their horns in a ritualised manner and it is rare for serious fights to take place. However, such fights are usually discouraged by visual displays, in which the males bulge their necks, roll their eyes, and hold their horns in a vertical position while slowly pacing back and forth in front of the other male. They seek out females only during mating time. When they are with a herd of females, males do not coerce them or try to restrict their movements as do some other antelopes.\nAlthough mostly nocturnal, they are occasionally active during the day. However, like deer, bongos may exhibit crepuscular behaviour. Bongos are both timid and easily frightened; after a scare, a bongo moves away at considerable speed, even through dense undergrowth. Once they find cover, they stay alert and face away from the disturbance, but peek every now and then to check the situation. The bongo's hindquarters are less conspicuous than the forequarters, and from this position the animal can quickly flee.\nWhen in distress, the bongo emits a bleat. It uses a limited number of vocalisations, mostly grunts and snorts; females have a weak mooing contact-call for their young. Females prefer to use traditional calving grounds restricted to certain areas, while newborn calves lie in hiding for a week or more, receiving short visits by the mother to suckle.\nThe calves grow rapidly and can soon accompany their mothers in the nursery herds. Their horns grow rapidly and begin to show in 3.5 months. They are weaned after six months and reach sexual maturity at about 20 months.\nEcology.\nDistribution and habitat.\nBongos are found in tropical jungles with dense undergrowth up to an altitude of in Central Africa, with isolated populations in Kenya, and these West African countries: Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Ivory Coast, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, South Sudan.\nHistorically, bongos are found in three disjunct parts of Africa: East, Central and West. Today, all three populations' ranges have shrunk in size due to habitat loss for agriculture and uncontrolled timber cutting, as well as hunting for meat.\nBongos favour disturbed forest mosaics that provide fresh, low-level green vegetation. Such habitats may be promoted by heavy browsing by elephants, fires, flooding, tree-felling (natural or by logging), and fallowing. Mass bamboo die-off provides ideal habitat in East Africa. They can live in bamboo forests.\nDiet.\nLike many forest ungulates, bongos are herbivorous browsers and feed on leaves, bushes, vines, bark and pith of rotting trees, grasses/herbs, roots, cereals, and fruits.\nBongos require salt in their diets, and are known to regularly visit natural salt licks. Examination of bongo feces revealed that charcoal from trees burnt by lightning is consumed. This behavior is believed to be a means of getting salts and minerals into their diets. This behavior has also been reported in the okapi. Another similarity to the okapi, though the bongo is unrelated, is that the bongo has a long prehensile tongue which it uses to grasp grasses and leaves.\nSuitable habitats for bongos must have permanent water available. As a large animal, the bongo requires an ample amount of food, and is restricted to areas with abundant year-round growth of herbs and low shrubs.\nBongos are also known to eat burnt wood after a storm, as a rich source of salt and minerals.\nPopulation and conservation.\nFew estimates of population density are available. Assuming average population densities of 0.25 animals per km2 in regions where it is known to be common or abundant, and 0.02 per km2 elsewhere, and with a total area of occupancy of 327,000\u00a0km2, a total population estimate of around 28,000 is suggested. Only about 60% are in protected areas, suggesting the actual numbers of the lowland subspecies may only be in the low tens of thousands. In Kenya, their numbers have declined significantly and on Mount Kenya, they were within the last decade due to illegal hunting with dogs. Although information on their status in the wild is lacking, lowland bongos are not presently considered endangered.\nBongos are susceptible to diseases such as rinderpest, which almost exterminated the species during the 1890s. \"Tragelaphus eurycerus\" may suffer from goitre. Over the course of the disease, the thyroid glands greatly enlarge (up to 10 x 20\u00a0cm) and may become polycystic. Pathogenesis of goiter in the bongo may reflect a mixture of genetic predisposition coupled with environmental factors, including a period of exposure to a goitrogen. Leopards and spotted hyenas are the primary natural predators (lions are seldom encountered due to differing habitat preferences); pythons sometimes eat bongo calves. Humans prey on them for their pelts, horns, and meat, with the species being a common local source for \"bush meat\". Bongo populations have been greatly reduced by hunting, poaching, and animal trapping, although some bongo refuges exist.\nAlthough bongos are quite easy for humans to catch using snares, many people native to the bongos' habitat believed that if they ate or touched bongo, they would have spasms similar to epileptic seizures. Because of this superstition, bongos were less harmed in their native ranges than expected. However, these taboos are said no longer to exist, which may account for increased hunting by humans in recent times.\nZoo programmes.\nAn international studbook is maintained to help manage animals held in captivity. Because of its bright colour, it is very popular in zoos and private collections. In North America, over 400 individuals are thought to be held, a population that probably exceeds that of the mountain bongo in the wild.\nIn 2000, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) upgraded the bongo to a Species Survival Plan participant, which works to improve the genetic diversity of managed animal populations. The target population for participating zoos and private collections in North America is 250 animals. Through the efforts of zoos in North America, a reintroduction to the population in Kenya is being developed.\nAt least one collaborative effort for reintroduction between North American wildlife facilities has already been carried out. In 2004, 18 eastern bongos born in North American zoos gathered at White Oak Conservation in Yulee, Florida for release in Kenya. White Oak staff members traveled with the bongos to a Mount Kenya holding facility, where they stayed until being reintroduced.\nConservation.\nIn the last few decades, a rapid decline in the numbers of wild mountain bongo has occurred due to poaching and human pressure on their habitat, with local extinctions reported in Cherangani and Chepalungu hills, Kenya.\nThe Bongo Surveillance Programme, working alongside the Kenya Wildlife Service, have recorded photos of bongos at remote salt licks in the Aberdare Forests using camera traps, and, by analyzing DNA extracted from dung, have confirmed the presence of bongo in Mount Kenya, Eburru and Mau forests. The programme estimate as few as 140 animals left in the wild \u2013 spread across four isolated populations. Whilst captive breeding programmes can be viewed as having been successful in ensuring survival of this species in Europe and North America, the situation in the wild has been less promising. Evidence exists of bongo surviving in Kenya. However, these populations are believed to be small, fragmented, and vulnerable to extinction.\nAnimal populations with impoverished genetic diversity are inherently less able to adapt to changes in their environments (such as climate change, disease outbreaks, habitat change, etc.). The isolation of the four remaining small bongo populations, which themselves would appear to be in decline, means a substantial amount of genetic material is lost each generation. Whilst the population remains small, the impact of transfers will be greater, so the establishment of a \"metapopulation management plan\" occurs concurrently with conservation initiatives to enhance \"in situ\" population growth, and this initiative is both urgent and fundamental to the future survival of mountain bongo in the wild.\nThe western/lowland bongo faces an ongoing population decline as habitat destruction and hunting pressures increase with the relentless expansion of human settlement. Its long-term survival will only be assured in areas which receive active protection and management. At present, such areas comprise about 30,000\u00a0km2, and several are in countries where political stability is fragile. So, a realistic possibility exists whereby its status could decline to Threatened in the near future.\nAs the largest and most spectacular forest antelope, the western/lowland bongo is both an important flagship species for protected areas such as national parks, and a major trophy species which has been taken in increasing numbers in Central Africa by sport hunters during the 1990s. Both of these factors are strong incentives to provide effective protection and management of populations.\nTrophy hunting has the potential to provide economic justification for the preservation of larger areas of bongo habitat than national parks, especially in remote regions of Central Africa, where possibilities for commercially successful tourism are very limited.\nThe eastern/mountain bongo's survival in the wild is dependent on more effective protection of the surviving remnant populations in Kenya. If this does not occur, it will eventually become extinct in the wild. The existence of a healthy captive population of this subspecies offers the potential for its reintroduction.\nGroups supporting bongo conservation in Kenya.\nIn 2004, Dr. Jake Veasey, the head of the Department of Animal Management and Conservation at Woburn Safari Park and a member of the European Association of Zoos and Aquariums Population Management Advisory Group, with the assistance of Lindsay Banks, took over responsibility for the management and coordination of the European Endangered Species Programme for the eastern bongo. This includes some 250 animals across Europe and the Middle East.\nAlong with the Rothschild giraffe, the eastern bongo is arguably one of the most threatened large mammals in Africa, with recent estimates numbering less than 140 animals, below a minimum sustainable viable population. The situation is exacerbated because these animals are spread across four isolated populations. Whilst the bongo endangered species program can be viewed as having been successful in ensuring survival of this species in Europe, it has not yet become actively involved in the conservation of this species in the wild in a coordinated fashion. The plan is to engage in conservation activities in Kenya to assist in reversing the decline of the eastern bongo populations and genetic diversity in Africa, and in particular, applying population management expertise to help ensure the persistence of genetic diversity in the free ranging wild populations.\nTo illustrate significance of genetic diversity loss, assume the average metapopulation size is 35 animals based on 140 animals spread across four populations (140/4=35). Assuming stable populations, these populations will lose 8% of their genetic diversity every decade. By managing all four populations as one, through strategic transfers, gene loss is reduced from 8% to 2% per decade, without any increase in bongo numbers in Kenya. By managing the European and African populations as one \u2013 by strategic exports from Europe combined with \"in situ\" transfers, gene loss is reduced to 0.72% every 100 years, with both populations remaining stable. If populations in Kenya are allowed to grow through the implementation of effective conservation, including strategic transfers, gene loss can be effectively halted in this species and its future secured in the wild.\nThe initial aims of the project are: \nIf effective protection were implemented immediately and bongo populations allowed to expand without transfers, then this would create a bigger population of genetically impoverished bongos. These animals would be less able to adapt to a dynamic environment. Whilst the population remains small, the impact of transfers will be greater. For this reason, the 'metapopulation management plan' must occur concurrently with conservation strategies to enhance \"in situ\" population growth. This initiative is both urgent and fundamental to the future survival of the mountain bongo in the wild.\nIn 2013, SafariCom telecommunications donated money to the Bongo Surveillance Programme to try to keep tabs on what are thought to be the last 100 eastern bongos left in the wild in the Mau Eburu Forest in central Kenya, whose numbers are still declining due to logging of their habitat and illegal poaching.\nMount Kenya Wildlife Conservancy runs a bongo rehabilitation program in collaboration with the Kenya Wildlife Service. The Conservancy aims to prevent extinction of the bongo through breeding and release back into the wild.\nStatus.\nThe IUCN Antelope Specialist Group considers the western or lowland bongo, \"T. e. eurycerus\", to be Lower Risk (Near Threatened) and the eastern or mountain bongo, \"T. e. isaaci\", of Kenya, to be Critically Endangered. These bongos may be endangered due to human environmental interaction, as well as hunting and illegal actions towards wildlife.\nCITES lists bongos as an Appendix III species, only regulating their exportation from a single country, Ghana. It is not protected by the US Endangered Species Act and is not listed by the USFWS."}
{"id": "4507", "revid": "1642792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4507", "title": "Bunyip", "text": "The bunyip is a creature from Australian Aboriginal mythology, said to lurk in swamps, billabongs, creeks, riverbeds, and waterholes.\nThe bunyip was part of traditional Aboriginal beliefs and stories throughout Australia, while its name varied according to tribal nomenclature. In his 2001 book, writer Robert Holden identified at least nine regional variations of the creature known as the bunyip across Aboriginal Australia. The origin of the word \"bunyip\" has been traced to the Wemba-Wemba or Wergaia language of the Aboriginal people of Victoria, in South-Eastern Australia. Europeans recorded various written accounts of bunyips in the early and mid-19th century, as they began to settle across the country.\nName.\nThe word \"bunyip\" is usually translated by Aboriginal Australians today as \"devil\" or \"evil spirit\". This contemporary translation may not accurately represent the role of the bunyip in pre-contact Aboriginal mythology or its possible origins before written accounts were made. Some modern sources allude to a linguistic connection between the bunyip and Bunjil, \"a mythic 'Great Man' who made the mountains, rivers, man, and all the animals.\" The word \"bahnyip\" first appeared in the \"Sydney Gazette\" in 1812. It was used by James Ives to describe \"a large black animal\nlike a seal, with a terrible voice which creates terror among the blacks.\" By the 1850s, \"bunyip\" was also used as a \"synonym for impostor, pretender, humbug and the like\" in the broader Australian community. The term \"bunyip aristocracy\" was first coined in 1853 to describe Australians aspiring to be aristocrats. In the early 1990s, Prime Minister Paul Keating used this term to describe members of the conservative Liberal Party of Australia opposition. The word \"bunyip\" can still be found in a number of Australian contexts, including place names such as the Bunyip River (which flows into Westernport Bay in southern Victoria) and the town of Bunyip, Victoria.\nCharacteristics.\nDescriptions of bunyips vary widely. George French Angus may have collected a description of a bunyip in his account of a \"water spirit\" from the Moorundi people of the Murray River before 1847, stating it is \"much dreaded by them\u00a0... It inhabits the Murray; but\u00a0... they have some difficulty describing it. Its most usual form\u00a0... is said to be that of an enormous starfish.\" The Challicum bunyip, an outline image of a bunyip carved by Aborigines into the bank of Fiery Creek, near Ararat, Victoria, was first recorded by \"The Australasian\" newspaper in 1851. According to the report, the bunyip had been speared after killing an Aboriginal man. Antiquarian Reynell Johns claimed that until the mid-1850s, Aboriginal people made a \"habit of visiting the place annually and retracing the outlines of the figure [of the bunyip] which is about 11 paces long and 4 paces in extreme breadth.\" The outline image no longer exists. Robert Brough Smyth's \"Aborigines of Victoria\" (1878) devoted ten pages to the bunyip, but concluded \"in truth little is known among the blacks respecting its form, covering or habits; they appear to have been in such dread of it as to have been unable to take note of its characteristics.\"\nThe bunyips presumably seen by witnesses, according to their descriptions, most commonly fit one of two categories: 60% of sightings resemble seals or swimming dogs, and 20% of sightings are of long-necked creatures with small heads; the remaining descriptions are ambiguous beyond categorization. The seal-dog variety is most often described as being between 4 and 6 feet long with a shaggy black or brown coat. According to reports, these bunyips have round heads resembling a bulldog, prominent ears, no tail, and whiskers like a seal or otter. The long-necked variety is allegedly between 5 and 15 feet long, and is said to have black or brown fur, large ears, small tusks, a head like a horse or emu, an elongated, maned neck about three feet long and with many folds of skin, and a horse-like tail. The bunyip has been described by natives as amphibious, nocturnal, and inhabiting lakes, rivers, and swamps. Bunyips, according to Aborigines, can swim swiftly with fins or flippers, have a loud, roaring call, and feed on crayfish, though some legends portray them as bloodthirsty predators of humans, particularly women and children. Bunyip eggs are allegedly laid in platypus nests.\nDebate over origins of the bunyip.\nThere have been various attempts to understand and explain the origins of the bunyip as a physical entity over the past 150 years. Writing in 1933, Charles Fenner suggested that it was likely that the \"actual origin of the bunyip myth lies in the fact that from time to time seals have made their way up the Murray and Darling (Rivers)\". He provided examples of seals found as far inland as Overland Corner, Loxton, and Conargo and reminded readers that \"the smooth fur, prominent 'apricot' eyes, and the bellowing cry are characteristic of the seal\", especially southern elephant seals and leopard seals.\nAnother suggestion is that the bunyip may be a cultural memory of extinct Australian marsupials such as the \"Diprotodon\", \"Zygomaturus\", \"Nototherium\", or \"Palorchestes\". This connection was first formally made by Dr George Bennett of the Australian Museum in 1871. In the early 1990s, palaeontologist Pat Vickers-Rich and geologist Neil Archbold also cautiously suggested that Aboriginal legends \"perhaps had stemmed from an acquaintance with prehistoric bones or even living prehistoric animals themselves\u00a0... When confronted with the remains of some of the now extinct Australian marsupials, Aborigines would often identify them as the bunyip.\" They also note that \"legends about the\" mihirung paringmal\" of western Victorian Aborigines\u00a0... may allude to the\u00a0... extinct giant birds the Dromornithidae.\"\nIn a 2017 \"Australian Birdlife\" article, Karl Brandt suggested Aboriginal encounters with the southern cassowary inspired the myth. According to the first written description of the bunyip from 1845, the creature, which laid pale blue eggs of immense size, possessed deadly claws, powerful hind legs, a brightly coloured chest, and an emu-like head, characteristics shared with the Australian cassowary. As the creature's bill was described as having serrated projections, each \"like the bone of the stingray\", this bunyip was associated with the indigenous people of Far North Queensland, renowned for their spears tipped with stingray barbs and their proximity to the cassowary's Australian range.\nAnother association to the bunyip is the shy Australasian bittern (\"Botaurus poiciloptilus\"). During the breeding season, the male call of this marsh-dwelling bird is a \"low pitched boom\"; hence, it is occasionally called the \"bunyip bird\".\nEarly accounts of European settlers.\nDuring the early settlement of Australia by Europeans, the notion became commonly held that the bunyip was an unknown animal that awaited discovery. Unfamiliar with the sights and sounds of the island continent's peculiar fauna, early Europeans believed that the bunyip described to them was one more strange Australian animal and they sometimes attributed unfamiliar animal calls or cries to it. Scholars suggest also that 19th-century bunyip lore was reinforced by imported European folklore, such as that of the Irish P\u00faca.\nA large number of bunyip sightings occurred during the 1840s and 1850s, particularly in the southeastern colonies of Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia, as European settlers extended their reach. The following is not an exhaustive list of accounts:\nHume find of 1818.\nOne of the earliest accounts relating to a large unknown freshwater animal was in 1818, when Hamilton Hume and James Meehan found some large bones at Lake Bathurst in New South Wales. They did not call the animal a bunyip, but described the remains indicating the creature as very much like a hippopotamus or manatee. The Philosophical Society of Australasia later offered to reimburse Hume for any costs incurred in recovering a specimen of the unknown animal, but for various reasons, Hume did not return to the lake. Ancient \"Diprotodon\" skeletons have sometimes been compared to the hippopotamus; they are a land animal, but have sometimes been found in a lake or water course.\nWellington Caves fossils, 1830.\nMore significant was the discovery of fossilised bones of \"some quadruped much larger than the ox or buffalo\" in the Wellington Caves in mid-1830 by bushman George Ranken and later by Thomas Mitchell. Sydney's Reverend John Dunmore Lang announced the find as \"convincing proof of the deluge\", referring to Biblical accounts of the Flood. But British anatomist Sir Richard Owen identified the fossils as the gigantic marsupials \"Nototherium\" and \"Diprotodon\". At the same time, some settlers observed that \"all natives throughout these\u00a0... districts have a tradition (of) a very large animal having at one time existed in the large creeks and rivers and by many it is said that such animals now exist.\"\nFirst written use of the word \"bunyip\", 1845.\nIn July 1845, \"The Geelong Advertiser\" announced the discovery of fossils found near Geelong, under the headline \"Wonderful Discovery of a new Animal\". This was a continuation of a story on 'fossil remains' from the previous issue. The newspaper continued, \"On the bone being shown to an intelligent black, he at once recognised it as belonging to the bunyip, which he declared he had seen. On being requested to make a drawing of it, he did so without hesitation.\" The account noted a story of an Aboriginal woman being killed by a bunyip and the \"most direct evidence of all\" \u2013 that of a man named Mumbowran \"who showed several deep wounds on his breast made by the claws of the animal\".\nThe account provided this description of the creature:\nShortly after this account appeared, it was repeated in other Australian newspapers. This appears to be the first use of the word \"bunyip\" in a written publication.\nAustralian Museum's bunyip of 1847.\nIn January 1846, a peculiar skull was taken by a settler from the banks of Murrumbidgee River near Balranald, New South Wales. Initial reports suggested that it was the skull of something unknown to science. The squatter who found it remarked, \"all the natives to whom it was shown called [it] a bunyip\". By July 1847, several experts, including W. S. Macleay and Professor Owen, had identified the skull as the deformed foetal skull of a foal or calf. At the same time, the purported bunyip skull was put on display in the Australian Museum (Sydney) for two days. Visitors flocked to see it, and \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" reported that many people spoke out about their \"bunyip sightings\". Reports of this discovery used the phrase 'Kine Pratie' as well as Bunyip. Explorer William Hovell, who examined the skull, also called it a 'katen-pai'.\nIn March of that year \"a bunyip or an immense Platibus\" (Platypus) was sighted \"sunning himself on the placid bosom of the Yarra, just opposite the Custom House\" in Melbourne. \"Immediately a crowd gathered\" and three men set off by boat \"to secure the stranger\" which \"disappeared\" when they were \"about a yard from him\".\nWilliam Buckley's account of bunyips, 1852.\nAnother early written account is attributed to escaped convict William Buckley in his 1852 biography of thirty years living with the Wathaurong people. His 1852 account records \"in\u00a0... Lake Moodewarri [now Lake Modewarre] as well as in most of the others inland\u00a0... is a\u00a0... very extraordinary amphibious animal, which the natives call Bunyip.\" Buckley's account suggests he saw such a creature on several occasions. He adds, \"I could never see any part, except the back, which appeared to be covered with feathers of a dusky grey colour. It seemed to be about the size of a full grown calf\u00a0... I could never learn from any of the natives that they had seen either the head or tail.\" Buckley also claimed the creature was common in the Barwon River and cites an example he heard of an Aboriginal woman being killed by one. He emphasized the bunyip was believed to have supernatural powers.\nStocqueler's sightings and drawings, 1857.\nIn an article titled, 'The Bunyip', a newspaper reported on the drawings made by Edwin Stocqueler as he travelled on the Murray and Goulburn rivers: 'Amongst the latter drawings we noticed a likeness of the Bunyip, or rather a view of the neck and shoulders of the animal. Mr. Stocqueler informs us that the Bunyip is a large freshwater seal, having two small padules or fins attached to the shoulders, a long swan like neck, a head like a dog, and a curious bag hanging under the jaw, resembling the pouch of the pelican. The animal is covered with hair, like the platypus, and the colour is a glossy black. Mr. Stocqueler saw no less than six of these curious animals at different times; his boat was within thirty feet of one near M'Guire's punt on the Goulburn, and he fired at the Bunyip, but did not succeed in capturing him. The smallest appeared to be about five feet in length, and the largest exceeded fifteen feet. The head of the largest was the size of a bullock's head, and three feet out of water. After taking a sketch of the animal, Mr. Stocqueler showed it to several blacks of the Goulburn tribe, who declared that the picture was \"Bunyip's brother,\" meaning a duplicate or likeness of the bunyip. The animals moved against the current, at the rate of about seven miles an hour, and Mr. Stockqueler states that he could have approached close to the specimens he observed, had he not been deterred by the stories of the natives concerning the power and fury of the bunyip, and by the fact that his gun had only a single barrel, and his boat was of a very frail description.'\nThe description varied across newspaper accounts: 'The great Bunyip question seems likely to be brought to a close, as a Mr. Stocqueler, an artist and gentleman, who has come up the Murray in a small boat, states that he saw one, and was enabled to take a drawing of this \"vexed question,\" but could not succeed in catching him. We have seen the sketch, and it puts us in mind of an hybrid between the water mole and the great sea serpent.' 'Mr. Stocqueler, an artist, and his mother are on an expedition down the Murray, for the purpose of making some faithful sketches of the views on this fine stream, as well as of the creatures frequenting it. I have seen some of their productions, and as they pourtray localities with which I am well acquainted, can pronounce the drawings faithful representations. Mother and son go down the stream in a canoe. The lady paints flowers, &amp;c.; the son devotes himself to choice views on the river's side. One of the drawings represents a singular creature, which the artist is unable to classify. It has the appearance in miniature of the famous sea-serpent, as that animal is described by navigators. Mr. Stocqueler was about twenty-five yards distant from it at first sight as it lay placidly on the water. On being observed, the stranger set-off, working his paddles briskly, and rapidly disappeared. Captain Cadell has tried to solve the mystery, but is not yet satisfied as to what the animal really is. Mr. Stocqueler states that there were about two feet of it above water when he first saw it, and he estimated its length at from five to six feet. The worthy Captain says, that unless the creature is the \"Musk Drake\" (so called from giving off a very strong odour of musk), he cannot account for the novelty.'\nStocqueler disputed the newspaper descriptions in a letter; stating that he never called the animal a bunyip, it did not have a swan like neck, and he never said anything about the size of the animal as he never saw the whole body. He went on to write that all would be revealed in his diorama as an 'almost life size portrait of the beast' would be included. The diorama took him four years to paint and was reputed to be a mile (1.6\u00a0km) long and made of 70 individual pictures. The diorama has long since disappeared and may no longer exist.\nIn popular culture and fiction.\nNumerous tales of the bunyip in written literature appeared in the 19th and early 20th centuries. One of the earliest known is a story in Andrew Lang's \"The Brown Fairy Book\" (1904).\nThe Australian tourism boom of the 1970s brought a renewed interest in bunyip mythology.\nBunyip stories have also been published outside Australia.\nThe Bunyip has been featured in films as well.\nIn the 21st century the bunyip has been featured in works around the world. "}
{"id": "4508", "revid": "367949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4508", "title": "Brabant", "text": "Brabant is a traditional geographical region (or regions) in the Low Countries of Europe. It may refer to:"}
{"id": "4509", "revid": "629857938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4509", "title": "Back-Cover Texts", "text": ""}
{"id": "4512", "revid": "41279701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4512", "title": "Boone, North Carolina", "text": "Boone is a town in and the county seat of Watauga County, North Carolina, United States. Located in the Blue Ridge Mountains of western North Carolina, Boone is the home of Appalachian State University and the headquarters for the disaster and medical relief organization Samaritan's Purse. The population was 17,122 at the 2010 census.\nThe town is named for famous American pioneer and explorer Daniel Boone, and every summer, other than 2020, from 1952 has hosted an outdoor amphitheatre drama, \"Horn in the West\", portraying the British settlement of the area during the American Revolutionary War and featuring the contributions of its namesake. It is the largest community and the economic hub of the seven-county region of Western North Carolina known as the High Country.\nAbout.\n Boone took its name from the famous pioneer and explorer Daniel Boone, who on several occasions camped at a site generally agreed to be within the present city limits. Daniel's nephews, Jesse and Jonathan (sons of brother Israel Boone), were members of the town's first church, Three Forks Baptist, still in existence today.\nBoone was served by the narrow gauge East Tennessee and Western North Carolina Railroad (nicknamed \"Tweetsie\") until the flood of 1940. The flood washed away much of the tracks and it was decided not to replace them.\nBoone is the home of Appalachian State University, a constituent member of the University of North Carolina.\nAppalachian State is the sixth-largest university in the seventeen-campus system.\nCaldwell Community College &amp; Technical Institute also operates a satellite campus in Boone.\n\"Horn in the West\" is a dramatization of the life and times of the early settlers of the mountain area. It features Daniel Boone as one of its characters, and has been performed in an outdoor amphitheater near the town every summer since 1952, except for when COVID-19 necessitated canceling the 2020 performances. \nThe original actor in the role of \"Daniel Boone\" was Ned Austin. His \"Hollywood Star\" stands on a pedestal on King Street in downtown Boone. He was followed in the role by Glenn Causey, who portrayed the rugged frontiersman for 41 years, and whose image is still seen in many of the depictions of Boone featured in the area today.\nBoone is notable for being home to the Junaluska community. Located in the hills just north of Downtown Boone, a free black community has existed in the area since before the Civil War. Although integration in the mid-20th century led to many of the businesses in the neighborhood closing in favor of their downtown counterparts, descendants of the original inhabitants still live in the neighborhood. Junaluska is also home to one of the few majority-African American Mennonite Brethren congregations.\nBoone is a center for bluegrass musicians and Appalachian storytellers. Notable artists associated with Boone include the late Grammy Award-winning bluegrass guitar player Doc Watson, and the late guitarist Michael Houser, one of the founding members of and the lead guitarist for the band Widespread Panic, as well as Old Crow Medicine Show, The Blue Rags, and Eric Church, all who are Boone natives.\nThe Blair Farm, Daniel Boone Hotel, Jones House, John Smith Miller House, and US Post Office-Boone are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nGeography and climate.\nBoone is located at (36.211364, \u221281.668657) and has an elevation of 3,333 feet (1015.9 m) above sea level. An earlier survey gave the elevation as 3,332\u00a0ft and since then it has been published as having an elevation of 3,333\u00a0ft (1,016 m). Boone has the highest elevation of any town of its size (over 10,000 population) east of the Mississippi River. As such, Boone features, depending on the isotherm used, a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"), a rarity for the Southeastern United States, bordering on a subtropical highland climate (\"Cfb\") and straddles the boundary between USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 6B and 7A; the elevation also results in enhanced precipitation, with of average annual precipitation. Compared to the lower elevations of the Carolinas, winters are long and cold, with frequent sleet and snowfall. The daily average temperature in January is , which gives Boone a winter climate more similar to coastal southern New England rather than the Southeast, where a humid subtropical climate predominates. Blizzard-like conditions are not unusual during many winters. Summers are warm, but far cooler and less humid than lower regions to the south and east, with a July daily average temperature of . Boone typically receives on average nearly of snowfall annually, far higher than the lowland areas in the rest of North Carolina.\nOn January 18, 1966, the temperature fell to .\nDemographics.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 13,472 people, 4,374 households, and 1,237 families residing in the town. The population density was 2,307.0 people per square mile (890.7/km). There were 4,748 housing units at an average density of 813.0 per square mile (313.9/km). The racial makeup of the town was 93.98% White, 3.42% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 1.19% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 0.60% from two or more races. 1.64% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 4,374 households, out of which 9.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 21.0% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 71.7% were non-families. 38.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.97 and the average family size was 2.63.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 5.8% under 18, 65.9% from 18 to 24, 12.1% from 25 to 44, 9.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.1% who were 65 or older. The median age was 21 years. For every 100 females, there are 95.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $20,541, and the median income for a family was $49,762. The per capita income was $12,256. Males had a median income of $28,060 versus $20,000 for females. About 9.2% of families and 37.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.3% of those under the age of 18 and 9.1% of those 65 and older.\nMedia.\nNewspaper.\nBoone is mainly served by three local newspapers:\nA smaller newspaper, \"The Appalachian\", is Appalachian State University's campus newspaper; it is published once a week on Thursdays. In addition to the locally printed papers, a monthly entertainment pamphlet named \"Kraut Creek Revival\" has limited circulation and is funded by a Denver, NC-based newspaper.\nLaw and government.\nBoone operates under a mayor\u2013council government. The city council consists of five members. The mayor presides over the council and casts a vote on issues only in the event of a tie. , the Town Council members were: Mayor Rennie Brantz, and Councilors: Connie Ulmer (Mayor Pro-Tem), Dustin Hicks, Sam Furgiuele, Virginia Roseman and Nancy LaPlaca. \nDevelopment.\nIndustrial, commercial, and residential development in the town of Boone is a controversial issue due to its location in the mountains of Appalachia. On October 16, 2009, the town council accepted the \"Boone 2030 Land Use Plan.\" While the document itself is not in any way actual law, it is used by the town council, board of adjustment, and other committees to guide decision making as to what types of development are appropriate.\nIn 2009, the North Carolina Department of Transportation began widening 1.1 miles of U.S. 421 (King Street) to a 4-to-6-lane divided highway with a raised concrete median from U.S. 321 (Hardin Street) to east of N.C. 194 (Jefferson Road), including a new entrance and exit to the new Watauga High School, at a cost of $16.2 million. The widening has displaced 25 businesses and 63 residences east of historic downtown King Street. The project was slated to be completed by December 31, 2011, but construction continued into the spring of 2012.\nSister city.\nBoone has one sister city, as designated by Sister Cities International:"}
{"id": "4513", "revid": "41365574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4513", "title": "Banshee", "text": "A banshee ( ; Modern Irish , from , , \"woman of the fairy mound\" or \"fairy woman\") is a female spirit in Irish folklore who heralds the death of a family member, usually by wailing, shrieking, or keening. Her name is connected to the mythologically important tumuli or \"mounds\" that dot the Irish countryside, which are known as (singular ) in Old Irish.\nDescription.\nSometimes she has long streaming hair and wears a gray cloak over a green dress, and her eyes are red from continual weeping. She may be dressed in white with red hair and a ghastly complexion, according to a firsthand account by Ann, Lady Fanshawe in her \"Memoirs\". Lady Wilde in \"Ancient Legends of Ireland\" provides another:\nThe size of the banshee is another physical feature that differs between regional accounts. Though some accounts of her standing unnaturally tall are recorded, the majority of tales that describe her height state the banshee's stature as short, anywhere between one foot and four feet. Her exceptional shortness often goes alongside the description of her as an old woman, though it may also be intended to emphasize her state as a fairy creature.\nIn O'Brien's Irish- English Dictionary the entry for S\u00edth-Bhr\u00f3g states:\"hence \"bean-s\u00edghe,\" plural \"mn\u00e1-s\u00edghe,\" she-fairies or women-fairies, credulously supposed by the common people to be so affected to certain families that they are hears to sing mournful lamentations about their houses by night, whenever any of the family labours under a sickness which is to end by death, but no families which are not of an ancient &amp; noble Stock, are believed to be honoured with this fairy privilege\". Sometimes the banshee assumes the form of some sweet singing virgin of the family who died young, and has been given the mission by the invisible powers to become the harbinger of coming doom to her mortal kindred. Or she may be seen at night as a shrouded woman, crouched beneath the trees, lamenting with veiled face, or flying past in the moonlight, crying bitterly. The cry of this spirit is mournful beyond all other sounds on earth, and betokens certain death to some member of the family whenever it is heard in the silence of the night.\nKeening.\nIn Ireland and parts of Scotland, a traditional part of mourning is the keening woman (\"bean chaointe\"), who wails a lament\u2014in , (Munster dialect), (Connaught dialect) or (Ulster dialect), \"caoin\" meaning \"to weep, to wail\". This keening woman may in some cases be a professional, and the best keeners would be in high demand.\nIrish legend speaks of a lament being sung by a fairy woman, or banshee. She would sing it when a family member died or was about to die, even if the person had died far away and news of their death had not yet come. In those cases, her wailing would be the first warning the household had of the death.\nThe banshee also is a predictor of death. If someone is about to enter a situation where it is unlikely they will come out alive she will warn people by screaming or wailing, giving rise to a banshee also being known as a wailing woman.\nIt is often stated that the banshee laments only the descendants of the pure Milesian stock of Ireland, sometimes clarified as surnames prefixed with O' and Mac, and some accounts even state that each family has its own banshee. One account, however, also included the Geraldines, as they had apparently become \"more Irish than the Irish themselves,\" countering the lore ascribing banshees exclusively to those of Milesian stock. Another exception was the Rossmore banshee which supposedly heralded the death of a member of the family of Baron Rossmore, whose ancestry was predominantly Scottish and Dutch.\nWhen several banshees appear at once, it indicates the death of someone great or holy. The tales sometimes recounted that the woman, though called a fairy, was a ghost, often of a specific murdered woman, or a mother who died in childbirth.\nOrigin.\nMost, though not all, surnames associated with banshees have the \"\u00d3\" or \"Mc/Mac\" prefix - that is, surnames of Goidelic origin, indicating a family native to the Insular Celtic lands rather than those of the Norse, English, or Norman. Accounts reach as far back as 1380 to the publication of the \"Cathreim Thoirdhealbhaigh\" (\"Triumphs of Torlough\") by Sean mac Craith. Mentions of banshees can also be found in Norman literature of that time.\nThe Ua Briain banshee is thought to be named Aibell and the ruler of 25 other banshees who would always be at her attendance. It is possible that this particular story is the source of the idea that the wailing of numerous banshees signifies the death of a great person.\nIn some parts of Leinster, she is referred to as the \"bean chaointe\" (keening woman) whose wail can be so piercing that it shatters glass. In Scottish folklore, a similar creature is known as the bean nighe or \"ban nigheachain\" (little washerwoman) or \"nigheag na h-\u00e0th\" (little washer at the ford) and is seen washing the bloodstained clothes or armour of those who are about to die. In Welsh folklore, a similar creature is known as the cyhyraeth.\nIn popular culture.\nBanshees, or creatures based upon them, have appeared in many forms in popular culture."}
{"id": "4514", "revid": "784330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4514", "title": "Genetically modified maize", "text": "Genetically modified maize (corn) is a genetically modified crop. Specific maize strains have been genetically engineered to express agriculturally-desirable traits, including resistance to pests and to herbicides. Maize strains with both traits are now in use in multiple countries. GM maize has also caused controversy with respect to possible health effects, impact on other insects and impact on other plants via gene flow. One strain, called Starlink, was approved only for animal feed in the US but was found in food, leading to a series of recalls starting in 2000.\nMarketed products.\nHerbicide-resistant maize.\nCorn varieties resistant to glyphosate herbicides were first commercialized in 1996 by Monsanto, and are known as \"Roundup Ready Corn\". They tolerate the use of Roundup. Bayer CropScience developed \"Liberty Link Corn\" that is resistant to glufosinate. Pioneer Hi-Bred has developed and markets corn hybrids with tolerance to imidazoline herbicides under the trademark \"Clearfield\" \u2013 though in these hybrids, the herbicide-tolerance trait was bred using tissue culture selection and the chemical mutagen ethyl methanesulfonate, not genetic engineering. Consequently, the regulatory framework governing the approval of transgenic crops does not apply for Clearfield.\nAs of 2011, herbicide-resistant GM corn was grown in 14 countries. By 2012, 26 varieties of herbicide-resistant GM maize were authorised for import into the European Union., but such imports remain controversial. Cultivation of herbicide-resistant corn in the EU provides substantial farm-level benefits.\nInsect-resistant corn.\nBt corn is a variant of maize that has been genetically altered to express one or more proteins from the bacterium \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" including Delta endotoxins. The protein is poisonous to certain insect pests. Spores of the bacillus are widely used in organic gardening, although GM corn is not considered organic. The European corn borer causes about a billion dollars in damage to corn crops each year.\nIn recent years, traits have been added to ward off corn ear worms and root worms, the latter of which annually causes about a billion dollars in damages.\nThe Bt protein is expressed throughout the plant. When a vulnerable insect eats the Bt-containing plant, the protein is activated in its gut, which is alkaline. In the alkaline environment, the protein partially unfolds and is cut by other proteins, forming a toxin that paralyzes the insect's digestive system and forms holes in the gut wall. The insect stops eating within a few hours and eventually starves.\nIn 1996, the first GM maize producing a Bt Cry protein was approved, which killed the European corn borer and related species; subsequent Bt genes were introduced that killed corn rootworm larvae.\nApproved Bt genes include single and stacked (event names bracketed) configurations of: Cry1A.105 (MON89034), CryIAb (MON810), CryIF (1507), Cry2Ab (MON89034), Cry3Bb1 (MON863 and MON88017), Cry34Ab1 (59122), Cry35Ab1 (59122), mCry3A (MIR604), and Vip3A (MIR162), in both corn and cotton. Corn genetically modified to produce VIP was first approved in the US in 2010.\nIn 2018 a study found that Bt-corn protected nearby fields of non-Bt corn and nearby vegetable crops, reducing the use of pesticides on those crops. Data from 1976-1996 (before Bt corn was widespread) was compared to data after it was adopted (1996-2016). They examined levels of the European corn borer and corn earworm. Their larvae eat a variety of crops, including peppers and green beans. Between 1992 and 2016, the amount of insecticide applied to New Jersey pepper fields decreased by 85 percent. Another factor was the introduction of more effective pesticides that were applied less often.\nSweet Corn.\nGM sweet corn varieties include \"Attribute\", the brand name for insect-resistant sweet corn developed by Syngenta and Performance Series\u2122 insect-resistant sweet corn developed by Monsanto.\nDrought-resistant maize.\nIn 2013 Monsanto launched the first transgenic drought tolerance trait in a line of corn hybrids called DroughtGard. The MON 87460 trait is provided by the insertion of the cspB gene from the soil microbe \"Bacillus subtilis\"; it was approved by the USDA in 2011 and by China in 2013.\nMaize with increased nutritional value.\nResearch has been done on adding a single \"E. coli\" gene to maize to enable it to be grown with an essential amino acid (methionine).\nHealth Safety.\nIn regular corn crops, insects promote fungal colonization by creating \"wounds,\" or holes, in corn kernels. These wounds are favored by fungal spores for germination, which subsequently leads to mycotoxin accumulation in the crop that can be carcinogenic and toxic to humans and other animals. This can prove to be especially devastating in developing countries with drastic climate patterns such as high temperatures, which favor the development of toxic fungi. In addition, higher mycotoxin levels leads to market rejection or reduced market prices for the grain. GM corn crops encounter fewer insect attacks, and thus, have lower concentrations of mycotoxins. Fewer insect attacks also keep corn ears from being damaged, which increases overall yields.\nProducts in development.\nIn 2007, South African researchers announced the production of transgenic maize resistant to maize streak virus (MSV), although it has not been released as a product.\nWhile breeding cultivars for resistance to MSV isn't done in the public, the private sector, international research centers, and national programmes have done all of the breeding.\nAs of 2014, there have been a few MSV-tolerant cultivars released in Africa. A private company Seedco has released 5 MSV cultivars.\nRefuges.\nUS Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations require farmers who plant Bt corn to plant non-Bt corn nearby (called a refuge) to provide a location to harbor vulnerable pests. Typically, 20% of corn in a grower's fields must be refuge; refuge must be at least 0.5 miles from Bt corn for lepidopteran pests, and refuge for corn rootworm must at least be adjacent to a Bt field.\nThe theory behind these refuges is to slow the evolution of resistance to the pesticide. EPA regulations also require seed companies to train farmers how to maintain refuges, to collect data on the refuges and to report that data to the EPA. A study of these reports found that from 2003 to 2005 farmer compliance with keeping refuges was above 90%, but that by 2008 approximately 25% of Bt corn farmers did not keep refuges properly, raising concerns that resistance would develop.\nUnmodified crops received most of the economic benefits of Bt corn in the US in 1996\u20132007, because of the overall reduction of pest populations. This reduction came because females laid eggs on modified and unmodified strains alike.\nSeed bags containing both Bt and refuge seed have been approved by the EPA in the United States. These seed mixtures were marketed as \"Refuge in a Bag\" (RIB) to increase farmer compliance with refuge requirements and reduce additional work needed at planting from having separate Bt and refuge seed bags on hand. The EPA approved a lower percentage of refuge seed in these seed mixtures ranging from 5 to 10%. This strategy is likely to reduce the likelihood of Bt-resistance occurring for corn rootworm, but may increase the risk of resistance for lepidopteran pests, such as European corn borer. Increased concerns for resistance with seed mixtures include partially resistant larvae on a Bt plant being able to move to a susceptible plant to survive or cross pollination of refuge pollen on to Bt plants that can lower the amount of Bt expressed in kernels for ear feeding insects.\nResistance.\nResistant strains of the European corn borer have developed in areas with defective or absent refuge management.\nIn November 2009, Monsanto scientists found the pink bollworm had become resistant to first-generation Bt cotton in parts of Gujarat, India \u2013 that generation expresses one Bt gene, \"Cry1Ac\". This was the first instance of Bt resistance confirmed by Monsanto anywhere in the world. Bollworm resistance to first generation Bt cotton has been identified in Australia, China, Spain, and the United States. In 2012, a Florida field trial demonstrated that army worms were resistant to pesticide-containing GM corn produced by Dupont-Dow; armyworm resistance was first discovered in Puerto Rico in 2006, prompting Dow and DuPont to voluntarily stop selling the product on the island.\nRegulation.\nRegulation of GM crops varies between countries, with some of the most-marked differences occurring between the US and Europe. Regulation varies in a given country depending on intended uses.\nControversy.\nThere is a scientific consensus that currently available food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food, but that each GM food needs to be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction. Nonetheless, members of the public are much less likely than scientists to perceive GM foods as safe. The legal and regulatory status of GM foods varies by country, with some nations banning or restricting them, and others permitting them with widely differing degrees of regulation.\nThe scientific rigor of the studies regarding human health has been disputed due to alleged lack of independence and due to conflicts of interest involving governing bodies and some of those who perform and evaluate the studies.\nGM crops provide a number of ecological benefits, but there are also concerns for their overuse, stalled research outside of the Bt seed industry, proper management and issues with Bt resistance arising from their misuse.\nCritics have objected to GM crops on ecological, economic and health grounds. The economic issues derive from those organisms that are subject to intellectual property law, mostly patents. The first generation of GM crops lose patent protection beginning in 2015. Monsanto has claimed it will not pursue farmers who retain seeds of off-patent varieties. These controversies have led to litigation, international trade disputes, protests and to restrictive legislation in most countries.\nEffects on nontarget insects.\nCritics claim that Bt proteins could target predatory and other beneficial or harmless insects as well as the targeted pest. These proteins have been used as organic sprays for insect control in France since 1938 and the USA since 1958 with no ill effects on the environment reported. While \"cyt\" proteins are toxic towards the insect order Diptera (flies), certain \"cry\" proteins selectively target lepidopterans (moths and butterflies), while other \"cyt\" selectively target Coleoptera. As a toxic mechanism, \"cry\" proteins bind to specific receptors on the membranes of mid-gut (epithelial) cells, resulting in rupture of those cells. Any organism that lacks the appropriate gut receptors cannot be affected by the \"cry\" protein, and therefore Bt. Regulatory agencies assess the potential for the transgenic plant to impact nontarget organisms before approving commercial release.\nA 1999 study found that in a lab environment, pollen from Bt maize dusted onto milkweed could harm the monarch butterfly. Several groups later studied the phenomenon in both the field and the laboratory, resulting in a risk assessment that concluded that any risk posed by the corn to butterfly populations under real-world conditions was negligible. A 2002 review of the scientific literature concluded that \"the commercial large-scale cultivation of current Bt\u2013maize hybrids did not pose a significant risk to the monarch population\". A 2007 review found that \"nontarget invertebrates are generally more abundant in Bt cotton and Bt maize fields than in nontransgenic fields managed with insecticides. However, in comparison with insecticide-free control fields, certain nontarget taxa are less abundant in Bt fields.\"\nGene flow.\nGene flow is the transfer of genes and/or alleles from one species to another. Concerns focus on the interaction between GM and other maize varieties in Mexico, and of gene flow into refuges.\nIn 2009 the government of Mexico created a regulatory pathway for genetically modified maize, but because Mexico is the center of diversity for maize, gene flow could affect a large fraction of the world's maize strains. A 2001 report in \"Nature\" presented evidence that Bt maize was cross-breeding with unmodified maize in Mexico. The data in this paper was later described as originating from an artifact. \"Nature\" later stated, \"the evidence available is not sufficient to justify the publication of the original paper\". A 2005 large-scale study failed to find any evidence of contamination in Oaxaca. However, other authors also found evidence of cross-breeding between natural maize and transgenic maize.\nA 2004 study found Bt protein in kernels of refuge corn.\nIn 2017, a large-scale study found \"pervasive presence of transgenes and glyphosate in maize-derived food in Mexico\"\nFood.\nThe French High Council of Biotechnologies Scientific Committee reviewed the 2009 Vend\u00f4mois \"et al.\" study and concluded that it \"..presents no admissible scientific element likely to ascribe any haematological, hepatic or renal toxicity to the three re-analysed GMOs.\" However, the French government applies the precautionary principle with respect to GMOs.\nA review by Food Standards Australia New Zealand and others of the same study concluded that the results were due to chance alone.\nA 2011 Canadian study looked at the presence of CryAb1 protein (BT toxin) in non-pregnant women, pregnant women and fetal blood. All groups had detectable levels of the protein, including 93% of pregnant women and 80% of fetuses at concentrations of 0.19 \u00b1 0.30 and 0.04 \u00b1 0.04 mean \u00b1 SD ng/ml, respectively. The paper did not discuss safety implications or find any health problems. The paper was found to be unconvincing by multiple authors and organizations. In a swine model, Cry1Ab-specific antibodies were not detected in pregnant sows or their offspring and no negative effects from feeding Bt maize to pregnant sows were observed.\nIn January 2013, the European Food Safety Authority released all data submitted by Monsanto in relation to the 2003 authorisation of maize genetically modified for glyphosate tolerance.\nStarlink corn recalls.\nStarLink contains Cry9C, which had not previously been used in a GM crop. Starlink's creator, Plant Genetic Systems had applied to the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to market Starlink for use in animal feed and in human food. However, because the Cry9C protein lasts longer in the digestive system than other Bt proteins, the EPA had concerns about its allergenicity, and PGS did not provide sufficient data to prove that Cry9C was not allergenic. As a result, PGS split its application into separate permits for use in food and use in animal feed. Starlink was approved by the EPA for use in animal feed only in May 1998.\nStarLink corn was subsequently found in food destined for consumption by humans in the US, Japan, and South Korea. This corn became the subject of the widely publicized Starlink corn recall, which started when Taco Bell-branded taco shells sold in supermarkets were found to contain the corn. Sales of StarLink seed were discontinued. The registration for Starlink varieties was voluntarily withdrawn by Aventis in October 2000. Pioneer had been bought by AgrEvo which then became Aventis CropScience at the time of the incident, which was later bought by Bayer.\nFifty-one people reported adverse effects to the FDA; US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), which determined that 28 of them were possibly related to Starlink. However, the CDC studied the blood of these 28 individuals and concluded there was no evidence of hypersensitivity to the Starlink Bt protein.\nA subsequent review of these tests by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act Scientific Advisory Panel points out that while \"the negative results decrease the probability that the Cry9C protein is the cause of allergic symptoms in the individuals examined ... in the absence of a positive control and questions regarding the sensitivity and specificity of the assay, it is not possible to assign a negative predictive value to this.\"\nThe US corn supply has been monitored for the presence of the Starlink Bt proteins since 2001.\nIn 2005, aid sent by the UN and the US to Central American nations also contained some StarLink corn. The nations involved, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala refused to accept the aid.\nCorporate espionage.\nOn 19 December 2013 six Chinese citizens were indicted in Iowa on charges of plotting to steal genetically modified seeds worth tens of millions of dollars from Monsanto and DuPont. Mo Hailong, director of international business at the Beijing Dabeinong Technology Group Co., part of the Beijing-based DBN Group, was accused of stealing trade secrets after he was found digging in an Iowa cornfield."}
{"id": "4516", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4516", "title": "Body substance isolation", "text": "Body substance isolation is a practice of isolating all body substances (blood, urine, feces, tears, etc.) of individuals undergoing medical treatment, particularly emergency medical treatment of those who might be infected with illnesses such as HIV, or hepatitis so as to reduce as much as possible the chances of transmitting these illnesses. BSI is similar in nature to universal precautions, but goes further in isolating workers from pathogens, including substances now known to carry HIV.\nPlace of body substance isolation practice in history.\nPractice of Universal precautions was introduced in 1985\u201388. In 1987, the practice of Universal precautions was adjusted by a set of rules known as body substance isolation. In 1996, both practices were replaced by the latest approach known as standard precautions (health care). Nowadays and in isolation, practice of body substance isolation has just historical significance.\nBody substance isolation went further than universal precautions in isolating workers from pathogens, including substances now currently known to carry HIV. These pathogens fall into two broad categories, bloodborne (carried in the body fluids) and airborne. The practice of BSI was common in Pre-Hospital care and emergency medical services due to the often unknown nature of the patient and his/her disease or medical conditions. It was a part of the National Standards Curriculum for Prehospital Providers and Firefighters.\nTypes of body substance isolation included:\nIt was postulated that BSI precautions should be practiced in environment where treaters were exposed to bodily fluids, such as:\nSuch infection control techniques that were recommended following the AIDS outbreak in the 1980s. Every patient was treated as if infected and therefore precautions were taken to minimize risk. Other conditions which called for minimizing risks with BSI:\nor any combination of the above."}
{"id": "4517", "revid": "2176705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4517", "title": "Boudica", "text": "Boudica or Boudicca (, ), also known as Boadicea (, ) or Boudicea, and in Welsh as (), was a queen of the British Celtic Iceni tribe who led an uprising against the conquering forces of the Roman Empire in AD 60 or 61. According to Roman sources, shortly after the uprising failed, she poisoned herself or died of her wounds, although there is no actual evidence of her fate. She is considered a British folk hero.\nBoudica's husband Prasutagus, with whom she had two children whose names are unknown, ruled as a nominally independent ally of Rome, and left his kingdom jointly to his daughters and to the Roman emperor in his will. However, when he died, his will was ignored, and the kingdom was annexed and his property taken. According to Tacitus, Boudica was flogged and her daughters raped. Cassius Dio explains Boudica's response by saying that previous imperial donations to influential Britons were confiscated and the Roman financier and philosopher Seneca called in the loans he had forced on the reluctant Celtic Britons.\nIn AD 60 or 61, when the Roman governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus was campaigning on the island of Mona (modern Anglesey) on the northwest coast of Wales, Boudica led the Iceni, the Trinovantes, and others in revolt. They destroyed Camulodunum (modern Colchester), earlier the capital of the Trinovantes but at that time a , a settlement for discharged Roman soldiers and site of a temple to the former Emperor Claudius. Upon hearing of the revolt, Suetonius hurried to Londinium (modern London), the 20-year-old commercial settlement that was the rebels' next target. He lacked sufficient numbers to defend the settlement, and he evacuated and abandoned Londinium. Boudica led a very large army of Iceni, Trinovantes, and others against a detachment of the , defeating them, and burning Londinium and Verulamium.\nAn estimated 70,000\u201380,000 Romans and British were killed in the three cities by those following Boudica, many by torture. Suetonius, meanwhile, regrouped his forces, possibly in the West Midlands; despite being heavily outnumbered, he decisively defeated the Britons. The crisis caused Nero to consider withdrawing all Roman forces from Britain, but Suetonius's victory over Boudica confirmed Roman control of the province. Boudica then either killed herself to avoid capture (according to Tacitus), or died of illness (according to Cassius Dio).\nInterest in these events was revived in the English Renaissance and led to Boudica's fame in the Victorian era. Boudica has remained an important cultural symbol in the United Kingdom.\nName.\nBoudica has been known by several versions of her name. In the 16th century, Raphael Holinshed called her Voadicia, while Edmund Spenser called her Bunduca, a variation of which was used in the popular Jacobean play \"Bonduca\" of 1612. In the 18th century, William Cowper's poem \"Boadicea, an ode\" (1782) popularised an alternative version of the name. From the 19th century until the late 20th century, Boadicea was the most common version of the name, which is probably derived from a mistranscription when a manuscript of Tacitus was copied in the Middle Ages.\nHer name was clearly spelled Boudicca in the best manuscripts of Tacitus. In the later, and probably secondary, epitome of Cassius Dio in Greek she was , , and .\nKenneth Jackson concludes, based on the later development in Welsh () and Irish (), that the name derives from the Proto-Celtic feminine adjective \"*boud\u012bk\u0101\" 'victorious', that in turn is derived from the Celtic word \"*boud\u0101\" 'victory' (cf. Irish (Classical Irish ) 'victory', Scottish Gaelic 'victorious; effective', Welsh , 'victorious', 'victory'), and that the correct spelling of the name in Common Brittonic (the British Celtic language) is \"Boudica\", pronounced . The Gaulish version is attested in inscriptions as Boudiga in Bordeaux, Boudica in Lusitania, and Bodicca in Algeria.\nThe closest English equivalent to the vowel in the first syllable is the \"ow\" in \"bow-and-arrow\". John Rhys suggested that the most comparable Latin name, in meaning only, would be \"Victorina\".\nHistory.\nHistorical sources.\nTacitus took a particular interest in Britain as his father-in-law Gnaeus Julius Agricola served there three times (and was the subject of his first book). Agricola was a military tribune under Suetonius Paulinus, which almost certainly gave Tacitus an eyewitness source for Boudica's revolt. Cassius Dio's account is only known from an epitome, and his sources are uncertain. He is generally agreed to have based his account on that of Tacitus, but he simplifies the sequence of events and adds details, such as the calling in of loans, that Tacitus does not mention.\nBackground.\nIt is agreed that Boudica was of royal descent. Cassius Dio describes her as tall, with tawny hair hanging down to below her waist, a harsh voice and a piercing glare. He writes that she habitually wore a large golden necklace (perhaps a torc), a colourful tunic, and a thick cloak fastened by a brooch.\nBoudica's husband, Prasutagus, was the king of the Iceni, a people who inhabited roughly what is now Norfolk. During Claudius's conquest of southern Britain in AD 43, the Iceni initially allied with Rome. They were proud of their independence, and had revolted in AD 47 when the then Roman governor Publius Ostorius Scapula planned to disarm all the peoples in the area of Britain under Roman control following a number of local uprisings. Ostorius defeated them and went on to put down other uprisings around Britain. The Iceni remained independent under Prasutagus. It is unknown whether he became the king only after Ostorius's defeat of the Iceni; Tacitus does not date the start of Prasutagus's reign and first mentioned him, as a long-reigning king who had died, when he wrote about Boudica's rebellion.\nTacitus mentions longstanding reasons for the Trinovantes to hate Rome: \"It was against the veterans that their hatred was most intense. For these new settlers in the colony of Camulodunum drove people out of their houses, ejected them from their farms, called them captives and slaves ...\"\nThe immediate cause of the rebellion was gross mistreatment by the Romans. Tacitus wrote,\"The Icenian king Prasutagus, celebrated for his long prosperity, had named the emperor his heir, together with his two daughters; an act of deference which he thought would place his kingdom and household beyond the risk of injury. The result was contrary \u2013 so much so that his kingdom was pillaged by centurions, his household by slaves; as though they had been prizes of war.\" He added that Boudica was lashed, her two daughters were raped, and that the estates of the leading Iceni men were confiscated. Cassius Dio wrote: \"An excuse for the war was found in the confiscation of the sums of money that Claudius had given to the foremost Britons; for these sums, as Decianus Catus, the procurator of the island maintained, were to be paid back.\" He also said that another reason was \"the fact that Seneca, in the hope of receiving a good rate of interest, had lent to the islanders 40,000,000 sesterces that they did not want, and had afterwards called in this loan all at once and had resorted to severe measures in exacting it.\"\nUprising.\nInitial actions.\nIn AD 60 or 61, while the current governor, Gaius Suetonius Paulinus, was leading a campaign against the island of (modern Anglesey) in the north of Wales, which was a refuge for British rebels and a stronghold of the druids, the Iceni conspired with their neighbours the Trinovantes, amongst others, to revolt. Boudica was chosen as their leader. Andraste, a British goddess of victory.\nThe rebels' first target was Camulodunum (modern Colchester), the former Trinovantian capital and, at that time, a Roman . The Roman veterans who had been settled there had mistreated the locals. The Romans, with only two hundred auxiliary troops along with the city's guard, were captured and destroyed. The last defenders were besieged in the temple for two days before it fell. A bronze statue to the emperor Nero, which probably stood in front of the temple, was decapitated and its head taken as a trophy by Boudica's army. The future governor Quintus Petillius Cerialis, then commanding the Legio IX \"Hispana\", attempted to relieve the city, but suffered an overwhelming defeat. The infantry with him were all killed \u2013 only the commander and some of his cavalry escaped. After this defeat, Catus Decianus fled to Gaul.\nWhen news of the rebellion reached Suetonius, he hurried along Watling Street through hostile territory to Londinium. Suetonius considered giving battle there, but considering his lack of numbers and chastened by Petillius's defeat, decided to sacrifice the city to save the province. \nLondinium was abandoned to the rebels, who burnt it down, torturing and killing anyone who had not evacuated with Suetonius. The \"municipium\" of Verulamium (modern St Albans) was next to be destroyed, although the full extent of its destruction is unclear.\nIn the three settlements destroyed, between seventy and eighty thousand people are said to have been killed. Tacitus says that the Britons had no interest in taking or selling prisoners, only in slaughter by gibbet, fire, or cross. Dio's account gives more detail; that the noblest women were impaled on spikes and had their breasts cut off and sewn to their mouths, \"to the accompaniment of sacrifices, banquets, and wanton behaviour\" in sacred places, particularly the groves of Andraste.\nRomans rally.\nWhile Boudica's army continued their assault in Verulamium (St. Albans), Suetonius regrouped his forces. According to Tacitus, he amassed a force including his own Legio XIV \"Gemina\", some \"vexillationes\" (detachments) of the XX \"Valeria Victrix\", and any available auxiliaries. The prefect of , Poenius Postumus, ignored the call, and a fourth legion, , had been routed trying to relieve Camulodunum, but nonetheless the governor now commanded an army of almost ten thousand men.\nSuetonius took a stand at an unidentified location, probably somewhere along the Roman road now known as Watling Street, in a defile with a wood behind him\u00a0\u2013 but his men were heavily outnumbered. According to Dio the rebels numbered 230\u2013300 thousand. Boudica's army was crushed and according to Tacitus neither the women or the animals were spared.\nThe Roman slaughter of women and animals was unusual, as they could have been sold for profit, and point to the mutual enmity between the two sides. According to Tacitus in his \"Annals\", Boudica poisoned herself, though in the which was written almost twenty years before the \"Annals\" he mentions nothing of suicide and attributes the end of the revolt to (\"indolence\"); Dio says she fell sick and died and then was given a lavish burial.\nCatus Decianus, who had fled to Gaul, was replaced by Gaius Julius Alpinus Classicianus. Suetonius conducted punitive operations, but criticism by Classicianus led to an investigation headed by Nero's freedman Polyclitus. Fearing Suetonius's actions would provoke further rebellion, Nero replaced the governor with the more conciliatory Publius Petronius Turpilianus. The historian Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus tells us the crisis had almost persuaded Nero to abandon Britain. No historical records tell what had happened to Boudica's two daughters.\nLocation of her defeat.\nThe location of Boudica's defeat is unknown. Some historians favour a site somewhere along the Roman road now known as Watling Street. Kevin K. Carroll suggests a site close to High Cross, Leicestershire, on the junction of Watling Street and the Fosse Way, which would have allowed the Legio II Augusta, based at Exeter, to rendezvous with the rest of Suetonius's forces, had they not failed to do so. Manduessedum (Mancetter), near the modern town of Atherstone in Warwickshire, has also been suggested, and according to legend \"The Rampart\" near Messing, Essex and Ambresbury Banks in Epping Forest. More recently, a discovery of Roman artefacts in Kings Norton close to Metchley Camp has suggested another possibility, one individual has suggested the Cuttle Mill area of Paulerspury in Northamptonshire, where fragments of Roman pottery from the 1st century have been found.\nIn 2009, it was suggested that the Iceni were returning to East Anglia along the Icknield Way when they encountered the Roman army in the vicinity of Arbury Banks, Hertfordshire. In March 2010, evidence was published suggesting the site may be located at Church Stowe, Northamptonshire.\nLegacy and legends.\nOne of the earliest possible mentions of Boudica (excluding Tacitus' and Dio's accounts) was the 6th-century work \"On the Ruin and Conquest of Britain\" by the British monk Gildas. In it, he demonstrates his knowledge of a female leader whom he describes as a \"treacherous lionness\" who \"butchered the governors who had been left to give fuller voice and strength to the endeavours of Roman rule.\" It is likely that Gildas is referring to Boudica in this statement. Polydore Vergil may have reintroduced her to British history as \"Voadicea\" in 1534. Raphael Holinshed also included her story in his \"Chronicles\" (1577) based on Tacitus and Dio.\n16th\u201318th centuries.\nDuring the reign of Elizabeth I, Boudica began to be seen as an important figure in British history. During the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, the works of Tacitus were rediscovered, and therefore interest in Boudica and her rebellion was triggered. It has been said that the Elizabethan era was a time where her popularity could flourish as Elizabeth, in 1588, was required to defend Britain from a possible invasion of Spanish Armada. Boudica had once defended Britain as well, however from the Romans. In 1610, Shakespeare's younger contemporaries Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher to write a play, \"Bonduca\", said to have been inspired by Holinshed's \"Chronicles.\" A version of that play called \"Bonduca, or the British Heroine\" was set to music by Henry Purcell in 1695; one of the choruses, \"Britons, Strike Home!\", became a popular patriotic song in the 18th and 19th centuries. William Cowper wrote a popular poem, \"Boadicea, an ode\", in 1782.\n19th-20th century.\nBritain.\nIt was in the Victorian era that Boudica's fame took on legendary proportions as Queen Victoria came to be seen as Boudica's \"namesake\", their names being identical in meaning. Victoria's Poet Laureate, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, wrote a poem, \"Boadicea\", and several ships were named after her. \"Boadicea and Her Daughters\", a statue of the queen in her war chariot (anachronistically furnished with scythes after the Persian fashion) was executed by Thomas Thornycroft over the 1850s and 1860s with the encouragement of Prince Albert, who lent his horses for use as models. Thornycroft exhibited the head separately in 1864. It was cast in bronze in 1902, 17 years after Thornycroft's death, by his son Sir John, who presented it to the London County Council. They erected it on a plinth on the Victoria Embankment next to Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament, inscribed with the following lines from Cowper's poem:&lt;poem&gt;\nRegions Caesar never knew\nThy posterity shall sway.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nA statue of her now stands guard over the city she razed to the ground. The area of King's Cross, London was previously a village known as Battle Bridge which was an ancient crossing of the River Fleet. The original name of the bridge was Broad Ford Bridge. The name \"Battle Bridge\" led to a tradition that this was the site of a major battle between the Romans and the Iceni tribe led by Boudica. The tradition is not supported by any historical evidence and is rejected by modern historians. However, Lewis Spence's 1937 book \"Boadicea \u2013 warrior queen of the Britons\" went so far as to include a map showing the positions of the opposing armies. There is a belief that she was buried between platforms 9 and 10 in King's Cross station in London, England. There is no evidence for this and it is probably a post-World War II invention. At Colchester Town Hall, a life-sized statue of Boudica stands on the south facade, sculpted by L J Watts in 1902; another depiction of her is in a stained glass window by Clayton and Bell in the council chamber.\nBoudica was adopted by the Suffragettes as one of the symbols of the campaign for women's suffrage. In 1908, a \"Boadicea Banner\" was carried in several National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies marches. She appears as character in \"A Pageant of Great Women\" written by Cicely Hamilton, which opened at the Scala Theatre, London, in November 1909 before a national tour, and she was described in a 1909 pamphlet as \"the eternal feminine... the guardian of the hearth, the avenger of its wrongs upon the defacer and the despoiler\". \nWales.\n\"Buddug\" has yet to be conclusively identified within the canon of medieval Welsh literature and she is not apparent in the , the or Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"History of the Kings of Britain\".\nBoudica (Buddug) was also chosen by the Welsh public as one of eleven statues of historical figures to be included in the Marble Hall at Cardiff City Hall. The statue was unveiled by David Lloyd George on 27 October 1916. Unlike the London chariot statue, it shows her as a more motherly figure without warrior trappings. The popularity of Buddug alongside other Welsh heroes such as Saint David and Owain Glynd\u0175r was surprising to manyof the statues, Buddug is the most ancient, the only female, and the only antecedent from outside the modern Welsh nation.\n21st century.\nPermanent exhibitions describing the Boudican Revolt are at the Museum of London, Colchester Castle Museum and the Verulamium Museum. At the Norwich Castle Museum, a dedicated gallery includes a reproduction of an Iceni chariot. A long distance footpath called Boudica's Way passes through countryside between Norwich and Diss in Norfolk."}
{"id": "4518", "revid": "40445031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4518", "title": "Borneo", "text": "Borneo (; ) is the third-largest island in the world and the largest in Asia. At the geographic centre of Maritime Southeast Asia, in relation to major Indonesian islands, it is located north of Java, west of Sulawesi, and east of Sumatra.\nThe island is politically divided among three countries: Malaysia and Brunei in the north, and Indonesia to the south. It is the only island in the world to be politically administered by three countries at a time. Approximately 73% of the island is Indonesian territory. In the north, the East Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak make up about 26% of the island. Additionally, the Malaysian federal territory of Labuan is situated on a small island just off the coast of Borneo. The sovereign state of Brunei, located on the north coast, comprises about 1% of Borneo's land area. A little more than half of the island is in the Northern Hemisphere including Brunei and the Malaysian portion, while the Indonesian portion spans both the Northern and Southern hemispheres.\nBorneo is home to one of the oldest rainforests in the world.\nIn August 2019, Indonesian president Joko Widodo announced a plan to move the capital of Indonesia from Jakarta to a newly established location in the East Kalimantan province in Borneo.\nEtymology.\nThe island is known by many names. Internationally it is known as \"Borneo\", derived from European contact with the Brunei kingdom in the 16th century during the Age of Exploration. It is very clear on a map from around 1601 that Brunei city is referred to as Borneo, and the whole island is also labelled Borneo. The name \"Borneo\" may derive from the Sanskrit word \"\" (), meaning either \"water\" or Varuna, the Hindu god of rain.\nThe local population called it \"Klemantan\" or \"Kalimantan,\" which was derived from the Sanskrit word \"Kalamanthana,\" meaning \"burning weather\" possibly to describe its hot and humid tropical weather. Indonesian historian Slamet Muljana suggests that the name \"Kalamanthana\" was derived from Sanskrit terms \"kala\" (time or season) and \"manthana\" (churning, kindling or creating fire by friction), which possibly describes the heat of the weather.\nIn earlier times, the island was known by other names. In 977, Chinese records began to use the term \"Bo-ni\" to refer to Borneo. In 1225, it was also mentioned by the Chinese official Chau Ju-Kua (\u8d99\u6c5d\u9002). The Javanese manuscript Nagarakretagama, written by Majapahit court poet Mpu Prapanca in 1365, mentioned the island as \"Nusa Tanjungnagara\", which means the island of the Tanjungpura Kingdom. Nevertheless, the same manuscript also mentioned \"Barune\" (Brunei) and other polities on the island.\nGeography.\nGeology.\nBorneo was formed through Mesozoic accretion of microcontinental fragments, ophiolite terranes and island arc crust onto a Paleozoic continental core. At the beginning of the Cenozoic Borneo formed a promontory of Sundaland which partly separated from Asian mainland by the proto-South China Sea. The oceanic part of the proto-South China Sea was subducted during the Paleogene period and a large accretionary complex formed along the northwestern of the island of Borneo. In the early Miocene uplift of the accretionary complex occurred as a result of underthrusting of thinned continental crust in northwest. The uplift may have also resulted from shortening due to the counter-clockwise rotation of Borneo between 20 and 10 mega-annum (Ma) as a consequence of Australia-Southeast Asia collision. Large volumes of sediment were shed into basins, which scattered offshore to the west, north and east of Borneo as well into\u00b7a Neogene basin which is currently exposed in large areas of eastern and southern Sabah. In southeast Sabah, the Miocene to recent island arc terranes of the Sulu Archipelago extend onshore into Borneo with the older volcanic arc was the result of southeast dipping subduction while the younger volcanics are likely resulted from northwest dipping subduction the Celebes Sea.\nBefore sea levels rose at the end of the last Ice Age, Borneo was part of the mainland of Asia, forming, with Java and Sumatra, the upland regions of a peninsula that extended east from present day Indochina. The South China Sea and Gulf of Thailand now submerge the former low-lying areas of the peninsula. Deeper waters separating Borneo from neighbouring Sulawesi prevented a land connection to that island, creating the divide known as Wallace's Line between Asian and Australia-New Guinea biological regions. The island today is surrounded by the South China Sea to the north and northwest, the Sulu Sea to the northeast, the Celebes Sea and the Makassar Strait to the east, and the Java Sea and Karimata Strait to the south. To the west of Borneo are the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. To the south and east are islands of Indonesia: Java and Sulawesi, respectively. To the northeast are the Philippine Islands. With an area of , it is the third-largest island in the world, and is the largest island of Asia (the largest continent). Its highest point is Mount Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia, with an elevation of .\nThe largest river system is the Kapuas in West Kalimantan, with a length of . Other major rivers include the Mahakam in East Kalimantan ( long), the Barito, Kahayan, and Mendawai in South Kalimantan (, , and long respectively), Rajang in Sarawak ( long) and Kinabatangan in Sabah ( long). Borneo has significant cave systems. In Sarawak, the Clearwater Cave has one of the world's longest underground rivers while Deer Cave is home to over three million bats, with guano accumulated to over deep. The Gomantong Caves in Sabah has been dubbed as the \"Cockroach Cave\" due to the presence of millions of cockroaches inside the cave. The Gunung Mulu National Park in Sarawak and Sangkulirang-Mangkalihat Karst in East Kalimantan which particularly a karst areas contains thousands of smaller caves.\nEcology.\nThe Borneo rainforest is estimated to be around 140 million years old, making it one of the oldest rainforests in the world. It is the centre of the evolution and distribution of many endemic species of plants and animals, and the rainforest is one of the few remaining natural habitats for the endangered Bornean orangutan. It is an important refuge for many endemic forest species, including the Borneo elephant, the eastern Sumatran rhinoceros, the Bornean clouded leopard, the hose's palm civet and the dayak fruit bat.\nPeat swamp forests occupy the entire coastline of Borneo. The soil of the peat swamp is comparatively infertile, while it is known to be the home of various bird species such as the hook-billed bulbul, helmeted hornbill and rhinoceros hornbill. There are about 15,000 species of flowering plants with 3,000 species of trees (267 species are dipterocarps), 221 species of terrestrial mammals and 420 species of resident birds in Borneo. There are about 440 freshwater fish species in Borneo (about the same as Sumatra and Java combined). The Borneo river shark is known only from the Kinabatangan River. In 2010, the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) stated that 123 species have been discovered in Borneo since the \"Heart of Borneo\" agreement was signed in 2007.\nThe WWF has classified the island into seven distinct ecoregions. Most are lowland regions:\nThe highest elevations of Mount Kinabalu are home to the Kinabalu mountain alpine meadow, an alpine shrubland notable for its numerous endemic species, including many orchids.\nAccording to analysis of data from Global Forest Watch, the Indonesian portion of Borneo lost 10.7 million hectares of tree cover between 2002 and 2019, of which 4 million hectares was primary forest, compared with Malaysian Borneo's 4.4 million hectares of tree cover loss and 1.9 million hectares of primary forest cover loss. As of 2020, Indonesian Borneo accounts for 72% of the island's tree cover, Malaysian Borneo 27%, and Brunei 1%. Primary forest in Indonesia accounts for 44% of Borneo's overall tree cover.\nConservation issues.\nThe island historically had extensive rainforest cover, but the area was reduced due to heavy logging by the Indonesian and Malaysian wood industry, especially with the large demands of raw materials from industrial countries along with the conversion of forest lands for large-scale agricultural purposes. Half of the annual global tropical timber acquisition comes from Borneo. Palm oil plantations have been widely developed and are rapidly encroaching on the last remnants of primary rainforest. Forest fires since 1997, started by the locals to clear the forests for plantations were exacerbated by an exceptionally dry El Ni\u00f1o season, worsening the annual shrinkage of the rainforest. During these fires, hotspots were visible on satellite images and the resulting haze frequently affected Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia. The haze could also reach southern Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam and the Philippines as evidenced on the 2015 Southeast Asian haze.The orchid Mycaranthes farinosa is specific to this island\nTopography.\nList of highest peaks in Borneo by elevation. \nRiver System.\nList of longest river in Borneo by length.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn November 2018, scientists reported the discovery of the oldest known figurative art painting, over 40,000 (perhaps as old as 52,000) years old, of an unknown animal, in the cave of Lubang Jeriji Sal\u00e9h on the island of Borneo.\nAccording to ancient Chinese (977), Indian and Japanese manuscripts, western coastal cities of Borneo had become trading ports by the first millennium AD. In Chinese manuscripts, gold, camphor, tortoise shells, hornbill ivory, rhinoceros horn, crane crest, beeswax, lakawood (a scented heartwood and root wood of a thick liana, \"Dalbergia parviflora\"), dragon's blood, rattan, edible bird's nests and various spices were described as among the most valuable items from Borneo. The Indians named Borneo \"Suvarnabhumi\" (the land of gold) and also \"Karpuradvipa\" (Camphor Island). The Javanese named Borneo \"Puradvipa\", or Diamond Island. Archaeological findings in the Sarawak river delta reveal that the area was a thriving centre of trade between India and China from the 6th century until about 1300.\nStone pillars bearing inscriptions in the Pallava script, found in Kutai along the Mahakam River in East Kalimantan and dating to around the second half of the 4th century, constitute some of the oldest evidence of Hindu influence in Southeast Asia. By the 14th century, Borneo became a vassal state of Majapahit (in present-day Indonesia), later changing its allegiance to the Ming dynasty of China. The religion of Islam entered the island in the 10th century, following the arrival of Muslim traders who later converted many indigenous peoples in the coastal areas.\nThe Sultanate of Brunei declared independence from Majapahit following the death of Majapahit Emperor in mid-14th century. During its golden age under Bolkiah from the 15th century to the 17th century, the Bruneian Empire ruled almost the entire coastal area of Borneo (lending its name to the island due to its influence in the region) and several islands in the Philippines. During the 1450s, Shari'ful Hashem Syed Abu Bakr, an Arab born in Johor, arrived in Sulu from Malacca. In 1457, he founded the Sultanate of Sulu; he titled himself as \"Paduka Maulana Mahasari Sharif Sultan Hashem Abu Bakr\". Following their independence in 1578 from Brunei's influence, the Sulu's began to expand their thalassocracy to parts of the northern Borneo. Both the sultanates who ruled northern Borneo had traditionally engaged in trade with China by means of the frequently-arriving Chinese junks. Despite the thalassocracy of the sultanates, Borneo's interior region remained free from the rule of any kingdoms.\nBritish and Dutch control.\nSince the fall of Malacca in 1511, Portuguese merchants traded regularly with Borneo, and especially with Brunei from 1530. Having visited Brunei's capital, the Portuguese described the place as surrounded by a stone wall. While Borneo was seen as rich, the Portuguese did not make any attempts to conquer it. The Spanish visit to Brunei led to the Castilian War in 1578. The English began to trade with Sambas of southern Borneo in 1609, while the Dutch only began their trade in 1644: to Banjar and Martapura, also in the southern Borneo. The Dutch tried to settle the island of Balambangan, north of Borneo, in the second half of the 18th century, but withdrew by 1797. In 1812, the sultan in southern Borneo ceded his forts to the English East India Company. The English, led by Stamford Raffles, then tried to establish an intervention in Sambas but failed. Although they managed to defeat the Sultanate the next year and declared a blockade on all ports in Borneo except Brunei, Banjarmasin and Pontianak, the project was cancelled by the British Governor-General Lord Minto in India as it was too expensive. At the beginning of British and Dutch exploration on the island, they described the island of Borneo as full of head hunters, with the indigenous in the interior practising cannibalism, and the waters around the island infested with pirates, especially between the north eastern Borneo and the southern Philippines. The Malay and Sea Dayak pirates preyed on maritime shipping in the waters between Singapore and Hong Kong from their haven in Borneo, along with the attacks by Illanuns of the Moro Pirates from the southern Philippines, such as in the Battle off Mukah.\nThe Dutch began to intervene in the southern part of the island upon resuming contact in 1815, posting Residents to Banjarmasin, Pontianak and Sambas and Assistant-Residents to Landak and Mampawa. The Sultanate of Brunei in 1842 granted large parts of land in Sarawak to the English adventurer James Brooke, as a reward for his help in quelling a local rebellion. Brooke established the Raj of Sarawak and was recognised as its rajah after paying a fee to the Sultanate. He established a monarchy, and the Brooke dynasty (through his nephew and great-nephew) ruled Sarawak for 100 years; the leaders were known as the White Rajahs. Brooke also acquired the island of Labuan for Great Britain in 1846 through the Treaty of Labuan with the Sultan of Brunei, Omar Ali Saifuddin II on 18 December 1846. The region of northern Borneo came under the administration of North Borneo Chartered Company following the acquisition of territory from the Sultanates of Brunei and Sulu by a German businessman and adventurer named Baron von Overbeck, before it was passed to British Dent brothers (comprising Alfred Dent and Edward Dent). Further expansion by the British continued into the Borneo interior. This led the 26th Sultan of Brunei, Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin to appeal the British to halt such efforts, and as a result a Treaty of Protection was signed in 1888, rendering Brunei a British protectorate.\nBefore the acquisition by the British, the Americans also managed to establish their temporary presence in northwestern Borneo after acquiring a parcel of land from the Sultanate of Brunei. A company known as American Trading Company of Borneo was formed by Joseph William Torrey, Thomas Bradley Harris and several Chinese investors, establishing a colony named \"Ellena\" in the Kimanis area. The colony failed and was abandoned, due to denials of financial backing, especially by the US government, and to diseases and riots among the workers. Before Torrey left, he managed to sell the land to the German businessman, Overbeck. Meanwhile, the Germans under William Frederick Schuck were awarded a parcel of land in northeastern Borneo of the Sandakan Bay from the Sultanate of Sulu where he conducted business and exported large quantities of arms, opium, textiles and tobacco to Sulu before the land was also passed to Overbeck by the Sultanate.\nPrior to the recognition of Spanish presence in the Philippine archipelago, a protocol known as the Madrid Protocol of 1885 was signed between the governments of the United Kingdom, Germany and Spain in Madrid to cement Spanish influence and recognise their sovereignty over the Sultanate of Sulu\u2014in return for Spain's relinquishing its claim to the former possessions of the Sultanate in northern Borneo. The British administration then established the first railway network in northern Borneo, known as the North Borneo Railway. During this time, the British sponsored a large number of Chinese workers to migrate to northern Borneo to work in European plantation and mines, and the Dutch followed suit to increase their economic production. By 1888, North Borneo, Sarawak and Brunei in northern Borneo had become British protectorate. The area in southern Borneo was made Dutch protectorate in 1891. The Dutch who already claimed the whole Borneo were asked by Britain to delimit their boundaries between the two colonial territories to avoid further conflicts. The British and Dutch governments had signed the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824 to exchange trading ports in Malay Peninsula and Sumatra that were under their controls and assert spheres of influence. This resulted in indirectly establishing British- and Dutch-controlled areas in the north (Malay Peninsula) and south (Sumatra and Riau Islands) respectively.\nIn 1895, Marcus Samuel received a concession in the Kutei area of east Borneo, and based on oil seepages in the Mahakam River delta, Mark Abrahams struck oil in February 1897. This was the discovery of the Sanga Sanga Oil Field, a refinery was built in Balikpapan, and discovery of the Samboja Oil Field followed in 1909. In 1901, the Pamusian Oil Field was discovered on Tarakan, and the Bunyu Oil Field in 1929. Royal Dutch Shell discovered the Miri Oil Field in 1910, and the Seria Oil Field in 1929.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Japanese forces gained control and occupied most areas of Borneo from 1941 to 1945. In the first stage of the war, the British saw the Japanese advance to Borneo as motivated by political and territorial ambitions rather than economic factors. The occupation drove many people in the coastal towns to the interior, searching for food and escaping the Japanese. The Chinese residents in Borneo, especially with the Sino-Japanese War in Mainland China mostly resisted the Japanese occupation. Following the formation of resistance movements in northern Borneo such as the Jesselton Revolt, many innocent indigenous and Chinese people were executed by the Japanese for their alleged involvement.\nIn Kalimantan, the Japanese also killed many Malay intellectuals, executing all the Malay Sultans of West Kalimantan in the Pontianak incidents, together with Chinese people who were already against the Japanese for suspecting them to be threats. Sultan Muhammad Ibrahim Shafi ud-din II of Sambas was executed in 1944. The Sultanate was thereafter suspended and replaced by a Japanese council. The Japanese also set-up \"Pusat Tenaga Rakjat\" (PUTERA) in the Indonesian archipelago in 1943, although it was abolished the following year when it became too nationalistic. Some of the Indonesian nationalist like Sukarno and Hatta who had returned from Dutch exile began to co-operate with the Japanese. Shortly after his release, Sukarno became President of the Central Advisory Council, an advisory council for south Borneo, Celebes, and Lesser Sunda, set up in February 1945.\nSince the fall of Singapore, the Japanese sent several thousand of British and Australian prisoners of war to camps in Borneo such as Batu Lintang camp. From the Sandakan camp site, only six of some 2,500 prisoners survived after they were forced to march in an event known as the Sandakan Death March. In addition, of the total of 17,488 Javanese labourers brought in by the Japanese during the occupation, only 1,500 survived mainly due to starvation, harsh working conditions and maltreatment. The Dayak and other indigenous people played a role in guerrilla warfare against the occupying forces, particularly in the Kapit Division. They temporarily revived headhunting of Japanese toward the end of the war, with Allied Z Special Unit provided assistance to them. Australia contributed significantly to the liberation of Borneo. The Australian Imperial Force was sent to Borneo to fight off the Japanese. Together with other Allies, the island was completely liberated in 1945.\nRecent history.\nIn May 1945, officials in Tokyo suggested that whether northern Borneo should be included in the proposed new country of Indonesia should be separately determined based on the desires of its indigenous people and following the disposition of Malaya. Sukarno and Mohammad Yamin meanwhile continuously advocated for a Greater Indonesian republic. Towards the end of the war, Japan decided to give an early independence to a new proposed country of Indonesia on 17 July 1945, with an Independence Committee meeting scheduled for 19 August 1945. However, following the surrender of Japan to the Allied forces, the meeting was shelved. Sukarno and Hatta continued the plan by unilaterally declaring independence, although the Dutch tried to retake their colonial possession in Borneo. The southern part of the island achieved its independence through the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence on 17 August 1945. The southern part saw guerilla conflicts followed by Dutch blockade to cut supplies for nationalist within the region. While nationalist guerrillas supporting the inclusion of southern Borneo in the new Indonesian republic were active in Ketapang, and to lesser extent in Sambas where they rallied with the red-white flag which became the flag of Indonesia, most of the Chinese residents in southern Borneo expected to be liberate by Chinese Nationalist troops from Mainland China and to integrate their districts as an overseas province of China. Meanwhile, Sarawak and Sabah in northern Borneo became separate British crown colonies in 1946.\nIn 1961, Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of the independent Federation of Malaya desired to unite Malaya, the British colonies of Sarawak, North Borneo, Singapore and the Protectorate of Brunei under the proposed Federation of Malaysia. The idea was heavily opposed by the governments in both Indonesia and the Philippines as well from Communist sympathisers and nationalists in Borneo. Sukarno, as the President of the new republic, perceiving the British trying to maintain their presence in northern Borneo and Malay Peninsula, he decided to launch a military infiltration later known as the confrontation from 1962 to 1969. As a response to the growing opposition, the British deployed their armed forces to guard their colonies against Indonesian and communist revolts, which was also participated by Australia and New Zealand.\nThe Philippines opposed the newly proposed federation, claiming the eastern part of North Borneo (today the Malaysian state of Sabah) as part of its territory as a former possession of the Sultanate of Sulu. The Philippine government mostly based their claim on the Sultanate of Sulu's cession agreement with the British North Borneo Company, as by now the Sultanate had come under the jurisdiction of the Philippine republican administration, which therefore should inherit the Sulu former territories. The Philippine government also claimed that the heirs of the Sultanate had ceded all their territorial rights to the republic.\nThe Sultanate of Brunei at the first welcomed the proposal of a new larger federation. Meanwhile, the Brunei People's Party led by A.M. Azahari desired to reunify Brunei, Sarawak and North Borneo into one federation known as the North Borneo Federation (), where the Sultan of Brunei would be the head of state for the federation\u2014though Azahari had his own intention to abolish the Brunei Monarchy, to make Brunei more democratic, and to integrate the territory and other former British colonies in Borneo into Indonesia, with the support from the latter government. This directly led to the Brunei Revolt, which thwarted Azahari's attempt and forced him to escape to Indonesia. Brunei withdrew from being part of the new Federation of Malaysia due to some disagreements on other issues while political leaders in Sarawak and North Borneo continued to favour inclusion in a larger federation.\nWith the continuous opposition from Indonesia and the Philippines, the Cobbold Commission was established to discover the feeling of the native populations in northern Borneo; it found the people greatly in favour of federation, with various stipulations. The federation was successfully achieved with the inclusion of northern Borneo through the Malaysia Agreement on 16 September 1963. To this day, the area in northern Borneo is still subjected to attacks by Moro Pirates since the 18th century and militant from groups such as Abu Sayyaf since 2000 in the frequent cross border attacks. During the administration of Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos, the President made some attempts to destabilise the state of Sabah, although his plan failed and resulted in the Jabidah massacre and later the insurgency in the southern Philippines.\nDemographics.\nThe demonym for Borneo is Bornean.\nBorneo has 21.3 million inhabitants (in 2014), a population density of . Most of the population lives in coastal cities, although the hinterland has small towns and villages along the rivers. The population consists mainly of Dayak ethnic groups, Malay, Banjar, Orang Ulu, Chinese and Kadazan-Dusun. The Chinese, who make up 29% of the population of Sarawak and 17% of total population in West Kalimantan, Indonesia are descendants of immigrants primarily from southeastern China.\nIn Sabah during the administration of Mustapha Harun of the United Sabah National Organisation (USNO) in the 1970s, thousands of Muslim immigrants and refugees from the southern Philippines of Mindanao and Sulawesi of Indonesia were given sanctuary and later identity cards in the bid to increase the Muslim population of the state: a policy later known as Project IC. Due to the high number of crimes attributed to the new migrant populations, ethnic tension between the indigenous and migrant populations has risen up to the present.\nIn Kalimantan, since the 1990s, the Indonesian government has undertaken an intense transmigration program; to that end it has financed the relocation of poor, landless families from Java, Madura, and Bali. By 2001, transmigrants made up 21% of the population in Central Kalimantan. Since the 1990s, the indigenous Dayak and Malays have resisted encroachment by these migrants, and violent conflict has occurred between some transmigrant and indigenous populations. In the 1999 Sambas riots, Dayaks and Malays joined together to massacre thousands of the Madurese migrants. In Kalimantan, thousands were killed in 2001 fighting between Madurese transmigrants and the Dayak people in the Sampit conflict.\nAdministration.\nThe island of Borneo is divided administratively by three countries.\nEconomy.\nBorneo's economy depends mainly on agriculture, logging and mining, oil and gas, and ecotourism. Brunei's economy is highly dependent on the oil and gas production sector, and the country has become one of the largest oil producers in Southeast Asia. The Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak are both top exporters of timber. Sabah is also known as the agricultural producer of rubber, cacao, and vegetables, and for its fisheries, while Sabah, Sarawak and Labuan export liquefied natural gas (LNG) and petroleum. The Indonesian provinces of Kalimantan are mostly dependent on mining sectors despite also being involved in logging and oil and gas explorations."}
{"id": "4519", "revid": "35436919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4519", "title": "Ballpoint pen", "text": "A ballpoint pen, also known as a biro or ball pen, is a pen that dispenses ink (usually in paste form) over a metal ball at its point, i.e. over a \"ball point\". The metal commonly used is steel, brass, or tungsten carbide. The design was conceived and developed as a cleaner and more reliable alternative to dip pens and fountain pens, and it is now the world's most-used writing instrument; millions are manufactured and sold daily. It has influenced art and graphic design and spawned an artwork genre.\nSome pen manufacturers produce designer ballpoint pens for the high-end and collectors' markets.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe concept of using a \"ball point\" within a writing instrument as a method of applying ink to paper has existed since the late 19th century. In these inventions, the ink was placed in a thin tube whose end was blocked by a tiny ball, held so that it could not slip into the tube or fall out of the pen.\nThe first patent for a ballpoint pen was issued on 30 October 1888 to John J. Loud, who was attempting to make a writing instrument that would be able to write \"on rough surfaces\u2009\u2014\u2009such as wood, coarse wrapping-paper, and other articles\" which fountain pens could not. Loud's pen had a small rotating steel ball, held in place by a socket. Although it could be used to mark rough surfaces such as leather, as Loud intended, it proved to be too coarse for letter-writing. With no commercial viability, its potential went unexploited and the patent eventually lapsed.\nThe manufacture of economical, reliable ballpoint pens as are known today arose from experimentation, modern chemistry, and precision manufacturing capabilities of the early 20th century. Patents filed worldwide during early development are testaments to failed attempts at making the pens commercially viable and widely available. Early ballpoints did not deliver the ink evenly; overflow and clogging were among the obstacles inventors faced toward developing reliable ballpoint pens. If the ball socket was too tight, or the ink too thick, it would not reach the paper. If the socket was too loose, or the ink too thin, the pen would leak or the ink would smear. Ink reservoirs pressurized by piston, spring, capillary action, and gravity would all serve as solutions to ink-delivery and flow problems.\nL\u00e1szl\u00f3 B\u00edr\u00f3, a Hungarian newspaper editor (later naturalized Argentine) frustrated by the amount of time that he wasted filling up fountain pens and cleaning up smudged pages, noticed that inks used in newspaper printing dried quickly, leaving the paper dry and smudge free. He decided to create a pen using the same type of ink. B\u00edr\u00f3 enlisted the help of his brother Gy\u00f6rgy, a dentist with a useful knowledge of chemistry, to develop viscous ink formulae for new ballpoint designs.\nB\u00edr\u00f3's innovation successfully coupled ink-viscosity with a ball-socket mechanism which acted compatibly to prevent ink from drying inside the reservoir while allowing controlled flow. B\u00edr\u00f3 filed a British patent on 15 June 1938.\nIn 1941, the B\u00edr\u00f3 brothers and a friend, Juan Jorge Meyne, fled Germany and moved to Argentina, where they formed \"B\u00edr\u00f3 Pens of Argentina\" and filed a new patent in 1943. Their pen was sold in Argentina as the \"Birome\" from the names B\u00edr\u00f3 and Meyne, which is how ballpoint pens are still known in that country. This new design was licensed by the British engineer Frederick George Miles and manufactured by his company Miles Aircraft, to be used by Royal Air Force aircrew as the \"Biro\". Ballpoint pens were found to be more versatile than fountain pens, especially at high altitudes, where fountain pens were prone to ink-leakage.\nB\u00edr\u00f3's patent, and other early patents on ballpoint pens, often used the term \"ball-point fountain pen\".\nPostwar proliferation.\nFollowing World War II, many companies vied to commercially produce their own ballpoint pen design. In pre-war Argentina, success of the Birome ballpoint was limited, but in mid-1945, the Eversharp Co., a maker of mechanical pencils, teamed up with Eberhard Faber Co. to license the rights from Birome for sales in the United States.\nIn 1946, a Catalan firm, Vila Sivill Hermanos, began to make a ballpoint, Regia Continua, and from 1953 to 1957 their factory also made Bic ballpoints, on contract with the French firm Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Bic.\nDuring the same period, American entrepreneur Milton Reynolds came across a Birome ballpoint pen during a business trip to Buenos Aires, Argentina. Recognizing commercial potential, he purchased several ballpoint samples, returned to the United States, and founded the Reynolds International Pen Company. Reynolds bypassed the Birome patent with sufficient design alterations to obtain an American patent, beating Eversharp and other competitors to introduce the pen to the US market. Debuting at Gimbels department store in New York City on 29 October 1945, for US$12.50 each (1945 US dollar value, about $ in dollars), \"Reynolds Rocket\" became the first commercially successful ballpoint pen. Reynolds went to great extremes to market the pen, with great success; Gimbel's sold many thousands of pens within one week. In Britain, the Miles Martin pen company was producing the first commercially successful ballpoint pens there by the end of 1945.\nNeither Reynolds' nor Eversharp's ballpoint lived up to consumer expectations in America. Ballpoint pen sales peaked in 1946, and consumer interest subsequently plunged due to market saturation. By the early 1950s the ballpoint boom had subsided and Reynolds' company folded.\nPaper Mate pens, among the emerging ballpoint brands of the 1950s, bought the rights to distribute their own ballpoint pens in Canada. Facing concerns about ink-reliability, Paper Mate pioneered new ink formulas and advertised them as \"banker-approved\". In 1954, Parker Pens released \"The Jotter\" \u2014 the company's first ballpoint\u2014boasting additional features and technological advances which also included the use of tungsten-carbide textured ball-bearings in their pens. In less than a year, Parker sold several million pens at prices between three and nine dollars. In the 1960s, the failing Eversharp Co. sold its pen division to Parker and ultimately folded.\nMarcel Bich also introduced a ballpoint pen to the American marketplace in the 1950s, licensed from B\u00edr\u00f3 and based on the Argentine designs. Bich shortened his name to Bic in 1953, forming the ballpoint brand Bic now recognized globally. Bic pens struggled until the company launched its \"Writes The First Time, Every Time!\" advertising campaign in the 1960s. Competition during this era forced unit prices to drop considerably.\nInks.\nBallpoint pen ink is normally a paste containing around 25 to 40 percent dye. The dyes are suspended in a mixture of solvents and fatty acids. The most common of the solvents are benzyl alcohol or phenoxyethanol, which mix with the dyes and oils to create a smooth paste that dries quickly. The fatty acids help to lubricate the ball tip while writing. Hybrid inks also contain added lubricants in the ink to provide a smoother writing experience. The drying time of the ink varies depending upon the viscosity of the ink and the diameter of the ball.\nIn general, more viscous the ink, the faster it will dry, but more writing pressure needs to be applied to dispense ink. But although they are less viscous, hybrid inks have a faster drying time compared to normal ballpoint inks. Also, a larger ball dispenses more ink and thus increases drying time.\nThe dyes used in blue and black ballpoint pens are basic dyes based on triarylmethane and acid dyes derived from diazo compounds or phthalocyanine. Common dyes in blue (and black) ink are Prussian blue, Victoria blue, methyl violet, crystal violet, and phthalocyanine blue. The dye eosin is commonly used for red ink.\nThe inks are resistant to water after drying but can be defaced by certain solvents which include acetone and various alcohols.\nTypes of ballpoint pens.\nBallpoint pens are produced in both disposable and refillable models. Refills allow for the entire internal ink reservoir, including a ballpoint and socket, to be replaced. Such characteristics are usually associated with designer-type pens or those constructed of finer materials. The simplest types of ballpoint pens are disposable and have a cap to cover the tip when the pen is not in use, or a mechanism for retracting the tip, which varies between manufacturers but is usually a spring- or screw-mechanism.\nRollerball pens employ the same ballpoint mechanics, but with the use of water-based inks instead of oil-based inks. Compared to oil-based ballpoints, rollerball pens are said to provide more fluid ink-flow, but the water-based inks will blot if held stationary against the writing surface. Water-based inks also remain wet longer when freshly applied and are thus prone to \"smearing\" \u2014 posing problems to left-handed people (or right handed people writing right-to-left script) \u2014 and \"running\", should the writing surface become wet.\nSome ballpoint pens use a hybrid ink formulation whose viscosity is lower than that of standard ballpoint ink, but greater than rollerball ink. The ink dries faster than a gel pen to prevent smearing when writing. These pens are better suited for left-handed persons. Examples are the Uni-ball Jetstream and Pilot Acroball ranges. These pens are also labelled \"extra smooth\", as they offer a smoother writing experience compared to normal ballpoint pens.\nBecause of a ballpoint pen's reliance on gravity to coat the ball with ink, most cannot be used to write upside-down. However, technology developed by Fisher pens in the United States resulted in the production of what came to be known as the \"Fisher Space Pen\". Space Pens combine a more viscous ink with a pressurized ink reservoir that forces the ink toward the point. Unlike standard ballpoints, the rear end of a Space Pen's pressurized reservoir is sealed, eliminating evaporation and leakage, thus allowing the pen to write upside-down, in zero-gravity environments, and reportedly underwater. Astronauts have made use of these pens in outer space.\nBallpoint pens with erasable ink were pioneered by the Paper Mate pen company. The ink formulas of erasable ballpoints have properties similar to rubber cement, allowing the ink to be literally rubbed clean from the writing surface before drying and eventually becoming permanent. Erasable ink is much thicker than standard ballpoint inks, requiring pressurized cartridges to facilitate inkflow\u2014meaning they can also write upside-down. Though these pens are equipped with erasers, any eraser will suffice.\nThe inexpensive, disposable Bic Cristal (also simply \"Bic pen\" or \"Biro\") is reportedly the most widely sold pen in the world. It was the Bic company's first product and is still synonymous with the company name. The Bic Cristal is part of the permanent collection at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, acknowledged for its industrial design. Its hexagonal barrel mimics that of a wooden pencil and is transparent, showing the ink level in the reservoir. Originally a sealed streamlined cap, the modern pen cap has a small hole at the top to meet safety standards, helping to prevent suffocation if children suck it into the throat.\nMulti-pens are pens that feature multiple varying colored pen refills. Sometimes ballpoint refills are combined with another non-ballpoint refill, usually a mechanical pencil. Sometimes ballpoint pens combine a ballpoint tip on one end and touchscreen stylus on the other.\nBallpoint pens are sometimes provided free by businesses, such as hotels and banks, printed with a company's name and logo. A ballpoint pen is a relatively low cost advertisement that is deemed highly effective (customers will use a pen daily). Ballpoints have also been produced to commemorate events, such as a pen commemorating the 1963 assassination of President John F. Kennedy. These pens, known as \"advertising pens,\" are the same as standard ballpoint pen models, but have become valued among collectors.\nAs art medium.\nBallpoint pens have proven to be a versatile art medium for professional artists as well as amateur doodlers. Low cost, availability, and portability are cited by practitioners as qualities which make this common writing tool a convenient, alternative art supply. Some artists use them within mixed-media works, while others use them solely as their medium-of-choice.\nEffects not generally associated with ballpoint pens can be achieved. Traditional pen-and-ink techniques such as stippling and cross-hatching can be used to create half-tones or the illusion of form and volume. For artists whose interests necessitate precision line-work, ballpoints are an obvious attraction; ballpoint pens allow for sharp lines not as effectively executed using a brush. Finely applied, the resulting imagery has been mistaken for airbrushed artwork and photography, causing reactions of disbelief which ballpoint artist Lennie Mace refers to as the \"Wow Factor\".\nFamous 20th-century artists such as Andy Warhol, among others, have utilized ballpoint pens to some extent during their careers. Ballpoint pen artwork continues to attract interest in the 21st century, with contemporary artists gaining recognition for their specific use of ballpoint pens; for their technical proficiency, imagination, and innovation. Korean-American artist Il Lee has been creating large-scale, ballpoint-only abstract artwork since the late 1970s. Since the 1980s, Lennie Mace creates imaginative, ballpoint-only artwork of varying content and complexity, applied to unconventional surfaces including wood and denim. The artist coined terms such as \"PENtings\" and \"Media Graffiti\" to describe his varied output. More recently, British artist James Mylne has been creating photo-realistic artwork using mostly black ballpoints, sometimes with minimal mixed-media color.\nUsing ballpoint pens to create artwork is not without limitations. Color availability and sensitivity of ink to light are among concerns of ballpoint pen artists. Mistakes pose greater risks to ballpoint artists; once a line is drawn, it generally cannot be erased. Additionally, \"blobbing\" of ink on the drawing surface and \"skipping\" of ink-flow require consideration when using ballpoint pens for artistic purposes. Although the mechanics of ballpoint pens remain relatively unchanged, ink composition has evolved to solve certain problems over the years, resulting in unpredictable sensitivity to light and some extent of fading.\nManufacturing.\nAlthough designs and construction vary between brands, basic components of all ballpoint pens are universal. Standard components of a ballpoint tip include the freely rotating \"ball\" itself (distributing the ink on the writing surface), a \"socket\" holding the ball in place, small \"ink channels\" that provide ink to the ball through the socket, and a self-contained \"ink reservoir\" supplying ink to the ball. In modern disposable pens, narrow plastic tubes contain the ink, which is compelled downward to the ball by gravity. Brass, steel, or tungsten carbide are used to manufacture the ball bearing-like points, then housed in a brass socket.\nThe function of these components can be compared with the ball-applicator of roll-on antiperspirant; the same technology at a larger scale. The ballpoint tip delivers the ink to the writing surface while acting as a \"buffer\" between the ink in the reservoir and the air outside, preventing the quick-drying ink from drying inside the reservoir. Modern ballpoints are said to have a two-year shelf life, on average.\nA ballpoint tip that can write comfortably for a long period of time is not easy to produce, as it requires high-precision machinery and thin high-grade steel alloy plates. China, which produces about 80 percent of the world's ballpoint pens, relied on imported ballpoint tips and metal alloys before 2017.\nThe common ballpoint pen is a product of mass production, with components produced separately on assembly lines. Basic steps in the manufacturing process include the production of ink formulas, molding of metal and plastic components, and assembly. Marcel Bich was involved in developing the production of inexpensive ballpoint pens.\nStandards.\nThe International Organization for Standardization has published standards for ball point and roller ball pens:"}
{"id": "4521", "revid": "1", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4521", "title": "Bubble sort/C", "text": ""}
{"id": "4523", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4523", "title": "Bipolar spectrum", "text": ""}
{"id": "4524", "revid": "18878183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4524", "title": "Burroughs Corporation", "text": "The Burroughs Corporation was a major American manufacturer of business equipment. The company was founded in 1886 as the American Arithmometer Company. In 1986, it merged with Sperry UNIVAC to form Unisys. The company's history paralleled many of the major developments in computing. At its start, it produced mechanical adding machines, and later moved into programmable ledgers and then computers. It was one of the largest producers of mainframe computers in the world, also producing related equipment including typewriters and printers.\nEarly history.\nIn 1886, the American Arithmometer Company was established in St. Louis, Missouri, to produce and sell an adding machine invented by William Seward Burroughs (grandfather of Beat Generation author William S. Burroughs). In 1904, six years after Burroughs' death, the company moved to Detroit and changed its name to the Burroughs Adding Machine Company. It was soon the biggest adding machine company in America.\nEvolving product lines.\nThe adding machine range began with the basic, hand-cranked P100 which was only capable of adding. The design included some revolutionary features, foremost of which was the dashpot which governed the speed at which the operating lever could be pulled so allowing the mechanism to operate consistently correctly. The machine also had a full-keyboard with a separate column of keys 1 to 9 for each decade where the keys latch when pressed, with interlocking which prevented more than one key in any decade from being latched. The latching allowed the operator to quickly check that the correct number had been entered before pulling the operating lever. The numbers entered and the final total were printed on a roll of paper at the rear, so there was no danger of the operator writing down the wrong answer and there was a copy of the calculation which could be checked later if necessary. The P200 offered a subtraction capability and the P300 provided a means of keeping two separate totals. The P400 provided a moveable carriage, and the P600 and top-of-the-range P612 offered some limited programmability based upon the position of the carriage. The range was further extended by the inclusion of the \"J\" series which provided a single finger calculation facility, and the \"c\" series of both manual and electrical assisted comptometers. In the late 1960s, the Burroughs sponsored \"nixi-tube\" provided an electronic display calculator. Burroughs developed a range of adding machines with different capabilities, gradually increasing in their capabilities. A revolutionary adding machine was the \"Sensimatic\", which was able to perform many business functions semi-automatically. It had a moving programmable carriage to maintain ledgers. It could store 9, 18 or 27 balances during the ledger posting operations and worked with a mechanical adder named a Crossfooter. The Sensimatic developed into the \"Sensitronic\" which could store balances on a magnetic stripe which was part of the ledger card. This balance was read into the accumulator when the card was inserted into the carriage. The Sensitronic was followed by the E1000, E2000, E3000, E4000, E6000 and the E8000, which were computer systems supporting card reader/punches and a line printer.\nLater, Burroughs was selling more than adding machines, including typewriters.\nMove into computers.\nThe biggest shift in company history came in 1953: the Burroughs Adding Machine Company was renamed the Burroughs Corporation and began moving into digital computer products, initially for banking institutions. This move began with Burroughs' purchase in June 1956, of the ElectroData Corporation in Pasadena, California, a spinoff of the Consolidated Engineering Corporation which had designed test instruments and had a cooperative relationship with Caltech in Pasadena. ElectroData had built the Datatron 205 and was working on the Datatron 220. The first major computer product that came from this marriage was the B205 tube computer. In the late 1960s the L and TC series range was produced (e.g. the TC500\u2014Terminal Computer 500) which had a golf ball printer and in the beginning a 1K (64 bit) disk memory. These were popular as branch terminals to the B5500/6500/6700 systems, and sold well in the banking sector, where they were often connected to non-Burroughs mainframes. In conjunction with these products, Burroughs also manufactured an extensive range of cheque processing equipment, normally attached as terminals to a larger system such as a B2700 or B1700.\nIn the 1950s, Burroughs worked with the Federal Reserve Bank on the development and computer processing of magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) especially for the processing of bank cheques. Burroughs made special MICR/OCR sorter/readers which attached to their medium systems line of computers (2700/3700/4700) and this entrenched the company in the computer side of the banking industry.\nA force in the computing industry.\nBurroughs was one of the nine major United States computer companies in the 1960s, with IBM the largest, Honeywell, NCR Corporation, Control Data Corporation (CDC), General Electric (GE), Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), RCA and Sperry Rand (UNIVAC line). In terms of sales, Burroughs was always a distant second to IBM. In fact, IBM's market share was so much larger than all of the others that this group was often referred to as \"IBM and the Seven Dwarves.\" By 1972 when GE and RCA were no longer in the mainframe business, the remaining five companies behind IBM became known as the BUNCH, an acronym based on their initials.\nAt the same time, Burroughs was very much a competitor. Like IBM, Burroughs tried to supply a complete line of products for its customers, including Burroughs-designed printers, disk drives, tape drives, computer printing paper, and even typewriter ribbons.\nDevelopments and innovations.\nThe Burroughs Corporation developed three highly innovative architectures, based on the design philosophy of \"language-directed design\". Their machine instruction sets favored one or many high level programming languages, such as ALGOL, COBOL or FORTRAN. All three architectures were considered mainframe class machines:\nMerger with Sperry.\nIn September 1986, Burroughs Corporation merged with Sperry Corporation to form Unisys. For a time, the combined company retained the Burroughs processors as the A- and V-systems lines. However, as the market for large systems shifted from proprietary architectures to common servers, the company eventually dropped the V-Series line, although customers continued to use V-series systems . Unisys continues to develop and market the A-Series, now known as ClearPath.\nReemergence of the Burroughs name.\nIn 2010, Unisys sold off its Payment Systems Division to Marlin Equity Partners, a California-based private investment firm, which incorporated it as Burroughs Payment Systems based in Plymouth, Michigan.\nReferences in popular culture.\nBurroughs B205 hardware has appeared as props in many Hollywood television and film productions from the late 1950s. For example, a B205 console was often shown in the television series \"Batman\" as the \"Bat Computer\"; also as the computer in \"Lost in Space\". B205 tape drives were often seen in series such as \"The Time Tunnel\" and \"Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea\". Craig Ferguson, American talk show host, comedian and actor was a Burroughs apprentice in Cumbernauld, Scotland."}
{"id": "4526", "revid": "19158033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4526", "title": "Brick", "text": "A brick is a type of block used to build walls, pavements and other elements in masonry construction. Properly, the term \"brick\" denotes a block composed of dried clay, but is now also used informally to denote other chemically cured construction blocks. Bricks can be joined together using mortar, adhesives or by interlocking them. Bricks are produced in numerous classes, types, materials, and sizes which vary with region and time period, and are produced in bulk quantities.\n\"Block\" is a similar term referring to a rectangular building unit composed of similar materials, but is usually larger than a brick. Lightweight bricks (also called lightweight blocks) are made from expanded clay aggregate.\nFired bricks are one of the longest-lasting and strongest building materials, sometimes referred to as artificial stone, and have been used since circa 4000 BC. Air-dried bricks, also known as mudbricks, have a history older than fired bricks, and have an additional ingredient of a mechanical binder such as straw.\nBricks are laid in \"courses\" and numerous patterns known as \"bonds\", collectively known as brickwork, and may be laid in various kinds of mortar to hold the bricks together to make a durable structure.\nHistory.\nMiddle East and South Asia.\nThe earliest bricks were \"dried brick\", meaning that they were formed from clay-bearing earth or mud and dried (usually in the sun) until they were strong enough for use. The oldest discovered bricks, originally made from shaped mud and dating before 7500 BC, were found at Tell Aswad, in the upper Tigris region and in southeast Anatolia close to Diyarbakir. The South Asian inhabitants of Mehrgarh also constructed, and lived in, air-dried mudbrick houses between 7000\u20133300 BC. Other more recent findings, dated between 7,000 and 6,395 BC, come from Jericho, Catal H\u00fcy\u00fck, the ancient Egyptian fortress of Buhen, and the ancient Indus Valley cities of Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, and Mehrgarh. Ceramic, or \"fired brick\" was used as early as 3000 BC in early Indus Valley cities like Kalibangan.\nChina.\nThe earliest fired bricks appeared in Neolithic China around 4400 BC at Chengtoushan, a walled settlement of the Daxi culture. These bricks were made of red clay, fired on all sides to above 600\u00a0\u00b0C, and used as flooring for houses. By the Qujialing period (3300 BC), fired bricks were being used to pave roads and as building foundations at Chengtoushan.\nBricks continued to be used during 2nd millennium BC at a site near Xi'an. Fired bricks were found in Western Zhou (1046\u2013771 BC) ruins, where they were produced on a large scale. The carpenter's manual \"Yingzao Fashi\", published in 1103 at the time of the Song dynasty described the brick making process and glazing techniques then in use. Using the 17th-century encyclopaedic text \"Tiangong Kaiwu\", historian Timothy Brook outlined the brick production process of Ming Dynasty China: \nEurope.\nEarly civilisations around the Mediterranean adopted the use of fired bricks, including the Ancient Greeks and Romans. The Roman legions operated mobile kilns, and built large brick structures throughout the Roman Empire, stamping the bricks with the seal of the legion.\nDuring the Early Middle Ages the use of bricks in construction became popular in Northern Europe, after being introduced there from Northern-Western Italy. An independent style of brick architecture, known as brick Gothic (similar to Gothic architecture) flourished in places that lacked indigenous sources of rocks. Examples of this architectural style can be found in modern-day Denmark, Germany, Poland, and Kaliningrad (former East Prussia).\nThis style evolved into Brick Renaissance as the stylistic changes associated with the Italian Renaissance spread to northern Europe, leading to the adoption of Renaissance elements into brick building. A clear distinction between the two styles only developed at the transition to Baroque architecture. In L\u00fcbeck, for example, Brick Renaissance is clearly recognisable in buildings equipped with terracotta reliefs by the artist Statius von D\u00fcren, who was also active at Schwerin (Schwerin Castle) and Wismar (F\u00fcrstenhof).\nLong-distance bulk transport of bricks and other construction equipment remained prohibitively expensive until the development of modern transportation infrastructure, with the construction of canal, roads, and railways.\nIndustrial era.\nProduction of bricks increased massively with the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the rise in factory building in England. For reasons of speed and economy, bricks were increasingly preferred as building material to stone, even in areas where the stone was readily available. It was at this time in London that bright red brick was chosen for construction to make the buildings more visible in the heavy fog and to help prevent traffic accidents.\nThe transition from the traditional method of production known as hand-moulding to a mechanised form of mass-production slowly took place during the first half of the nineteenth century. Possibly the first successful brick-making machine was patented by Henry Clayton, employed at the Atlas Works in Middlesex, England, in 1855, and was capable of producing up to 25,000 bricks daily with minimal supervision. His mechanical apparatus soon achieved widespread attention after it was adopted for use by the South Eastern Railway Company for brick-making at their factory near Folkestone. The Bradley &amp; Craven Ltd 'Stiff-Plastic Brickmaking Machine' was patented in 1853, apparently predating Clayton. Bradley &amp; Craven went on to be a dominant manufacturer of brickmaking machinery. Predating both Clayton and Bradley &amp; Craven Ltd. however was the brick making machine patented by Richard A. Ver Valen of Haverstraw, New York, in 1852.\nThe demand for high office building construction at the turn of the 20th century led to a much greater use of cast and wrought iron, and later, steel and concrete. The use of brick for skyscraper construction severely limited the size of the building \u2013 the Monadnock Building, built in 1896 in Chicago, required exceptionally thick walls to maintain the structural integrity of its 17 storeys.\nFollowing pioneering work in the 1950s at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology and the Building Research Establishment in Watford, UK, the use of improved masonry for the construction of tall structures up to 18 storeys high was made viable. However, the use of brick has largely remained restricted to small to medium-sized buildings, as steel and concrete remain superior materials for high-rise construction.\nMethods of manufacture.\nThree basic types of brick are un-fired, fired, and chemically set bricks. Each type is manufactured differently.\nMudbrick.\nUnfired bricks, also known as mudbricks, are made from a wet, clay-containing soil mixed with straw or similar binders. They are air-dried until ready for use.\nFired brick.\nFired bricks are burned in a kiln which makes them durable. Modern, fired, clay bricks are formed in one of three processes \u2013 soft mud, dry press, or extruded. Depending on the country, either the extruded or soft mud method is the most common, since they are the most economical.\nNormally, bricks contain the following ingredients:\nShaping methods.\nThree main methods are used for shaping the raw materials into bricks to be fired:\nKilns.\nIn many modern brickworks, bricks are usually fired in a continuously fired tunnel kiln, in which the bricks are fired as they move slowly through the kiln on conveyors, rails, or kiln cars, which achieves a more consistent brick product. The bricks often have lime, ash, and organic matter added, which accelerates the burning process.\nThe other major kiln type is the Bull's Trench Kiln (BTK), based on a design developed by British engineer W. Bull in the late 19th century.\nAn oval or circular trench is dug, 6\u20139 metres wide, 2-2.5 metres deep, and 100\u2013150 metres in circumference. A tall exhaust chimney is constructed in the centre. Half or more of the trench is filled with \"green\" (unfired) bricks which are stacked in an open lattice pattern to allow airflow. The lattice is capped with a roofing layer of finished brick.\nIn operation, new green bricks, along with roofing bricks, are stacked at one end of the brick pile. Historically, a stack of unfired bricks covered for protection from the weather was called a \"hack\". Cooled finished bricks are removed from the other end for transport to their destinations. In the middle, the brick workers create a firing zone by dropping fuel (coal, wood, oil, debris, and so on) through access holes in the roof above the trench.\nThe advantage of the BTK design is a much greater energy efficiency compared with clamp or scove kilns. Sheet metal or boards are used to route the airflow through the brick lattice so that fresh air flows first through the recently burned bricks, heating the air, then through the active burning zone. The air continues through the green brick zone (pre-heating and drying the bricks), and finally out the chimney, where the rising gases create suction that pulls air through the system. The reuse of heated air yields savings in fuel cost.\nAs with the rail process, the BTK process is continuous. A half-dozen labourers working around the clock can fire approximately 15,000\u201325,000 bricks a day. Unlike the rail process, in the BTK process the bricks do not move. Instead, the locations at which the bricks are loaded, fired, and unloaded gradually rotate through the trench.\nInfluences on colour.\nThe fired colour of tired clay bricks is influenced by the chemical and mineral content of the raw materials, the firing temperature, and the atmosphere in the kiln. For example, pink bricks are the result of a high iron content, white or yellow bricks have a higher lime content. Most bricks burn to various red hues; as the temperature is increased the colour moves through dark red, purple, and then to brown or grey at around . The names of bricks may reflect their origin and colour, such as London stock brick and Cambridgeshire White. \"Brick tinting\" may be performed to change the colour of bricks to blend-in areas of brickwork with the surrounding masonry.\nAn impervious and ornamental surface may be laid on brick either by salt glazing, in which salt is added during the burning process, or by the use of a slip, which is a glaze material into which the bricks are dipped. Subsequent reheating in the kiln fuses the slip into a glazed surface integral with the brick base.\nChemically set bricks.\nChemically set bricks are not fired but may have the curing process accelerated by the application of heat and pressure in an autoclave.\nCalcium-silicate bricks.\nCalcium-silicate bricks are also called sandlime or flintlime bricks, depending on their ingredients. Rather than being made with clay they are made with lime binding the silicate material. The raw materials for calcium-silicate bricks include lime mixed in a proportion of about 1 to 10 with sand, quartz, crushed flint, or crushed siliceous rock together with mineral colourants. The materials are mixed and left until the lime is completely hydrated; the mixture is then pressed into moulds and cured in an autoclave for three to fourteen hours to speed the chemical hardening. The finished bricks are very accurate and uniform, although the sharp arrises need careful handling to avoid damage to brick and bricklayer. The bricks can be made in a variety of colours; white, black, buff, and grey-blues are common, and pastel shades can be achieved. This type of brick is common in Sweden, Belarus, Russia and other post-Soviet countries, especially in houses built or renovated in the 1970s. A version known as fly ash bricks, manufactured using fly ash, lime, and gypsum (known as the FaL-G process) are common in South Asia. Calcium-silicate bricks are also manufactured in Canada and the United States, and meet the criteria set forth in ASTM C73 \u2013 10 Standard Specification for Calcium Silicate Brick (Sand-Lime Brick).\nConcrete bricks.\nBricks formed from concrete are usually termed as blocks or concrete masonry unit, and are typically pale grey. They are made from a dry, small aggregate concrete which is formed in steel moulds by vibration and compaction in either an \"egglayer\" or static machine. The finished blocks are cured, rather than fired, using low-pressure steam. Concrete bricks and blocks are manufactured in a wide range of shapes, sizes and face treatments \u2013 a number of which simulate the appearance of clay bricks.\nConcrete bricks are available in many colours and as an engineering brick made with sulfate-resisting Portland cement or equivalent. When made with adequate amount of cement they are suitable for harsh environments such as wet conditions and retaining walls. They are made to standards BS 6073, EN 771-3 or ASTM C55. Concrete bricks contract or shrink so they need movement joints every 5 to 6 metres, but are similar to other bricks of similar density in thermal and sound resistance and fire resistance.\nCompressed earth blocks.\nCompressed earth blocks are made mostly from slightly moistened local soils compressed with a mechanical hydraulic press or manual lever press. A small amount of a cement binder may be added, resulting in a \"stabilised compressed earth block\".\nTypes.\nThere are thousands of types of bricks that are named for their use, size, forming method, origin, quality, texture, and/or materials.\nCategorized by manufacture method:\nCategorized by use:\nSpecialized use bricks:\nBricks named for place of origin:\nOptimal dimensions, characteristics, and strength.\nFor efficient handling and laying, bricks must be small enough and light enough to be picked up by the bricklayer using one hand (leaving the other hand free for the trowel). Bricks are usually laid flat, and as a result, the effective limit on the width of a brick is set by the distance which can conveniently be spanned between the thumb and fingers of one hand, normally about . In most cases, the length of a brick is twice its width plus the width of a mortar joint, about or slightly more. This allows bricks to be laid \"bonded\" in a structure which increases stability and strength (for an example, see the illustration of bricks laid in \"English bond\", at the head of this article). The wall is built using alternating courses of \"stretchers\", bricks laid longways, and \"headers\", bricks laid crossways. The headers tie the wall together over its width. In fact, this wall is built in a variation of \"English bond\" called \"English cross bond\" where the successive layers of stretchers are displaced horizontally from each other by half a brick length. In true \"English bond\", the perpendicular lines of the stretcher courses are in line with each other.\nA bigger brick makes for a thicker (and thus more insulating) wall. Historically, this meant that bigger bricks were necessary in colder climates (see for instance the slightly larger size of the Russian brick in table below), while a smaller brick was adequate, and more economical, in warmer regions. A notable illustration of this correlation is the Green Gate in Gdansk; built in 1571 of imported Dutch brick, too small for the colder climate of Gdansk, it was notorious for being a chilly and drafty residence. Nowadays this is no longer an issue, as modern walls typically incorporate specialised insulation materials.\nThe correct brick for a job can be selected from a choice of colour, surface texture, density, weight, absorption, and pore structure, thermal characteristics, thermal and moisture movement, and fire resistance.\nIn England, the length and width of the common brick has remained fairly constant over the centuries (but see brick tax), but the depth has varied from about or smaller in earlier times to about more recently. In the United Kingdom, the usual size of a modern brick is , which, with a nominal mortar joint, forms a \"unit size\" of , for a ratio of 6:3:2.\nIn the United States, modern standard bricks are specified for various uses; The most commonly used is the modular brick has the \"actual dimensions\" of \u00a0 \u00d7 \u00a0 \u00d7 \u00a0inches (194 \u00d7 92 \u00d7 57\u00a0mm). With the standard mortar joint, this gives the \"nominal dimensions\" of 8 x 4 x inches which eases the calculation of the number of bricks in a given wall. The 2:1 ratio of modular bricks means that when they turn corners, a 1/2 running bond is formed without needing to cut the brick down or fill the gap with a cut brick; and the height of modular bricks means that a soldier course matches the height of three modular running courses, or one standard CMU course. \nSome brickmakers create innovative sizes and shapes for bricks used for plastering (and therefore not visible on the inside of the building) where their inherent mechanical properties are more important than their visual ones. These bricks are usually slightly larger, but not as large as blocks and offer the following advantages:\nBlocks have a much greater range of sizes. Standard co-ordinating sizes in length and height (in mm) include 400\u00d7200, 450\u00d7150, 450\u00d7200, 450\u00d7225, 450\u00d7300, 600\u00d7150, 600\u00d7200, and 600\u00d7225; depths (work size, mm) include 60, 75, 90, 100, 115, 140, 150, 190, 200, 225, and 250. They are usable across this range as they are lighter than clay bricks. The density of solid clay bricks is around 2000\u00a0kg/m3: this is reduced by frogging, hollow bricks, and so on, but aerated autoclaved concrete, even as a solid brick, can have densities in the range of 450\u2013850\u00a0kg/m3.\nBricks may also be classified as \"solid\" (less than 25% perforations by volume, although the brick may be \"frogged,\" having indentations on one of the longer faces), \"perforated\" (containing a pattern of small holes through the brick, removing no more than 25% of the volume), \"cellular\" (containing a pattern of holes removing more than 20% of the volume, but closed on one face), or \"hollow\" (containing a pattern of large holes removing more than 25% of the brick's volume). Blocks may be solid, cellular or hollow\nThe term \"frog\" can refer to the indentation or the implement used to make it. Modern brickmakers usually use plastic frogs but in the past they were made of wood.\nThe compressive strength of bricks produced in the United States ranges from about , varying according to the use to which the brick are to be put. In England clay bricks can have strengths of up to 100 MPa, although a common house brick is likely to show a range of 20\u201340 MPa.\nUses.\nIn the United States, bricks have been used for both buildings and pavements. Examples of brick use in buildings can be seen in colonial era buildings and other notable structures around the country. Bricks have been used in pavements especially during the late 19th century and early 20th century. The introduction of asphalt and concrete reduced the use of brick pavements, but they are still sometimes installed as a method of traffic calming or as a decorative surface in pedestrian precincts. For example, in the early 1900s, most of the streets in the city of Grand Rapids, Michigan, were paved with bricks. Today, there are only about 20 blocks of brick-paved streets remaining (totalling less than 0.5 percent of all the streets in the city limits). Much like in Grand Rapids, municipalities across the United States began replacing brick streets with inexpensive asphalt concrete by the mid-20th century.\nBricks in the metallurgy and glass industries are often used for lining furnaces, in particular refractory bricks such as silica, magnesia, chamotte and neutral (chromomagnesite) refractory bricks. This type of brick must have good thermal shock resistance, refractoriness under load, high melting point, and satisfactory porosity. There is a large refractory brick industry, especially in the United Kingdom, Japan, the United States, Belgium and the Netherlands.\nIn Northwest Europe, bricks have been used in construction for centuries. Until recently, almost all houses were built almost entirely from bricks. Although many houses are now built using a mixture of concrete blocks and other materials, many houses are skinned with a layer of bricks on the outside for aesthetic appeal.\nEngineering bricks are used where strength, low water porosity or acid (flue gas) resistance are needed.\nIn the UK a red brick university is one founded in the late 19th or early 20th century. The term is used to refer to such institutions collectively to distinguish them from the older Oxbridge institutions, and refers to the use of bricks, as opposed to stone, in their buildings.\nColombian architect Rogelio Salmona was noted for his extensive use of red bricks in his buildings and for using natural shapes like spirals, radial geometry and curves in his designs. Most buildings in Colombia are made of brick, given the abundance of clay in equatorial countries like this one.\nLimitations.\nStarting in the 20th century, the use of brickwork declined in some areas due to concerns about earthquakes. Earthquakes such as the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 and the 1933 Long Beach earthquake revealed the weaknesses of unreinforced brick masonry in earthquake-prone areas. During seismic events, the mortar cracks and crumbles, so that the bricks are no longer held together. Brick masonry with steel reinforcement, which helps hold the masonry together during earthquakes, has been used to replace unreinforced bricks in many buildings. Retrofitting older unreinforced masonry structures has been mandated in many jurisdictions."}
{"id": "4527", "revid": "1012758652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4527", "title": "B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k", "text": "B\u00e9la Viktor J\u00e1nos Bart\u00f3k (; , ; 25 March 1881 \u2013 26 September 1945) was a Hungarian composer, pianist, and ethnomusicologist. He is considered one of the most important composers of the 20th century; he and Franz Liszt are regarded as Hungary's greatest composers. Through his collection and analytical study of folk music, he was one of the founders of comparative musicology, which later became ethnomusicology.\nBiography.\nChildhood and early years (1881\u201398).\nBart\u00f3k was born in the Banatian town of Nagyszentmikl\u00f3s in the Kingdom of Hungary (present-day S\u00e2nnicolau Mare, Romania) on 25 March 1881. On his father's side, the Bart\u00f3k family was a Hungarian lower noble family, originating from Borsodszir\u00e1k, Borsod. His paternal grandmother was a Catholic of Bunjevci origin, but considered herself Hungarian. Bart\u00f3k's father was also named B\u00e9la. Bart\u00f3k's mother, Paula (n\u00e9e Voit), had ethnic German roots but spoke Hungarian fluently. A native of Tur\u00f3cszentm\u00e1rton (present-day Martin, Slovakia), she also had Hungarian and Slavic ancestry.\nB\u00e9la displayed notable musical talent very early in life: according to his mother, he could distinguish between different dance rhythms that she played on the piano before he learned to speak in complete sentences. By the age of four he was able to play 40 pieces on the piano and his mother began formally teaching him the next year.\nB\u00e9la was a sickly child and suffered from severe eczema until the age of five, as a result of an inoculation with a faulty smallpox vaccine, with his facial disfigurement causing him to avoid people. In 1888, when he was seven, his father, the director of an agricultural school, died suddenly. His mother then took B\u00e9la and his sister, Erzs\u00e9bet, to live in Nagysz\u0151l\u0151s (present-day Vynohradiv, Ukraine) and then in Pressburg (\"Pozsony\", present-day Bratislava, Slovakia). B\u00e9la gave his first public recital aged 11 in Nagysz\u0151l\u0151s, to positive critical reception. Among the pieces he played was his own first composition, written two years previously: a short piece called \"The Course of the Danube\". Shortly thereafter, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Erkel accepted him as a pupil.\nEarly musical career (1899\u20131908).\nFrom 1899 to 1903, Bart\u00f3k studied piano under Istv\u00e1n Thom\u00e1n, a former student of Franz Liszt, and composition under J\u00e1nos Koessler at the Royal Academy of Music in Budapest. There he met Zolt\u00e1n Kod\u00e1ly, who made a strong impression on him and became a lifelong friend and colleague. In 1903, Bart\u00f3k wrote his first major orchestral work, \"Kossuth\", a symphonic poem which honored Lajos Kossuth, hero of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848.\nThe music of Richard Strauss, whom he met in 1902 at the Budapest premiere of \"Also sprach Zarathustra\", strongly influenced his early work. When visiting a holiday resort in the summer of 1904, Bart\u00f3k overheard a young nanny, Lidi D\u00f3sa from Kib\u00e9d in Transylvania, sing folk songs to the children in her care. This sparked his lifelong dedication to folk music.\nFrom 1907, he also began to be influenced by the French composer Claude Debussy, whose compositions Kod\u00e1ly had brought back from Paris. Bart\u00f3k's large-scale orchestral works were still in the style of Johannes Brahms and Richard Strauss, but he wrote a number of small piano pieces which showed his growing interest in folk music. The first piece to show clear signs of this new interest is the String Quartet No. 1 in A minor (1908), which contains folk-like elements. He began teaching as a piano professor at the Liszt Academy of Music in Budapest. This position freed him from touring Europe as a pianist and enabled him to work in Hungary. Among his notable students were Fritz Reiner, Sir Georg Solti, Gy\u00f6rgy S\u00e1ndor, Ern\u0151 Balogh, and Lili Kraus. After Bart\u00f3k moved to the United States, he taught Jack Beeson and Violet Archer.\nIn 1908, he and Kod\u00e1ly traveled into the countryside to collect and research old Magyar folk melodies. Their growing interest in folk music coincided with a contemporary social interest in traditional national culture. They made some surprising discoveries. Magyar folk music had previously been categorised as Gypsy music. The classic example is Franz Liszt's famous \"Hungarian Rhapsodies\" for piano, which he based on popular art songs performed by Romani bands of the time. In contrast, Bart\u00f3k and Kod\u00e1ly discovered that the old Magyar folk melodies were based on pentatonic scales, similar to those in Asian folk traditions, such as those of Central Asia, Anatolia and Siberia.\nBart\u00f3k and Kod\u00e1ly quickly set about incorporating elements of such Magyar peasant music into their compositions. They both frequently quoted folk song melodies \"verbatim\" and wrote pieces derived entirely from authentic songs. An example is his two volumes entitled \"For Children\" for solo piano, containing 80 folk tunes to which he wrote accompaniment. Bart\u00f3k's style in his art music compositions was a synthesis of folk music, classicism, and modernism. His melodic and harmonic sense was profoundly influenced by the folk music of Hungary, Romania, and other nations. He was especially fond of the asymmetrical dance rhythms and pungent harmonies found in Bulgarian music. Most of his early compositions offer a blend of nationalist and late Romanticism elements.\nMiddle years and career (1909\u201339).\nPersonal life.\nIn 1909, at the age of 28, Bart\u00f3k married M\u00e1rta Ziegler (1893\u20131967), aged 16. Their son, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k III, was born the next year. After nearly 15 years together, Bart\u00f3k divorced M\u00e1rta in June 1923. Two months after his divorce, he married Ditta P\u00e1sztory (1903\u20131982), a piano student, ten days after proposing to her. She was aged 19, he 42. Their son, P\u00e9ter, was born in 1924.\nRaised as a Catholic, by his early adulthood Bart\u00f3k had become an atheist. He later became attracted to Unitarianism and publicly converted to the Unitarian faith in 1916. Although Bart\u00f3k was not conventionally religious, according to his son B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k III, \"he was a nature lover: he always mentioned the miraculous order of nature with great reverence.\" As an adult, B\u00e9la III later became lay president of the Hungarian Unitarian Church.\nOpera.\nIn 1911, Bart\u00f3k wrote what was to be his only opera, \"Bluebeard's Castle\", dedicated to M\u00e1rta. He entered it for a prize by the Hungarian Fine Arts Commission, but they rejected his work as not fit for the stage. In 1917 Bart\u00f3k revised the score for the 1918 premi\u00e8re, and rewrote the ending. Following the 1919 revolution in which he actively participated, he was pressured by the Horthy regime to remove the name of librettist B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs from the opera, as Bal\u00e1zs was of Jewish origin, was blacklisted, and had left the country for Vienna. \"Bluebeard's Castle\" received only one revival, in 1936, before Bart\u00f3k emigrated. For the remainder of his life, although passionately devoted to Hungary, its people and its culture, he never felt much loyalty to the government or its official establishments.\nFolk music and composition.\nAfter his disappointment over the Fine Arts Commission competition, Bart\u00f3k wrote little for two or three years, preferring to concentrate on collecting and arranging folk music. He found the phonograph an essential tool for collecting folk music for its accuracy, objectivity, and manipulability. He collected first in the Carpathian Basin (then the Kingdom of Hungary), where he notated Hungarian, Slovak, Romanian, and Bulgarian folk music. He also collected in Moldavia, Wallachia, and (in 1913) Algeria. The outbreak of World War I forced him to stop the expeditions, but he returned to composing with a ballet called \"The Wooden Prince\" (1914\u201316) and the String Quartet No. 2 in (1915\u201317), both influenced by Debussy.\nBart\u00f3k's \"libretto\" for \"The Miraculous Mandarin\", another ballet, was influenced by Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg and Richard Strauss. Though started in 1918, the story of prostitution, robbery, and murder was not performed on the stage until 1926 because of its sexual content. He next wrote his two violin sonatas (written in 1921 and 1922, respectively), which are harmonically and structurally some of his most complex pieces.\nIn 1927\u201328, Bart\u00f3k wrote his Third and Fourth String Quartets, after which his compositions demonstrated his mature style. Notable examples of this period are \"Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta\" (1936) and Divertimento for String Orchestra (1939). The Fifth String Quartet was composed in 1934, and the Sixth String Quartet (his last) in 1939. In 1936 he travelled to Turkey to collect and study Turkish folk music. He worked in collaboration with Turkish composer Ahmet Adnan Saygun mostly around Adana.\nWorld War II and last years in America (1940\u201345).\nIn 1940, as the European political situation worsened after the outbreak of World War II, Bart\u00f3k was increasingly tempted to flee Hungary. He strongly opposed the Nazis and Hungary's alliance with Germany and the Axis powers under the Tripartite Pact. After the Nazis came to power in the early 1930s, Bart\u00f3k refused to give concerts in Germany and broke away from his publisher there. His anti-fascist political views caused him a great deal of trouble with the establishment in Hungary. Having first sent his manuscripts out of the country, Bart\u00f3k reluctantly emigrated to the U.S. with his wife, Ditta P\u00e1sztory, in October that year. They settled in New York City after arriving on the night of 29\u201330 October 1940 via a steamer from Lisbon. After joining them in 1942, their younger son, P\u00e9ter Bart\u00f3k, enlisted in the United States Navy where he served in the Pacific during the remainder of the war and later settled in Florida where he became a recording and sound engineer. His elder son, by his first marriage, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k III, remained in Hungary and later worked as a railroad official until his retirement in the early 1980s.\nAlthough he became an American citizen in 1945, shortly before his death, Bart\u00f3k never felt fully at home in the United States. He initially found it difficult to compose. Although he was well known in America as a pianist, ethnomusicologist and teacher, he was not well known as a composer. There was little American interest in his music during his final years. He and his wife Ditta gave some concerts, although demand for them was low. Bart\u00f3k, who had made some recordings in Hungary, also recorded for Columbia Records after he came to the US; many of these recordings (some with Bart\u00f3k's own spoken introductions) were later issued on LP and CD.\nSupported by a research fellowship from Columbia University, for several years, Bart\u00f3k and Ditta worked on a large collection of Serbian and Croatian folk songs in Columbia's libraries. Bart\u00f3k's economic difficulties during his first years in America were mitigated by publication royalties, teaching and performance tours. While his finances were always precarious, he did not live and die in poverty as was the common myth. He had enough friends and supporters to ensure that there was sufficient money and work available for him to live on. Bart\u00f3k was a proud man and did not easily accept charity. Despite being short on cash at times, he often refused money that his friends offered him out of their own pockets. Although he was not a member of the ASCAP, the society paid for any medical care he needed during his last two years, to which Bart\u00f3k reluctantly agreed. The first symptoms of his health problems began late in 1940, when his right shoulder began to show signs of stiffening. In 1942, symptoms increased and he started having bouts of fever. Bart\u00f3k 's illness was at first thought to be a recurrence of the tuberculosis he had experienced as a young man, and one of his doctors in New York was Edgar Mayer, director of Will Rogers Memorial Hospital in Saranac Lake but medical examinations found no underlying disease. Finally, in April 1944, leukemia was diagnosed, but by this time, little could be done.\nAs his body slowly failed, Bart\u00f3k found more creative energy, and he produced a final set of masterpieces, partly thanks to the violinist Joseph Szigeti and the conductor Fritz Reiner (Reiner had been Bart\u00f3k's friend and champion since his days as Bart\u00f3k's student at the Royal Academy). Bart\u00f3k's last work might well have been the String Quartet No. 6 but for Serge Koussevitzky's commission for the Concerto for Orchestra. Koussevitsky's Boston Symphony Orchestra premi\u00e8red the work in December 1944 to highly positive reviews. The Concerto for Orchestra quickly became Bart\u00f3k's most popular work, although he did not live to see its full impact.\nIn 1944, he was also commissioned by Yehudi Menuhin to write a Sonata for Solo Violin. In 1945, Bart\u00f3k composed his Piano Concerto No. 3, a graceful and almost neo-classical work, as a surprise 42nd birthday present for Ditta, but he died just over a month before her birthday, with the scoring not quite finished. He had also sketched his Viola Concerto, but had barely started the scoring at his death, leaving completed only the viola part and sketches of the orchestral part.\nB\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k died at age 64 in a hospital in New York City from complications of leukemia (specifically, of secondary polycythemia) on 26 September 1945. His funeral was attended by only ten people. Aside from his widow and their son, other attendees included Gy\u00f6rgy S\u00e1ndor.\nBart\u00f3k's body was initially interred in Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York. During the final year of communist Hungary in the late 1980s, the Hungarian government, along with his two sons, B\u00e9la III and P\u00e9ter, requested that his remains be exhumed and transferred back to Budapest for burial, where Hungary arranged a state funeral for him on 7 July 1988. He was re-interred at Budapest's Farkasr\u00e9ti Cemetery, next to the remains of Ditta, who died in 1982, one year after what would have been B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k's 100th birthday.\nThe two unfinished works were later completed by his pupil Tibor Serly. Gy\u00f6rgy S\u00e1ndor was the soloist in the first performance of the Third Piano Concerto on 8\u00a0February 1946. Ditta P\u00e1sztory-Bart\u00f3k later played and recorded it. The Viola Concerto was revised and published in the 1990s by Bart\u00f3k's son; this version may be closer to what Bart\u00f3k intended. Concurrently, Peter Bart\u00f3k, in association with Argentinian musician Nelson Dellamaggiore, worked to reprint and revise past editions of the Third Piano Concerto.\nMusic.\nBart\u00f3k's music reflects two trends that dramatically changed the sound of music in the 20th century: the breakdown of the diatonic system of harmony that had served composers for the previous two hundred years; and the revival of nationalism as a source for musical inspiration, a trend that began with Mikhail Glinka and Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k in the last half of the 19th century. In his search for new forms of tonality, Bart\u00f3k turned to Hungarian folk music, as well as to other folk music of the Carpathian Basin and even of Algeria and Turkey; in so doing he became influential in that stream of modernism which used indigenous music and techniques.\nOne characteristic style of music is his Night music, which he used mostly in slow movements of multi-movement ensemble or orchestral compositions in his mature period. It is characterised by \"eerie dissonances providing a backdrop to sounds of nature and lonely melodies\". An example is the third movement (Adagio) of his \"Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta\". His music can be grouped roughly in accordance with the different periods in his life.\nEarly years (1890\u20131902).\nThe works of Bart\u00f3k's youth were written in a classical and early romantic style touched with influences of popular and Gypsy music. Between 1890 and 1894 (nine to 13 years of age) he wrote 31 piano pieces with corresponding opus numbers. Although most of these were simple dance pieces, in these early works Bart\u00f3k began to tackle some more advanced forms, as in his ten-part programmatic \"A Duna foly\u00e1sa\" (\"The Course of the Danube\", 1890\u201394), which he played in his first public recital in 1892.\nIn Catholic grammar school Bart\u00f3k took to studying the scores of composers \"from Bach to Wagner\", his compositions then advancing in style and taking on similarities to Schumann and Brahms. Following his matriculation into the Budapest Academy in 1890 he composed very little, though he began to work on exercises in orchestration and familiarized himself thoroughly with the operas of Wagner. In 1902 his creative energies were revitalized by the discovery of the music of Richard Strauss, whose tone poem \"Also sprach Zarathustra\", according to Bart\u00f3k, \"stimulated the greatest enthusiasm in me; at last I saw the way that lay before me.\" Bart\u00f3k also owned the score to \"A Hero's Life\", which he transcribed for the piano and committed to memory.\nNew influences (1903\u201311).\nUnder the influence of Strauss, Bart\u00f3k composed in 1903 \"Kossuth\", a symphonic poem in ten tableaux on the subject of the 1848 Hungarian war of independence, reflecting the composers growing interest in musical nationalism. A year later he renewed his opus numbers with the \"Rhapsody for Piano and Orchestra\" serving as Opus 1. Driven by nationalistic fervor and a desire to transcend the influence of prior composers, Bart\u00f3k began a lifelong devotion to folk music which was sparked by his overhearing nanny Lidi D\u00f3sa's singing of Transylvanian folk songs at a Hungarian resort in 1904. Bart\u00f3k began to collect Magyar peasant melodies, later extending to the folk music of other peoples of the Carpathian Basin, Slovaks, Romanians, Rusyns, Serbs and Croatians. His compositional output would gradually prune away romantic elements in favour of an idiom that embodied folk music as intrinsic and essential to its style. Later in life he would have this to say on the incorporation of folk and art music:The question is, what are the ways in which peasant music is taken over and becomes transmuted into modern music? We may, for instance, take over a peasant melody unchanged or only slightly varied, write an accompaniment to it and possibly some opening and concluding phrases. This kind of work would show a certain analogy with Bach's treatment of chorales. ... Another method ... is the following: the composer does not make use of a real peasant melody but invents his own imitation of such melodies. There is no true difference between this method and the one described above. ... There is yet a third way ... Neither peasant melodies nor imitations of peasant melodies can be found in his music, but it is pervaded by the atmosphere of peasant music. In this case we may say, he has completely absorbed the idiom of peasant music which has become his musical mother tongue.\nBart\u00f3k became first acquainted with Debussy's music in 1907 and regarded his music highly. In an interview in 1939 Bart\u00f3k said\nDebussy's great service to music was to reawaken among all musicians an awareness of harmony and its possibilities. In that, he was just as important as Beethoven, who revealed to us the possibilities of progressive form, or as Bach, who showed us the transcendent significance of counterpoint. Now, what I am always asking myself is this: is it possible to make a synthesis of these three great masters, a living synthesis that will be valid for our time? Debussy's influence is present in the Fourteen Bagatelles (1908). These made Ferruccio Busoni exclaim \"At last something truly new!\". Until 1911, Bart\u00f3k composed widely differing works which ranged from adherence to romantic-style, to folk song arrangements and to his modernist opera \"Bluebeard's Castle\". The negative reception of his work led him to focus on folk music research after 1911 and abandon composition with the exception of folk music arrangements.\nNew inspiration and experimentation (1916\u201321).\nHis pessimistic attitude towards composing was lifted by the stormy and inspiring contact with Kl\u00e1ra Gombossy in the summer of 1915. This interesting episode in Bart\u00f3k's life remained hidden until it was researched by Denijs Dille between 1979 and 1989. Bart\u00f3k started composing again, including the Suite for piano opus 14 (1916), and \"The Miraculous Mandarin\" (1918) and he completed \"The Wooden Prince\" (1917).\nBart\u00f3k felt the result of World War I as a personal tragedy. Many regions he loved were severed from Hungary: Transylvania, the Banat (where he was born), and Pozsony where his mother had lived. Additionally, the political relations between Hungary and other successor states to the Austro-Hungarian empire prohibited his folk music research outside of Hungary. Bart\u00f3k also wrote the noteworthy \"Eight Improvisations on Hungarian Peasant Songs\" in 1920, and the sunny \"Dance Suite\" in 1923, the year of his second marriage.\n\"Synthesis of East and West\" (1926\u201345).\nIn 1926, Bart\u00f3k needed a significant piece for piano and orchestra with which he could tour in Europe and America. In the preparation for writing his First Piano Concerto, he wrote his Sonata, \"Out of Doors\", and \"Nine Little Pieces\", all for solo piano. He increasingly found his own voice in his maturity. The style of his last period\u2014named \"Synthesis of East and West\"\u2014is hard to define let alone to put under one term. In his mature period, Bart\u00f3k wrote relatively few works but most of them are large-scale compositions for large settings. Only his voice works have programmatic titles and his late works often adhere to classical forms.\nAmong Bart\u00f3k's most important works are the six string quartets (1908, 1917, 1927, 1928, 1934, and 1939), the \"Cantata Profana\" (1930, Bart\u00f3k declared that this was the work he felt and professed to be his most personal \"credo\", the \"Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta\" (1936), the Concerto for Orchestra (1943) and the Third Piano Concerto (1945). He made a lasting contribution to the literature for younger students: for his son P\u00e9ter's music lessons, he composed \"Mikrokosmos\", a six-volume collection of graded piano pieces.\nMusical analysis.\nPaul Wilson lists as the most prominent characteristics of Bart\u00f3k's music from late 1920s onwards the influence of the Carpathian basin and European art music, and his changing attitude toward (and use of) tonality, but without the use of the traditional harmonic functions associated with major and minor scales.\nAlthough Bart\u00f3k claimed in his writings that his music was always tonal, he rarely uses the chords or scales of tonality, and so the descriptive resources of tonal theory are of limited use. George and Elliott focus on alternative methods of signaling tonal centers, via axes of inversional symmetry. Others view Bart\u00f3k's axes of symmetry in terms of atonal analytic protocols. Richard argues that inversional symmetry is often a byproduct of another atonal procedure, the formation of chords from transpositionally related dyads. Atonal pitch-class theory also furnishes the resources for exploring polymodal chromaticism, projected sets, privileged patterns, and large set types used as source sets such as the equal tempered twelve tone aggregate, octatonic scale (and alpha chord), the diatonic and \"heptatonia secunda\" seven-note scales, and less often the whole tone scale and the primary pentatonic collection.\nHe rarely used the simple aggregate actively to shape musical structure, though there are notable examples such as the second theme from the first movement of his Second Violin Concerto, commenting that he \"wanted to show Schoenberg that one can use all twelve tones and still remain tonal\". More thoroughly, in the first eight measures of the last movement of his Second Quartet, all notes gradually gather with the twelfth (G) sounding for the first time on the last beat of measure 8, marking the end of the first section. The aggregate is partitioned in the opening of the Third String Quartet with C\u2013D\u2013D\u2013E in the accompaniment (strings) while the remaining pitch classes are used in the melody (violin 1) and more often as 7\u201335 (diatonic or \"white-key\" collection) and 5\u201335 (pentatonic or \"black-key\" collection) such as in no. 6 of the \"Eight Improvisations\". There, the primary theme is on the black keys in the left hand, while the right accompanies with triads from the white keys. In measures 50\u201351 in the third movement of the Fourth Quartet, the first violin and cello play black-key chords, while the second violin and viola play stepwise diatonic lines. On the other hand, from as early as the Suite for piano, Op. 14 (1914), he occasionally employed a form of serialism based on compound interval cycles, some of which are maximally distributed, multi-aggregate cycles. Ern\u0151 Lendvai analyses Bart\u00f3k's works as being based on two opposing tonal systems, that of the acoustic scale and the axis system, as well as using the golden section as a structural principle.\nMilton Babbitt, in his 1949 critique of Bart\u00f3k's string quartets, criticized Bart\u00f3k for using tonality and non-tonal methods unique to each piece. Babbitt noted that \"Bart\u00f3k's solution was a specific one, it cannot be duplicated\". Bart\u00f3k's use of \"two organizational principles\"\u2014tonality for large scale relationships and the piece-specific method for moment to moment thematic elements\u2014was a problem for Babbitt, who worried that the \"highly attenuated tonality\" requires extreme non-harmonic methods to create a feeling of closure.\nCatalogues and opus numbers.\nThe cataloguing of Bart\u00f3k's works is somewhat complex. Bart\u00f3k assigned opus numbers to his works three times, the last of these series ending with the Sonata for Violin and Piano No. 1, Op. 21 in 1921. He ended this practice because of the difficulty of distinguishing between original works and ethnographic arrangements, and between major and minor works. Since his death, three attempts\u2014two full and one partial\u2014have been made at cataloguing. The first, and still most widely used, is Andr\u00e1s Sz\u0151ll\u0151sy's chronological Sz. numbers, from 1 to 121. subsequently reorganised the juvenilia (Sz. 1\u201325) thematically, as DD numbers 1 to 77. The most recent catalogue is that of L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Somfai; this is a chronological index with works identified by BB numbers 1 to 129, incorporating corrections based on the B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k Thematic Catalogue. On 1 January 2016, his works entered the public domain in the European Union.\nDiscography.\nTogether with his like-minded contemporary Zolt\u00e1n Kod\u00e1ly, Bart\u00f3k embarked on an extensive programme of field research to capture the folk and peasant melodies of Magyar, Slovak and Romanian language territories. At first they would transcribe the melodies by hand, but later they began to use a wax cylinder recording machine invented by Thomas Edison. Compilations of Bart\u00f3k's field recordings, interviews, and original piano playing have been released over the years, largely by the Hungarian record label Hungaroton:\nA compilation of field recordings and transcriptions for two violas was also recently released by Tantara Records in 2014.\nOn 18 March 2016 Decca Classics released \"B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k: The Complete Works\", the first ever complete compilation of all of Bart\u00f3k's compositions, including new recordings of never-before-recorded early piano and vocal works. However, none of the composer's own performances are included in this 32-disc set."}
{"id": "4528", "revid": "777667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4528", "title": "Bill Haley", "text": "William John Clifton Haley (; July 6, 1925 \u2013 February 9, 1981) was a pioneering American rock and roll musician. He is credited by many with first popularizing this form of music in the early 1950s with his group Bill Haley &amp; His Comets and million-selling hits such as \"Rock Around the Clock\", \"See You Later, Alligator\", \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\", \"Rocket 88\", \"Skinny Minnie\", and \"Razzle Dazzle\". His recordings have sold over 60 million records worldwide.\nBiography.\nEarly life and career.\nHaley was born July 6, 1925 in Highland Park, Michigan. In 1929, the four-year-old Haley underwent an inner-ear mastoid operation which accidentally severed an optic nerve, leaving him blind in his left eye for the rest of his life. It is said that he adopted his trademark kiss curl over his right eye to draw attention from his left, but it also became his \"gimmick\", and added to his popularity. As a result of the effects of the Great Depression on the Detroit area, his father moved the family to Bethel, Pennsylvania, when Bill was seven years old. Haley's father William Albert Haley was from Kentucky and played the banjo and mandolin, and his mother, Maude Green, who was originally from Ulverston in Lancashire, England, was a technically accomplished keyboardist with classical training. Haley told the story that when he made a simulated guitar out of cardboard, his parents bought him a real one.\nOne of his first appearances was in 1938 for a Bethel Junior baseball team entertainment event, performing guitar and songs when he was 13 years old.\nThe anonymous sleeve notes accompanying the 1956 Decca album \"Rock Around the Clock\" describe Haley's early life and career: \"When Bill Haley was fifteen [c. 1940] he left home with his guitar and very little else and set out on the hard road to fame and fortune. The next few years, continuing this story in a fairy-tale manner, were hard and poverty-stricken, but crammed full of useful experience. Apart from learning how to exist on one meal a day and other artistic exercises, he worked at an open-air park show, sang and yodelled with any band that would have him, and worked with a traveling medicine show. Eventually he got a job with a popular group known as the 'Down Homers' while they were in Hartford, Connecticut. Soon after this he decided, as all successful people must decide at some time or another, to be his own boss again \u2013 and he has been that ever since.\" These notes fail to account for his early band, known as the Four Aces of Western Swing. During the 1940s Haley was considered one of the top cowboy yodelers in America as \"Silver Yodeling Bill Haley\". One source states that Hayley started his career as \"The Rambling Yodeler\" in a country band, The Saddlemen.\nThe sleeve notes conclude: \"For six years Bill Haley was a musical director of Radio Station WPWA in Chester, Pennsylvania, and led his own band all through this period. It was then known as Bill Haley's Saddlemen, indicating their definite leaning toward the tough Western style. They continued playing in clubs as well as over the radio around Philadelphia, and in 1951 made their first recordings on Ed Wilson's Keystone Records in Philadelphia.\" The group subsequently signed with Dave Miller's Holiday Records and, on June 14, 1951 the Saddlemen recorded a cover of the Delta Cats \"Rocket 88\".\nBill Haley and His Comets.\nDuring the Labor Day weekend in 1952, the Saddlemen were renamed Bill Haley with Haley's Comets (inspired by the supposedly official pronunciation of Halley's Comet, a name suggested by WPWA radio station program director, Bob Johnson, where Bill Haley had a live radio program from noon to 1 p.m.), and in 1953, Haley's recording of \"Crazy Man, Crazy\" (co-written by him and his bass player, Marshall Lytle, although Lytle would not receive credit until 2001) became the first rock and roll song to hit the American charts, peaking at number 15 on \"Billboard\" and number 11 on \"Cash Box\". Soon after, the band's name was revised to \"Bill Haley &amp; His Comets\".\nIn 1954, Haley recorded \"Rock Around the Clock\". Initially, it was relatively successful, peaking at number 23 on the \"Billboard\" pop singles chart and staying on the charts for a few weeks. On re-release, the record reached #1 on July 9, 1955.\nHaley soon had another worldwide hit with \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\", another rhythm and blues cover in this case from Big Joe Turner, which went on to sell a million copies and was the first rock 'n' roll song to enter the British singles charts in December 1954, becoming a gold record. He retained elements of the original (which was slow blues), but sped it up with some country music aspects into the song (specifically, Western swing) and changed up the lyrics. Haley and his band were important in launching the music known as \"Rock and Roll\" to a wider audience after a period of it being considered an underground genre.\nWhen \"Rock Around the Clock\" appeared as the theme song of the 1955 film \"Blackboard Jungle\" starring Glenn Ford, it soared to the top of the American \"Billboard\" chart for eight weeks. The single is commonly used as a convenient line of demarcation between the \"rock era\" and the music industry that preceded it. \"Billboard\" separated its statistical tabulations into 1890\u20131954 and 1955\u2013present. After the record rose to number one, Haley became widely popular by those who had come to embrace the new style of music. With the song's success, the age of rock music began overnight and ended the dominance of the jazz and pop standards performed by Frank Sinatra, Jo Stafford, Perry Como, Bing Crosby, Eddie Fisher, Patti Page and others. Nevertheless, in the United Kingdom, Haley was supported by former Dankworth Seven lead vocalist Frank Holder among others.\n\"Rock Around the Clock\" was the first record to sell over one million copies in both Britain and Germany. Later on in 1957, Haley became the first major American rock singer to tour Europe. Haley continued to score hits throughout the 1950s such as \"See You Later, Alligator\" and he starred in the first rock and roll musical films \"Rock Around the Clock\" and \"Don't Knock the Rock\", both in 1956. Haley was already 30 years old, and he was soon eclipsed in the United States by the younger, sexier Elvis Presley, but continued to enjoy great popularity in Latin America, Europe, and Australia during the 1960s.\nBill Haley and the Comets performed \"Rock Around the Clock\" on the \"Texaco Star Theater\" hosted by Milton Berle on Tuesday, May 31, 1955, on NBC in an\" a cappella\" and lip-synched version. Berle predicted that the song would go number one: \"A group of entertainers who are going right to the top.\" Berle also sang and danced to the song which was performed by the entire cast of the show. This was one of the earliest nationally televised performances by a rock and roll band and provided the new musical genre with a much wider audience.\nBill Haley and the Comets were the first rock and roll act to appear on the iconic American musical variety series the \"Ed Sullivan Show\" on Sunday, August 7, 1955, on CBS in a broadcast that originated from the Shakespeare Festival Theater in Hartford, Connecticut. They performed a live version of \"Rock Around the Clock\" with Franny Beecher on lead guitar and Dick Richards on drums. The band made their second appearance on the show on Sunday, April 28, 1957, performing the songs \"Rudy's Rock\" and \"Forty Cups of Coffee\".\nBill Haley and the Comets appeared on \"American Bandstand\" hosted by Dick Clark on ABC twice in 1957, on the prime time show October 28, 1957, and on the regular daytime show on November 27, 1957. The band also appeared on Dick Clark's \"Saturday Night Beechnut Show\", also known as \"The Dick Clark Show\", a primetime TV series from New York on March 22, 1958, during the first season and on February 20, 1960, performing \"Rock Around the Clock\", \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\", and \"Tamiami\". In 2017 Haley was inducted into the National Rhythm &amp; Blues Hall of Fame.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages.\nBill Haley was married three times:\nChildren.\nBill Haley had at least ten children. John W. Haley, his eldest son, wrote \"Sound and Glory\", a biography of Haley. His youngest daughter, Gina Haley, is a professional musician based in Texas. Scott Haley is an athlete. His youngest son Pedro is also a musician.\nHe also had a daughter, Martha Maria, from his last marriage with Martha Velasco.\nBill Haley Jr., Haley's second son and first with Joan Barbara \"Cuppy\" Haley-Hahn, publishes a regional business magazine. In February, 2011, he formed a tribute band, performing his father's music and telling the stories behind the songs.\nLast years and death.\nAn admitted alcoholic, Haley fought a battle with alcohol into the 1970s. Nonetheless, he and his band continued to be a popular touring act, benefiting from a 1950s nostalgia movement that began in the late 1960s and the signing of a lucrative record deal with the European Sonet label. After performing for Queen Elizabeth II at the Royal Variety Performance on November 10, 1979, Haley made his final performances in South Africa in May and June 1980. Before the South African tour, he was diagnosed with a brain tumor. Subsequently, Haley's planned tour of Germany in the autumn of 1980 had to be cancelled.\nDespite his illness, Haley started compiling notes for possible use as a basis for either a biographical film based on his life, or a published autobiography (accounts differ), and there were plans for him to record an album in Memphis, Tennessee, when the brain tumor began affecting his behavior and he returned to his home in Harlingen, Texas.\nThe October 25, 1980 issue of German tabloid \"Bild\" reported that Haley had a brain tumor. Haley's British manager, Patrick Malynn, was quoted as saying...\"Haley had taken a fit [and] didn't recognize anyone any more.\" Haley was immediately taken to his home in Beverly Hills. In addition, Haley's doctor said that the tumor was inoperable. The \"Berliner Zeitung\" reported a few days later that Haley had collapsed after a performance in Texas and was taken to the hospital in his hometown of Harlingen. However, this account is questionable, as Bill Haley did not perform in the United States at all in 1980.\nMartha, Bill's widow, who was with him in these troubling times, denies he had a brain tumor as does his old, very close friend, Hugh McCallum. Martha and friends related that Bill did not want to go on the road any more and that ticket sales for that planned tour of Germany in the fall of 1980 were slow. According to McCallum, \"It's my unproven gut feeling that that [the brain tumor] was said to curtail talks about the tour and play the sympathy card.\" \nAt this same time, Haley's drinking problem appeared to be getting worse. According to Martha, she and Bill fought all the time and she told him to stop drinking or move out. Eventually, he moved out into a room in their pool house. Martha still took care of him and sometimes, he would come in the house to eat, but he ate very little. \"There were days we never saw him,\" said his daughter Martha Maria.\nIn addition to Haley's drinking problems, he was also having serious mental health issues. Martha Maria said, \"It was like sometimes he was drunk even when he wasn't drinking.\" After being picked up by the Harlingen Police several times for alleged intoxication, Martha had a judge put Haley in the hospital, where he was seen by a psychiatrist, who said Bill's brain was overproducing a chemical, like adrenaline. The doctor prescribed a medication to stop the overproduction, but said Bill would have to stop drinking. Martha said, \"This is pointless.\" She took him home, however, fed him and gave him his first dose. As soon as he felt better, he went back out to his room in the pool house, and the downward spiral continued until his passing. \nMedia reports immediately following his death indicated that Haley displayed deranged and erratic behavior in his final weeks. According to a biography of Haley by John Swenson, released a year later, Haley made a succession of bizarre, mostly monologue late-night phone calls to friends and relatives towards the end of his life in which he was semi-coherent, his first wife has been quoted as saying, \"He would call you and ramble, dwelling on the past ...\". The biography also describes Haley painting the windows of his home black, but there is little other information available about his final days.\nHaley died on February 9, 1981, at the age of 55 at his home in Harlingen. He was discovered lying motionless on his bed by a friend who had stopped by to visit him. The friend immediately called the police and Haley was pronounced dead at the scene. Haley's death certificate gave 'natural causes, most likely a heart attack' as being the cause. Following a small funeral service attended by 75 people, Haley was cremated; the fate of his ashes is publicly unknown.\nTributes and legacy.\nHaley was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987. His son Pedro represented him at the ceremony. He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6350 Hollywood Boulevard on February 8, 1960, for his contributions to the music industry The Comets were separately inducted into the Hall of Fame as a group in 2012, after a rule change allowed the induction of backing groups.\nSongwriters Tom Russell and Dave Alvin addressed Haley's demise in musical terms with \"Haley's Comet\" on Alvin's 1991 album \"Blue Blvd.\" Dwight Yoakam sang backup on the tribute.\nSurviving members of the 1954\u201355 contingent of Haley's Comets reunited in the late 1980s and continued to perform for many years around the world. They released a concert DVD in 2004 on Hydra Records, played the Viper Room in West Hollywood in 2005, and performed at Dick Clark's American Bandstand Theater in Branson, Missouri, beginning in 2006\u201307. As of 2014, only two members of this particular contingent were still alive (Joey Ambrose and Dick Richards), but they continued to perform in Branson and in Europe. In the Summer of 2019, Dick Richards, the drummer of the Comets, passed away, at the age of 95. At least two other groups also continue to perform in North America under the Comets name as of 2014.\nIn March 2007, the Original Comets opened the Bill Haley Museum in Munich, Germany. On October 27, 2007, ex-Comets guitar player Bill Turner opened the Bill Haley Museum for the public.\nAsteroid.\nIn February 2006, the International Astronomical Union announced the naming of asteroid 79896 Billhaley to mark the 25th anniversary of Bill Haley's death.\nFilm portrayals.\nUnlike his contemporaries, Bill Haley has rarely been portrayed on screen. Following the success of \"The Buddy Holly Story\" in 1978, Haley expressed interest in having his life story committed to film, but this never came to fruition. In the 1980s and early 1990s, numerous media reports emerged stating that plans were underway to do a biopic based upon Haley's life, with Beau Bridges, Jeff Bridges and John Ritter all at one point being mentioned as actors in line to play Haley (according to \"Goldmine Magazine\", Ritter attempted to buy the film rights to \"Sound and Glory\").\nBill Haley has also been portrayed \u2013 not always in a positive light \u2013 in several \"period\" films:\nDiscography.\nBefore the formation of Bill Haley and the Saddlemen, which later became the Comets, Haley released several singles with other groups. Dates are approximate due to lack of documentation.\nAs Bill Haley and the Four Aces of Western Swing:\n1948\n1949\nAs Johnny Clifton and His String Band:\n1950\nMany Haley discographies list two 1946 recordings by the Down Homers released on the Vogue Records label as featuring Haley. Haley historian Chris Gardner, as well as surviving members of the group, have confirmed that the two singles: \"Out Where the West Winds Blow\"/\"Who's Gonna Kiss You When I'm Gone\" (Vogue R736) and \"Boogie Woogie Yodel\"/\"Baby I Found Out All About You\" (Vogue R786) do not feature Haley. However, the tracks were nonetheless included in the compilation box set \"Rock 'n' Roll Arrives\" released by Bear Family Records in 2006.\nUnreleased recordings.\nBill Haley recorded prolifically during the 1940s, often at the radio stations where he worked, or in formal studio settings. Virtually none of these recordings were ever released. Liner notes for a 2003 CD release by Hydra Records entitled \"Bill Haley and Friends Vol. 2: The Legendary Cowboy Recordings\" reveal that several additional Cowboy label single releases were planned for the Four Aces, but this never occurred.\nA number of previously unreleased Haley country-western recordings from the 1946\u20131950 period began to emerge near the end of Haley's life, some of which were released by the Arzee label, with titles such as \"Yodel Your Blues Away\" and \"Rose of My Heart.\" Still more demos, alternate takes, and wholly unheard-before recordings have been released since Haley's death. Notable examples of such releases include the albums \"Golden Country Origins\" by Grassroots Records of Australia and \"Hillbilly Haley\" by the British label, Rollercoaster, as well as the aforementioned German release by Hydra Records. In 2006, Bear Family Records of Germany released what is considered to be the most comprehensive (yet still incomplete) collection of Haley's 1946\u20131950 recordings as part of its Haley box set \"Rock n' Roll Arrives\".\nCompositions.\nBill Haley's compositions included \"Four Leaf Clover Blues\" in 1948, \"Rose of My Heart\", \"Yodel Your Blues Away\", \"Crazy Man, Crazy\", \"What'Cha Gonna Do\", \"Fractured\", \"Live It Up\", \"Farewell, So Long, Goodbye\", \"Real Rock Drive\", \"Rocking Chair on the Moon\", \"Sundown Boogie\", \"Green Tree Boogie\", \"Tearstains on My Heart\", \"Down Deep in My Heart\", \"Straight Jacket\", \"Birth of the Boogie\", \"Two Hound Dogs\", \"Rock-A-Beatin' Boogie\", \"Hot Dog Buddy Buddy\", \"R-O-C-K\", \"Rudy's Rock\", \"Calling All Comets\", \"Tonight's the Night\", \"Hook, Line and Sinker\", \"Sway with Me\", \"Paper Boy (On Main Street U.S.A.)\", \"Skinny Minnie\", \"B.B. Betty\", \"Eloise\", \"Whoa Mabel!\", \"Vive le Rock and Roll\", \"I've Got News For You\", \"So Right Tonight\", \"Jamaica D.J.\", \"Ana Maria\", \"Yucat\u00e1n Twist\", \"Football Rock and Roll\", \"Let the Good Times Roll Again\" in 1979, and \"Chick Safari\" in 1960.\nHe also wrote or co-wrote songs for other artists such as \"I've Got News for You\" for Penny Smith in 1955 on Kahill, \"Calypso Rock\" for Dave Day and The Red Coats on Kapp in 1956, \"Half Your Heart\" with Robert J. Hayes for Kitty Nation in 1956 on Wing, \"I Oughta\" and \"Everything But You\" for Dotti Malone in 1956 also on Wing, \"A.B.C. Rock\" and \"Rocky the Rockin' Rabbit\" (among others) for Sally Starr for an album she released on Haley's own label, Clymax Records, \"A Sweet Bunch of Roses\" for Country and Western singer Lou Graham, \"Toodle-Oo-Bamboo\" for Ray Coleman and His Skyrockets on Skyrocket Records in 1959, \"Always Together\" for the Cook Brothers on Arcade in 1960, \"Crazy Street\" for The Matys Brothers on Coral Records, \"The Cat\" for Cappy Bianco, and \"(Ya Gotta) Sing For the Ladies\" and \"Butterfly Love\" for Ginger Shannon and Johnny Montana in 1960 on Arcade as well as \"I'm Shook\" and \"Broke Down Baby\", both of which were recorded by The Tyrones in 1958-59.\nQuotations.\n\"NME\" \u2013 October 1955\n\"NME\" \u2013 January 1957\nAwards.\nIn 1982, Haley's \"Rock Around the Clock\" was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings at least 25 years old and with \"qualitative or historical significance\".\nIn December 2017, Haley was inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Hall Of Fame."}
{"id": "4529", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4529", "title": "Northern bobwhite", "text": "The northern bobwhite (\"Colinus virginianus\"), also known as the Virginia quail or (in its home range) bobwhite quail, is a ground-dwelling bird native to Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Cuba, with introduced populations elsewhere in the Caribbean, Europe, and Asia. It is a member of the group of species known as New World quails (Odontophoridae). They were initially placed with the Old World quails in the pheasant family (Phasianidae), but are not particularly closely related. The name \"bobwhite\" is an onomatopoeic derivation from its characteristic whistling call. Despite its secretive nature, the northern bobwhite is one of the most familiar quails in eastern North America, because it is frequently the only quail in its range. Habitat degradation has likely contributed to the northern bobwhite population in eastern North America declining by roughly 85% from 1966\u20132014. This population decline is apparently range-wide and continuing.\nThere are 23 subspecies of northern bobwhite, many of which are hunted extensively as game birds. One subspecies, the masked bobwhite (\"Colinus virginianus ridgwayi\"), is listed as endangered with wild populations located in the northern Mexican state of Sonora and a reintroduced population in Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge in southern Arizona.\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nSubspecies.\nThere are 23 recognized subspecies in four groups. One subspecies, the Key West bobwhite (\"C. v. insulanus\"), is extinct.\nThe holotype specimen of \"Ortyx pectoralis\" Gould (Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1842 (1843), p.182.) is held in the collections of the National Museums Liverpool at the World Museum, with accession number D3713. The specimen died in the aviary at Knowsley Hall, Lancashire and came to the Liverpool national collection via the 13th Earl of Derby\u2019s collection, which was bequeathed to the people of Liverpool in 1851.\nDescription.\n\"C. virginianus\" is a moderately-sized quail, and is the only small galliform native to eastern North America. The bobwhite can range from in length with a wingspan. As indicated by body mass, weights increase in birds found further north, as corresponds to Bergmann's rule. In Mexico, northern bobwhites weigh from whereas in the north they average and large males can attain as much as . Among standard measurements, the wing chord is , the tail is the culmen is and the tarsus is . It has the typical chunky, rounded shape of a quail. The bill is short, curved and brown-black in color. This species is sexually dimorphic. Males have a white throat and brow stripe bordered by black. The overall rufous plumage has gray mottling on the wings, white scalloped stripes on the flanks, and black scallops on the whitish underparts. The tail is gray. Females are similar but are duller overall and have a buff throat and brow without the black border. Both sexes have pale legs and feet.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe northern bobwhite can be found year-round in agricultural fields, grassland, open woodland areas, roadsides and wood edges. Its range covers the southeastern quadrant of the United States from the Great Lakes and southern Minnesota east to Pennsylvania and southern Massachusetts, and extending west to southern Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Colorado front-range foothills to 7,000 feet, and all but westernmost Texas. It is absent from the southern tip of Florida and the highest elevations of the Appalachian Mountains, but occurs in eastern Mexico and in Cuba, and has been introduced to Hispaniola, the Bahamas, the Turks and Caicos islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, France, China, Portugal, and Italy . Isolated populations also have been introduced in Oregon and Washington. The northern bobwhite has also been introduced to New Zealand.\nVocalizations.\nThe clear whistle \"bob-WHITE\" or \"bob-bob-WHITE\" call is very recognizable. The syllables are slow and widely spaced, rising in pitch a full octave from beginning to end. Other calls include lisps, peeps, and more rapidly whistled warning calls.\nBehavior and ecology.\nLike most game birds, the northern bobwhite is shy and elusive. When threatened, it will crouch and freeze, relying on camouflage to stay undetected, but will flush into low flight if closely disturbed. It is generally solitary or paired early in the year, but family groups are common in the late summer and winter roosts may have two dozen or more birds in a single covey.\nBreeding.\nThe species was once considered monogamous, but with the advent of radio telemetry, the sexual behavior of bobwhites has better been described as ambisexual polygamy. Either parent may incubate a clutch for 23 days, and the precocial young leave the nest shortly after hatching. The main source of nest failure is predation, with nest success averaging 28% across their range. However, the nest success of stable populations is typically much higher than this average, and the aforementioned estimate includes values for declining populations. \nBrooding behavior varies in that amalgamation (kidnapping, adopting, creching, gang brooding) may occur. An incubating parent may alternatively stay with its young. A hen may re-nest up to four times until she has a successful nest. However, it is extremely rare for bobwhites to hatch more than two successful nests within one nesting season.\nFood and feeding.\nThe northern bobwhite's diet consists of plant material and small invertebrates, such as ticks, snails, grasshoppers, beetles, spiders, crickets, and leafhoppers. Plant sources include seeds, wild berries, partridge peas, and cultivated grains. It forages on the ground in open areas with some spots of taller vegetation.\nOptimal nutrient requirements for bobwhite vary depending on the age of bird and the time of the year. For example, optimal protein and energy requirements for egg laying hens (23% protein) is much higher than males (16%).\nRelationship to humans.\nIntroduced populations.\nEuropean Union.\nNorthern bobwhite were introduced into Italy in 1927, and are reported in the plains and hills in the northwest of the country. Other reports from the EU are in France, Spain, and Yugoslavia. As bobwhites are highly productive and popular aviary subjects, it is reasonable to expect other introductions have been made in other parts of the EU, especially in the U.K. and Ireland, where game-bird breeding, liberation, and naturalization are relatively common practices.\nNew Zealand.\nFrom 1898 to 1902, some 1,300 birds were imported from America and released in many parts of the North and South Islands, from Northland to Southland. The bird was briefly on the Nelson game shooting licence, but: \"It would seem that the committee was a little too eager in placing these Quail on the licence, or the shooters of the day were over-zealous and greedy in their bag limits, for the Virginian Quail, like the Mountain Quail were soon a thing of the past.\" The Taranaki (Acclimatisation) Society released a few in 1900 and was confidant that in a year or two they might offer good sport; two years later, broods were reported and the species was said to be \"steadily increasing\"; but after another two years they seemed \"to have disappeared\" and that was the end of them. The Otago (Acclimatisation) Society imported more in 1948, but these releases did no good. After 1923, no more genuinely wild birds were sighted until 1952, when a small population was found northwest of Wairoa in the Ruapapa Road area. Since then, bobwhite have been found at several localities around Waikaremoana, in farmland, open bush and along roadsides.\nMore birds have been imported into New Zealand by private individuals since the 1990s and a healthy captive population is now held by backyard aviculturists and have been found to be easily cared for and bred and are popular for their song and good looks. A larger proportion of the national captive population belong to a few game preserves and game bird breeders. Though the birds would be self-sustaining in the wild if they were protected; it is tricky to guess what the effect of an annual population subsidy and hunting has on any of the original populations from the Acclimatisation Society releases. It would be fair to suggest most birds in the wild are no more than one generation from captive stock.\nAn albino hen was present in a covey in Bayview, Hawkes Bay for a couple of seasons sometime around 2000.\nCaptivity.\nHousing.\nBobwhites are generally compatible with most parrots, softbills and doves. This species should, however, be the only ground-dwelling species in the aviary. Most individuals will do little damage to finches, but one should watch that nests are not being crushed when the species perches at night. Single pairs are preferred, unless the birds have been raised together as a group since they were chicks. Some fighting will occur between cocks at breeding time. One cock may be capable of servicing several hens at once, but the fertility seems to be highest in the eggs from the \"preferred\" hen. Aviary style is a compromise between what is tolerated by the bird and what is best for the bird. Open parrot-style type aviaries may be used, but some birds will remain flighty and shy in this situation. In a planted aviary, this species will generally settle down to become quite tame and confiding. Parents with chicks will roost on the ground, forming a circular arrangement, with heads facing outwards. In the early morning and late afternoon, the cock will utter his call, which, although not loud, carries well and may offend noise-sensitive neighbors. Most breeding facilities keep birds in breeding groups on wire up off the ground. This keeps the birds clean and generally avoids diseases and parasites, which can devastate a covey. Cages with mesh floors for pairs and trios are also employed, but usually where there is a photo-period manipulation to keep birds breeding through winter.\nFeeding.\nIn the wild the northern bobwhite feeds on a variety of weed and grass seeds, as well as insects. These are generally collected on the ground or from low foliage. Birds in the aviary are easily catered for with a commercial small seed mix (finch, budgerigar, or small parrot mix) when supplemented with greenfeed. Live food is not usually necessary for breeding, but will be ravenously accepted. High protein foods such as chicken grower crumble are more convenient to supply and will be useful for the stimulation of breeding birds. Extra calcium is required, especially by laying hens; it can be supplied in the form of shell grit, or cuttlefish bone.\nBreeding.\nIn an open aviary, hens will lay all over the show if a nesting site and privacy are not provided. Hens that do this may lay upwards of 80 eggs in a season which can be taken for artificial incubation - and the chicks hand-raised. Otherwise, hens with nesting cover that do make a nest (on the ground) will build up 8\u201325 eggs in a clutch, with eggs being laid daily.\nMutations and hybrids.\nSome captive bobwhite hybrids recorded are between blue quail (scaled quail), Gambel's quail, California quail, and mountain quail. It has long been suggested that there are Japanese quail hybrids being bred commercially; however, there is a distinct lack of photographic proof to substantiate this. Inter-subspecific hybrids have been common.\nSeveral mutations have long been established, including Californian Jumbo, Wisconsin Jumbo, Northern Giant, Albino, Snowflake, Blonde, Fawn, Barred, Silver, and Red.\nStatus.\nThe northern bobwhite is rated as a Near-threatened species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. The northern bobwhite is threatened across its range due to habitat loss and habitat degradation. Changing land use patterns and changing fire regimes have caused once prime habitat to become unfavorable for the bobwhite.\nMasked bobwhite.\nThe masked bobwhite subspecies, \"C. v. ridgwayi\", is listed as endangered in the U.S. The birds were twice declared extirpated in Arizona in the past century. It was originally endemic to southern Arizona in the U.S., and northern Sonora in Mexico. \nThe masked bobwhite was in decline since its discovery in 1884. By 1900, the subspecies was already extinct in the U.S. Populations remained in Mexico, but their study was curtailed by political events in Mexico, including the Mexican Revolution and the last of the Yaqui Wars. A population of the masked bobwhite was finally discovered and studied in Mexico, in 1931 and 1932.\nA native population historically existed in Sonora, but by 2017, its population appeared to be declining, or possibly extinct. A 2017 study recorded no wild sightings of the bird in Sonora. Decline of the species has been attributed to intense livestock grazing in an ecosystem that does not rejuvenate quickly. \nA captive flock was established in Arizona in the 1970s. The George Miksch Sutton Avian Research Center (Sutton Center) became involved with conservation efforts in 2017 to establish a breeding population at the Sutton Center in Oklahoma, in order to reintroduce birds to Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge (BANWR)\n. In 2019, biologists from the Sutton Center transported 1,000 chicks by road vehicle to Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge. In 2020, a projected total of 1,200 birds will be transported by airplanes to BANWR. These recent actions are supplemental, and in addition to other conservation efforts in the past, seem to aid the subspecies' future conservation efforts. "}
{"id": "4530", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4530", "title": "Bluescreen", "text": ""}
{"id": "4531", "revid": "40502578", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4531", "title": "Bipolar disorder", "text": "Bipolar disorder, previously known as manic depression, is a mental disorder characterized by periods of depression and periods of abnormally elevated mood that last from days to weeks each. If the elevated mood is severe or associated with psychosis, it is called mania; if it is less severe, it is called hypomania. During mania, an individual behaves or feels abnormally energetic, happy, or irritable, and they often make impulsive decisions with little regard for the consequences. There is usually also a reduced need for sleep during manic phases. During periods of depression, the individual may experience crying and have a negative outlook on life and poor eye contact with others. The risk of suicide is high; over a period of 20 years, 6% of those with bipolar disorder died by suicide, while 30\u201340% engaged in self-harm. Other mental health issues, such as anxiety disorders and substance use disorders, are commonly associated with bipolar disorder.\nWhile the causes of bipolar disorder are not clearly understood, both genetic and environmental factors are thought to play a role. Many genes, each with small effects, may contribute to the development of disorder. Genetic factors account for about 70\u201390% of the risk of developing bipolar disorder. Environmental risk factors include a history of childhood abuse and long-term stress. The condition is classified as bipolar I disorder if there has been at least one manic episode, with or without depressive episodes, and as bipolar II disorder if there has been at least one hypomanic episode (but no full manic episodes) and one major depressive episode. If the symptoms are due to drugs or medical problems, they are not diagnosed as bipolar disorder. Other conditions having overlapping symptoms with bipolar disorder include attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, personality disorders, schizophrenia, and substance use disorder as well as many other medical conditions. Medical testing is not required for a diagnosis, though blood tests or medical imaging can rule out other problems.\nMood stabilizers\u2014lithium and certain anticonvulsants such as valproate and carbamazepine\u2014are the mainstay of long-term relapse prevention. Antipsychotics are given during acute manic episodes as well as in cases where mood stabilizers are poorly tolerated or ineffective or where compliance is poor. There is some evidence that psychotherapy improves the course of this disorder. The use of antidepressants in depressive episodes is controversial\u2014they can be effective but have been implicated in triggering manic episodes. The treatment of depressive episodes is often difficult. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is effective in acute manic and depressed episodes, especially with psychosis or catatonia. Admission to a psychiatric hospital may be required if a person is a risk to themselves or others; involuntary treatment is sometimes necessary if the affected person refuses treatment.\nBipolar disorder occurs in approximately 1% of the global population. In the United States, about 3% are estimated to be affected at some point in their life; rates appear to be similar in females and males. The most common age at which symptoms begin is 20; an earlier onset in life is associated with a worse prognosis. Around a quarter to a third of people with bipolar disorder have financial, social, or work-related problems due to the illness. Bipolar disorder is among the top 20 causes of disability worldwide and leads to substantial costs for society. Due to lifestyle choices and the side effects of medications, the risk of death from natural causes such as coronary heart disease in people with bipolar disorder is twice that of the general population. \nSigns and symptoms.\nLate adolescence and early adulthood are peak years for the onset of bipolar disorder. The condition is characterized by intermittent episodes of mania or depression, with an absence of symptoms in between. During these episodes, people with bipolar disorder exhibit disruptions in normal mood, psychomotor activity-the level of physical activity that is influenced by mood-(e.g., constant fidgeting with mania or slowed movements with depression), circadian rhythm, and cognition. Mania can present with varying levels of mood disturbance, ranging from euphoria that is associated with \"classic mania\" to dysphoria and irritability. Psychotic symptoms such as delusions or hallucinations may occur in both manic and depressive episodes, their content and nature is consistent with the person's prevailing mood. \nAccording to the DSM-5 criteria, mania is distinguished from hypomania by length, as hypomania is present if elevated mood symptoms are present for at least four consecutive days, and mania is present if such symptoms are present for more than a week. Unlike mania, hypomania is not always associated with impaired functioning. The biological mechanisms responsible for switching from a manic or hypomanic episode to a depressive episode, or vice versa, remain poorly understood.\nManic episodes.\nAlso known as a manic episode, mania is a distinct period of at least one week of elevated or irritable mood, which can range from euphoria to delirium. The core symptom of mania involves an increase in energy of psychomotor activity. Mania can also present with increased self-esteem or grandiosity, racing thoughts, pressured speech that is difficult to interrupt, decreased need for sleep, disinhibited social behavior, increased goal-oriented activities and impaired judgment\u2014exhibition of behaviors characterized as impulsive or high-risk, such as hypersexuality or excessive spending. To meet the definition for a manic episode, these behaviors must impair the individual's ability to socialize or work. If untreated, a manic episode usually lasts three to six months.\nIn severe manic episodes, a person can experience psychotic symptoms, where thought content is affected along with mood. They may feel unstoppable, or as if they have a special relationship with God, a great mission to accomplish, or other grandiose or delusional ideas. This may lead to violent behavior and, sometimes, hospitalization in an inpatient psychiatric hospital. The severity of manic symptoms can be measured by rating scales such as the Young Mania Rating Scale, though questions remain about the reliability of these scales.\nThe onset of a manic or depressive episode is often foreshadowed by sleep disturbance. Mood changes, psychomotor and appetite changes, and an increase in anxiety can also occur up to three weeks before a manic episode develops. Manic individuals often have a history of substance abuse developed over years as a form of \"self-medication\".\nHypomanic episodes.\nHypomania is the milder form of mania, defined as at least four days of the same criteria as mania, but which does not cause a significant decrease in the individual's ability to socialize or work, lacks psychotic features such as delusions or hallucinations, and does not require psychiatric hospitalization. Overall functioning may actually increase during episodes of hypomania and is thought to serve as a defense mechanism against depression by some. Hypomanic episodes rarely progress to full-blown manic episodes. Some people who experience hypomania show increased creativity while others are irritable or demonstrate poor judgment.\nHypomania may feel good to some persons who experience it, though most people who experience hypomania state that the stress of the experience is very painful. Bipolar people who experience hypomania tend to forget the effects of their actions on those around them. Even when family and friends recognize mood swings, the individual will often deny that anything is wrong. If not accompanied by depressive episodes, hypomanic episodes are often not deemed problematic, unless the mood changes are uncontrollable, or volatile. Most commonly, symptoms continue for a few weeks to a few months.\nDepressive episodes.\nSymptoms of the depressive phase of bipolar disorder include persistent feelings of sadness, irritability or anger, loss of interest in previously enjoyed activities, excessive or inappropriate guilt, hopelessness, sleeping too much or not enough, changes in appetite and/or weight, fatigue, problems concentrating, self-loathing or feelings of worthlessness, and thoughts of death or suicide. Although the DSM-5 criteria for diagnosing unipolar and bipolar episodes are the same, some clinical features are more common in the latter, including increased sleep, sudden onset and resolution of symptoms, significant weight gain or loss, and severe episodes after childbirth.\nThe earlier the age of onset, the more likely the first few episodes are to be depressive. For most people with bipolar types 1 and 2, the depressive episodes are much longer than the manic or hypomanic episodes. Since a diagnosis of bipolar disorder requires a manic or hypomanic episode, many affected individuals are initially misdiagnosed as having major depression and incorrectly treated with prescribed antidepressants.\nMixed affective episodes.\nIn bipolar disorder, a mixed state is an episode during which symptoms of both mania and depression occur simultaneously. Individuals experiencing a mixed state may have manic symptoms such as grandiose thoughts while simultaneously experiencing depressive symptoms such as excessive guilt or feeling suicidal. They are considered to have a higher risk for suicidal behavior as depressive emotions such as hopelessness are often paired with mood swings or difficulties with impulse control. Anxiety disorders occur more frequently a comorbidity in mixed bipolar episodes than in non-mixed bipolar depression or mania. Substance abuse (including alcohol) also follows this trend, thereby appearing to depict bipolar symptoms as no more than a consequence of substance abuse.\nComorbid conditions.\nThe diagnosis of bipolar disorder can be complicated by coexisting (comorbid) psychiatric conditions including obsessive-compulsive disorder, substance-use disorder, eating disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, social phobia, premenstrual syndrome (including premenstrual dysphoric disorder), or panic disorder. A thorough longitudinal analysis of symptoms and episodes, assisted if possible by discussions with friends and family members, is crucial to establishing a treatment plan where these comorbidities exist. Children of parents with bipolar disorder more frequently have other mental health problems.\nPeople with bipolar disorder often have other co-existing psychiatric conditions such as anxiety (present in about 71% of people with bipolar disorder), substance use (56%), personality disorders (36%) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (10\u201320%) which can add to the burden of illness and worsen the prognosis. Certain medical conditions are also more common in people with bipolar disorder as compared to the general population. This includes increased rates of metabolic syndrome (present in 37% of people with bipolar disorder), migraine headaches (35%), obesity (21%) and type 2 diabetes (14%). This contributes to a risk of death that is two times higher in those with bipolar disorder as compared to the general population.\nCauses.\nThe causes of bipolar disorder likely vary between individuals and the exact mechanism underlying the disorder remains unclear. Genetic influences are believed to account for 73\u201393% of the risk of developing the disorder indicating a strong hereditary component. The overall heritability of the bipolar spectrum has been estimated at 0.71. Twin studies have been limited by relatively small sample sizes but have indicated a substantial genetic contribution, as well as environmental influence. For bipolar I disorder, the rate at which identical twins (same genes) will both have bipolar I disorder (concordance) is around 40%, compared to about 5% in fraternal twins. A combination of bipolar I, II, and cyclothymia similarly produced rates of 42% and 11% (identical and fraternal twins, respectively). The rates of bipolar II combinations without bipolar I are lowerbipolar II at 23 and 17%, and bipolar II combining with cyclothymia at 33 and 14%, which may reflect relatively higher genetic heterogeneity. \nThe cause of bipolar disorders overlaps with major depressive disorder. When defining concordance as the co-twins having either bipolar disorder or major depression, then the concordance rate rises to 67% in identical twins and 19% in fraternal twins. The relatively low concordance between fraternal twins brought up together suggests that shared family environmental effects are limited, although the ability to detect them has been limited by small sample sizes.\nGenetic.\nBehavioral genetic studies have suggested that many chromosomal regions and candidate genes are related to bipolar disorder susceptibility with each gene exerting a mild to moderate effect. The risk of bipolar disorder is nearly ten-fold higher in first-degree relatives of those with bipolar disorder than in the general population; similarly, the risk of major depressive disorder is three times higher in relatives of those with bipolar disorder than in the general population.\nAlthough the first genetic linkage finding for mania was in 1969, linkage studies have been inconsistent. Findings point strongly to heterogeneity, with different genes implicated in different families. Robust and replicable genome-wide significant associations showed several common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with bipolar disorder, including variants within the genes \"CACNA1C\", \"ODZ4\", and \"NCAN\". The largest and most recent genome-wide association study failed to find any locus that exerts a large effect, reinforcing the idea that no single gene is responsible for bipolar disorder in most cases. Polymorphisms in \"BDNF\", \"DRD4\", \"DAO\", and \"TPH1\" have been frequently associated with bipolar disorder and were initially associated in a meta-analysis, but this association disappeared after correction for multiple testing. On the other hand, two polymorphisms in \"TPH2\" were identified as being associated with bipolar disorder.\nDue to the inconsistent findings in a genome-wide association study, multiple studies have undertaken the approach of analyzing SNPs in biological pathways. Signaling pathways traditionally associated with bipolar disorder that have been supported by these studies include corticotropin-releasing hormone signaling, cardiac \u03b2-adrenergic signaling, Phospholipase C signaling, glutamate receptor signaling, cardiac hypertrophy signaling, Wnt signaling, Notch signaling, and endothelin 1 signaling. Of the 16 genes identified in these pathways, three were found to be dysregulated in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex portion of the brain in post-mortem studies: \"CACNA1C\", \"GNG2\", and \"ITPR2\".\nBipolar disorder is associated with reduced expression of specific DNA repair enzymes and increased levels of oxidative DNA damages.\nEnvironmental.\nPsychosocial factors play a significant role in the development and course of bipolar disorder, and individual psychosocial variables may interact with genetic dispositions. Recent life events and interpersonal relationships likely contribute to the onset and recurrence of bipolar mood episodes, just as they do for unipolar depression. In surveys, 30\u201350% of adults diagnosed with bipolar disorder report traumatic/abusive experiences in childhood, which is associated with earlier onset, a higher rate of suicide attempts, and more co-occurring disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder. The number of reported stressful events in childhood is higher in those with an adult diagnosis of bipolar spectrum disorder than in those without, particularly events stemming from a harsh environment rather than from the child's own behavior. Acutely, mania can be induced by sleep deprivation in around 30% of people with bipolar disorder.\nNeurological.\nLess commonly, bipolar disorder or a bipolar-like disorder may occur as a result of or in association with a neurological condition or injury including stroke, traumatic brain injury, HIV infection, multiple sclerosis, porphyria, and rarely temporal lobe epilepsy.\nProposed mechanisms.\nThe precise mechanisms that cause bipolar disorder are not well understood. Bipolar disorder is thought to be associated with abnormalities in the structure and function of certain brain areas responsible for cognitive tasks and the processing of emotions. A neurologic model for bipolar disorder proposes that the emotional circuitry of the brain can be divided into two main parts. The ventral system (regulates emotional perception) includes brain structures such as the amygdala, insula, ventral striatum, ventral anterior cingulate cortex, and the prefrontal cortex. The dorsal system (responsible for emotional regulation) includes the hippocampus, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, and other parts of the prefrontal cortex. The model hypothesizes that bipolar disorder may occur when the ventral system is overactivated and the dorsal system is underactivated. Other models suggest the ability to regulate emotions is disrupted in people with bipolar disorder and that dysfunction of the ventricular prefrontal cortex (vPFC) is crucial to this disruption.\nMeta-analyses of structural MRI studies have shown that certain brain regions (e.g., the left rostral anterior cingulate cortex, fronto-insular cortex, ventral prefrontal cortex, and claustrum) are smaller in people with bipolar disorder, whereas other are larger (lateral ventricles, globus pallidus, subgenual anterior cingulate, and the amygdala). Additionally, these meta-analyses found that people with bipolar disorder have higher rates of deep white matter hyperintensities.\nFunctional MRI findings suggest that the vPFC regulates the limbic system, especially the amygdala. In people with bipolar disorder, decreased vPFC activity allows for dysregulated activity of the amygdala, which likely contributes to labile mood and poor emotional regulation. Consistent with this, pharmacological treatment of mania returns vPFC activity to the levels in non-manic people, suggesting that vPFC activity is an indicator of mood state. However, while pharmacological treatment of mania reduces amygdala hyperactivity, it remains more active than the amygdala of those without bipolar disorder, suggesting amygdala activity may be a marker of the disorder rather than the current mood state. Manic and depressive episodes tend to be characterized by dysfunction in different regions of the vPFC. Manic episodes appear to be associated with decreased activation of the right vPFC whereas depressive episodes are associated with decreased activation of the left vPFC.\nPeople with bipolar disorder who are in a euthymic mood state show decreased activity in the lingual gyrus compared to people without bipolar disorder. In contrast, they demonstrate decreased activity in the inferior frontal cortex during manic episodes compared to people without the disorder. Similar studies examining the differences in brain activity between people with bipolar disorder and those without did not find a consistent area in the brain that was more or less active when comparing these two groups. People with bipolar have increased activation of left hemisphere ventral limbic areaswhich mediate emotional experiences and generation of emotional responsesand decreased activation of right hemisphere cortical structures related to cognitionstructures associated with the regulation of emotions.\nNeuroscientists have proposed additional models to try to explain the cause of bipolar disorder. One proposed model for bipolar disorder suggests that hypersensitivity of reward circuits consisting of frontostriatal circuits causes mania, and decreased sensitivity of these circuits causes depression. According to the \"kindling\" hypothesis, when people who are genetically predisposed toward bipolar disorder experience stressful events, the stress threshold at which mood changes occur becomes progressively lower, until the episodes eventually start (and recur) spontaneously. There is evidence supporting an association between early-life stress and dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis leading to its overactivation, which may play a role in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder. Other brain components that have been proposed to play a role in bipolar disorder are the mitochondria and a sodium ATPase pump. Circadian rhythms and regulation of the hormone melatonin also seem to be altered.\nDopamine, a neurotransmitter responsible for mood cycling, has increased transmission during the manic phase. The dopamine hypothesis states that the increase in dopamine results in secondary homeostatic downregulation of key system elements and receptors such as lower sensitivity of dopaminergic receptors. This results in decreased dopamine transmission characteristic of the depressive phase. The depressive phase ends with homeostatic upregulation potentially restarting the cycle over again. Glutamate is significantly increased within the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during the manic phase of bipolar disorder, and returns to normal levels once the phase is over.\nMedications used to treat bipolar may exert their effect by modulating intracellular signaling, such as through depleting myo-inositol levels, inhibition of cAMP signaling, and through altering subunits of the dopamine-associated G-protein. Consistent with this, elevated levels of G\u03b1i, G\u03b1s, and G\u03b1q/11 have been reported in brain and blood samples, along with increased protein kinase A (PKA) expression and sensitivity; typically, PKA activates as part of the intracellular signalling cascade downstream from the detachment of G\u03b1s subunit from the G protein complex.\nDecreased levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, a byproduct of serotonin, are present in the cerebrospinal fluid of persons with bipolar disorder during both the depressed and manic phases. Increased dopaminergic activity has been hypothesized in manic states due to the ability of dopamine agonists to stimulate mania in people with bipolar disorder. Decreased sensitivity of regulatory \u03b12 adrenergic receptors as well as increased cell counts in the locus coeruleus indicated increased noradrenergic activity in manic people. Low plasma GABA levels on both sides of the mood spectrum have been found. One review found no difference in monoamine levels, but found abnormal norepinephrine turnover in people with bipolar disorder. Tyrosine depletion was found to reduce the effects of methamphetamine in people with bipolar disorder as well as symptoms of mania, implicating dopamine in mania. VMAT2 binding was found to be increased in one study of people with bipolar mania.\nDiagnosis.\nBipolar disorder is commonly diagnosed during adolescence or early adulthood, but onset can occur throughout life. Its diagnosis is based on the self-reported experiences of the individual, abnormal behavior reported by family members, friends or co-workers, observable signs of illness as assessed by a clinician, and ideally a medical work-up to rule-out other causes. Caregiver-scored rating scales, specifically from the mother, are more accurate than teacher and youth-scored reports in identifying youths with bipolar disorder. Assessment is usually done on an outpatient basis; admission to an inpatient facility is considered if there is a risk to oneself or others. The most widely used criteria for diagnosing bipolar disorder are from the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\", Fifth Edition (DSM-5) and the World Health Organization's (WHO) \"International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems\", 10th Edition (ICD-10). The ICD-10 criteria are used more often in clinical settings outside of the U.S. while the DSM criteria are used within the U.S. and are the prevailing criteria used internationally in research studies. The DSM-5, published in 2013, includes further and more accurate specifiers compared to its predecessor, the DSM-IV-TR. This work has influenced the upcoming eleventh revision of the ICD, which includes the various diagnoses within the bipolar spectrum of the DSM-V.\nSeveral rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist, including the Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale, Mood Disorder Questionnaire, the General Behavior Inventory and the Hypomania Checklist. The use of evaluation scales cannot substitute a full clinical interview but they serve to systematize the recollection of symptoms. On the other hand, instruments for screening bipolar disorder tend to have lower sensitivity.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nMental disorders that can have symptoms similar to those seen in bipolar disorder include schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and certain personality disorders, such as borderline personality disorder. A key difference between bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder is the nature of the mood swings; in contrast to the sustained changes to mood over days to weeks or longer, those of the latter condition (more accurately called emotional dysregulation) are sudden and often short-lived, and secondary to social stressors.\nAlthough there are no biological tests that are diagnostic of bipolar disorder, blood tests and/or imaging are carried out to investigate whether medical illnesses with clinical presentations similar to that of bipolar disorder are present before making a definitive diagnosis. Neurologic diseases such as multiple sclerosis, complex partial seizures, strokes, brain tumors, Wilson's disease, traumatic brain injury, Huntington's disease, and complex migraines can mimic features of bipolar disorder. An EEG may be used to exclude neurological disorders such as epilepsy, and a CT scan or MRI of the head may be used to exclude brain lesions. Additionally, disorders of the endocrine system such as hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, and Cushing's disease are in the differential as is the connective tissue disease systemic lupus erythematosus. Infectious causes of mania that may appear similar to bipolar mania include herpes encephalitis, HIV, influenza, or neurosyphilis. Certain vitamin deficiencies such as pellagra (niacin deficiency), Vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency, and Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome (thiamine deficiency) can also lead to mania. Common medications that can cause manic symptoms include antidepressants, prednisone, Parkinson's disease medications, thyroid hormone, stimulants (including cocaine and methamphetamine), and certain antibiotics.\nBipolar spectrum.\nBipolar spectrum disorders include: bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder and cases where subthreshold symptoms are found to cause clinically significant impairment or distress. These disorders involve major depressive episodes that alternate with manic or hypomanic episodes, or with mixed episodes that feature symptoms of both mood states. The concept of the bipolar spectrum is similar to that of Emil Kraepelin's original concept of manic depressive illness. Bipolar II disorder was established as a diagnosis in 1994 within DSM IV; though debate continues over whether it is a distinct entity, part of a spectrum, or exists at all.\nCriteria and subtypes.\nThe DSM and the ICD characterize bipolar disorder as a spectrum of disorders occurring on a continuum. The DSM-5 and ICD-11 lists three specific subtypes:\nWhen relevant, specifiers for \"peripartum onset\" and \"with rapid cycling\" should be used with any subtype. Individuals who have subthreshold symptoms that cause clinically significant distress or impairment, but do not meet full criteria for one of the three subtypes may be diagnosed with other specified or unspecified bipolar disorder. Other specified bipolar disorder is used when a clinician chooses to provide an explanation for why the full criteria were not met (e.g., hypomania without a prior major depressive episode). If the condition is thought to have a non-psychiatric medical cause, the diagnosis of \"bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition\" is made, while \"substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder\" is used if a medication is thought to have triggered the condition.\nRapid cycling.\nMost people who meet criteria for bipolar disorder experience a number of episodes, on average 0.4 to 0.7 per year, lasting three to six months. \"Rapid cycling\", however, is a course specifier that may be applied to any bipolar subtype. It is defined as having four or more mood disturbance episodes within a one-year span. Rapid cycling is usually temporary but is common amongst people with bipolar disorder and affects between 25.8%\u201345.3% of them at some point in their life. These episodes are separated from each other by a remission (partial or full) for at least two months or a switch in mood polarity (i.e., from a depressive episode to a manic episode or vice versa). The definition of rapid cycling most frequently cited in the literature (including the DSM-V and ICD-11) is that of Dunner and Fieve: at least four major depressive, manic, hypomanic or mixed episodes during a 12-month period. The literature examining the pharmacological treatment of rapid cycling is sparse and there is no clear consensus with respect to its optimal pharmacological management.\nPeople with the rapid cycling or ultradian subtypes of bipolar disorder tend to be more difficult to treat and less responsive to medications than other people with bipolar disorder.\nChildren.\nIn the 1920s, Kraepelin noted that manic episodes are rare before puberty. In general, bipolar disorder in children was not recognized in the first half of the twentieth century. This issue diminished with an increased following of the DSM criteria in the last part of the twentieth century. The diagnosis of childhood bipolar disorder, while formerly controversial, has gained greater acceptance among childhood and adolescent psychiatrists. American children and adolescents diagnosed with bipolar disorder in community hospitals increased 4-fold reaching rates of up to 40% in 10 years around the beginning of the 21st century, while in outpatient clinics it doubled reaching 6%. Studies using DSM criteria show that up to 1% of youth may have bipolar disorder. The DSM-5 has established a diagnosis\u2014disruptive mood dysregulation disorder\u2014that covers children with long-term, persistent irritability that had at times been misdiagnosed as having bipolar disorder, distinct from irritability in bipolar disorder that is restricted to discrete mood episodes.\nElderly.\nBipolar disorder is uncommon in older patients, with measured lifetime prevalence of 1% in over 60s and 12-month prevalence of 0.1 to 0.5% in people over 65. Despite this, it is overrepresented in psychiatric admissions, making up 4 to 8% of inpatient admission to aged care psychiatry units, and the incidence of mood disorders is increasing overall with the aging population. Depressive episodes more commonly present with sleep disturbance, fatigue, hopelessness about the future, slowed thinking, and poor concentration and memory; the last three symptoms are seen in what is known as pseudodementia. Clinical features also differ between those with late onset bipolar disorder and those who developed it early in life; the former group present with milder manic episodes, more prominent cognitive changes and have a background of worse psychosocial functioning, while the latter present more commonly with mixed affective episodes, and have a stronger family history of illness. Older people with bipolar disorder suffer cognitive changes, particularly in executive functions such as abstract thinking and switching cognitive sets, as well as concentrating for long periods and decision-making.\nPrevention.\nAttempts at prevention of bipolar disorder have focused on stress (such as childhood adversity or highly conflictual families) which, although not a diagnostically specific causal agent for bipolar, does place genetically and biologically vulnerable individuals at risk for a more severe course of illness.\nManagement.\nThe aim of management is to treat acute episodes safely with medication and work with the patient in long-term maintenance to prevent further episodes and optimise function using a combination of pharmacological and psychotherapeutic techniques. Hospitalization may be required especially with the manic episodes present in bipolar I. This can be voluntary or (local legislation permitting) involuntary. Long-term inpatient stays are now less common due to deinstitutionalization, although these can still occur. Following (or in lieu of) a hospital admission, support services available can include drop-in centers, visits from members of a community mental health team or an Assertive Community Treatment team, supported employment, patient-led support groups, and intensive outpatient programs. These are sometimes referred to as partial-inpatient programs.\nPsychosocial.\nPsychotherapy aims to assist a person with bipolar disorder in accepting and understanding their diagnosis, coping with various types of stress, improving their interpersonal relationships, and recognizing prodromal symptoms before full-blown recurrence. Cognitive behavioral therapy, family-focused therapy, and psychoeducation have the most evidence for efficacy in regard to relapse prevention, while interpersonal and social rhythm therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy appear the most effective in regard to residual depressive symptoms. Most studies have been based only on bipolar I, however, and treatment during the acute phase can be a particular challenge. Some clinicians emphasize the need to talk with individuals experiencing mania, to develop a therapeutic alliance in support of recovery.\nMedication.\nMedications may differ depending on what episode is being treated. The medication with the best overall evidence is lithium, which is an effective treatment for acute manic episodes, preventing relapses, and bipolar depression. Lithium reduces the risk of suicide, self-harm, and death in people with bipolar disorder. Antipsychotics and mood stabilizers used together are quicker and more effective at treating mania than either class of drug used alone. Some analyses indicate antipsychotics alone are also more effective at treating acute mania. Mood stabilizers are used for long-term maintenance but have not demonstrated the ability to quickly treat acute bipolar depression. It is unclear if ketamine (a common general dissociative anesthetic used in surgery) is useful in bipolar disorder.\nMood stabilizers.\nLithium and the anticonvulsants carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and valproic acid are classed as mood stabilizers due to their effect on the mood states in bipolar disorder. Lithium is preferred for long-term mood stabilization, although it erodes kidney and thyroid function over extended periods. Valproate has become a commonly prescribed treatment and effectively treats manic episodes. Carbamazepine is less effective in preventing relapse than lithium or valproate. Lamotrigine has some efficacy in treating depression, and this benefit is greatest in more severe depression. It has also been shown to have some benefit in preventing bipolar disorder relapses, though there are concerns about the studies done, and is of no benefit in rapid cycling subtype of bipolar disorder. Valproate and carbamazepine are teratogenic and should be avoided as a treatment in women of childbearing age, but discontinuation of these medications during pregnancy is associated with a high risk of relapse. The effectiveness of topiramate is unknown.\nAntipsychotics.\nAntipsychotic medications are effective for short-term treatment of bipolar manic episodes and appear to be superior to lithium and anticonvulsants for this purpose. Atypical antipsychotics are also indicated for bipolar depression refractory to treatment with mood stabilizers. Olanzapine is effective in preventing relapses, although the supporting evidence is weaker than the evidence for lithium. A 2006 review found that haloperidol was an effective treatment for acute mania, limited data supported no difference in overall efficacy between haloperidol, olanzapine or risperidone, and that it could be less effective than aripiprazole. Carbamazepine effectively treats manic episodes, with some evidence it has greater benefit in rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, or those with more psychotic symptoms or more symptoms similar to that of schizoaffective disorder.\nAntidepressants.\nAntidepressants are not recommended for use alone in the treatment of bipolar disorder and have not been found to be of any benefit over mood stabilizers. Atypical antipsychotic medications (e.g., aripiprazole) are preferred over antidepressants to augment the effects of mood stabilizers due to the lack of efficacy of antidepressants in bipolar disorder. Treatment of bipolar disorder using antidepressants carries a risk of affective switches; where a person switches from depression to manic or hypomanic phases. The risk of affective switches is higher in bipolar I depression; antidepressants are generally avoided in bipolar I disorder or only used with mood stabilizers when they are deemed necessary. There is also a risk of accelerating cycling between phases when antidepressants are used in bipolar disorder.\nOther.\nShort courses of benzodiazepines are used in addition to other medications for calming effect until mood stabilizing become effective. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective form of treatment for acute mood disturbances in those with bipolar disorder, especially when psychotic or catatonic features are displayed. ECT is also recommended for use in pregnant women with bipolar disorder.\nChildren.\nTreating bipolar disorder in children involves medication and psychotherapy. Unfortunately, the literature and research on the effects of psychosocial therapy on bipolar spectrum disorders are scarce, making it difficult to determine the efficacy of various therapies. Mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics are commonly prescribed. Among the former, lithium is the only compound approved by the FDA for children. Psychological treatment combines normally education on the disease, group therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy. Long-term medication is often needed.\nPrognosis.\nA lifelong condition with periods of partial or full recovery in between recurrent episodes of relapse, bipolar disorder is considered to be a major health problem worldwide because of the increased rates of disability and premature mortality. It is also associated with co-occurring psychiatric and medical problems, higher rates of death from natural causes (e.g., cardiovascular disease), and high rates of initial under- or misdiagnosis, causing a delay in appropriate treatment and contributing to poorer prognoses. When compared to the general population, people with bipolar disorder also have higher rates of other serious medical comorbidities including diabetes mellitus, respiratory diseases, HIV, and Hepatitis C virus infection. After a diagnosis is made, it remains difficult to achieve complete remission of all symptoms with the currently available psychiatric medications and symptoms often become progressively more severe over time.\nCompliance with medications is one of the most significant factors that can decrease the rate and severity of relapse and have a positive impact on overall prognosis. However, the types of medications used in treating BD commonly cause side effects and more than 75% of individuals with BD inconsistently take their medications for various reasons. Of the various types of the disorder, rapid cycling (four or more episodes in one year) is associated with the worst prognosis due to higher rates of self-harm and suicide. Individuals diagnosed with bipolar who have a family history of bipolar disorder are at a greater risk for more frequent manic/hypomanic episodes. Early onset and psychotic features are also associated with worse outcomes, as well as subtypes that are nonresponsive to lithium.\nEarly recognition and intervention also improve prognosis as the symptoms in earlier stages are less severe and more responsive to treatment. Onset after adolescence is connected to better prognoses for both genders, and being male is a protective factor against higher levels of depression. For women, better social functioning before developing bipolar disorder and being a parent are protective towards suicide attempts.\nFunctioning.\nChanges in cognitive processes and abilities are seen in mood disorders, with those of bipolar disorder being greater than those in major depressive disorder. These include reduced attentional and executive capabilities and impaired memory. People with bipolar disorder often experience a decline in cognitive functioning during (or possibly before) their first episode, after which a certain degree of cognitive dysfunction typically becomes permanent, with more severe impairment during acute phases and moderate impairment during periods of remission. As a result, two-thirds of people with BD continue to experience impaired psychosocial functioning in between episodes even when their mood symptoms are in full remission. A similar pattern is seen in both BD-I and BD-II, but people with BD-II experience a lesser degree of impairment. When bipolar disorder occurs in children, it severely and adversely affects their psychosocial development. Children and adolescents with bipolar disorder have higher rates of significant difficulties with substance abuse, psychosis, academic difficulties, behavioral problems, social difficulties, and legal problems. Cognitive deficits typically increase over the course of the illness. Higher degrees of impairment correlate with the number of previous manic episodes and hospitalizations, and with the presence of psychotic symptoms. Early intervention can slow the progression of cognitive impairment, while treatment at later stages can help reduce distress and negative consequences related to cognitive dysfunction.\nDespite the overly ambitious goals that are frequently part of manic episodes, symptoms of mania undermine the ability to achieve these goals and often interfere with an individual's social and occupational functioning. One third of people with BD remain unemployed for one year following a hospitalization for mania. Depressive symptoms during and between episodes, which occur much more frequently for most people than hypomanic or manic symptoms over the course of illness, are associated with lower functional recovery in between episodes, including unemployment or underemployment for both BD-I and BD-II. However, the course of illness (duration, age of onset, number of hospitalizations, and presence or not of rapid cycling) and cognitive performance are the best predictors of employment outcomes in individuals with bipolar disorder, followed by symptoms of depression and years of education.\nRecovery and recurrence.\nA naturalistic study from first admission for mania or mixed episode (representing the hospitalized and therefore most severe cases) found that 50% achieved syndromal recovery (no longer meeting criteria for the diagnosis) within six weeks and 98% within two years. Within two years, 72% achieved symptomatic recovery (no symptoms at all) and 43% achieved functional recovery (regaining of prior occupational and residential status). However, 40% went on to experience a new episode of mania or depression within 2 years of syndromal recovery, and 19% switched phases without recovery.\nSymptoms preceding a relapse (prodromal), specially those related to mania, can be reliably identified by people with bipolar disorder. There have been intents to teach patients coping strategies when noticing such symptoms with encouraging results.\nSuicide.\nBipolar disorder can cause suicidal ideation that leads to suicide attempts. Individuals whose bipolar disorder begins with a depressive or mixed affective episode seem to have a poorer prognosis and an increased risk of suicide. One out of two people with bipolar disorder attempt suicide at least once during their lifetime and many attempts are successfully completed. The annual average suicide rate is 0.4%, which is 10\u201320 times that of the general population. The number of deaths from suicide in bipolar disorder is between 18 and 25 times higher than would be expected in similarly aged people without bipolar disorder. The lifetime risk of suicide has been estimated to be as high as 20% in those with bipolar disorder.\nRisk factors for suicide attempts and death from suicide in people with bipolar disorder include older age, prior suicide attempts, a depressive or mixed index episode (first episode), a manic index episode with psychotic symptoms, hopelessness or psychomotor agitation present during the episodes, co-existing anxiety disorder, a first degree relative with a mood disorder or suicide, interpersonal conflicts, occupational problems, bereavement or social isolation.\nEpidemiology.\nBipolar disorder is the sixth leading cause of disability worldwide and has a lifetime prevalence of about 1 to 3% in the general population. However, a reanalysis of data from the National Epidemiological Catchment Area survey in the United States suggested that 0.8% of the population experience a manic episode at least once (the diagnostic threshold for bipolar I) and a further 0.5% have a hypomanic episode (the diagnostic threshold for bipolar II or cyclothymia). Including sub-threshold diagnostic criteria, such as one or two symptoms over a short time-period, an additional 5.1% of the population, adding up to a total of 6.4%, were classified as having a bipolar spectrum disorder. A more recent analysis of data from a second US National Comorbidity Survey found that 1% met lifetime prevalence criteria for bipolar I, 1.1% for bipolar II, and 2.4% for subthreshold symptoms. Estimates vary about how many children and young adults have bipolar disorder. These estimates range from 0.6 to 15% depending on differing settings, methods, and referral settings, raising suspicions of overdiagnosis. One meta-analysis of bipolar disorder in young people worldwide estimated that about 1.8% of people between the ages of seven and 21 have bipolar disorder. Similar to adults, bipolar disorder in children and adolescents is thought to occur at a similar frequency in boys and girls.\nThere are conceptual and methodological limitations and variations in the findings. Prevalence studies of bipolar disorder are typically carried out by lay interviewers who follow fully structured/fixed interview schemes; responses to single items from such interviews may suffer limited validity. In addition, diagnoses (and therefore estimates of prevalence) vary depending on whether a categorical or spectrum approach is used. This consideration has led to concerns about the potential for both underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis.\nThe incidence of bipolar disorder is similar in men and women as well as across different cultures and ethnic groups. A 2000 study by the World Health Organization found that prevalence and incidence of bipolar disorder are very similar across the world. Age-standardized prevalence per 100,000 ranged from 421.0 in South Asia to 481.7 in Africa and Europe for men and from 450.3 in Africa and Europe to 491.6 in Oceania for women. However, severity may differ widely across the globe. Disability-adjusted life year rates, for example, appear to be higher in developing countries, where medical coverage may be poorer and medication less available. Within the United States, Asian Americans have significantly lower rates than their African and European American counterparts. In 2017, the Global Burden of Disease Study estimated there were 4.5 million new cases and a total of 45.5 million cases globally.\nHistory.\nIn the early 1800s, French psychiatrist Jean-\u00c9tienne Dominique Esquirol's lypemania, one of his affective monomanias, was the first elaboration on what was to become modern depression. The basis of the current conceptualization of bipolar illness can be traced back to the 1850s. In 1850, Jean-Pierre Falret described \"circular insanity\" (la folie circulaire, ); the lecture was summarized in 1851 in the \"Gazette des h\u00f4pitaux\" (\"Hospital Gazette\"). Three years later, in 1854, Jules-Gabriel-Fran\u00e7ois Baillarger (1809\u20131890) described to the French Imperial Acad\u00e9mie Nationale de M\u00e9decine a biphasic mental illness causing recurrent oscillations between mania and melancholia, which he termed \"folie \u00e0 double forme\" (, \"madness in double form\"). Baillarger's original paper, \"De la folie \u00e0 double forme,\" appeared in the medical journal \"Annales m\u00e9dico-psychologiques\" (\"Medico-psychological annals\") in 1854.\nThese concepts were developed by the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (1856\u20131926), who, using Kahlbaum's concept of cyclothymia, categorized and studied the natural course of untreated bipolar patients. He coined the term \"manic depressive psychosis\", after noting that periods of acute illness, manic or depressive, were generally punctuated by relatively symptom-free intervals where the patient was able to function normally.\nThe term \"manic\u2013depressive \"reaction\"\" appeared in the first version of the DSM in 1952, influenced by the legacy of Adolf Meyer. Subtyping into \"unipolar\" depressive disorders and bipolar disorders has its origin in Karl Kleist's concept \u2013 since 1911 \u2013 of unipolar and bipolar affective disorders, which was used by Karl Leonhard in 1957 to differentiate between unipolar and bipolar disorder in depression. These subtypes have been regarded as separate conditions since publication of the DSM-III. The subtypes bipolar II and rapid cycling have been included since the DSM-IV, based on work from the 1970s by David Dunner, Elliot Gershon, Frederick Goodwin, Ronald Fieve, and Joseph Fleiss.\nSociety and culture.\nCost.\nThe United States spent approximately $202.1 billion on people diagnosed with bipolar disorder I (excluding other subtypes of bipolar disorder and undiagnosed people) in 2015. One analysis estimated that the United Kingdom spent approximately \u00a35.2 billion on the disorder in 2007. In addition to the economic costs, bipolar disorder is a leading cause of disability and lost productivity worldwide. People with bipolar disorder are generally more disabled, have a lower level of functioning, longer duration of illness, and increased rates of work absenteeism and decreased productivity when compared to people experiencing other mental health disorders. The decrease in the productivity seen in those who care for people with bipolar disorder also significantly contributes to these costs.\nAdvocacy.\nThere are widespread issues with social stigma, stereotypes, and prejudice against individuals with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. In 2000, actress Carrie Fisher went public with her bipolar disorder diagnosis. She became one of the most well-recognized advocates for people with bipolar disorder in the public eye and fiercely advocated to eliminate the stigma surrounding mental illnesses, including bipolar disorder. Stephen Fried, who has written extensively on the topic, noted that Fisher helped to draw attention to the disorder's chronicity, relapsing nature, and that bipolar disorder relapses do not indicate a lack of discipline or moral shortcomings. Since being diagnosed at age 37, actor Stephen Fry has pushed to raise awareness of the condition, with his 2006 documentary \"\". In an effort to ease the social stigma associated with bipolar disorder, the orchestra conductor Ronald Braunstein cofounded the ME/2 Orchestra with his wife Caroline Whiddon in 2011. Braunstein was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 1985 and his concerts with the ME/2 Orchestra were conceived in order to create a welcoming performance environment for his musical colleagues, while also raising public awareness about mental illness.\nNotable cases.\nNumerous authors have written about bipolar disorder and many successful people have openly discussed their experience with it. Kay Redfield Jamison, a clinical psychologist and professor of psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, profiled her own bipolar disorder in her memoir \"An Unquiet Mind\" (1995). Several celebrities have also publicly shared that they have bipolar disorder; in addition to Carrie Fisher and Stephen Fry these include Catherine Zeta-Jones, Mariah Carey, Jane Pauley, Demi Lovato, and Selena Gomez.\nMedia portrayals.\nSeveral dramatic works have portrayed characters with traits suggestive of the diagnosis which have been the subject of discussion by psychiatrists and film experts alike. \nIn \"Mr. Jones\" (1993), (Richard Gere) swings from a manic episode into a depressive phase and back again, spending time in a psychiatric hospital and displaying many of the features of the syndrome. In \"The Mosquito Coast\" (1986), Allie Fox (Harrison Ford) displays some features including recklessness, grandiosity, increased goal-directed activity and mood lability, as well as some paranoia. Psychiatrists have suggested that Willy Loman, the main character in Arthur Miller's classic play \"Death of a Salesman\", has bipolar disorder.\nThe 2009 drama \"90210\" featured a character, Silver, who was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Stacey Slater, a character from the BBC soap EastEnders, has been diagnosed with the disorder. The storyline was developed as part of the BBC's Headroom campaign. The Channel 4 soap \"Brookside\" had earlier featured a story about bipolar disorder when the character Jimmy Corkhill was diagnosed with the condition. 2011 Showtime's political thriller drama \"Homeland\" protagonist Carrie Mathison has bipolar disorder, which she has kept secret since her school days. The 2014 ABC medical drama, \"Black Box\", featured a world-renowned neuroscientist with bipolar disorder. In the TV series \"Dave\", the main character Dave, played by Lil Dicky who plays a fictionalized version of himself, is an aspiring rapper. Lil Dicky's real-life hype man GaTa plays himself. In an episode, after being off his medication and having an episode, GaTa tearfully confesses to having bipolar disorder and that was the reason for his episode. GaTa suffers from bipolar disorder in real life, but, as with his character in the show, is able to maintain it with medication.\nCreativity.\nA link between mental illness and professional success or creativity has been suggested, including in accounts by Socrates, Seneca the Younger, and Cesare Lombroso. Despite prominence in popular culture, the link between creativity and bipolar has not been rigorously studied. This area of study also is likely affected by confirmation bias. Some evidence suggests that some heritable component of bipolar disorder overlaps with heritable components of creativity. Probands of people with bipolar disorder are more likely to be professionally successful, as well as to demonstrate temperamental traits similar to bipolar disorder. Furthermore, while studies of the frequency of bipolar disorder in creative population samples have been conflicting, full-blown bipolar disorder in creative samples is rare.\nResearch.\nResearch directions for bipolar disorder in children include optimizing treatments, increasing the knowledge of the genetic and neurobiological basis of the pediatric disorder and improving diagnostic criteria. Some treatment research suggests that psychosocial interventions that involve the family, psychoeducation, and skills building (through therapies such as CBT, DBT, and IPSRT) can benefit in addition to pharmocotherapy."}
{"id": "4536", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4536", "title": "Blitz", "text": "Blitz, German for \"lightning\", may refer to:"}
{"id": "4537", "revid": "39224972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4537", "title": "Burt Lancaster", "text": "Burton Stephen Lancaster (November 2, 1913 \u2013 October 20, 1994) was an American actor and producer. Initially known for playing tough guys with a tender heart, he went on to achieve success with more complex and challenging roles over a 45-year career in film and, later, television. He was a four-time nominee for the Academy Award for Best Actor (winning once), and he also won two BAFTA Awards and one Golden Globe Award for Best Lead Actor. The American Film Institute ranks Lancaster as of the greatest male stars of classic Hollywood cinema.\nLancaster performed as a circus acrobat in the 1930s. After serving in World War II, the 32-year-old Lancaster landed a role in a Broadway play and drew the attention of a Hollywood agent. His breakthrough role was the film noir \"The Killers\" in 1946 alongside Ava Gardner. A critical success, it launched both of their careers. In 1953, Lancaster played the illicit lover of Deborah Kerr in the military drama \"From Here to Eternity\". A box office smash, it won eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and landed a Best Actor nomination for Lancaster. In 1956, he starred in \"The Rainmaker\", with Katharine Hepburn, earning a Best Actor Golden Globe nomination, and in 1957 he starred in \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" with frequent co-star Kirk Douglas. During the 1950s, his production company, Hecht-Hill-Lancaster, was highly successful, with Lancaster acting in films such as: \"Trapeze\" in 1956, a box office smash in which he used his acrobatic skills; \"Sweet Smell of Success\" (1957), a dark drama today considered a classic; \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" (1958), a WWII submarine drama with Clark Gable; and \"Separate Tables\" (1958), a hotel-set drama which received seven Oscar nominations.\nIn the early 1960s, Lancaster starred in a string of critically successful films, each in very disparate roles. Playing a charismatic biblical con-man in \"Elmer Gantry\" in 1960 won him the Academy Award and the Golden Globe for Best Actor. He played a Nazi war criminal in 1961 in the all-star, war-crime-trial film, \"Judgment at Nuremberg\". Playing a bird expert prisoner in \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" in 1962, he earned the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actor and his third Oscar nomination. In 1963, Lancaster traveled to Italy to star as an Italian prince in the epic period drama \"The Leopard\". In 1964, he played a US Air Force General who, opposed by a Colonel played by Kirk Douglas, tries to overthrow the President in \"Seven Days in May\". Then, in 1966, he played an explosives expert in the western \"The Professionals\".\nIn 1970, Lancaster starred in the box-office hit, air-disaster drama \"Airport\". He experienced a career resurgence in 1980 with the crime-romance \"Atlantic City\", winning the BAFTA for Best Actor and landing his fourth Oscar nomination. Starting in the late 1970s, he also appeared in television mini-series, including the award-winning \"Separate but Equal\" with Sidney Poitier. He continued acting into his late 70s, until a stroke in 1990 forced him to retire; four years later he died from a heart attack. His final film role was in the Oscar-nominated \"Field of Dreams\".\nEarly life.\nLancaster was born on November 2, 1913, in Manhattan, New York, at his parents' home at 209 East 106th Street, the son of Elizabeth (\"n\u00e9e\" Roberts) and mailman James Lancaster. Both of his parents were Protestants of working-class origin. All four of his grandparents were immigrants from Ireland to the United States, from the province of Ulster; his maternal grandparents were from Belfast and were descendants of English immigrants to Ireland.\nLancaster grew up in East Harlem and spent much of his time on the streets. He developed a great interest and skill in gymnastics while attending DeWitt Clinton High School, where he was a basketball star. Before he graduated from DeWitt Clinton, his mother died of a cerebral hemorrhage. Lancaster was accepted by New York University with an athletic scholarship, but subsequently dropped out.\nCircus career.\nAt the age of 9, Lancaster met Nick Cravat with whom he developed a lifelong partnership. Together, they learned to act in local theatre productions and circus arts at Union Settlement, one of the city's oldest settlement houses. In the 1930s, they formed the acrobat duo \"Lang and Cravat\" and soon joined the Kay Brothers circus. However, in 1939, an injury forced Lancaster to give up the profession, with great regret. He then found temporary work, first as a salesman for Marshall Fields and then as a singing waiter in various restaurants.\nWorld War II service.\nAfter the United States entered World War II, Lancaster joined the United States Army in 1942 and performed with the Army's 21st Special Services Division, one of the military groups organized to follow the troops on the ground and provide USO entertainment to keep up morale. He served with General Mark Clark's Fifth Army in Italy from 1943 to 1945.\nActing career.\nBroadway.\nLancaster returned to New York after his Army service. Although initially unenthusiastic about acting, Lancaster was encouraged to audition for a Broadway play by a producer who saw him in an elevator while he was visiting his then-girlfriend at work. The audition was successful and Lancaster was cast in Harry Brown's \"A Sound of Hunting\" (1945). The show only ran three weeks, but his performance attracted the interest of a Hollywood agent, Harold Hecht. Lancaster had other offers but Hecht promised him the opportunity to produce their own movies within five years of hitting Hollywood.\nThrough Hecht, Lancaster was brought to the attention of producer Hal B. Wallis, who signed him to a non-exclusive eight-movie contract.\nHal Wallis.\nLancaster's first filmed movie was \"Desert Fury\" for Wallis in 1947, where Lancaster was billed after John Hodiak and Lizabeth Scott. It was directed by Lewis Allen.\nThen producer Mark Hellinger approached him to star in 1946's \"The Killers\", which was completed and released prior to \"Desert Fury\". Directed by Robert Siodmak, it was a great commercial and critical success and launched Lancaster and his co-star Ava Gardner to stardom. It has since come to be regarded as a classic.\nHellinger used Lancaster again on \"Brute Force\" in 1947, a prison drama written by Richard Brooks and directed by Jules Dassin. It was also well received. Wallis released his films through Paramount, and so Lancaster and other Wallis contractees made cameos in \"Variety Girl\" in 1947.\nLancaster's next film was a thriller for Wallis in 1947, \"I Walk Alone\", co-starring Lizabeth Scott and a young Kirk Douglas, who was also under contract to Wallis. \"Variety\" listed it as one of the top grossers of the year, taking in more than 2 million dollars.\nIn 1948, Lancaster had a change of pace with the film adaptation of Arthur Miller's \"All My Sons\", made at Universal Pictures with Edward G. Robinson. His third film for Wallis was an adaptation of \"Sorry, Wrong Number\" in 1948, with Barbara Stanwyck.\nNorma Productions.\nHecht kept to his promise to Lancaster to turn producer. The two of them formed a company, Norma Productions, and did a deal with Universal to make a thriller about a disturbed G.I. in London, \"Kiss the Blood Off My Hands\" in 1948, with Joan Fontaine and directed by Norman Foster. It made a profit of only $50,000, but was critically acclaimed.\nBack in Hollywood, Lancaster made another film noir with Siodmak, \"Criss Cross\", in 1949. It was originally going to be produced by Hellinger and when Hellinger died, another took over. Tony Curtis made an early appearance.\nLancaster appeared in a fourth picture for Wallis, \"Rope of Sand\", in 1949.\nNorma Productions signed a three-picture deal with Warner Bros. The first was 1950's \"The Flame and the Arrow\", a swashbuckler movie, in which Lancaster drew on his circus skills. Nick Cravat had a supporting role and the film was a huge commercial success, making $6 million. It was Warners' most popular film of the year and established an entirely new image for Lancaster.\nLancaster was borrowed by 20th Century Fox for \"Mister 880\" in 1950, a comedy with Edmund Gwenn. MGM put him in a popular Western, \"Vengeance Valley\" in 1951, then he went to Warners to play the title role in the biopic \"Jim Thorpe \u2013 All-American\", also in 1951.\nHalburt.\nNorma signed a deal with Columbia Pictures to make two films through a Norma subsidiary, Halburt. The first film was 1951's \"Ten Tall Men\", where Lancaster was a member of the French Foreign Legion. Robert Aldrich worked on the movie as a production manager.\nThe second was 1952's \"The First Time\", a comedy which was the directorial debut of Frank Tashlin. It was meant to star Lancaster but he wound up not appearing in the film\u2014the first of their productions in which he did not act.\nHecht-Lancaster Productions.\nIn 1951, the actor/producer duo changed the company's name to Hecht-Lancaster Productions. The first film under the new name was another swashbuckler: 1952's \"The Crimson Pirate\", directed by Siodmak. Co-starring Cravat, it was extremely popular.\nLancaster changed pace once more by doing a straight dramatic part in 1952's \"Come Back, Little Sheba\", based on a Broadway hit, with Shirley Booth, produced by Wallis and directed by Daniel Mann.\nAlternating with adventure films, he went into \"South Sea Woman\" in 1952 at Warners. Part of the Norma-Warners contract was that Lancaster had to appear in some non-Norma films, of which this was one.\nIn 1954, for his own company, Lancaster produced and starred in \"His Majesty O'Keefe\", a South Sea island tale shot in Fiji. It was co-written by James Hill, who would soon become a part of the Hecht-Lancaster partnership.\nUnited Artists.\nHecht and Lancaster left Warners for United Artists, for what began as a two-picture deal, the first of which was to be 1954's \"Apache\", starring Lancaster as a Native American.\nThey followed it with another Western in 1954, \"Vera Cruz\", co-starring Gary Cooper and produced by Hill. Both films were directed by Robert Aldrich and were hugely popular.\nUnited Artists signed Hecht-Lancaster to a multi-picture contract, to make seven films over two years. These included films in which Lancaster did not act. Their first was \"Marty\" in 1955, based on Paddy Chayefsky's TV play starring Ernest Borgnine and directed by Delbert Mann. It won both the Best Picture Oscar and the Palme d'Or award at Cannes. It also earned $2 million on a budget of $350,000. \"Vera Cruz\" had been a huge success, but \"Marty\" secured Hecht-Lancaster as one of the most successful independent production companies in Hollywood at the time. \"Marty\" star Ernest Borgnine was under contract to Hecht-Lancaster and was unhappy about his lack of upcoming roles, especially after only receiving some seven lines in 1957's \"Sweet Smell of Success\" and half of his pay for \"Marty\". He eventually sued for breach of contract to gain back some of this money in 1957.\nWithout Hill, Hecht and Lancaster produced \"The Kentuckian\" in 1955; it was directed by Lancaster in his directorial debut, and he also played a lead role. Lancaster disliked directing and only did it once more, in the 1970s (\"The Midnight Man\", 1974).\nLancaster still had commitments with Wallis, and made \"The Rose Tattoo\" for him in 1955, starring with Anna Magnani and Daniel Mann directing. It was very popular at the box office and critically acclaimed, winning Magnani an Oscar.\nHecht-Hill-Lancaster.\nIn 1955, Hill was made an equal partner in Hecht-Lancaster, with his name added to the production company. Hecht-Hill-Lancaster (HHL) released their first film \"Trapeze\" in 1956, with Lancaster performing many of his own stunts. The film, co-starring Tony Curtis and Gina Lollobrigida, went on to become the production company's top box office success, and United Artists expanded its deal with HHL.\nIn 1956, Lancaster and Hecht entered the music industry with the companies Hecht-Lancaster &amp; Buzzell Music and Calyork Music.\nThe HHL team impressed Hollywood with its success; as \"Life\" wrote in 1957, \"[a]fter the independent production of a baker's dozen of pictures, it has yet to have its first flop ... (They were also good pictures.).\" In late 1957, they announced they would make ten films worth $14 million in 1958.\nLancaster made two films for Wallis to complete his eight film commitment for that contract: \"The Rainmaker\" (1956) with Katharine Hepburn, which earned Lancaster a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor; and \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957) with Kirk Douglas, which was a huge commercial hit directed by John Sturges.\nLancaster re-teamed with Tony Curtis in 1957 for \"Sweet Smell of Success\", a co-production between Hecht-Hill-Lancaster and Curtis' own company with wife Janet Leigh, Curtleigh Productions. The movie, directed by Alexander Mackendrick, was a critical success but a commercial disappointment. Over the years it has come to be regarded as one of Lancaster's greatest films.\nHHL produced seven additional films in the late 1950s. Four starred Lancaster: \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" (1958), a Robert Wise directed war film with Clark Gable, which was mildly popular; \"Separate Tables\" (1958) a hotel-set drama with Kerr and Rita Hayworth (who married James Hill), which received an Oscar nomination for Best Picture and Oscar awards for lead actor David Niven and supporting actress Wendy Hiller, and was both a critical and commercial success; \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1959), with Douglas and Laurence Olivier, which lost money (and saw Lancaster fire Mackendrick during shooting); and the Western \"The Unforgiven\" (1960), with Audrey Hepburn, which was a critical and commercial disappointment.\nThree were made without Lancaster, all of which lost money: \"The Bachelor Party\" (1957), from another TV play by Chayefsky, and directed by Delbert Mann; \"Take a Giant Step\" (1959), about a black student; and \"Summer of the Seventeenth Doll\" (1960), from an Australian play, shot on location in Australia and Britain.\nAdditionally, HHL served as the production company for the 1960\u201361 TV series \"Whiplash\".\nThe Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions company dissolved in 1960 after Hill ruptured his relationship with both Hecht and Lancaster.\nHecht and Lancaster.\nLancaster played the title role in \"Elmer Gantry\" (1960), written and directed by Richard Brooks for United Artists. The film received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor. Lancaster won the 1960 Academy Award for Best Actor, a Golden Globe Award, and the New York Film Critics Award for his performance.\nHecht and Lancaster worked together on \"The Young Savages\" (1961), directed by John Frankenheimer and produced by Hecht. Sydney Pollack worked as a dialogue coach.\nLancaster starred in \"Judgment at Nuremberg\" (1961) for Stanley Kramer, alongside Spencer Tracy, Richard Widmark and a number of other iconic stars. The film was both a commercial and critical success, receiving 11 Oscar nominations, including Best Picture.\nHe then did another film with Hecht and Frankenheimer (replacing Charles Crichton), \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962), a largely fictionalized biography. In it he plays Robert Stroud, a federal prisoner incarcerated for life for two murders, who begins to collect birds and over time becomes an expert in bird diseases, even publishing a book. The film shows Stroud transferred to the maximum security Alcatraz prison where he is not allowed to keep birds and as he ages he gets married, markets bird remedies, helps stop a prison rebellion, and writes a book on the history of the U.S. penal system, but never gets paroled. The sympathetic performance earned Lancaster a Best Actor Oscar nomination, a BAFTA Award for Best Actor, and a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor in a Dramatic Role. Hecht went on to produce five films without Lancaster's assistance, through his company Harold Hecht Films Productions between 1961 and 1967, including another Academy Award winner, \"Cat Ballou\", starring Lee Marvin and Jane Fonda.\nCollaborations with younger filmmakers.\nLancaster made \"A Child Is Waiting\" (1963) with Judy Garland. It was produced by Kramer and directed by John Cassavetes.\nHe went to Italy to star in \"The Leopard\" (1963) for Luchino Visconti, co-starring Alain Delon and Claudia Cardinale. It was one of Lancaster's favourite films and was a big hit in France but failed in the US (though the version released was much truncated.)\nHe had a small role in \"The List of Adrian Messenger\" (1963) for producer/star Kirk Douglas, and then did two for Frankenheimer: \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), a political thriller with Douglas, and \"The Train\" (1964), a World War Two action film (Lancaster had Frankenheimer replace Arthur Penn several days into filming).\nLancaster starred in \"The Hallelujah Trail\" (1965), a comic Western produced and directed by John Sturges which failed to recoup its large cost.\nHe had a big hit with \"The Professionals\" (1966), a Western directed by Brooks and also starring Lee Marvin.\nIn 1966, at the age of 52, Lancaster appeared nude in director Frank Perry's film \"The Swimmer\" (1968), in what the critic Roger Ebert called \"his finest performance\". Prior to working on \"The Swimmer\", Lancaster was terrified of the water because he did not know how to swim. In preparation for the film, he took swimming lessons from UCLA swim coach Bob Horn. Filming was difficult and clashes between Lancaster and Perry led to Sydney Pollack coming in to do some filming. The film was not released until 1968, when it proved to be a commercial failure, though Lancaster remained proud of the movie and his performance.\nNorlan Productions.\nIn 1967, Lancaster formed a new partnership with Roland Kibbee, who had already worked as a writer on five Lancaster projects:\nThrough Norlan Productions, Lancaster and Kibbee produced \"The Scalphunters\" in 1968, directed by Sydney Pollack.\nLancaster followed it with another film from Pollack, \"Castle Keep\" in 1969, which was a big flop. So was \"The Gypsy Moths\", for Frankenheimer, also in 1969.\n1970s.\nLancaster had one of the biggest successes of his career with \"Airport\" in 1970, starring alongside Dean Martin, Jean Seberg and Jacqueline Bisset. The film received nine Academy Award nominations, including one for Best Picture. It became one of the biggest box-office hits of 1970 and, at that time, reportedly the highest-grossing film in the history of Universal Pictures.\nHe then went into a series of Westerns: \"Lawman\" in 1971, directed by Michael Winner; \"Valdez Is Coming\" in 1971, for Norlan; and \"Ulzana's Raid\" in 1972, directed by Aldrich and produced by himself and Hecht. None were particularly popular but \"Ulzana's Raid\" has become a cult film.\nLancaster did two thrillers, both 1973: \"Scorpio\" with Winner and \"Executive Action\".\nLancaster returned to directing in 1974 with \"The Midnight Man\", which he also wrote and produced with Kibee.\nHe made a second film with Visconti, \"Conversation Piece\" in 1974 and played the title role in the TV series \"Moses the Lawgiver\", also in 1974.\nLancaster was one of many names in 1975's \"1900\", directed by Bernardo Bertolucci, and he had a cameo in 1976's \"Buffalo Bill and the Indians, or Sitting Bull's History Lesson\" for Robert Altman.\nHe played Shimon Peres in the TV movie \"Victory at Entebbe\" in 1977 and had a supporting role in \"The Cassandra Crossing\" in 1976. He made a fourth and final film with Aldrich, \"Twilight's Last Gleaming\" in 1977, and had the title role in 1977's \"The Island of Dr. Moreau\".\nLancaster was top-billed in \"Go Tell the Spartans\" in 1978, a Vietnam War film; Lancaster admired the script so much that he took a reduced fee and donated money to help the movie to be completed. He was in \"Zulu Dawn\" in 1979.\n1980s.\nLancaster began the 1980s with a highly acclaimed performance alongside Susan Sarandon in \"Atlantic City\" in 1980, directed by Louis Malle. The film received 5 Oscar nominations, including Best Picture and a Best Actor nomination for Lancaster.\nHe had key roles in \"Cattle Annie and Little Britches\" in 1981, \"The Skin\" in 1982 with Cardinale, \"Marco Polo\", also in 1982, and \"Local Hero\" in 1983.\nBy now, Lancaster was mostly a character actor in features, as in \"The Osterman Weekend\" in 1983, but he was the lead in the TV movie \"Scandal Sheet\" in 1985.\nHe was in \"Little Treasure\" in 1985, directed by Alan Sharp, who had written \"Ulzana's Raid\"; \"On Wings of Eagles\" for TV in 1986, as Bull Simons; 1986's made for TV \"Barnum\" starred him in the title role; \"Tough Guys\" reunited him on the big screen with Kirk Douglas in 1986; \"\" in 1986 for German TV; 1987's \"Control\" made in Italy; \"Rocket Gibraltar\" in 1988, and \"The Jeweller's Shop\" in 1989.\nHis first critical success in a while was \"Field of Dreams\" in 1989, in which he played a supporting role as Moonlight Graham. He was also in the miniseries \"The Betrothed\" in 1989.\nLater career.\nLancaster's final performances included TV mini series \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1990); \"\" (1990) as Leon Klinghoffer based on the 1985 MS Achille Lauro incident; and \"Separate But Equal\" (1991) with Sidney Poitier.\nFrequent collaborators.\nLancaster appeared in a total of 17 films produced by his agent, Harold Hecht. Eight of these were co-produced by James Hill. He also appeared in eight films produced by Hal B. Wallis and two with producer Mark Hellinger. Although Lancaster's work alongside Kirk Douglas was mostly known as a successful pair of actors, Douglas, in fact, produced four films for the pair, through his production companies Bryna Productions and Joel Productions. Roland Kibbee also produced three Lancaster films, and Lancaster was also cast in two Stanley Kramer productions.\nKirk Douglas starred in seven films across the decades with Burt Lancaster: \"I Walk Alone\" (1948), \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957), \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1959), \"The List of Adrian Messenger\" (1963), \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), \"Victory at Entebbe\" (1976) and \"Tough Guys\" (1986), which fixed the notion of the pair as something of a team in the public imagination. Douglas was always billed under Lancaster in these movies but, with the exception of \"I Walk Alone\", in which Douglas played a villain, their roles were usually more or less the same size. Both actors arrived in Hollywood at about the same time, and first appeared together in the fourth film for each, albeit with Douglas in a supporting role. They both became actor-producers who sought out independent Hollywood careers.\nJohn Frankenheimer directed five films with Lancaster:\nHe was directed four times by Robert Aldrich, three times each by Robert Siodmak and Sydney Pollack, and twice each by Byron Haskin, Daniel Mann, John Sturges, John Huston, Richard Brooks, Alexander Mackendrick, Luchino Visconti, and Michael Winner.\nRoland Kibbee wrote for seven Lancaster films. Lancaster used makeup veteran Robert Schiffer in 20 credited films, hiring Schiffer on nearly all of the films he produced.\nPolitical activism.\nLancaster was a vocal supporter of progressive and liberal political causes. He frequently spoke out in support of racial and other minorities. As a result, he was often a target of FBI investigations. He was named in President Richard Nixon's 1973 \"Enemies List\".\nA vocal opponent of the Vietnam War, he helped pay for the successful defense of a soldier accused of \"fragging\" (i.e., murdering) another soldier during war-time. In 1968, Lancaster actively supported the presidential candidacy of anti-war Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, and frequently spoke on his behalf during the Democratic primaries.\nHe campaigned heavily for George McGovern in the 1972 United States presidential election.\nIn 1985, Lancaster joined the fight against AIDS after fellow movie star Rock Hudson contracted the disease. Lancaster delivered the bed-ridden Hudson's last words at the Commitment to Life fundraiser at a time when the stigma surrounding AIDS was at its height. He was the only major male star who attended.\nOf his political opinions, frequent co-star Tony Curtis said: \"Here's this great big aggressive guy that looks like a ding-dong athlete playing these big tough guys and he has the soul of\u2014who were those first philosophers of equality?\u2014Socrates, Plato. He was a Greek philosopher with a sense that everybody was equal.\"\nActor and SAG president Ed Asner said he showed everybody in Hollywood \"how to be a liberal with balls\".\nHollywood Ten.\nIn 1947, Lancaster reportedly signed a statement release by the National Council of the Arts, Sciences and Professions (NCASP) asking Congress to abolish the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). He was also a member of the short-lived Committee for the First Amendment, formed in support of the Hollywood Ten. He was one of 26 movie stars who flew to Washington in October 1947 to protest against the HUAC hearings. The committee's \"Hollywood Fights Back\" broadcasts on ABC Radio Network were two 30-minute programs that took place on October 27 and November 2, 1947, during which committee members voiced their opposition to the HUAC hearings. Many members faced blacklisting and backlash due to their involvement in the committee. Lancaster was listed in anti-communist literature as a fellow traveler.\nCivil Rights Movement.\nHe and his second wife, Norma, hosted a fundraiser for Martin Luther King Jr. and the Student Diversity Leadership Conference (SDLC) ahead of the historic March on Washington in 1963. He attended the march, where he was one of the speakers. He flew in from France for the event, where he was shooting \"The Train\", and flew back again the next day, despite a reported fear of flying.\nACLU.\nIn 1968, Lancaster was elected to serve as chairman of the Roger Baldwin Foundation, a newly formed fund-raising arm of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California. His co-chairs were Frank Sinatra and Irving L. Lichtenstein. In October 1968, he hosted a party at his home to raise money for the ACLU to use for the defense of the more than four hundred people at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Throughout the years, he remained an ardent supporter and a fundraiser for the organization.\nWhile serving as a member of the five-person ACLU Foundation executive committee, he cast the key vote to retain Ramona Ripston as executive director of the Southern California affiliate, a position she would build into a powerful advocacy force in Los Angeles politics. Ripston later recalled: \"There was a feeling that a woman couldn't run the ACLU foundation, nor have access to the books. The vote finally came down to two 'yes' and two 'no.' Who had the deciding vote? Burt. He had a scotch or two and finally he said, 'I think she should be executive director.' I always loved him for that.\"\nWhen President George H. W. Bush derided Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis as a \u201ccard-carrying member of the ACLU\u201d, Lancaster was one of the supporters featured in the organization's first television advertising campaign stating: \"I'm a card-carrying member of the ACLU\" and \"No one agrees with every single thing they've done. But no one can disagree with the guiding principle\u2014with liberty and justice for all.'\" He also campaigned for Michael Dukakis in the 1988 United States presidential election.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and relationships.\nLancaster guarded his personal life and attempted to keep it private despite his stardom. He was married three times and had five children. He also attended gay orgies and had gay affairs, according to his family.\nHis first marriage was to June Ernst, a trapeze acrobat. Ernst was the daughter of a renowned female aerialist and an accomplished acrobat herself. After they were married, he performed with her and her family until their separation in the late 1930s. It is not clear when they divorced. Contemporary reports listed 1940, but subsequent biographers have suggested dates as late as 1946, thus delaying his marriage to his second wife.\nHe met second wife Norma Anderson (1917\u20131988) when the stenographer substituted for an ill actress in a USO production for the troops in Italy. \nReportedly, on seeing Lancaster in the crowd on her way to town from the airport, she turned to an officer and asked, \"Who is that good-looking officer and is he married?\" The officer set up a blind date between the two for that evening. She was active in political causes with an entire room in their Bel Air home devoted to her major interest, the League of Woman Voters, crammed with printing presses and all the necessary supplies for mass mailings. She was a life-long member of the NAACP. The couple held a fundraiser for Martin Luther King Jr. and the SCLC ahead of the 1963 March on Washington. All five of his children were with Anderson: Bill (who became an actor and screenwriter), James, Susan, Joanna (who worked as a film producer), and Sighle (pronounced \"Sheila\"). However, it was a troubled marriage. The pair separated in 1966, and finally divorced in 1969.\nIn 1966, Lancaster began a long-term relationship with hairdresser Jackie Bone, who worked on \"The Professionals\". She was abusive, with Bone once smashing a wine bottle over Lancaster's head at a dinner with Sydney Pollack and Peter Falk. Reportedly, they eventually split up after her religious conversion, which Lancaster believed he could not share with her.\nHis third marriage, to Susan Martin, lasted from September 1990 until his death in 1994.\nPossible affairs.\nFriends said he claimed he was romantically involved with Deborah Kerr during the filming of \"From Here to Eternity\" in 1953. However, Kerr stated that while there was a spark of attraction, nothing ever happened.\nHe reportedly had an affair with Joan Blondell.\nIn her 1980 autobiography, Shelley Winters claimed to have had a 2-year affair with him, during which time he was considering separation from his wife. In his Hollywood memoirs, friend Farley Granger recalled an incident when he and Lancaster had to come to Winters' rescue one evening when she had inadvertently overdosed on alcohol and sleeping pills. She broke up with him for \"cheating on her with his wife\" after she heard reports of his wife's third or fourth pregnancy. Lancaster and Winters performed together in the 1949 radio play adaptation of \"The Killers\". They appeared in 2 films together: \"The Young Savages\", where she played his character's former lover, and \"The Scalphunters\".\nAccording to biographer Kate Buford in \"Burt Lancaster: An American Life\", Lancaster was devotedly loyal to his friends and family. Old friends from his childhood remained his friends for life.\nReligion.\nDespite his Protestant background and upbringing, Lancaster identified as an atheist later in life.\nHealth problems.\nAs Lancaster reached his sixties he began to be affected by cardiovascular disease. In January 1980 he suffered complications from a routine gall bladder operation; and in 1983, following two minor heart attacks, he underwent an emergency quadruple coronary bypass. He continued to act, however, and to engage in public activism. In 1988, he attended a Congressional hearing in Washington, D.C., with former colleagues who included James Stewart and Ginger Rogers to protest against media magnate Ted Turner's plan to colorize various black-and-white films from the 1930s and 1940s. On November 30, 1990, when he was 77, a stroke left him partially paralyzed and largely unable to speak, effectively ending his acting career.\nDeath.\nBurt Lancaster died at his apartment in Century City, California, after suffering a third heart attack at 4:50 am on October 20, 1994, at the age of 80. His body was cremated, and his ashes were scattered under a large oak tree in Westwood Memorial Park which is located in Westwood Village, California. A small, square ground plaque amidst several others inscribed \"Burt Lancaster 1913\u20131994\", marks the location. As he had previously requested, upon his death no memorial or funeral service was held for him.\nLegacy.\nThe centennial of Lancaster's birth was honored at New York City's Film Society of Lincoln Center in May 2013 with the screening of 12 of the actor's best-known films, from \"The Killers\" to \"Atlantic City\".\nLancaster has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard.\nFilmography and awards.\nBox office ranking.\nFor a number of years exhibitors voted Lancaster among the most popular stars:\nIn other media.\nSpanish music group Hombres G released an album named \"La cagaste, Burt Lancaster\" (\"You messed up, Burt Lancaster\") in 1986.\nThomas Hart Benton painted a scene from \"The Kentuckian\" as part of the film's marketing. Lancaster posed for the painting, also known as \"The Kentuckian\"."}
{"id": "4540", "revid": "1025532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4540", "title": "Balts", "text": "The Balts or Baltic people (, ) are a group of Indo-European peoples primarily characterized as speakers of the Baltic languages.\nOne of the features of Baltic languages is the number of conservative or archaic features retained. Among the Baltic peoples are modern Lithuanians and Latvians (including Latgalians) \u2014 all Eastern Balts \u2014 as well as the Old Prussians, Yotvingians and Galindians \u2014 the Western Balts \u2014 whose languages and cultures are now extinct.\nEtymology.\nMedieval German chronicler Adam of Bremen in the latter part of the 11th century AD was the first writer to use the term \"Baltic\" in reference to the sea of that name. Before him various ancient places names, such as Balcia, were used in reference to a supposed island in the Baltic Sea.\nAdam, a speaker of German, connected \"Balt-\" with \"belt\", a word with which he was familiar. However, linguistics has since established that \"Balt\" carried the sense of \"white.\" Many Baltic words contain the stem \"balt-\" \"white\", which may also refer to shallow bodies of water like marshes.\nIn Germanic languages there was some form of the toponym East Sea until after about the year 1600, when maps in English began to labeled it as the Baltic Sea. By 1840, German nobles of the Governorate of Livonia adopted the term \"Balts\" to distinguish themselves from Germans of Germany. They spoke an exclusive dialect, Baltic German, which was regarded by many as the language of the Balts until 1919.\nIn 1845, Georg Heinrich Ferdinand Nesselmann proposed a distinct language group for Latvian, Lithuanian, and Old Prussian, which he termed Baltic. The term became prevalent after Latvia and Lithuania gained independence in 1918. Up until the early 20th century, either \"Latvian\" or \"Lithuanian\" could be used to mean the entire language family.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Balts or Baltic peoples, defined as speakers of one of the Baltic languages, a branch of the Indo-European language family, are descended from a group of Indo-European tribes who settled the area between the lower Vistula and southeast shore of the Baltic Sea and upper Daugava and Dnieper rivers. Because the thousands of lakes and swamps in this area contributed to the Balts' geographical isolation, the Baltic languages retain a number of conservative or archaic features.\nSome of the major authorities on Balts, such as Kazimieras B\u016bga, Max Vasmer, Vladimir Toporov and Oleg Trubachyov, in conducting etymological studies of eastern European river names, were able to identify in certain regions names of specifically Baltic provenance, which most likely indicate where the Balts lived in prehistoric times. This information is summarized and synthesized by Marija Gimbutas in \"The Balts\" (1963) to obtain a likely proto-Baltic homeland. Its borders are approximately: from a line on the Pomeranian coast eastward to include or nearly include the present-day sites of Berlin, Warsaw, Kyiv, and Kursk, northward through Moscow to the River Berzha, westward in an irregular line to the coast of the Gulf of Riga, north of Riga.\nProto-history.\nThe area of Baltic habitation shrank due to assimilation by other groups, and invasions. According to one of the theories which has gained considerable traction over the years, one of the western Baltic tribes, the Galindians, Galindae, or Goliad, migrated to the area around modern day Moscow, Russia around the 4th century AD.\nOver time the Balts became differentiated into Western and Eastern Balts. In the 5th century AD parts of the eastern Baltic coast began to be settled by the ancestors of the Western Balts: Brus/Pr\u016bsa (\"Old Prussians\"), Sudovians/Jotvingians, Scalvians, Nadruvians, and Curonians. The Eastern Balts, including the hypothesised Dniepr Balts, were living in modern-day Belarus, Ukraine and Russia.\nGermanic peoples lived to the west of the Baltic homelands; by the first century AD, the Goths had stabilized their kingdom from the mouth of the Vistula, south to Dacia. As Roman domination collapsed in the first half of the first millennium CE in Northern and Eastern Europe, large migrations of the Balts occurred \u2014 first, the Galindae or Galindians towards the east, and later, Eastern Balts towards the west. In the seventh century, Slavic tribes from the Volga regions appeared. By the 13th and 14th centuries, they reached the general area that the present-day Balts and Belarusians inhabit. Many other Eastern and Southern Balts either assimilated with other Balts, or Slavs in the 4th\u20137th centuries and were gradually slavicized.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the 12th and 13th centuries, internal struggles and invasions by Ruthenians and Poles, and later the expansion of the Teutonic Order, resulted in an almost complete annihilation of the Galindians, Curonians, and Yotvingians. Gradually, Old Prussians became Germanized or Lithuanized between the 15th and 17th centuries, especially after the Reformation in Prussia. The cultures of the Lithuanians and Latgalians/Latvians survived and became the ancestors of the populations of the modern countries of Latvia and Lithuania.\nOld Prussian was closely related to the other extinct Western Baltic languages, Curonian, Galindian and Sudovian. It is more distantly related to the surviving Eastern Baltic languages, Lithuanian and Latvian. Compare the Prussian word \"seme\" (\"zem\u0113\"), the Latvian \"zeme\", the Lithuanian \"\u017eem\u0117\" (\"land\" in English).\nCulture.\nThe Balts originally practiced Baltic religion. They were gradually Christianized as a result of the Northern Crusades of the Middle Ages. Baltic peoples such as the Latvians, Lithuanians and Old Prussians had their distinct mythologies. The Lithuanians have close historic ties to Poland, and many of them are therefore Roman Catholic. The Latvians have close historic ties of Northern Germany and Scandinavia, and many of them are therefore Lutherans. Irreligion is widespread. In recent times, the Baltic religion has been revived in Baltic neopaganism.\nGenetics.\nRecent genetic research show that the eastern Baltic in the Mesolithic was inhabited primarily by Western Hunter-Gatherers (WHGs). Their paternal haplogroups were mostly types of I2a and R1b, while their maternal haplogroups were mostly types of U5, U4 and U2. These people carried a high frequency of the derived HERC2 allele which codes for light eye color.\nDuring the Neolithic, increasing admixture from Eastern Hunter-Gatherers (EHGs) is detected. The paternal haplogroups of EHGs was mostly types of R1b and R1a, while their maternal haplogroups appears to have been almost exclusively types of U5, U4, and U2. Baltic hunter-gatherers still displayed a slightly larger amount of WHG ancestry than Scandinavian Hunter-Gatherers (SHGs). WHG ancestry in the Baltic was particularly high among hunter-gatherers in Latvia and Lithuania. Unlike other parts of Europe, the hunter-gatherers of the eastern Baltic do not appear to have mixed much with Early European Farmers (EEFs) arriving from Anatolia.\nThe rise of the Corded Ware culture in the eastern Baltic in the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age is accompanied by a significant infusion of steppe ancestry and EEF ancestry into the eastern Baltic gene pool. In the aftermath of the Corded Ware expansion, local hunter-gatherer ancestry experienced a resurgence. Haplogroup N did not appear in the eastern Baltic until the late Bronze Age, perhaps as part of a westward migration of Uralic peoples.\nModern Balts have a lower amount of EEF ancestry, and a higher amount of WHG ancestry, than any other population in Europe.\nList of Baltic peoples.\nModern Baltic peoples"}
{"id": "4541", "revid": "756697464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4541", "title": "Burnt-in timecode", "text": "Burnt-in timecode (often abbreviated to BITC by analogy to VITC) is a human-readable on-screen version of the timecode information for a piece of material superimposed on a video image. BITC is sometimes used in conjunction with \"real\" machine-readable timecode, but more often used in copies of original material on to a non-broadcast format such as VHS, so that the VHS copies can be traced back to their master tape and the original time codes easily located. \nMany professional VTRs can \"burn\" (overlay) the tape timecode onto one of their outputs. This output (which usually also displays the setup menu or on-screen display) is known as the \"super out\" or \"monitor out\". The \"character\" switch or menu item turns this behaviour on or off. The \"character\" function is also used to display the timecode on the preview monitors in linear editing suites.\nVideotapes that are recorded with timecode numbers overlaid on the video are referred to as \"window dubs\", named after the \"window\" that displays the burnt-in timecode on-screen.\nWhen editing was done using magnetic tapes that were subject to damage from excessive wear, it was common to use a window dub as a working copy for the majority of the editing process. Editing decisions would be made using a window dub, and no specialized equipment was needed to write down an edit decision list which would then be replicated from the high-quality masters.\nTimecode can also be superimposed on video using a dedicated overlay device, often called a \"window dub inserter\". This inputs a video signal and its separate timecode audio signal, reads the timecode, superimposes the timecode display over the video, and outputs the combined display (usually via composite), all in real time. Stand-alone timecode generator / readers often have the window dub function built-in. \nSome consumer cameras, in particular DV cameras, can \"burn\" (overlay) the tape timecode onto the composite output. This output typically is semi-transparent and may include other tape information. It is usually activated by turning on the 'display' info in one of the camera's sub-menus. While not as 'professional' as an overlay as created by a professional VCRs, it is a cheap alternative that is just as accurate.\nTimecode is stored in the metadata areas of captured DV AVI files, and some software is able to \"burn\" (overlay) this into the video frames. For example, DVMP Pro is able to \"burn\" timecode or other items of DV metadata (such as date and time, iris, shutter speed, gain, white balance mode, etc.) into DV AVI files.\nOCR techniques can be used to read BITC in situations where other forms of timecode are not available."}
{"id": "4542", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4542", "title": "Bra\u2013ket notation", "text": "In quantum mechanics, bra\u2013ket notation, or Dirac notation, is ubiquitous. The notation uses the angle brackets, and , and a vertical bar , to construct \"bras\" and \"kets\" .\nA ket looks like \"formula_1\". Mathematically it denotes a vector, formula_2, in an abstract (complex) vector space formula_3, and physically it represents a state of some quantum system.\nA bra looks like and mathematically it denotes a linear form formula_4, i.e. a linear map that maps each vector in formula_3 to a number in the complex plane formula_6. Letting the linear functional formula_7 act on a vector formula_8 is written as formula_9. \nOn formula_3 we introduce a scalar product formula_11 with antilinear first argument, which makes formula_3 a Hilbert space. With this scalar product each vector formula_13 can be identified with a corresponding linear form, by placing the vector in the anti-linear first slot of the inner product: formula_14. The correspondence between these notations is then formula_15. The linear form formula_16 is a covector to formula_17, and the set of all covectors form a dual vector space formula_18, to the initial vector space formula_3. The purpose of this linear form formula_16 can now be understood in terms of making projections on the state formula_21, to find how linearly dependent two states are, etc.\nFor the vector space formula_22, kets can be identified with column vectors, and bras with row vectors. Combinations of bras, kets, and operators are interpreted using matrix multiplication. If formula_22 has the standard hermitian inner product formula_24, under this identification, the identification of kets and bras and vice versa provided by the inner product is taking the Hermitian conjugate (denoted formula_25).\nIt is common to suppress the vector or linear form from the bra\u2013ket notation and only use a label inside the typography for the bra or ket. For example, the spin operator formula_26 on a two dimensional space formula_27 of spinors, has eigenvalues formula_28\u00bd with eigenspinors formula_29. In bra-ket notation one typically denotes this as formula_30, and formula_31. Just as above, kets and bras with the same label are interpreted as kets and bras corresponding to each other using the inner product. In particular when also identified with row and column vectors, kets and bras with the same label are identified with Hermitian conjugate column and row vectors. \nBra\u2013ket notation was effectively established in 1939 by Paul Dirac and is thus also known as the Dirac notation. (Still, the bra-ket notation has a precursor in Hermann Grassmann's use of the notation formula_32 for his inner products nearly 100 years earlier.)\nIntroduction.\nBra\u2013ket notation is a notation for linear algebra and linear operators on complex vector spaces together with their dual space both in the finite-dimensional and infinite-dimensional case. It is specifically designed to ease the types of calculations that frequently come up in quantum mechanics. Its use in quantum mechanics is quite widespread. Many phenomena that are explained using quantum mechanics are explained using bra\u2013ket notation.\nVector spaces.\nVectors vs kets.\nIn mathematics, the term \"vector\" is used for an element of any vector space. In physics, however, the term \"vector\" is much more specific: \"vector\" refers almost exclusively to quantities like displacement or velocity, which have components that relate directly to the three dimensions of space, or relativistically, to the four of space time. Such vectors are typically denoted with over arrows (formula_33), boldface (formula_34) or indices (formula_35).\nIn quantum mechanics, a quantum state is typically represented as an element of a complex Hilbert space, for example, the infinite-dimensional vector space of all possible wavefunctions (square integrable functions mapping each point of 3D space to a complex number) or some more abstract Hilbert space constructed more algebraically. Since the term \"vector\" is already used for something else (see previous paragraph), and physicists tend to prefer conventional notation to stating what space something is an element of, it is common and useful to denote an element formula_36 of an abstract complex vector spaces as a ket formula_17 using vertical bars and angular brackets and refer to them as \"kets\" rather than as vectors and pronounced \"ket-formula_36\" or \"ket-A\" for . \nSymbols, letters, numbers, or even words\u2014whatever serves as a convenient label\u2014can be used as the label inside a ket, with the formula_39 making clear that the label indicates a vector in vector space. In other words, the symbol \" has a specific and universal mathematical meaning, while just the \" by itself does not. For example, is not necessarily equal to . Nevertheless, for convenience, there is usually some logical scheme behind the labels inside kets, such as the common practice of labeling energy eigenkets in quantum mechanics through a listing of their quantum numbers. At its simplest, the label inside the ket is the eigenvalue of a physical operator, such as formula_40, formula_41, formula_42, etc.\nBra-ket notation.\nSince kets are just vectors in a Hermitian vector space they can be manipulated using the usual rules of linear algebra, for example:\nNote how the last line above involves infinitely many different kets, one for each real number .\nIf the ket is an element of a vector space, a bra formula_44 is an element of its dual space, i.e. a bra is a linear functional which is a linear map from the vector space to the complex numbers. Thus, it is useful to think of kets and bras as being elements of different vector spaces (see below however) with both being different useful concepts.\nA bra formula_16 and a ket formula_46 (i.e. a functional and a vector), can be combined to an operator formula_47 of rank one with outer product\nInner product and bra-ket identification on Hilbert space.\nThe bra-ket notation is particularly useful in Hilbert spaces which have an inner product that allows Hermitian conjugation and identifying a vector with a linear functional, i.e. a ket with a bra, and vice versa (see Riesz representation theorem). The inner product on Hilbert space formula_49 (with the first argument anti linear as preferred by physicists) is fully equivalent to an (anti linear) identification between the space of kets and that of bras in the bra ket notation: for a vector ket formula_50 define a functional (i.e. bra) formula_51 by\nBras and kets as row and column vectors.\nIn the simple case where we consider the vector space formula_53, a ket can be identified with a column vector, and a bra as a row vector. If moreover we use the standard Hermitian inner product on formula_53, the bra corresponding to a ket, in particular a bra and a ket with the same label are conjugate transpose. Moreover, conventions are set up in such a way that writing bras, kets, and linear operators next to each other simply imply matrix multiplication. In particular the outer product formula_55 of a column and a row vector ket and bra can be identified with matrix multiplication (column vector times row vector equals matrix).\nFor a finite-dimensional vector space, using a fixed orthonormal basis, the inner product can be written as a matrix multiplication of a row vector with a column vector:\nBased on this, the bras and kets can be defined as:\nand then it is understood that a bra next to a ket implies matrix multiplication.\nThe conjugate transpose (also called \"Hermitian conjugate\") of a bra is the corresponding ket and vice versa:\nbecause if one starts with the bra\nthen performs a complex conjugation, and then a matrix transpose, one ends up with the ket\nWriting elements of a finite dimensional (or mutatis mutandis, countably infinite) vector space as a column vector of numbers requires picking a basis. Picking a basis is not always helpful because quantum mechanics calculations involve frequently switching between different bases (e.g. position basis, momentum basis, energy eigenbasis), and one can write something like \" without committing to any particular basis. In situations involving two different important basis vectors, the basis vectors can be taken in the notation explicitly and here will be referred simply as \" and \"\".\nNon-normalizable states and non-Hilbert spaces.\nBra\u2013ket notation can be used even if the vector space is not a Hilbert space.\nIn quantum mechanics, it is common practice to write down kets which have infinite norm, i.e. non-normalizable wavefunctions. Examples include states whose wavefunctions are Dirac delta functions or infinite plane waves. These do not, technically, belong to the Hilbert space itself. However, the definition of \"Hilbert space\" can be broadened to accommodate these states (see the Gelfand\u2013Naimark\u2013Segal construction or rigged Hilbert spaces). The bra\u2013ket notation continues to work in an analogous way in this broader context.\nBanach spaces are a different generalization of Hilbert spaces. In a Banach space , the vectors may be notated by kets and the continuous linear functionals by bras. Over any vector space without topology, we may also notate the vectors by kets and the linear functionals by bras. In these more general contexts, the bracket does not have the meaning of an inner product, because the Riesz representation theorem does not apply.\nUsage in quantum mechanics.\nThe mathematical structure of quantum mechanics is based in large part on linear algebra:\nSince virtually every calculation in quantum mechanics involves vectors and linear operators, it can involve, and often does involve, bra\u2013ket notation. A few examples follow:\nSpinless position\u2013space wave function.\nThe Hilbert space of a spin-0 point particle is spanned by a \"position basis\" , where the label extends over the set of all points in position space. This label is the eigenvalue of the position operator acting on such a basis state, formula_61. Since there are an uncountably infinite number of vector components in the basis, this is an uncountably infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. The dimensions of the Hilbert space (usually infinite) and position space (usually 1, 2 or 3) are not to be conflated.\nStarting from any ket in this Hilbert space, one may \"define\" a complex scalar function of , known as a wavefunction,\nOn the left-hand side, is a function mapping any point in space to a complex number; on the right-hand side, is a ket consisting of a superposition of kets with relative coefficients specified by that function.\nIt is then customary to define linear operators acting on wavefunctions in terms of linear operators acting on kets, by\nFor instance, the momentum operator formula_64 has the following coordinate representation,\nOne occasionally even encounters an expression such as\nthough this is something of an abuse of notation. The differential operator must be understood to be an abstract operator, acting on kets, that has the effect of differentiating wavefunctions once the expression is projected onto the position basis, formula_67\neven though, in the momentum basis, this operator amounts to a mere multiplication operator (by ). That is, to say,\nor\nOverlap of states.\nIn quantum mechanics the expression is typically interpreted as the probability amplitude for the state to collapse into the state . Mathematically, this means the coefficient for the projection of onto . It is also described as the projection of state onto state .\nChanging basis for a spin-\u00bd particle.\nA stationary spin-\u00bd particle has a two-dimensional Hilbert space. One orthonormal basis is:\nwhere is the state with a definite value of the spin operator equal to +\u00bd and is the state with a definite value of the spin operator equal to \u2212\u00bd .\nSince these are a basis, \"any\" quantum state of the particle can be expressed as a linear combination (i.e., quantum superposition) of these two states:\nwhere and are complex numbers.\nA \"different\" basis for the same Hilbert space is:\ndefined in terms of rather than .\nAgain, \"any\" state of the particle can be expressed as a linear combination of these two:\nIn vector form, you might write\ndepending on which basis you are using. In other words, the \"coordinates\" of a vector depend on the basis used.\nThere is a mathematical relationship between formula_75, formula_76, formula_77 and formula_78; see change of basis.\nPitfalls and ambiguous uses.\nThere are some conventions and uses of notation that may be confusing or ambiguous for the non-initiated or early student. \nSeparation of inner product and vectors.\nA cause for confusion is that the notation does not separate the inner-product operation from the notation for a (bra) vector. If a (dual space) bra-vector is constructed as a linear combination of other bra-vectors (for instance when expressing it in some basis) the notation creates some ambiguity and hides mathematical details. We can compare bra-ket notation to using bold for vectors, such as formula_79, and formula_11 for the inner product. Consider the following dual space bra-vector in the basis formula_81:\nIt has to be determined by convention if the complex numbers formula_83 are inside or outside of the inner product, and each convention gives different results.\nReuse of symbols.\nIt is common to use the same symbol for \"labels\" and \"constants\". For example, formula_86, where the symbol formula_87 is used simultaneously as the \"name of the operator\" formula_88, its \"eigenvector\" formula_89 and the associated \"eigenvalue\" formula_87. Sometimes the \"hat\" is also dropped for operators, and one can see notation such as formula_91\nHermitian conjugate of kets.\nIt is common to see the usage formula_92, where the dagger (formula_93) corresponds to the Hermitian conjugate. This is however not correct in a technical sense, since the ket, formula_94, represents a vector in a complex Hilbert-space formula_95, and the bra, formula_96, is a linear functional on vectors in formula_95. In other words, formula_94 is just a vector, while formula_96 is the combination of a vector and an inner product.\nOperations inside bras and kets.\nThis is done for a fast notation of scaling vectors. For instance, if the vector formula_100 is scaled by formula_101, it may be denoted formula_102. This can be ambiguous since formula_87 is simply a label for a state, and not a mathematical object on which operations can be performed. This usage is more common when denoting vectors as tensor products, where part of the labels are moved outside the designed slot, e.g. formula_104.\nLinear operators.\nLinear operators acting on kets.\nA linear operator is a map that inputs a ket and outputs a ket. (In order to be called \"linear\", it is required to have certain properties.) In other words, if formula_105 is a linear operator and formula_94 is a ket-vector, then formula_107 is another ket-vector.\nIn an formula_108-dimensional Hilbert space, we can impose a basis on the space and represent formula_94 in terms of its coordinates as a formula_110 column vector. Using the same basis for formula_105, it is represented by an formula_112 complex matrix. The ket-vector formula_107 can now be computed by matrix multiplication.\nLinear operators are ubiquitous in the theory of quantum mechanics. For example, observable physical quantities are represented by self-adjoint operators, such as energy or momentum, whereas transformative processes are represented by unitary linear operators such as rotation or the progression of time.\nLinear operators acting on bras.\nOperators can also be viewed as acting on bras \"from the right hand side\". Specifically, if is a linear operator and is a bra, then is another bra defined by the rule\nIn an -dimensional Hilbert space, can be written as a row vector, and (as in the previous section) is an matrix. Then the bra can be computed by normal matrix multiplication.\nIf the same state vector appears on both bra and ket side,\nthen this expression gives the expectation value, or mean or average value, of the observable represented by operator for the physical system in the state .\nOuter products.\nA convenient way to define linear operators on a Hilbert space is given by the outer product: if is a bra and is a ket, the outer product\ndenotes the rank-one operator with the rule \nFor a finite-dimensional vector space, the outer product can be understood as simple matrix multiplication:\nThe outer product is an matrix, as expected for a linear operator.\nOne of the uses of the outer product is to construct projection operators. Given a ket of norm 1, the orthogonal projection onto the subspace spanned by is\nThis is an idempotent in the algebra of observables that acts on the Hilbert space.\nHermitian conjugate operator.\nJust as kets and bras can be transformed into each other (making into ), the element from the dual space corresponding to is , where denotes the Hermitian conjugate (or adjoint) of the operator . In other words,\nIf is expressed as an matrix, then is its conjugate transpose.\nSelf-adjoint operators, where , play an important role in quantum mechanics; for example, an observable is always described by a self-adjoint operator. If is a self-adjoint operator, then is always a real number (not complex). This implies that expectation values of observables are real.\nProperties.\nBra\u2013ket notation was designed to facilitate the formal manipulation of linear-algebraic expressions. Some of the properties that allow this manipulation are listed herein. In what follows, and denote arbitrary complex numbers, denotes the complex conjugate of , and denote arbitrary linear operators, and these properties are to hold for any choice of bras and kets.\nAssociativity.\nGiven any expression involving complex numbers, bras, kets, inner products, outer products, and/or linear operators (but not addition), written in bra\u2013ket notation, the parenthetical groupings do not matter (i.e., the associative property holds). For example:\nand so forth. The expressions on the right (with no parentheses whatsoever) are allowed to be written unambiguously \"because\" of the equalities on the left. Note that the associative property does \"not\" hold for expressions that include nonlinear operators, such as the antilinear time reversal operator in physics.\nHermitian conjugation.\nBra\u2013ket notation makes it particularly easy to compute the Hermitian conjugate (also called \"dagger\", and denoted ) of expressions. The formal rules are:\nThese rules are sufficient to formally write the Hermitian conjugate of any such expression; some examples are as follows:\nComposite bras and kets.\nTwo Hilbert spaces and may form a third space by a tensor product. In quantum mechanics, this is used for describing composite systems. If a system is composed of two subsystems described in and respectively, then the Hilbert space of the entire system is the tensor product of the two spaces. (The exception to this is if the subsystems are actually identical particles. In that case, the situation is a little more complicated.)\nIf is a ket in and is a ket in , the direct product of the two kets is a ket in . This is written in various notations:\nSee quantum entanglement and the EPR paradox for applications of this product.\nThe unit operator.\nConsider a complete orthonormal system (\"basis\"),\nfor a Hilbert space , with respect to the norm from an inner product .\nFrom basic functional analysis, it is known that any ket formula_133 can also be written as\nwith the inner product on the Hilbert space.\nFrom the commutativity of kets with (complex) scalars, it follows that\nmust be the \"identity operator\", which sends each vector to itself.\nThis, then, can be inserted in any expression without affecting its value; for example\nwhere, in the last line, the Einstein summation convention has been used to avoid clutter.\nIn quantum mechanics, it often occurs that little or no information about the inner product of two arbitrary (state) kets is present, while it is still possible to say something about the expansion coefficients and of those vectors with respect to a specific (orthonormalized) basis. In this case, it is particularly useful to insert the unit operator into the bracket one time or more.\nFor more information, see Resolution of the identity, \nSince , plane waves follow, \nTypically, when all matrix elements of an operator such as \nare available,\nthis resolution serves to reconstitute the full operator,\nNotation used by mathematicians.\nThe object physicists are considering when using bra\u2013ket notation is a Hilbert space (a complete inner product space).\nLet be a Hilbert space and a vector in . What physicists would denote by is the vector itself. That is,\nLet be the dual space of . This is the space of linear functionals on . The isomorphism is defined by , where for every we define\nwhere , , and are just different notations for expressing an inner product between two elements in a Hilbert space (or for the first three, in any inner product space). Notational confusion arises when identifying and with and respectively. This is because of literal symbolic substitutions. Let and let . This gives\nOne ignores the parentheses and removes the double bars. Some properties of this notation are convenient since we are dealing with linear operators and composition acts like a ring multiplication.\nMoreover, mathematicians usually write the dual entity not at the first place, as the physicists do, but at the second one, and they usually use not an asterisk but an overline (which the physicists reserve for averages and the Dirac spinor adjoint) to denote complex conjugate numbers; i.e., for scalar products mathematicians usually write\nwhereas physicists would write for the same quantity"}
