{"id": "3029", "revid": "11396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3029", "title": "Arthur Jensen", "text": "Arthur Robert Jensen (August 24, 1923\u00a0\u2013 October 22, 2012) was an American psychologist and writer. He was a professor of educational psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. Jensen was known for his work in psychometrics and differential psychology, the study of how and why individuals differ behaviorally from one another.\nHe was a major proponent of the hereditarian position in the nature and nurture debate, the position that genetics play a significant role in behavioral traits, such as intelligence and personality. He was the author of over 400 scientific papers published in refereed journals and sat on the editorial boards of the scientific journals \"Intelligence\" and \"Personality and Individual Differences\".\nJensen was controversial, largely for his conclusions regarding the causes of race-based differences in IQ. A 2019 study found him to be the most controversial intelligence researcher among 55 persons covered.\nEarly life.\nJensen was born August 24, 1923, in San Diego, California, the son of Linda Mary (n\u00e9e Schachtmayer) and Arthur Alfred Jensen, who operated and owned a lumber and building materials company. His paternal grandparents were Danish immigrants and his mother was of half Polish Jewish and half German descent.\nAs a child, Jensen was interested in herpetology and classical music, playing clarinet in the San Diego Symphony orchestra.\nHe studied at University of California, Berkeley (B.A. 1945), San Diego State College (M.A., 1952) and Columbia University (Ph.D., 1956), and did his doctoral thesis with Percival Symonds on the Thematic Apperception Test. From 1956 through 1958, he did postdoctoral research at the University of London, Institute of Psychiatry with Hans Eysenck.\nUpon returning to the United States, he became a researcher and professor at the University of California, Berkeley, where he focused on individual differences in learning, especially the influences of culture, development, and genetics on intelligence and learning. He received tenure at Berkeley in 1962 and was given his first sabbatical in 1964. He concentrated much of his work on the learning difficulties of culturally disadvantaged students.\nJensen had a lifelong interest in classical music and was, early in his life, attracted by the idea of becoming a conductor himself. At 14, he conducted a band that won a nationwide contest held in San Francisco. Later, he conducted orchestras and attended a seminar given by Nikolai Sokoloff. Soon after graduating from Berkeley, he moved to New York, mainly to be near the conductor Arturo Toscanini. He was also deeply interested in the life and example of Gandhi, producing an unpublished book-length manuscript on his life. During Jensen's period in San Diego he spent time working as a social worker with the San Diego Department of Public Welfare.\nIQ and academic achievement.\nJensen's interest in learning differences directed him to the extensive testing of school children. The results led him to distinguish between two separate types of learning ability. \"Level I\", or associative learning, may be defined as retention of input and rote memorization of simple facts and skills. \"Level II\", or conceptual learning, is roughly equivalent to the ability to manipulate and transform inputs, that is, the ability to solve problems.\nLater, Jensen was an important advocate in the mainstream acceptance of the general factor of intelligence, a concept which was essentially synonymous with his \"Level II\" conceptual learning. The general factor, or \"g\", is an abstraction that stems from the observation that scores on all forms of cognitive tests correlate positively with one another.\nJensen claimed, on the basis of his research, that general cognitive ability is essentially an inherited trait, determined predominantly by genetic factors rather than by environmental conditions. He also contended that while associative learning, or memorizing ability, is equally distributed among the races, conceptual learning, or synthesizing ability, occurs with significantly greater frequency in whites than in non-whites.\nJensen's most controversial work, published in February 1969 in the \"Harvard Educational Review\", was titled \"How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?\" It concluded, among other things, that Head Start programs designed to boost African-American IQ scores had failed, and that this was likely never to be remedied, largely because, in Jensen's estimation, 80% of the variance in IQ in the population studied was the result of genetic factors and the remainder was due to environmental influences.\nThe work became one of the most cited papers in the history of psychological testing and intelligence research, although a large number of citations consisted of rebuttals of Jensen's work, or references to it as an example of a controversial paper.\nAfter the paper was released, large protests were held, demanding that Jensen be fired. Jensen's car tires were slashed, the university police provided him with plain-clothes bodyguards, and he and his family received threats that were considered so realistic by the police that they temporarily left their house. Jensen was spat on and was prevented from delivering lectures by disruptive protests. The editorial board of the \"Harvard Educational Review\" for a time refused to let him have reprints of his article, and said that they had not solicited the section on racial differences; Jensen later provided correspondence in which the board had requested he do so.\nIn a later article, Jensen argued that his claims had been misunderstood:\nAlthough a critic of Jensen's thesis, economist Thomas Sowell, criticizing the taboo against research on race and intelligence, wrote:\nHowever, Jensen's 1998 \"\" gives his position suggesting a genetic component is implicated in the white-black difference in IQ. In Chapter 12: Population Differences in \"g\": Causal Hypotheses, Jensen writes:\nIn 1994 he was one of 52 signatories on \"Mainstream Science on Intelligence, \" an editorial written by Linda Gottfredson and published in \"The Wall Street Journal\", which declared the consensus of the signing scholars on the meaning and significance of IQ following the publication of the book \"The Bell Curve\". Jensen received $1.1 million from the Pioneer Fund,\nan organization frequently described as racist and white supremacist in nature.\nThe fund contributed a total of $3.5 million to researchers cited in The Bell Curve's most controversial chapter \"that suggests some races are naturally smarter than others\" with Jensen's works being cited twenty-three times in the book's bibliography.\nIn 2005, Jensen's article, co-written with J. Philippe Rushton, named \"Thirty Years of Research on Race Differences in Cognitive Ability\", was published in the APA journal \"Psychology, Public Policy, and Law\". Jensen and Rushton present ten categories of evidence in support of the notion that IQ differences between whites and blacks are partly genetic in origin.\nDeath.\nHe died on October 22, 2012 at his home in Kelseyville, California at age 89.\nAssessment.\nSupport.\nPaul E. Meehl of the University of Minnesota, after being honored by the APA, wrote that Jensen's \"contributions, in both quality and quantity, certainly excelled mine\" and that he was \"embarrassed\" and \"distress[ed]\" that APA refused to honor Jensen because of his ideology.\nSandra Scarr of Yale University wrote that Jensen possessed an \"uncompromising personal integrity\" and set the standard for \"honest psychological science\". She contrasted him and his work favorably to some of his critics, who she called \"politically driven liars, who distort scientific facts in a misguided and condescending effort to protect an impossible myth about human equality\".\nSteven J. Haggbloom, writing for \"Review of General Psychology\" in 2002, rated Jensen as one of the 100 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century, based on six different metrics chosen by Haggbloom.\nFrancis Crick, the co-discoverer of DNA, considered that there was \"much substance to Jensen's arguments\" and that it was \"likely that more than half the difference between the average I.Q. of American whites and Negroes is due to genetic reasons, and will not be eliminated by any foreseeable change in the environment.\"\nIn 1980 Jensen published a detailed book in defense of the tests used to measure mental abilities, entitled \"Bias in Mental Testing\". Reviewing this book, psychologist Kenneth Kaye endorsed Jensen's distinction between bias and discrimination, saying that he found many of Jensen's opponents to be more politically-biased than Jensen was.\nCriticism.\nMelvin Konner of Emory University, wrote:\nLisa Suzuki and Joshua Aronson of New York University wrote that Jensen had largely ignored evidence which failed to support his position that IQ test score gaps represent genetic racial differences.\nPaleontologist and evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould criticized Jensen's work in his 1981 book \"The Mismeasure of Man\". Gould writes that Jensen misapplies the concept of \"heritability\", which is defined as a measure of the variation of a trait due to inheritance \"within\" a population (Gould 1981: 127; 156-157). According to Gould, Jensen uses heritability to measure differences \"between\" populations. Gould also disagrees with Jensen's belief that IQ tests measure a real variable, \"g\", or \"the general factor common to a large number of cognitive abilities\" which can be measured along a unilinear scale. This is a claim most closely identified with Charles Spearman. According to Gould, Jensen misunderstood the research of L. L. Thurstone to ultimately support this claim; Gould, however, argues that Thurstone's factor analysis of intelligence revealed \"g\" to be an illusion (1981: 159; 13-314). Gould criticizes Jensen's sources including his use of Catharine Cox's 1926 \"Genetic Studies of Genius\", which examines historiometrically the IQs of historic intellectuals after their deaths (Gould 1981: 153-154).\nNeutral responses.\nAccording to David Lubinski of Vanderbilt University, the \"extent to which [Jensen's] work was either admired or reviled by many distinguished scientists is unparalleled.\"\nAfter Jensen's death, James Flynn of the University of Otago, a prominent advocate of the environmental position, told \"The New York Times\" that Jensen was without racial bias and had not initially foreseen that his research would be used to argue for racial supremacy and that his career was \"emblematic of the extent to which American scholarship is inhibited by political orthodoxy\", though he noted that Jensen shifted towards genetic explanations later in life.\nJensen's response and criticism.\nIn Arthur Jensen's response to Gould's criticisms, in the paper titled \"The Debunking of Scientific Fossils and Straw Persons\", Jensen begins his paper with this observation:\nWhile Jensen recognizes the validity of some of Gould's claims, in many places, he criticizes Gould's general approach:\nJensen adds that Gould made a number of misrepresentations, whether intentional or unintentional, while purporting to present Jensen's own positions:\nJensen expressed considerably greater praise of his frequent intellectual sparring partner, James R. Flynn:\nBooks.\n\"Bias in Mental Testing\".\n\"Bias in Mental Testing\" (1980) is a book examining the question of test bias in commonly used standardized tests. The book runs almost 800 pages and has been called \"exhaustive\" by three researchers who reviewed the field 19 years after the book's publication. It reviewed in detail the available evidence about test bias across major US racial/ethnic groups. Jensen concluded that \"the currently most widely used standardized tests of mental ability -- IQ, scholastic aptitude, and achievement tests -- are, by and large, not biased against any of the native-born English-speaking minority groups on which the amount of research evidence is sufficient for an objective determination of bias, if the tests were in fact biased. For most nonverbal standardized tests, this generalization is not limited to English-speaking minorities.\" (p. ix). Jensen also published a summary of the book the same year which was a target article in the journal \"Behavioral and Brain Sciences\" to which 27 commentaries were printed along with the author's reply.\n\"Straight Talk about Mental Tests\".\n\"Straight Talk about Mental Tests\" (1981) is a book written about psychometrics for the general public. John B. Carroll reviewed it favorably in 1982, saying it was a useful summary of the issues, as did Paul Cline writing for the \"British Journal of Psychiatry\". In 2016, Richard J. Haier called it \"a clear examination of all issues surrounding mental testing\".\n\"The g Factor\".\n\"\" (1998) is a book on the general intelligence factor (\"g\"). The book deals with the intellectual history of g and various models of how to conceptualize intelligence, and with the biological correlates of g, its heritability, and its practical predictive power.\n\"Clocking the Mind\".\n\"Clocking the Mind: Mental Chronometry and Individual Differences\" (2006) deals with mental chronometry (MC), and covers the speed with which the brain processes information and different ways this is measured. Jensen argues mental chronometry represents a true natural science of mental ability, which is in contrast to IQ, which merely represents an interval (ranking) scale and thus possesses no true ratio scale properties.\nJoseph Glicksohn wrote in a 2007 review for \"Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology\" that \"The book should be perused with care in order to ensure the further profitable use of [reaction time] in both experimental and differential lines of research.\"\nDouglas Detterman reviewed it in 2008 for \"Intelligence\", writing that \"the book would make a good introduction to the field of the measurement of individual differences in cognitive tasks for beginning graduate students.\" Eric-Jan Wagenmakers and Han van der Mass, also writing for \"Intelligence\" in 2018, faulted the book for omitting the work by mathematical psychologists, advocating standardization of chronometric methods (which the authors consider problematic because it can hide method variance), and because it does not discuss topics such as the mutualism model of the \"g-\"factor and the Flynn effect. They describe the book's breadth as useful, despite its simplistic approach. Jensen was on the editorial board of \"Intelligence\" when these reviews were published.\nAwards.\nIn 2003, Jensen was awarded the Kistler Prize for original contributions to the understanding of the connection between the human genome and human society. In 2006, the International Society for Intelligence Research awarded Jensen its Lifetime Achievement Award."}
{"id": "3032", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3032", "title": "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum", "text": "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart.\nInspired by the farces of the ancient Roman playwright Plautus (251\u2013183 BC), specifically \"Pseudolus\", \"Miles Gloriosus\", and \"Mostellaria\", the musical tells the bawdy story of a slave named Pseudolus and his attempts to win his freedom by helping his young master woo the girl next door. The plot displays many classic elements of farce, including puns, the slamming of doors, cases of mistaken identity (frequently involving characters disguising themselves as one another), and satirical comments on social class. The title derives from a line often used by vaudeville comedians to begin a story: \"A funny thing happened on the way to the theater\".\nThe musical's original 1962 Broadway run won several Tony Awards, including Best Musical and Best Author (Musical). \"A Funny Thing\" has enjoyed several Broadway and West End revivals and was made into a successful film starring the original lead of the stage musical, Zero Mostel.\nProductions.\nOriginal Broadway.\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" opened on Broadway on May 8, 1962, at the Alvin Theatre, and then transferred to the Mark Hellinger Theatre and the Majestic Theatre, where the show closed on August 29, 1964, after 964 performances and 8 previews.\nThe show's creators originally wanted Phil Silvers in the lead role of Pseudolus, but he turned them down, allegedly because he would have to perform onstage without his glasses, and his vision was so poor that he feared tripping into the orchestra pit. He is also quoted as turning down the role for being \"Sgt. Bilko in a toga\". (Silvers eventually played the role \u2014 wearing his glasses \u2014 in a 1972 revival. In the film, he played Marcus Lycus.) Milton Berle also passed on the role. Eventually, Zero Mostel was cast.\nDuring the out of town pre-Broadway tryouts the show was attracting little business and not playing well. Jerome Robbins was called in to give advice and make changes. The biggest change Robbins made was a new opening number to replace \"Love Is in the Air\" and introduce the show as a bawdy, wild comedy. Stephen Sondheim wrote the song \"Comedy Tonight\" for this new opening. From that point on, the show was a success.\nIt was directed by George Abbott and produced by Hal Prince, with choreography by Jack Cole and uncredited staging and choreography by Robbins. The scenic and costume design was by Tony Walton. This wardrobe is on display at the Costume World Broadway Collection in Pompano Beach, Florida. The lighting design was by Jean Rosenthal. Along with Mostel, the musical featured a cast of seasoned performers, including Jack Gilford (Mostel's friend and fellow blacklist member), David Burns, John Carradine, Ruth Kobart, and Raymond Walburn. The young lovers were played by Brian Davies and Preshy Marker. Karen Black, originally cast as the ingenue, was replaced out of town.\nThe show won several Tony Awards: Best Musical, Best Actor, Best Supporting Actor (Burns), Best Book, and Best Director. The score, however, was coolly received; it was Sondheim's first musical on Broadway in which he wrote both the music and lyrics, and did not earn a nomination for Best Original Score.\nLondon.\nThe show was presented twice in London's West End. The 1963 production and its 1986 revival were staged at the Strand Theatre and the Piccadilly Theatre respectively, and starred Frankie Howerd as Pseudolus and Leon Greene as Miles Gloriosus in both. In the 1963 production, Kenneth Connor appeared as Hysterium, 'Monsewer' Eddie Gray as Senex and Jon Pertwee as Marcus Lycus. In the 1986 revival, Patrick Cargill was Senex with Ronnie Stevens as Hysterium and Derek Royle as Erronius.\nIn 2004 there was a limited-run revival at the Royal National Theatre, starring Desmond Barrit as Pseudolus, Philip Quast as Miles Gloriosus, Hamish McColl as Hysterium and Isla Blair as Domina (who had previously played Philia in the 1963 production). This production was nominated for the 2005 Olivier Award, Outstanding Musical Production.\nMotion picture adaptation.\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" was made into a musical film in 1966, directed by Richard Lester, with Mostel and Gilford re-creating their Broadway stage roles, Leon Greene reprising his West End stage role, and Phil Silvers in an expanded role as \"Marcus Lycus\". David Burns did not return for the film role of Senex, which was played in the film by Michael Hordern. Buster Keaton made his final film appearance in the role of Erronius.\nBroadway revivals.\nA revival opened on Broadway at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre on April 4, 1972 and closed on August 12, 1972 after 156 performances. Directed by co-author Burt Shevelove the cast starred Phil Silvers as Pseudolus (later replaced by Tom Poston), Lew Parker as Senex, Carl Ballantine as Lycus and Reginald Owen as Erronius. Larry Blyden, who played Hysterium, the role created by Jack Gilford, also co-produced. \"Pretty Little Picture\" and \"That'll Show Him\" were dropped from the show, and were replaced with \"Echo Song\" (sung by Hero and Philia), and \"Farewell\" (added for Nancy Walker as Domina, as she and Senex depart for the country). \"Echo Song\" and \"Farewell\" had been added to a production staged in Los Angeles the previous year and were composed by Sondheim. They had to close soon after Phil Silvers suffered a stroke. The show won two Tony Awards, Best Leading Actor in a Musical for Silvers, and Best Featured Actor in a Musical for Blyden.\nThe musical was revived again with great success in 1996, opening at the St. James Theatre on April 18, 1996 and closing on January 4, 1998 after 715 performances. The cast starred Nathan Lane as Pseudolus (replaced by Whoopi Goldberg and later by David Alan Grier), Mark Linn-Baker as Hysterium, Ernie Sabella as Lycus, Jim Stanek as Hero, Lewis J. Stadlen as Senex, and Cris Groenendaal as Miles Gloriosus. The production was directed by Jerry Zaks, with choreography by Rob Marshall. Lane won the 1996 Tony Award for Best Leading Actor and the Drama Desk Award, Outstanding Actor in a Musical; the production was nominated for the 1996 Tony Award and Drama Desk Award, Revival of a Musical.\nEvery actor who has opened in the role of Pseudolus on Broadway (Zero Mostel, Phil Silvers, and Nathan Lane) has won a Best Leading Actor Tony Award for his performance. In addition, Jason Alexander, who performed as Pseudolus in one scene in \"Jerome Robbins' Broadway\", also won a Tony for Best Actor in a Musical.\nOther productions.\nThe original Australian production with American actor Jack Collins as Pseudolus opened at the Theatre Royal in Sydney in July 1964, and toured other Australian cities through 1965.\nIn 1998, Jon English starred as Pseudolus in Essgee Entertainment's production that opened New Year's Day at the State Theatre, Melbourne and toured Australia and New Zealand, closing September 1999.\nThe Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts produced a limited-run revival of the musical from January 11 to 27, 2008. The production was directed by Randal K. West, with Justin Hill as musical director and Adam Cates as choreographer. The cast featured Richard Kind as Pseudolus, Joel Blum as Senex, Stephen DeRosa as Marcus Lycus, Sean McCall as Hysterium, and Steve Wilson as Miles Gloriosus. It also featured Diana Upton-Hill, Ryan Gaffney, Stephen Mark Crisp, Jack Kloppenborg, and Margret Clair.\nThe Chung Ying Theatre Company in Hong Kong staged a Cantonese version of the musical at Kwai Tsing Theatre, to celebrate the company's 30th anniversary. It was directed by Chung King Fai and Ko Tin Lung and ran from 14 to 21 March 2009.\nThe Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Stratford, Ontario, Canada production ran from June 11 to November 7, 2009, with Des McAnuff directing and Wayne Cilento as choreographer. Bruce Dow originally performed the role of Pseudolus, but was forced to withdraw from the entire 2009 season due to an injury, and the role was then performed by Se\u00e1n Cullen as of September 5, 2009. Stephen Ouimette played Hysterium. Mirvish Productions presented the earlier Stratford production at the Canon Theatre, Toronto, in December 2010 through January 2011. Bruce Dow and Sean Cullen were alternates in the lead role.\nIn October 2012 the play opened at Her Majesty's Theatre, Melbourne, Australia, with Geoffrey Rush as Pseudolus, Magda Szubanski as Domina and Shane Bourne as Senex.\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" was produced at the Two River Theater in Red Bank, New Jersey from November 14, 2015 to December 13, 2015 with an all-male cast (Paul Castree, Eddie Cooper, Kevin Isola, David Josefsberg, Max Kumangai, Graham Rowat, Manny Stark, Bobby Conte Thornton, David Turner, Michael Urie, Tom Deckman, and Christopher Fitzgerald).\nPlot.\nIn ancient Rome, some neighbors live in three adjacent houses. In the center is the house of Senex, who lives there with wife Domina, son Hero, and several slaves, including head slave Hysterium and the musical's main character Pseudolus. A slave belonging to Hero, Pseudolus wishes to buy, win, or steal his freedom. One of the neighboring houses is owned by Marcus Lycus, who is a buyer and seller of beautiful women; the other belongs to the ancient Erronius, who is abroad searching for his long-lost children (stolen in infancy by pirates).\nOne day, Senex and Domina depart on a visit to Domina's mother and leave Pseudolus in charge of Hero. Hero confides in Pseudolus that he is in love with the lovely Philia, one of the courtesans in the House of Lycus (albeit still a virgin). Pseudolus promises to help him win Philia's love in exchange for his own freedom. Unfortunately (as the two find out when they pay a visit on Lycus), Philia has been sold to the renowned warrior Miles Gloriosus, who is expected to claim her very soon. Pseudolus, an excellent liar, uses Philia's cheery disposition to convince Lycus that she has picked up a plague from Crete, which causes its victims to smile endlessly in its terminal stages. By offering to isolate her in Senex's house, he is able to give Philia and Hero some time alone together, and the two fall in love. But Philia insists that, even though she is in love with Hero, she must honor her contract with the Captain, for \"that is the way of a courtesan.\" To appease her, he tells her to wait (\"that's what virgins do best, isn't it?\") inside, and that he will have the captain knock three times when he arrives. Pseudolus comes up with a plan to slip Philia a sleeping potion that will render her unconscious. He will then tell Lycus that she has died of the Cretan plague, and will offer to remove the body. Hero will come along, and they will stow away on a ship headed for Greece. Satisfied with his plan, Pseudolus steals Hysterium's book of potions and has Hero read him the recipe for the sleeping potion; the only ingredient he lacks is \"mare's sweat\", and Pseudolus goes off in search of some.\nUnexpectedly, Senex returns home early from his trip, and knocks three times on his own door. Philia comes out of the house, and, thinking that Senex is the Captain, offers herself up to him. Surprised but game, Senex instructs Philia to wait in the house for him, and she does. Hysterium arrives to this confusion, and tells Senex that Philia is the new maid that he has hired. Pseudolus returns, having procured the necessary mare's sweat; seeing that Senex has returned unexpectedly and grasping the need to keep him out of the way, Pseudolus discreetly sprinkles some of the horse-sweat onto him, then suggests that the road trip has left Senex in dire need of a bath. Taking the bait, Senex instructs Hysterium to draw him a bath in the long-abandoned house of Erronius. But while this is happening, Erronius returns home, finally having given up the search for his long-lost children. Hysterium, desperate to keep him out of the house where his master is bathing, tells the old man that his house has become haunted \u2013 a story seemingly confirmed by the sound of Senex singing in his bath. Erronius immediately determines to have a soothsayer come and banish the spirit from his house, and Pseudolus obligingly poses as one, telling Erronius that, in order to banish the spirit, he must travel seven times around the seven hills of Rome (thus keeping the old man occupied and out of the way for quite a while).\nWhen Miles Gloriosus arrives to claim his courtesan-bride, Pseudolus hides Philia on the roof of Senex's house; told that she has \"escaped,\" Lycus is terrified to face the Captain's wrath. Pseudolus offers to impersonate Lycus and talk his way out of the mess but, his ingenuity flagging, he ends up merely telling the Captain that Philia has disappeared, and that he, \"Lycus\", will search for her. Displeased and suspicious, Miles insists that his soldiers accompany Pseudolus, but the wily slave loses them in Rome's winding streets.\nComplicating matters further, Domina returns from her trip early, suspicious that her husband Senex is \"up to something low.\" She disguises herself in virginal white robes and a veil (much like Philia's) to try to catch Senex being unfaithful. Pseudolus convinces Hysterium to help him by dressing in drag and pretending to be Philia, \"dead\" from the plague. Unfortunately, it turns out that Miles Gloriosus has just returned from Crete, where there is of course no actual plague. With the ruse thus revealed, the main characters run for their lives, resulting in a madcap chase across the stage with both Miles and Senex pursuing all three \"Philia\"s (Domina, Hysterium, and the actual Philia \u2013 all wearing identical white robes and veils). Meanwhile, the courtesans from the house of Marcus Lycus \u2013 who had been recruited as mourners at \"Philia\"'s ersatz funeral \u2013 have escaped, and Lycus sends his eunuchs out to bring them all back, adding to the general pandemonium.\nFinally, the Captain's troops are able to round everyone up. His plot thoroughly unraveled, Pseudolus appears to be in deep trouble \u2013 but Erronius, completing his third circuit of the Roman hills, shows up fortuitously to discover that Miles Gloriosus and Philia are wearing matching rings which mark them as his long-lost children. Philia's betrothal to the Captain is nullified by the unexpected revelation that he's her brother, and, as the daughter of a free-born citizen, she's freed from Marcus Lycus. Philia weds Hero; Pseudolus gets his freedom and the lovely courtesan Gymnasia; Gloriosus receives twin courtesans to replace Philia; and Erronius is reunited with his children. A happy ending prevails for all \u2013 except for poor Senex, stuck with his shrewish wife Domina.\nSongs.\nAct I\nAct II\nNotes: \nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography"}
{"id": "3033", "revid": "71006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3033", "title": "Antenna theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "3034", "revid": "31514246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3034", "title": "Aleut", "text": "The Aleuts (; \"Ale\u00faty\"), who are usually known in the Aleut language by the endonyms Unangan (eastern dialect), Unangas (western dialect), \u0423\u043d\u0430\u04c8\u0430\u043d (lit. \"people\", singular is Unangax\u0302), are the indigenous people of the Aleutian Islands.\nBoth the Aleut people and the islands are divided between the US state of Alaska and the Russian administrative division of Kamchatka Krai.\nLanguage.\nAleut people speak Unangam Tunuu, the Aleut language, as well as English and Russian in the United States and Russia respectively. An estimated 150 people in the United States and five people in Russia speak Aleut. The language belongs to the Eskimo-Aleut language family and includes three dialects: Eastern Aleut, spoken on the Eastern Aleutian, Shumagin, Fox and Pribilof Islands; Atkan, spoken on Atka and Bering islands; and the now extinct Attuan dialect.\nThe Pribilof Islands boast the highest number of active speakers of Unangam Tunuu. Most of the Native elders speak Aleut, but it is very rare for an everyday person to speak the language fluently.\nBeginning in 1829, Aleut was written in the Cyrillic script. From 1870, the language has been written in the Latin script. An Aleut dictionary and grammar have been published, and portions of the Bible were translated into Aleut.\nTribes.\nThe Aleut (Unangan) dialects and tribes:\nPopulation and distribution.\nThe Aleut people historically lived throughout the Aleutian Islands, the Shumagin Islands, and the far western part of the Alaska Peninsula, with an estimated population of around 25,000 prior to European contact. In the 1820s, the Russian-American Company administered a large portion of the North Pacific during a Russian-led expansion of the fur trade. They resettled many Aleut families to the Commander Islands (within the Aleutsky District of the Kamchatka Krai in Russia) and to the Pribilof Islands (in Alaska). These continue to have majority-Aleut communities.\nAccording to the 2000 Census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut, while 17,000 identified as having partial Aleut ancestry. Prior to sustained European contact, approximately 25,000 Aleut lived in the archipelago. The Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online says more than 15,000 people have Aleut ancestry in the early 21st century. The Aleut suffered high fatalities in the 19th and early 20th centuries from Eurasian infectious diseases to which they had no immunity. In addition, the population suffered as their customary lifestyles were disrupted. Russian traders and later Europeans married Aleut women and had families with them.\nHistory.\nAfter Russian contact.\nAfter the arrival of Russian Orthodox missionaries in the late 18th century, many Aleuts became Christian. Of the numerous Russian Orthodox congregations in Alaska, most are majority Alaska Native in ethnicity. One of the earliest Christian martyrs in North America was Saint Peter the Aleut.\nRecorded Uprising against the Russians.\nIn the 18th century, Russia \"promyshlenniki\" traders established settlements on the islands. There was high demand for the furs that the Aleut provided from hunting. In May 1784, local Aleuts revolted on Amchitka against the Russian traders. (The Russians had a small trading post there.) According to what Aleut people said, in an account recorded by Japanese castaways and published in 2004, otters were decreasing year by year. The Russians paid the Aleuts less and less in goods in return for the furs they made. The Japanese learned that the Aleuts felt the situation was at crisis. The leading Aleuts negotiated with the Russians, saying they had failed to deliver enough supplies in return for furs. Nezimov, leader of the Russians, ordered two of his men, Stephanov (\u30b9\u30c6\u30c3\u30d1\u30ce \"Suteppano\") and Kazhimov (\u30ab\u30b8\u30e2\u30d5 \"Kazimofu\") to kill his mistress Oniishin (\u30aa\u30cb\u30a4\u30b7\u30f3 \"Oniishin\"), who was the Aleut chief's daughter, because he doubted that Oniishin had tried to dissuade her father and other leaders from pushing for more goods.\nAfter the four leaders had been killed, the Aleuts began to move from Amchitka to neighboring islands. Nezimov, leader of the Russian group, was jailed after the whole incident was reported to Russian officials. (According to , written by Katsuragawa Hosh\u016b after interviewing Daikokuya K\u014dday\u016b.)\nAleut genocide against Nicole\u00f1o Tribe in California.\nAccording to Russian American Company (RAC) records translated and published in the Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology, Vol. 34, No. 1 (2014). A 200-ton otter hunting ship named \"Il\u2019mena\" with a mixed nationality crew, including a majority Aleut contingent was involved in conflict resulting in a massacre of the indigenous natives of San Nicolas Island.\nIn 1811, to obtain more of the commercially valuable otter pelts, a party of Aleut hunters traveled to the coastal island of San Nicolas, near the Alta California-Baja California border. The locally resident Nicole\u00f1o nation sought a payment from the Aleut hunters for the large number of otters being killed in the area. Disagreement arose, turning violent; in the ensuing battle, the Aleut killed nearly all the Nicole\u00f1o men. Together with high fatalities from European diseases, the Nicole\u00f1os suffered so much from the loss of their men that by 1853, only one Nicole\u00f1an remained alive. (See Juana Maria, \"The Lone Woman of San Nicolas\", also known as Karana.)\nInternment during World War II.\nIn June 1942, during World War II, Japanese forces occupied Kiska and Attu Islands in the western Aleutians. They later transported captive Attu Islanders to Hokkaid\u014d, where they were held as prisoners of war in harsh conditions. Fearing a Japanese attack on other Aleutian Islands and mainland Alaska, the U.S. government evacuated hundreds more Aleuts from the western chain and the Pribilofs, placing them in internment camps in southeast Alaska, where many died of measles, influenza and other infectious diseases which spread quickly in the overcrowded dormitories. In total, about 75 died in American internment and 19 as a result of Japanese occupation. The Aleut Restitution Act of 1988 was an attempt by Congress to compensate the survivors. On June 17, 2017, the U.S. Government formally apologized for the internment of the Unangan people and their treatment in the camps.\nThe World War II campaign by the United States to retake Attu and Kiska was a significant component of the operations in the American and Pacific theaters.\nPopulation decline.\nBefore major influence from outside, there were approximately 25,000 Aleuts on the archipelago. Foreign diseases, harsh treatment and disruption of aboriginal society soon reduced the population to less than one-tenth this number. The 1910 Census count showed 1,491 Aleuts. In the 2000 Census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut; nearly 17,000 said Aleuts were among their ancestors.\nCulture.\nHousing.\nThe Aleut constructed partially underground houses called \"barabara\". According to Lillie McGarvey, a 20th-century Aleut leader, \"barabaras\" keep \"occupants dry from the frequent rains, warm at all times, and snugly sheltered from the high winds common to the area\". Aleuts traditionally built houses by digging an oblong square pit in the ground, usually or smaller. The pit was then covered by a roof framed with driftwood, thatched with grass, then covered with earth for insulation. Inside trenches were dug along the sides, with mats placed on top to keep them clean. The bedrooms were at the back of the lodge, opposite the entrance. Several families would stay in one house, with their own designated areas. Rather than fireplaces or bonfires in the middle, lanterns were hung in the house.\nSubsistence.\nThe Aleut survived by hunting and gathering. They fished for salmon, crabs, shellfish, and cod, as well as hunting sea mammals such as seal, walrus, and whales. They processed fish and sea mammals in a variety of ways: dried, smoked, or roasted. Caribou, muskoxen, deer, moose, whale, and other types of game were eaten roasted or preserved for later use. They dried berries. They were also processed as \"alutiqqutigaq\", a mixture of berries, fat, and fish. The boiled skin and blubber of a whale is a delicacy, as is that of walrus.\nToday, many Aleut continue to eat customary and locally sourced foods but also buy processed foods from Outside, which is expensive in Alaska.\nEthnobotany.\nA full list of their ethnobotany can be found at http://naeb.brit.org/uses/tribes/5/ (65 documented plant uses).\nVisual arts.\nCustomary arts of the Aleut include weapon-making, building of \"baidarkas\" (special hunting boats), weaving, figurines, clothing, carving, and mask making. Men as well as women often carved ivory and wood. 19th-century craftsmen were famed for their ornate wooden hunting hats, which feature elaborate and colorful designs and may be trimmed with sea lion whiskers, feathers, and walrus ivory. Andrew Gronholdt of the Shumagin Islands has played a vital role in reviving the ancient art of building the \"chagudax\" or bentwood hunting visors.\nAleut women sewed finely stitched, waterproof parkas from seal gut and wove fine baskets from sea-lyme grass (\"Elymus mollis\"). Some Aleut women continue to weave ryegrass baskets. Aleut arts are practiced and taught throughout the state of Alaska. As many Aleut have moved out of the islands to other parts of the state, they have taken with them the knowledge of their arts. They have also adopted new materials and methods for their art, including serigraphy, video art, and installation art.\nAleut carving, distinct in each region, has attracted traders for centuries, including early Europeans and other Alaska Natives. Historically, carving was a male art and leadership attribute whereas today it is done by both genders. Most commonly the carvings of walrus ivory and driftwood originated as part of making hunting weapons. Sculptural carvings depict local animals, such as seals and whales. Aleut sculptors also have carved human figures.\nThe Aleut also carve walrus ivory for other uses, such as jewelry and sewing needles. Jewelry is made with designs specific to the region of each people. Each clan would have a specific style to signify their origin. Jewelry ornaments were made for piercing lips (labrum), nose, and ears, as well as for necklaces. Each woman had her own sewing needles, which she made, and that often had detailed end of animal heads.\nThe main Aleut method of basketry was false embroidery (overlay). Strands of grasses or reeds were overlaid upon the basic weaving surface, to obtain a plastic effect. Basketry was an art reserved for women. Early Aleut women created baskets and woven mats of exceptional technical quality, using only their thumbnail, grown long and then sharpened, as a tool. Today, Aleut weavers continue to produce woven grass pieces of a remarkable cloth-like texture, works of modern art with roots in ancient tradition. Birch bark, puffin feathers, and baleen are also commonly used by the Aleut in basketry. The Aleut term for grass basket is \"qiigam aygaaxsii\". One Aleut leader recognized by the State of Alaska for her work in teaching and reviving Aleut basketry was Anfesia Shapsnikoff. Her life and accomplishments are portrayed in the book \"Moments Rightly Placed\" (1998).\nMasks were created to portray figures of their myths and oral history. The Atka people believed that another people lived in their land before them. They portrayed such ancients in their masks, which show anthropomorphic creatures named in their language. Knut Bergsland says their word means \"like those found in caves.\" Masks were generally carved from wood and were decorated with paints made from berries or other natural products. Feathers were inserted into holes carved out for extra decoration. These masks were used in ceremonies ranging from dances to praises, each with its own meaning and purpose.\nTattoos and piercings.\nThe tattoos and piercings of the Aleut people demonstrated accomplishments as well as their religious views. They believed their body art would please the spirits of the animals and make any evil go away. The body orifices were believed to be pathways for the entry of evil entities. By piercing their orifices: the nose, the mouth, and ears, they would stop evil entities, \"khoughkh\", from entering their bodies (Osborn, 52). Body art also enhanced their beauty, social status, and spiritual authority.\nBefore the 19th century, piercings and tattoos were very common among the Aleut people, especially among women. Piercings, such as the nose pin, were common among both men and women and were usually performed a few days after birth. The ornament was made of various materials, a piece of bark or bone, or an eagle's feather shaft. From time to time, adult women decorated the nose pins by hanging pieces of amber and coral from strings on it; the semi-precious objects dangled down to their chins.\nPiercing ears was also very common. The Aleuts pierced holes around the rim of their ears with dentalium shells (tooth shells or tusk shells), bone, feathers, dried bird wings or skulls and/or amber. Materials associated with birds were important, as birds were considered to defend animals in the spirit world. A male would wear sea lion whiskers in his ears as a trophy of his expertise as a hunter. Worn for decorative reasons, and sometimes to signify social standing, reputation, and the age of the wearer, Aleuts would pierce their lower lips with walrus ivory and wear beads or bones. The individual with the most piercings held the highest respect.\nTattooing for women began when they reached physical maturity, after menstruation, at about age 20. Historically, men received their first tattoo after killing their first animal, an important rite of passage. Sometimes tattoos signaled social class. For example, the daughter of a wealthy, famous ancestor or father would work hard at her tattoos to show the accomplishments of that ancestor or father. They would sew, or prick, different designs on the chin, the side of the face, or under the nose.\nAleut clothing.\nThe Aleut people developed in one of the harshest climates in the world, and learned to create and protect warmth. Both men and women wore parkas that extended below the knees. The women wore the skin of seal or sea-otter, and the men wore bird skin parkas, the feathers turned in or out depending on the weather. When the men were hunting on the water, they wore waterproof parkas made from seal or sea-lion guts, or the entrails of bear, walrus, or whales. Parkas had a hood that could be cinched, as could the wrist openings, so water could not get in. Men wore breeches made from the esophageal skin of seals. Children wore parkas made of downy eagle skin with tanned bird skin caps. They called these parkas \"kameikas,\" meaning raingear in the English language.(Aleut Corp. Web.).\nSea-lions, harbor seals, and the sea otters are the most abundant marine mammals. The men brought home the skins and prepared them by soaking them in urine and stretching them. The women undertook the sewing (\"Enthnohistory:\" Gross &amp; Khera pg. 32). Preparation of the gut for clothing involved several steps. The prepared intestines were turned inside out. A bone knife was used to remove the muscle tissue and fat from the walls of the intestine. The gut was cut and stretched, and fastened to stakes to dry. It was then cut and sewn to make waterproof parkas, bags, and other receptacles (Turner, Ch. 5, pg. 70). On some hunting trips, the men would take several women with them. They would catch birds and prepare the carcasses and feathers for future use. They caught puffins, Lunda Cirrhata, Fratercula Corniculata, Guillemots, and Cephus &amp; Murres.\nIt took 40 skins of tufted puffin and 60 skins of horned puffin to make one parka. A woman would need a year for all the labor to make one parka. Each lasted two years with proper care. All parkas were decorated with bird feathers, beard bristles of seal and sea-lion, beaks of sea parrots, bird claws, sea otter fur, dyed leather, and caribou hair sewn in the seams. (Gross &amp; Khera, pg. 34).\nWomen made needles from the wingbones of seabirds. They made thread from the sinews of different animals and fish guts. A thin strip of seal intestine could also be used, twisted to form a thread. The women grew their thumbnail extra long and sharpened it. They could split threads to make them as fine as a hair. They used vermilion paint, hematite, the ink bag of the octopus, and the root of a kind of grass or vine to color the threads.\nGender.\nRussian travelers making early contact with the Aleut mention traditional tales of two-spirits or third and fourth gender people, known as \"ayagigux\u0302\" (male-bodied, \"man transformed into a woman\") and \"tayagigux\u0302\" (female-bodied, \"woman transformed into a man\"), but it is unclear whether these tales are about historical individuals or spirits.\nHunting technologies.\nBoats.\nThe interior regions of the rough, mountainous Aleutian Islands provided little in terms of natural resources for the Aleutian people. They collected stones for weapons, tools, stoves or lamps. They collected and dried grasses for their woven baskets. For everything else, the Aleuts had learned to use the fish and mammals they caught and processed to satisfy their needs.\nTo hunt sea mammals and to travel between islands, the Aleuts became experts of sailing and navigation. While hunting, they used small watercraft called \"baidarkas.\" For regular travel, they used their large baidaras. \nThe baidara was a large, open, walrus-skin-covered boat. Aleut families used it when traveling among the islands. It was also used to transport goods for trade, and warriors took them to battle.\nThe baidarka (small skin boat) was a small boat covered in sea lion skin. It was developed and used for hunting because of its sturdiness and maneuverability. The Aleut baidarka resembles that of a Yup'ik kayak, but it is hydrodynamically sleeker and faster. They made the baidarka for one or two persons only. The deck was made with a sturdy chamber, the sides of the craft were nearly vertical and the bottom was rounded. Most one-man baidarkas were about long and wide, whereas a two-man was on average about long and wide. It was from the baidarka that Aleut men would stand on the water to hunt from the sea.\nWeapons.\nThe Aleuts hunted small sea mammals with barbed darts and harpoons slung from throwing boards. These boards gave precision as well as some extra distance to these weapons.\nHarpoons were also called throwing-arrows when the pointed head fit loosely into the socket of the foreshaft and the head was able to detach from the harpoon when it penetrated an animal, and remain in the wound. There were three main kinds of harpoon that the Aleuts used: a simple harpoon, with a head that kept its original position in the animal after striking, a compound (toggle-head) harpoon in which the head took a horizontal position in the animal after penetration, and the throwing-lance used to kill large animals.\nThe simple Aleut harpoon consisted of four main parts: the wooden shaft, the bone foreshaft, and the bonehead (tip) with barbs pointed backward. The barbed head was loosely fitted into the socket of the foreshaft so that when the animal was stabbed, it pulled the head away from the rest of the harpoon. The sharp barbs penetrated with ease, but could not be pulled out. The bone tip is fastened to a length of braided twine meanwhile; the hunter held the other end of the twine in his hand.\nThe compound harpoon was the most prevalent weapon of the Aleut people. Also known as the toggle-head spear, it was about the same size as the simple harpoon and used to hunt the same animals, however, this harpoon provided a more efficient and lethal weapon. This harpoon separated into four parts. The longest part was the shaft with the thicker stalk closer to the tip of the harpoon. The shaft was fitted into the socket of the fore shaft and a bone ring was then placed over the joint to hold the two pieces together, as well as, protecting the wooden shaft from splitting. Connected to the fore shaft of the harpoon is the toggle head spear tip. This tip was made of two sub shafts that break apart on impact with an animal. The upper sub shaft held the razor stone head and attached to the lower sub shaft with a small braided twine loop. Once the tip penetrates the animal the upper sub head broke off from the rest of the shaft, however, since it was still connected with the braided loop it rotated the head into a horizontal position inside the animal's body so that it could not get away from the hunter.\nThe throwing lance may be distinguished from a harpoon because of the fact that all its pieces are fixed and immovable. A lance was a weapon of war and it was also used to kill large marine animals after it has already been harpooned. The throwing lance usually consisted of three parts: a wooden shaft, a bone ring or belt, and the compound head that was made with a barbed bonehead and a stone tip. The length of the compound head was equivalent to the distance between the planes of a man's chest to his back. The lance would penetrate the chest and pass through the chest cavity and exit from the back. The bone ring was designed to break after impact so that the shaft could be used again for another kill.\nBurial practices.\nThey buried their dead ancestors near the village.\nArcheologists have found many different types of burials, dating from a variety of periods, in the Aleutian Islands. The Aleut developed a style of burials that were accommodated to local conditions, and honored the dead. They have had four main types of burials: \"umqan\", cave, above-ground sarcophagi, and burials connected to communal houses.\nUmqan burials are the most widely known type of mortuary practice found in the Aleutian Islands. The people created burial mounds, that tend to be located on the edge of a bluff. They placed stone and earth over the mound to protect and mark it. Such mounds were first excavated by archeologists in 1972 on Southwestern Unmak Island, and dated to the early contact period. Researchers have found a prevalence of these umqan burials, and concluded it is a regional mortuary practice. It may be considered a pan-Aleutian mortuary practice.\nCave burials have been found throughout the Eastern Aleutian Islands. The human remains are buried in shallow graves at the rear of the cave. These caves tend to be located next to middens and near villages. Some grave goods have been found in the caves associated with such burials. For example, a deconstructed boat was found in a burial cave on Kanaga Island. There were no other major finds of grave goods in the vicinity.\nThroughout the Aleutian Islands, gravesites have been found that are above-ground sarcophagi. These sarcophagi are left exposed, with no attempt to bury the dead in the ground. These burials tend to be isolated and limited to the remains of adult males, which may indicate a specific ritual practice. In the Near Islands, isolated graves have also been found with the remains, and not just the sarcophagus, left exposed on the surface. This way of erecting sarcophagi above ground is not as common as umqan and cave burials, but it is still widespread.\nAnother type of practice has been to bury remains in areas next to the communal houses of the settlement. Human remains are abundant in such sites. They indicate a pattern of burying the dead within the main activity areas of the settlement. These burials consist of small pits adjacent to the houses and scattered around them. In these instances, mass graves are common for women and children. This type of mortuary practice has been mainly found in the Near Islands.\nIn addition to these four main types, other kinds of burials have been found in the Aleutian Islands. These more isolated examples in include mummification, private burial houses, abandoned houses, etc. To date, such examples are not considered to be part of a larger, unifying cultural practice. The findings discussed represent only the sites that have been excavated.\nThe variety of mortuary practices mostly did not include the ritual of including extensive grave goods, as has been found in other cultures. The remains so far have been mainly found with other human and faunal remains. The addition of objects to \"accompany\" the dead is rare. Archaeologists have been trying to dissect the absence of grave goods, but their findings have been ambiguous and do not really help the academic community to understand these practices more.\nNot much information is known about the ritual parts of burying the dead. Archeologists and anthropologists have not found much evidence related to burial rituals. This lack of ritual evidence could hint at either no ritualized ceremony, or one that has not yet been revealed in the archaeological record. As a result, archaeologists cannot decipher the context to understand exactly why a certain type of burial was used in particular cases.\nIn popular culture.\nIn \"Snow Crash\", a science fiction novel by American writer Neal Stephenson, a central character named Raven is portrayed as an Aleut with incredible toughness and hunting skill. The story is about revenge due in part to perceived mistreatment of the Aleut.\n\"Alaska\" by James A. Michener."}
{"id": "3035", "revid": "35035024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3035", "title": "Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act", "text": "The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) was signed into law by President Richard Nixon on December 18, 1971, constituting at the time the largest land claims settlement in United States history. ANCSA was intended to resolve long-standing issues surrounding aboriginal land claims in Alaska, as well as to stimulate economic development throughout Alaska.\nThe settlement established Alaska Native claims to the land by transferring titles to twelve Alaska Native regional corporations and over 200 local village corporations. A thirteenth regional corporation was later created for Alaska Natives who no longer resided in Alaska. The act is codified as 43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.\nBackground.\nWhen Alaska became a state in 1959, section 4 of the Alaska Statehood Act provided that any existing Alaska Native land claims would be unaffected by statehood and held in status quo. Yet while section 4 of the act preserved Native land claims until later settlement, section 6 allowed for the state government to claim lands deemed vacant. Section 6 granted the state of Alaska the right to select lands then in the hands of the federal government, with the exception of Native territory. As a result, nearly from the public domain would eventually be transferred to the state. The state government also attempted to acquire lands under section 6 of the Statehood Act that were subject to Native claims under section 4, and that were currently occupied and used by Alaska Natives. The federal Bureau of Land Management began to process the Alaska government's selections without taking into account the Native claims and without informing the affected Native groups.\nIt was against this backdrop that the original language for a land claims settlement was developed.\nA 9.2-magnitude earthquake struck the state in 1964. Recovery efforts drew the attention of the federal government The Federal Field Committee for Development Planning in Alaska decided that Natives should receive $100 million and 10% of revenue as a royalty. Nothing was done with this proposal, however, and a freeze on land transfers remained in effect.\nIn 1966, Emil Notti called for a statewide meeting inviting numerous leaders around Alaska to gather and create the first meeting of a committee. The historic meeting was held October 18, 1966 - on the 99th anniversary of the transfer of Alaska from Russia. Notti presided over the three-day conference as it discussed matters of land recommendations, claims committee's, and political challenges the act would have getting through congress. Many respected politicians and businessmen attended the meeting and delegates were astonished at the attention which they received from well-known political figures of the state. The growing presence and political importance of Natives was evidenced when association leaders were elected to the legislature. Members of the associated gathered and were able to gain seven of the sixty seats in the legislature. When the group met a second time early in 1967, it emerged with a new name, The Alaska Federation of Natives, and a new full-time President, Emil Notti. AFN changed the human rights and economic stability of the Alaska Native population forever.\nIn 1968, Governor Walter Hickel summoned a group of Native leaders to work out a settlement that would be satisfactory to Natives. The group met for ten days and asked for $20 million in exchange for requested lands. They also asked for 10% of federal mineral lease revenue.\nIn 1969, President Nixon appointed Hickel as Secretary of the Interior. The Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN) protested against Hickel's nomination, but he was eventually confirmed.\nHickel worked with the AFN, negotiating with Native leaders and state government over the disputed lands. Offers went back and forth, with each rejecting the other's proposals. The AFN wanted rights to land, while then-Governor Keith Miller believed Natives did not have legitimate claims to state land in light of the provisions of the Alaska Statehood Act.\nBut a succeeding Alaska state administration under Governor William A. Egan would stake out positions upon which the AFN and other stakeholders could largely agree. Native leaders, in addition to Alaska's congressional delegation and the state's newly elected Governor William A. Egan, eventually reached the basis for presenting an agreement to Congress. The proposed settlement terms faced challenges in both houses but found a strong ally in Senator Henry M. Jackson from Washington state. The most controversial issues that continued to hold up approval were methods for determining land selection by Alaska Natives and financial distribution.\nIn 1968, the Atlantic-Richfield Company discovered oil at Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic coast, catapulting the issue of land ownership into headlines. In order to lessen the difficulty of drilling at such a remote location and transporting the oil to the lower 48 states, the oil companies proposed building a pipeline to carry the oil across Alaska to the port of Valdez At Valdez, the oil would be loaded onto tankers and shipped to the contiguous states. The plan had been approved, but a permit to construct the pipeline, which would cross lands involved in the land claims dispute, could not be granted until the Native claims were settled.\nWith major petroleum dollars on the line, pressure mounted to achieve a definitive legislative resolution at the federal level. In 1971, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act was signed into law by President Nixon. It abrogated Native claims to aboriginal lands except those that are the subject of the law. In return, Natives received up to of land and were paid $963 million. The land and money were to be divided among regional, urban, and village tribal corporations established under the law, often recognizing existing leadership.\nEffect of land conveyances.\nIn 1971, barely one million acres of land in Alaska were in private hands. ANCSA, together with section 6 of Alaska Statehood Act, which the new act allowed to come to fruition, affected ownership to about of land in Alaska once wholly controlled by the federal government. That is larger by than the combined areas of Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland and Virginia.\nWhen the bill passed in 1971, it included provisions that had never before been attempted in previous United States settlements with Native Americans. The newly passed Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act created twelve Native regional economic development corporations. Each corporation was associated with a specific region of Alaska and the Natives who had traditionally lived there. This innovative approach to native settlements engaged the tribes in corporate capitalism.\nThe idea originated with the AFN, who believed that the Natives would have to become a part of the capitalist system in order to survive. As stockholders in these corporations, the Natives could earn some income and stay in their traditional villages. If the corporations were managed properly, they could make profits that would enable individuals to stay, rather than having to leave Native villages to find better work. This was intended to help preserve Native culture.\nNative and state land selection.\nAlaska Natives had three years from passage of ANCSA to make land selections of the granted under the act. In some cases Native corporations received outside aid in surveying the land. For instance, Doyon, Limited (one of the 13 regional corporations) was helped by the Geophysical Institute of the University of Alaska. The Institute determined which land contained resources such as minerals and coal. NASA similarly provided satellite imagery to aid in Native corporations finding areas most suited for vegetation and their traditional subsistence culture. The imagery showed locations of caribou and moose, as well as forests with marketable timber. In total about were analyzed for Doyon. Natives were able to choose tens of thousands of acres of land rich with timber while Doyon used mineral analysis to attract businesses.\nThe state of Alaska to date has been granted approximately 85% or of the land claims it has made under ANCSA. The state is entitled to a total of under the terms of the Statehood Act. Originally the state had 25 years after passage of the Alaska Statehood Act to file claims under section 6 of the act with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Amendments to ANCSA extended that deadline until 1994, with the expectation that BLM would complete processing of land transfers subject to overlapping Native claims by 2009. Nonetheless, some Native and state selections under ANCSA remained unresolved as late as December 2014.\nCriticism of ANCSA.\nThere was largely positive reaction to ANCSA, although not entirely. The act was supported by Natives as well as non-Natives, and likewise enjoyed bipartisan support. Natives were heavily involved in the legislative process, and the final draft of the act used many AFN ideas.\nSome Natives have argued that ANCSA has hastened cultural genocide of Alaska Natives. Some Natives critiqued ANCSA as an illegitimate treaty since only tribal leaders were involved and the provisions of the act were not voted on by indigenous populations. One native described it as a social and political experiment. Critics have also argued that Natives so feared massacre or incarceration that they offered no resistance to the act.\nOthers have argued that the settlement was arguably the most generous afforded by the United States to a Native group. They note that some of the largest and most profitable corporations in the state are the twelve created by ANCSA. Other critics attacked the act as \"Native welfare\" and such complaints continue to be expressed.\nThe corporation system has been critiqued, as in some cases stockholders have sold land to outside corporations that have leveled forests and extracted minerals. But supporters of the system argue that it has provided economic benefits for indigenous peoples that outweigh these problems.\nSelected provisions of ANCSA.\nAlaska Native regional corporations.\nThe following thirteen regional corporations were created under ANCSA:\nAdditionally, most regions and some villages have created their own nonprofits providing social services and health care through grant funding and federal compacts. The objectives of these nonprofits are varied, but focus generally on cultural and educational activities. These include scholarships for Native students, sponsorship of cultural and artistic events, preservation efforts for Native languages, and protection of sites with historic or religious importance.\nAlaska Native village and urban corporations.\nANCSA created about 224 village and urban corporations. Below is a representative list of village and urban corporations created under ANCSA:"}
{"id": "3036", "revid": "1005536342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3036", "title": "Adoptionism", "text": "Adoptionism, also called dynamic monarchianism, is a Christian nontrinitarian theological doctrine which holds that Jesus was adopted as the Son of God at his baptism, his resurrection, or his ascension.\nDefinition.\nAdoptionism is one of two main forms of monarchianism (the other is modalism, which regards \"Father\" and \"Son\" as two historical or soteriological roles of a single divine Person). Adoptionism denies the eternal pre-existence of Christ, and although it explicitly affirms his deity subsequent to events in his life, many classical trinitarians claim that the doctrine implicitly denies it by denying the constant hypostatic union of the eternal Logos to the human nature of Jesus. Under adoptionism Jesus is currently divine and has been since his adoption, although he is not equal to the Father, per \"my Father is greater than I\" (). and as such is a kind of subordinationism. Adoptionism is sometimes, but not always, related to denial of the virgin birth of Jesus.\nHistory.\nEarly Christianity.\nAdoptionism and High Christology.\nBart Ehrman holds that the New Testament writings contain two different Christologies, namely a \"low\" or adoptionist Christology, and a \"high\" or \"incarnation Christology.\" The \"low Christology\" or \"adoptionist Christology\" is the belief \"that God exalted Jesus to be his Son by raising him from the dead,\" thereby raising him to \"divine status.\" The other early Christology is \"high Christology,\" which is \"the view that Jesus was a pre-existent divine being who became a human, did the Father\u2019s will on earth, and then was taken back up into heaven whence he had originally come,\" and from where he appeared on earth. The chronology of the development of these early Christologies is a matter of debate within contemporary scholarship.\nAccording to the \"evolutionary model\" c.q. \"evolutionary theories,\" as proposed by Bousset, followed by Brown, the Christological understanding of Christ developed over time, from a low Christology to a high Christology, as witnessed in the Gospels. According to the evolutionary model, the earliest Christians believed that Jesus was a human who was exalted, c.q. adopted as God's Son, when he was resurrected, signaling the nearness of the Kingdom of God, when all dead would be resurrected and the righteous exalted. Adoptionist concepts can be found in the Gospel of Mark, in which the birth of Jesus and the epithet \"Son of God\" are absent in some early manuscripts, suggesting that the concept of the Virgin Birth of Jesus had not been developed or elucidated at the time Mark was written. As Daniel Johansson notes, a majority consensus holds Mark\u2019s Jesus as \"an exalted, but merely human figure\", especially when read in the apparent context of Jewish beliefs. Later beliefs shifted the exaltation to his baptism, birth, and subsequently to the idea of his eternal existence, as witnessed in the Gospel of John. Mark shifted the moment of when Jesus became the son to the baptism of Jesus, and later still Matthew and Luke shifted it to the moment of the divine conception, and finally John declared that Jesus had been with God from the beginning: \"In the beginning was the Word\".\nSince the 1970s, the late datings for the development of a \"high Christology\" have been contested, and a majority of scholars argue that this \"High Christology\" existed already before the writings of Paul. This \"incarnation Christology\" or \"high Christology\" did not evolve over a longer time, but was a \"big bang\" of ideas which were already present at the start of Christianity, and took further shape in the first few decades of the church, as witnessed in the writings of Paul.\nAccording to Ehrman, these two Christologies existed alongside each other, calling the \"low Christology\" an \"adoptionist Christology, and \"the \"high Christology\" an \"incarnation Christology.\"\nNew Testamental epistles.\nAdoptionist theology may also be reflected in canonical epistles, the earliest of which pre-date the writing of the gospels. The letters of Paul the Apostle, for example, do not mention a virgin birth of Christ. Paul describes Jesus as \"born of a woman, born under the law\" and \"as to his human nature was a descendant of David\" in the Epistle to the Galatians and the Epistle to the Romans. Many interpreters, however, take his statements in Philippians 2 to imply that Paul believed Jesus to have existed as equal to God before his incarnation.\nThe Book of Hebrews, a contemporary sermon by an unknown author, describes God as saying \"You are my son; today I have begotten you.\" () The latter phrase, a quote of , could reflect an early Adoptionist view.\nShepherd of Hermas.\nThe 2nd-century work Shepherd of Hermas may also have taught that Jesus was a virtuous man filled with the Holy Spirit and adopted as the Son. While the Shepherd of Hermas was popular and sometimes bound with the canonical scriptures, it didn't retain canonical status, if it ever had it.\nTheodotus of Byzantium.\nTheodotus of Byzantium (fl. late 2nd century), a Valentinian Gnostic, was the most prominent exponent of adoptionism. According to Hippolytus of Rome (\"Philosophumena\", VII, xxiii) Theodotus taught that Jesus was a man born of a virgin, according to the Council of Jerusalem, that he lived like other men, and was most pious. At his baptism in the Jordan the \"Christ\" came down upon the man Jesus, in the likeness of a dove (\"Philosophumena\", VII, xxiii), but Jesus was not himself God until after his resurrection.\nAdoptionism was declared heresy at the end of the 3rd century and was rejected by the Synods of Antioch and the First Council of Nicaea, which defined the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity and identified the man Jesus with the eternally begotten Son or Word of God in the Nicene Creed. The belief was also declared heretical by Pope Victor I.\nEbionites.\nAdoptionism was also adhered to by the Jewish Christians known as Ebionites, who, according to Epiphanius in the 4th century, believed that Jesus was chosen on account of his sinless devotion to the will of God.\nThe Ebionites were a Jewish Christian movement that existed during the early centuries of the Christian Era. They show strong similarities with the earliest form of Jewish Christianity, and their specific theology may have been a \"reaction to the law-free Gentile mission.\" They regarded Jesus as the Messiah while rejecting his divinity and his virgin birth, and insisted on the necessity of following Jewish law and rites. They used the Gospel of the Ebionites, one of the Jewish\u2013Christian gospels; the Hebrew Book of Matthew starting at chapter 3; revered James the brother of Jesus (James the Just); and rejected Paul the Apostle as an apostate from the Law. Their name ( \"Ebionaioi\", derived from Hebrew \"ebyonim\", \"ebionim\", meaning \"the poor\" or \"poor ones\") suggests that they placed a special value on voluntary poverty.\nDistinctive features of the \"Gospel of the Ebionites\" include the absence of the virgin birth and of the genealogy of Jesus; an Adoptionist Christology, in which Jesus is chosen to be God's Son at the time of his Baptism; the abolition of the Jewish sacrifices by Jesus; and an advocacy of vegetarianism.\nSpanish Adoptionism.\nSpanish Adoptionism was a theological position which was articulated in Umayyad and Christian-held regions of the Iberian peninsula in the 8th and 9th centuries. The issue seems to have begun with the claim of archbishop Elipandus of Toledo that \u2013 in respect to his human nature \u2013 Christ was \"adoptive\" Son of God. Another leading advocate of this Christology was Felix of Urgel. In Spain, adoptionism was opposed by Beatus of Liebana, and in the Carolingian territories, the Adoptionist position was condemned by Pope Hadrian I, Alcuin of York, Agobard, and officially in Carolingian territory by the Council of Frankfurt (794).\nDespite the shared name of \"adoptionism\" the Spanish Adoptionist Christology appears to have differed sharply from the adoptionism of early Christianity. Spanish advocates predicated the term \"adoptivus\" of Christ only in respect to his humanity; once the divine Son \"emptied himself\" of divinity and \"took the form of a servant\" (Philippians 2:7), Christ's human nature was \"adopted\" as divine.\nHistorically, many scholars have followed the Adoptionists' Carolingian opponents in labeling Spanish Adoptionism as a minor revival of \u201cNestorian\u201d Christology. John C. Cavadini has challenged this notion by attempting to take the Spanish Christology in its own Spanish/North African context in his study, \"The Last Christology of the West: Adoptionism in Spain and Gaul, 785\u2013820\".\nScholastic Neo-adoptionism.\nA third wave was the revived form (\"Neo-adoptionism\") of Peter Abelard in the 12th century. Later, various modified and qualified Adoptionist tenets emerged from some theologians in the 14th century. Duns Scotus (1300) and Durandus of Saint-Pour\u00e7ain (1320) admit the term \"Filius adoptivus\" in a qualified sense. In more recent times the Jesuit Gabriel V\u00e1squez, and the Lutheran divines Georgius Calixtus and Johann Ernst Immanuel Walch, have defended adoptionism as essentially orthodox.\nModern adoptionist groups.\nA form of adoptionism surfaced in Unitarianism during the 18th century as denial of the virgin birth became increasingly common, led by the views of Joseph Priestley and others.\nA similar form of adoptionism was expressed in the writings of James Strang, a Latter Day Saint leader who founded the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite) after the death of Joseph Smith in 1844. In his Book of the Law of the Lord, a purported work of ancient scripture found and translated by Strang, he offers an essay entitled \"Note on the Sacrifice of Christ\" in which he explains his unique (for Mormonism as a whole) doctrines on the subject. Jesus Christ, said Strang, was the natural-born son of Mary and Joseph, who was chosen from before all time to be the Savior of mankind, but who had to be born as an ordinary mortal of two human parents (rather than being begotten by the Father or the Holy Spirit) to be able to truly fulfill his Messianic role. Strang claimed that the earthly Christ was in essence \"adopted\" as God's son at birth, and fully revealed as such during the Transfiguration. After proving himself to God by living a perfectly sinless life, he was enabled to provide an acceptable sacrifice for the sins of men, prior to his resurrection and ascension."}
{"id": "3037", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3037", "title": "Apollinarism", "text": "Apollinarism or Apollinarianism is a Christological concept proposed by Apollinaris of Laodicea (died 390) that argues that Jesus had a normal human body but a divine mind instead of a regular human soul. It was deemed heretical in 381 and virtually died out within the following decades.\nHistory.\nThe Trinity had been recognized at the Council of Nicea in 325, but debate about exactly what it meant continued. A rival to the more common belief that Jesus Christ had two natures was monophysitism (\"one nature\"), the doctrine that Christ had only one nature. Apollinarism and Eutychianism were two forms of monophysitism. Apollinaris' rejection that Christ had a human mind was considered an over-reaction to Arianism and its teaching that Christ was a lesser god. \nTheodoret charged Apollinaris with confounding the persons of the Godhead and with giving in to the heretical ways of Sabellius. Basil of Caesarea accused him of abandoning the literal sense of the scripture, and taking up wholly with the allegorical sense. His views were condemned in a Synod at Alexandria, under Athanasius of Alexandria, in 362, and later subdivided into several different heresies, the main ones of which were the Polemians and the Antidicomarianites.\nApollinaris, considering the rational soul or spirit as essentially liable to sin and capable, at its best, of only precarious efforts, saw no way of saving Christ's impeccability and the infinite value of Redemption, except by the elimination of the human spirit from Jesus' humanity, and the substitution of the Divine Logos in its stead. Apollinarism was declared to be a heresy in 381 by the First Council of Constantinople.\nChristian philosopher William Lane Craig has proposed a neo-Apollinarian Christology in which the divine Logos completes the human nature of Christ. Craig says his proposal is tentative and he welcomes critique and interaction from other scholars.\nCraig also clarifies his proposed neo-Apollinarian Christology with this statement. \"Against Apollinarius, I want to say that Christ did have a complete human nature. He was truly God and truly man. Therefore his death on our behalf as our representative before God was efficacious.\""}
{"id": "3038", "revid": "985995098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3038", "title": "Acid\u2013base reaction", "text": "An acid\u2013base reaction is a chemical reaction that occurs between an acid and a base. It can be used to determine pH. Several theoretical frameworks provide alternative conceptions of the reaction mechanisms and their application in solving related problems; these are called the acid\u2013base theories, for example, Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory.\nTheir importance becomes apparent in analyzing acid\u2013base reactions for gaseous or liquid species, or when acid or base character may be somewhat less apparent. The first of these concepts was provided by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, around 1776.\nIt is important to think of the acid-base reaction models as theories that complement each other. For example, the current Lewis model has the broadest definition of what an acid and base are, with the Br\u00f8nsted-Lowry theory being a subset of what acids and bases are, and the Arrhenius theory being the most restrictive.\nAcid\u2013base definitions.\nHistoric development.\nThe concept of an acid-base reaction was first proposed in 1754 by Guillaume-Fran\u00e7ois Rouelle, who introduced the word \"base\" into chemistry to mean a substance which reacts with an acid to give it solid form (as a salt).\nLavoisier's oxygen theory of acids.\nThe first scientific concept of acids and bases was provided by Lavoisier in around 1776. Since Lavoisier's knowledge of strong acids was mainly restricted to oxoacids, such as (nitric acid) and (sulfuric acid), which tend to contain central atoms in high oxidation states surrounded by oxygen, and since he was not aware of the true composition of the hydrohalic acids (HF, HCl, HBr, and HI), he defined acids in terms of their containing \"oxygen\", which in fact he named from Greek words meaning \"acid-former\" (from the Greek \u03bf\u03be\u03c5\u03c2 (\"oxys\") meaning \"acid\" or \"sharp\" and \u03b3\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9 (\"geinomai\") meaning \"engender\"). The Lavoisier definition held for over 30 years, until the 1810 article and subsequent lectures by Sir Humphry Davy in which he proved the lack of oxygen in , H2Te, and the hydrohalic acids. However, Davy failed to develop a new theory, concluding that \"acidity does not depend upon any particular elementary substance, but upon peculiar arrangement of various substances\". One notable modification of oxygen theory was provided by J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius, who stated that acids are oxides of nonmetals while bases are oxides of metals.\nLiebig's hydrogen theory of acids.\nIn 1838, Justus von Liebig proposed that an acid is a hydrogen-containing compound whose hydrogen can be replaced by a metal. This redefinition was based on his extensive work on the chemical composition of organic acids, finishing the doctrinal shift from oxygen-based acids to hydrogen-based acids started by Davy. Liebig's definition, while completely empirical, remained in use for almost 50 years until the adoption of the Arrhenius definition.\nArrhenius definition.\nThe first modern definition of acids and bases in molecular terms was devised by Svante Arrhenius. A hydrogen theory of acids, it followed from his 1884 work with Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald in establishing the presence of ions in aqueous solution and led to Arrhenius receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1903.\nAs defined by Arrhenius:\nThis causes the protonation of water, or the creation of the hydronium (H3O+) ion. Thus, in modern times, the symbol H+ is interpreted as a shorthand for H3O+, because it is now known that a bare proton does not exist as a free species in aqueous solution.\nThe Arrhenius definitions of acidity and alkalinity are restricted to aqueous solutions, and refer to the concentration of the solvent ions. Under this definition, pure H2SO4 and HCl dissolved in toluene are not acidic, and molten NaOH and solutions of calcium amide in liquid ammonia are not alkaline. This led to the development of the Br\u00f8nsted-Lowry theory and subsequent Lewis theory to account for these non-aqueous exceptions.\nOverall, to qualify as an Arrhenius acid, upon the introduction to water, the chemical must either cause, directly or otherwise:\nConversely, to qualify as an Arrhenius base, upon the introduction to water, the chemical must either cause, directly or otherwise:\nThe reaction of an acid with a base is called a neutralization reaction. The products of this reaction are a salt and water.\nIn this traditional representation an acid\u2013base neutralization reaction is formulated as a double-replacement reaction. For example, the reaction of hydrochloric acid, HCl, with sodium hydroxide, NaOH, solutions produces a solution of sodium chloride, NaCl, and some additional water molecules.\nThe modifier (aq) in this equation was implied by Arrhenius, rather than included explicitly. It indicates that the substances are dissolved in water. Though all three substances, HCl, NaOH and NaCl are capable of existing as pure compounds, in aqueous solutions they are fully dissociated into the aquated ions H+, Cl\u2212, Na+ and OH\u2212.\nBr\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition.\nThe Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition, formulated in 1923, independently by Johannes Nicolaus Br\u00f8nsted in Denmark and Martin Lowry in England, is based upon the idea of protonation of bases through the deprotonation of acids \u2013 that is, the ability of acids to \"donate\" hydrogen ions (H+)\u2014otherwise known as protons\u2014to bases, which \"accept\" them.\nAn acid\u2013base reaction is, thus, the removal of a hydrogen ion from the acid and its addition to the base. The removal of a hydrogen ion from an acid produces its \"conjugate base\", which is the acid with a hydrogen ion removed. The reception of a proton by a base produces its \"conjugate acid\", which is the base with a hydrogen ion added.\nUnlike the previous definitions, the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition does not refer to the formation of salt and solvent, but instead to the formation of \"conjugate acids\" and \"conjugate bases\", produced by the transfer of a proton from the acid to the base. In this approach, acids and bases are fundamentally different in behavior from salts, which are seen as electrolytes, subject to the theories of Debye, Onsager, and others. An acid and a base react not to produce a salt and a solvent, but to form a new acid and a new base. The concept of neutralization is thus absent. Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base behavior is formally independent of any solvent, making it more all-encompassing than the Arrhenius model. The calculation of pH under the Arrhenius model depended on alkalis (bases) dissolving in water (aqueous solution). The Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry model expanded what could be pH tested using insoluble and soluble solutions (gas, liquid, solid).\nThe general formula for acid\u2013base reactions according to the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition is:\nwhere HA represents the acid, B represents the base, BH+ represents the conjugate acid of B, and A\u2212 represents the conjugate base of HA.\nFor example, a Br\u00f8nsted-Lowry model for the dissociation of hydrochloric acid (HCl) in aqueous solution would be the following:\nThe removal of H+ from the HCl produces the chloride ion, Cl\u2212, the conjugate base of the acid. The addition of H+ to the H2O (acting as a base) forms the hydronium ion, H3O+, the conjugate acid of the base.\nWater is amphoteric\u2014that is, it can act as both an acid and a base. The Br\u00f8nsted-Lowry model explains this, showing the dissociation of water into low concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions:\nThis equation is demonstrated in the image below:\nHere, one molecule of water acts as an acid, donating an H+ and forming the conjugate base, OH\u2212, and a second molecule of water acts as a base, accepting the H+ ion and forming the conjugate acid, H3O+.\nAs an example of water acting as an acid, consider an aqueous solution of pyridine, C5H5N.\nIn this example, a water molecule is split into a hydrogen ion, which is donated to a pyridine molecule, and a hydroxide ion.\nIn the Br\u00f8nsted-Lowry model, the solvent does not necessarily have to be water, as is required by the Arrhenius Acid-Base model. For example, consider what happens when acetic acid, CH3COOH, dissolves in liquid ammonia.\nAn H+ ion is removed from acetic acid, forming its conjugate base, the acetate ion, CH3COO\u2212. The addition of an H+ ion to an ammonia molecule of the solvent creates its conjugate acid, the ammonium ion, .\nThe Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry model calls hydrogen-containing substances (like HCl) acids. Thus, some substances, which many chemists considered to be acids, such as SO3 or BCl3, are excluded from this classification due to lack of hydrogen. Gilbert N. Lewis wrote in 1938, \"To restrict the group of acids to those substances that contain hydrogen interferes as seriously with the systematic understanding of chemistry as would the restriction of the term oxidizing agent to substances containing oxygen.\" Furthermore, KOH and KNH2 are not considered Br\u00f8nsted bases, but rather salts containing the bases OH\u2212 and .\nLewis definition.\nThe hydrogen requirement of Arrhenius and Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry was removed by the Lewis definition of acid\u2013base reactions, devised by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1923, in the same year as Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry, but it was not elaborated by him until 1938. Instead of defining acid\u2013base reactions in terms of protons or other bonded substances, the Lewis definition defines a base (referred to as a \"Lewis base\") to be a compound that can donate an \"electron pair\", and an acid (a \"Lewis acid\") to be a compound that can receive this electron pair.\nFor example, boron trifluoride, BF3 is a typical Lewis acid. It can accept a pair of electrons as it has a vacancy in its octet. The fluoride ion has a full octet and can donate a pair of electrons. Thus\nis a typical Lewis acid, Lewis base reaction. All compounds of group 13 elements with a formula AX3 can behave as Lewis acids. Similarly, compounds of group 15 elements with a formula DY3, such as amines, NR3, and phosphines, PR3, can behave as Lewis bases. Adducts between them have the formula X3A\u2190DY3 with a dative covalent bond, shown symbolically as \u2190, between the atoms A (acceptor) and D (donor). Compounds of group 16 with a formula DX2 may also act as Lewis bases; in this way, a compound like an ether, R2O, or a thioether, R2S, can act as a Lewis base. The Lewis definition is not limited to these examples. For instance, carbon monoxide acts as a Lewis base when it forms an adduct with boron trifluoride, of formula F3B\u2190CO.\nAdducts involving metal ions are referred to as co-ordination compounds; each ligand donates a pair of electrons to the metal ion. The reaction\ncan be seen as an acid\u2013base reaction in which a stronger base (ammonia) replaces a weaker one (water)\nThe Lewis and Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definitions are consistent with each other since the reaction\nis an acid\u2013base reaction in both theories.\nSolvent system definition.\nOne of the limitations of the Arrhenius definition is its reliance on water solutions. Edward Curtis Franklin studied the acid\u2013base reactions in liquid ammonia in 1905 and pointed out the similarities to the water-based Arrhenius theory. Albert F.O. Germann, working with liquid phosgene, , formulated the solvent-based theory in 1925, thereby generalizing the Arrhenius definition to cover aprotic solvents.\nGermann pointed out that in many solutions, there are ions in equilibrium with the neutral solvent molecules:\nFor example, water and ammonia undergo such dissociation into hydronium and hydroxide, and ammonium and amide, respectively:\nSome aprotic systems also undergo such dissociation, such as dinitrogen tetroxide into nitrosonium and nitrate, antimony trichloride into dichloroantimonium and tetrachloroantimonate, and phosgene into chlorocarboxonium and chloride:\nA solute that causes an increase in the concentration of the solvonium ions and a decrease in the concentration of solvate ions is defined as an \"acid\". A solute that causes an increase in the concentration of the solvate ions and a decrease in the concentration of the solvonium ions is defined as a \"base\".\nThus, in liquid ammonia, (supplying ) is a strong base, and (supplying ) is a strong acid. In liquid sulfur dioxide (), thionyl compounds (supplying ) behave as acids, and sulfites (supplying ) behave as bases.\nThe non-aqueous acid\u2013base reactions in liquid ammonia are similar to the reactions in water:\nNitric acid can be a base in liquid sulfuric acid:\nThe unique strength of this definition shows in describing the reactions in aprotic solvents; for example, in liquid :\nBecause the solvent system definition depends on the solute as well as on the solvent itself, a particular solute can be either an acid or a base depending on the choice of the solvent: is a strong acid in water, a weak acid in acetic acid, and a weak base in fluorosulfonic acid; this characteristic of the theory has been seen as both a strength and a weakness, because some substances (such as and ) have been seen to be acidic or basic on their own right. On the other hand, solvent system theory has been criticized as being too general to be useful. Also, it has been thought that there is something intrinsically acidic about hydrogen compounds, a property not shared by non-hydrogenic solvonium salts.\nLux\u2013Flood definition.\nThis acid\u2013base theory was a revival of oxygen theory of acids and bases, proposed by German chemist Hermann Lux in 1939, further improved by H\u00e5kon Flood circa 1947 and is still used in modern geochemistry and electrochemistry of molten salts. This definition describes an acid as an oxide ion () acceptor and a base as an oxide ion donor. For example:\nThis theory is also useful in the systematisation of the reactions of noble gas compounds, especially the xenon oxides, fluorides, and oxofluorides.\nUsanovich definition.\nMikhail Usanovich developed a general theory that does not restrict acidity to hydrogen-containing compounds, but his approach, published in 1938, was even more general than Lewis theory. Usanovich's theory can be summarized as defining an acid as anything that accepts negative species or donates positive ones, and a base as the reverse. This defined the concept of redox (oxidation-reduction) as a special case of acid\u2013base reactions\nSome examples of Usanovich acid\u2013base reactions include:\nRationalizing the strength of Lewis acid\u2013base interactions.\nHSAB theory.\nIn 1963, Ralph Pearson proposed a qualitative concept known as the Hard and Soft Acids and Bases principle. later made quantitative with help of Robert Parr in 1984. 'Hard' applies to species that are small, have high charge states, and are weakly polarizable. 'Soft' applies to species that are large, have low charge states and are strongly polarizable. Acids and bases interact, and the most stable interactions are hard\u2013hard and soft\u2013soft. This theory has found use in organic and inorganic chemistry.\nECW model.\nThe ECW model created by Russell S. Drago is a quantitative model that describes and predicts the strength of Lewis acid base interactions, \u2212\u0394\"H\". The model assigned \"E\" and \"C\" parameters to many Lewis acids and bases. Each acid is characterized by an \"E\"A and a \"C\"A. Each base is likewise characterized by its own \"E\"B and \"C\"B. The \"E\" and \"C\" parameters refer, respectively, to the electrostatic and covalent contributions to the strength of the bonds that the acid and base will form. The equation is\nThe \"W\" term represents a constant energy contribution for acid\u2013base reaction such as the cleavage of a dimeric acid or base. The equation predicts reversal of acids and base strengths. The graphical presentations of the equation show that there is no single order of Lewis base strengths or Lewis acid strengths.\nAcid\u2013base equilibrium.\nThe reaction of a strong acid with a strong base is essentially a quantitative reaction. For example,\nIn this reaction both the sodium and chloride ions are spectators as the neutralization reaction,\ndoes not involve them. With weak bases addition of acid is not quantitative because a solution of a weak base is a buffer solution. A solution of a weak acid is also a buffer solution. When a weak acid reacts with a weak base an equilibrium mixture is produced. For example, adenine, written as AH, can react with a hydrogen phosphate ion, .\nThe equilibrium constant for this reaction can be derived from the acid dissociation constants of adenine and of the dihydrogen phosphate ion.\nThe notation [X] signifies \"concentration of X\". When these two equations are combined by eliminating the hydrogen ion concentration, an expression for the equilibrium constant, \"K\" is obtained.\nAcid\u2013alkali reaction.\nAn acid\u2013alkali reaction is a special case of an acid\u2013base reaction, where the base used is also an alkali. When an acid reacts with an alkali salt (a metal hydroxide), the product is a metal salt and water. Acid\u2013alkali reactions are also neutralization reactions.\nIn general, acid\u2013alkali reactions can be simplified to\nby omitting spectator ions.\nAcids are in general pure substances that contain hydrogen cations () or cause them to be produced in solutions. Hydrochloric acid () and sulfuric acid () are common examples. In water, these break apart into ions:\nThe alkali breaks apart in water, yielding dissolved hydroxide ions:"}
{"id": "3039", "revid": "157842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3039", "title": "Abednego", "text": ""}
{"id": "3040", "revid": "17009880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3040", "title": "Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani", "text": "Ali ibn al-Husayn al-I\u1e63fah\u0101n\u012b (), also known as Abul-Faraj, (full form: Ab\u016b al-Faraj \u02bfAl\u012b ibn al-\u1e24usayn ibn Mu\u1e25ammad ibn A\u1e25mad ibn al-\u1e24aytham al-Umaw\u012b al-I\u1e63fah\u0101n\u012b) (284\u2013356AH / 897-967CE) was a litterateur, genealogist, poet, musicologist, scribe, and boon companion in the tenth century. He was of Arab-Quraysh origin and mainly based in Baghdad. He is best known as the author of \"Kitab al-Aghani\" (\"The Book of Songs\"), which includes information about the earliest attested periods of Arabic music (from the seventh to the ninth centuries) and the lives of poets and musicians from the pre-Islamic period to al-Isfahani's time. Given his contribution to the documentation of the history of Arabic music, al-Isfahani is characterised by Sawa as \"a true prophet of modern ethnomusicology\".\nDates.\nThe commonly accepted dates of al-Isfahani's birth and death are 284AH/897\u20138CE and 356/967, based on the dates given by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi which itself bases testimony of al-Isfahani's student, Muhammad ibn Abi al-Fawaris. However, the credibility of these dates is to be treated with discretion. No source places his death earlier than 356/967, but several place it later. These dates are at odds with a reference in the \"Kitab Adab al-ghuraba\" (\"The Book of the Etiquettes of Strangers\"), attributed to al-Isfahani, to his being in the prime of youth (\"fi ayyam al-shabiba wa-l-siba\") in 356/967. Calculation of the approximate dates of his birth and death through the lifespans of his students and his direct informants suggests that he was born before 290/902 and died after 348/960.\nBiography.\nAbu al-Faraj al-Isfahani was born in Isfahan, Persia (present-day Iran) but spent his youth and made his early studies in Baghdad (present-day Iraq). He was a direct descendant of the last of the Umayyad caliphs, Marwan II, and was thus connected with the Umayyad rulers in al-Andalus, and seems to have kept up a correspondence with them and to have sent them some of his works. He became famous for his knowledge of early Arabian antiquities.\nHis later life was spent in various parts of the Islamic world, in Aleppo with its Hamdanid governor Sayf ad-Dawlah (to whom he dedicated the \"Book of Songs\"), in Ray with the Buwayhid vizier Ibn 'Abbad, and elsewhere.\nFamily.\nThe epithet, al-Isfahani, refers to the city, Isfahan, on the Iranian plateau. Instead of indicating al-Isfahani's birthplace, this epithet seems to be common to al-Isfahani's family. Every reference al-Isfahani makes to his paternal relatives includes the attributive, al-Isfahani. According to Ibn Hazm (384\u2013456/994\u20131064), some descendants of the last Umayyad caliph, Marwan b. Muhammad (72\u2013132/691\u2013750), al-Isfahani's forefather, settled in Isfahan. However, it has to be borne in mind that the earliest information we have regarding al-Isfahani's family history only dates to the generation of his great-grandfather, Ahmad b. al-\u1e24aytham, who settled in Samarra sometime between 221/835\u20136 and 232/847.\nBased on al-Isfahani's references in the \"Kitab al-Aghani\" (hereafter, the \"Aghani\"), Ahmad b. al-Haytham seems to have led a privileged life in S\u0101marr\u0101\u02be, while his sons were well-connected with the elite of the Abbasid capital at that time. His son, Abd al-Aziz b. Ahmad, was \"one of the high ranking scribes in the days of al-Mutawakkil (r. 232\u2013247/847\u2013861) (\"min kib\u0101r al-kutt\u0101b f\u012b ayy\u0101m al-Mutawakkil\")\". Another son, Muhammad b. Ahmad (\"viz\". al-Isfahani's grandfather), was associated with the Abbasid officials, the vizier Ibn al-Zayy\u0101t (d. 233/847), the scribe Ibrahim b. al-Abbas al-\u1e62\u016bl\u012b (176\u2013243/792\u2013857), and the vizier Ubaydallah b. Sulayman (d. 288/901), besides the \u1e6c\u0101libid notables, above all, al-Husayn b. al-Husayn b. Zayd, who was the leader of the Banu Hashim of his time. The close ties with the Abbasid court continued in the generation of Muhammad's sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (al-Isfahani's father).\nIn various places in the \"Aghani\", al-Isfahani refers to Yahya b. Muhammad b. Thawaba (from the Al Thawaba) as his grandfather on his mother's side. It is often suggested that the family of Thawaba, being Shi'i, bequeathed their sectarian inclination to al-Isfahani. However, the identification of the Thawaba family as Shi'is is only found in a late source, Yaqut's (574\u2013626/1178\u20131225) work. Although it is not implausible for the family of Thawaba to have been Shi'i-inclined in one way or another, since many elite families working under the Abbasid caliphate during this period of time indeed allied with Alids or their partisans, there is no evidence that members of the Thawaba family embraced an extreme form of Shi'ism.\nIn short, al-Isfahani came from a family well-entrenched in the networks of the Abbasid elite, which included the officials and the Alids. Despite the epithet, al-Isfahani, it does not seem that the Isfahani family has much to do with the city, Isfahan. Rather, the family was mainly based in S\u0101marr\u0101\u02be, from the generation of Ahmad b. al-\u1e24aytham, and then Baghdad. In the seats of the caliphate, a few members of this family worked as scribes, while maintaining friendship or alliance with other scribes, viziers, and notables. Like many of the court elite, al-Isfahani's family maintained an amicable relationship with the offspring of Ali and allied with families, such as the Thawaba family, sharing their veneration of Ali and Alids. However, it is hard to pinpoint such a reverential attitude towards Alids in terms of sectarian alignment, given the scanty information about al-Isfahani's family and the fluidity of sectarian identities at the time.\nEducation and career.\nThe Isfahani family's extensive social outreach is reflected in al-Isfahani's sources. Among the direct informants whom al-Isfahani cites in his works, one finds the members of his own family, who were further connected to other notable families, as mentioned above, the Al Thawaba, the Ban\u016b Munajjim, the Yaz\u012bd\u012bs, the \u1e62\u016bl\u012bs, the Ban\u016b \u1e24amd\u016bn, the \u1e6c\u0101hirids, the Ban\u016b al-Marzub\u0101n, and the \u1e6c\u0101libids.\nGiven that al-Isfahani and his family very likely settled in Baghdad around the beginning of the tenth century, it is no surprise that he transmitted from a considerable number of the inhabitants of or visitors to that city, such as, to name just a few: Ja\u1e25\u1e93a (d. 324/936), al-Khaff\u0101f, Ali b. Sulaym\u0101n al-Akhfash (d. 315/927 or 316/928), and Muhammad b. Jarir al-\u1e6cabari (d. 310/922). Like other scholars of his time, al-Isfahani travelled in pursuit of knowledge. Although the details are not sufficient for us to establish the dates of his journeys, based on the chains of transmission (\"as\u0101n\u012bd\", sing. \"isn\u0101d\") al-Isfahani cites consistently and meticulously in every report, it is certain that he transmitted from \u02bfAbd al-Malik b. Maslama and \u02bf\u0100\u1e63im b. Muhammad in Antakya; \u02bfAbdall\u0101h b. Muhammad b. Ishaq in Ahwaz; and Yahya b. A\u1e25mad b. al-Jawn in Raqqa. If we accept the ascription of the \"Kitab Adab al-ghuraba\" to al-Isfahani, then he once visited Ba\u1e63ra besides other towns such as \u1e24i\u1e63n Mahd\u012b, Matt\u016bth, and B\u0101jistr\u0101. Yet, none of these cities seems to have left as tremendous an impact upon al-Isfahani as K\u016bfa and Baghdad did. While al-Isfahani's Baghdadi informants were wide-ranging in their expertise as well as sectarian and theological tendencies, his K\u016bfan sources, to a certain degree, can be characterised as either Shi'i or keen on preserving and disseminating memory that favours Ali and his family. For example, Ibn \u02bfUqda (d. 333/944), mentioned in both the \"Agh\u0101n\u012b\" and the \"Maq\u0101til,\" is invariably cited for the reports about the Alids and their merits.\nThe journey in search for knowledge taken by al-Isfahani may not be particularly outstanding by the standard of his time, but the diversity of his sources' occupations and fortes is beyond doubt impressive. His informants can be assigned into one or more of the following categories: philologists and grammarians; singers and musicians; booksellers and copyists (\"sahhafun\" or \"warraqun\", sing. \"sahhaf\" or \"Warraq\"); boon companions; tutors (\"mu\u02beaddib\u016bn\", sing. \"mu\u02beaddib\"); scribes (\"kutt\u0101b\", sing. \"k\u0101tib\"); imams or preachers (\"khu\u1e6dab\u0101\u02be\", sing. \"kha\u1e6d\u012bb\"); religious scholars (of the \"\u1e25ad\u012bth\", the Qur\u02be\u0101nic recitations and exegeses, or jurisprudence) and judges; poets; and \"akhb\u0101r\u012bs\" (transmitters of reports of all sorts, including genealogical, historical, and anecdotal reports). The variety of the narrators and their narrations enriched al-I\u1e63fah\u0101n\u012b\u2019s literary output, which covers a wide range of topics from amusing tales to the accounts of the Alids' martyrdom. His erudition is best illustrated by Abu Ali al-Muhassin al-Tanukhi's (329\u2013384/941\u2013994) comment:\nWith his encyclopaedic knowledge of music, musicians, poetry, poets, genealogy, history, and other subjects, al-I\u1e63fah\u0101n\u012b established himself as a learned scholar and teacher.\nHe was also a scribe and this is not surprising, given his families\u2019 scribal connections, but the details of his \"k\u0101tib\" activities are rather opaque. Although both al-Tan\u016bkh\u012b and al-Baghd\u0101d\u012b refer to al-Isfahani with the attribute, \"k\u0101tib\", they mention nothing of where he worked or for whom. The details of his job as a scribe only come later, with Yaqut, many of whose reports about al-Isfahani prove problematic. For instance, a report from Yaqut claims that al-Isfahani was the scribe of Rukn al-Dawla (d. 366/976) and mentions his resentment at Ab\u016b al-Fa\u1e0dl b. al-\u02bfAm\u012bd (d. 360/970). However, the very same report is mentioned by Ab\u016b \u1e24ayy\u0101n al-Taw\u1e25\u012bd\u012b (active fourth/tenth century) in his \"Akhl\u0101q al-waz\u012brayn\", where the aforementioned scribe of Rukn al-Dawla is identified as Ab\u016b al-Faraj \u1e24amd b. Muhammad, not Ab\u016b al-Faraj al-Isfahani. Thus, it is hard to know with certainty how and where al-Isfahani was engaged in his capacity as a \"k\u0101tib\". Nevertheless, al-Isfahani's association with the vizier, Ab\u016b Mu\u1e25ammad al-Muhallab\u012b (291\u2013352/903\u2013963), is well-documented. The friendship between the two began before al-Muhallab\u012b\u2019s vizierate in 339/950. The firm relationship between them is supported by al-Isfahani's poetry collected by al-Tha\u02bf\u0101lib\u012b (350\u2013429/961\u20131038): half of the fourteen poems are panegyrics dedicated to al-Muhallab\u012b. In addition, al-Isfahani's own work, \"al-Im\u0101\u02be al-shaw\u0101\u02bfir\" (\u201cEnslaved Women Who Composed Poetry\u201d), refers to the vizier \u2014 presumably, al-Muhallab\u012b \u2014 as his dedicatee. His no longer surviving \"Man\u0101j\u012bb al-khi\u1e63y\u0101n\" (\u201cThe Noble Eunuchs\u201d), which addresses two castrated male singers owned by al-Muhallab\u012b, was composed for him. His \"magnum opus\", the \"Agh\u0101n\u012b\", was very likely intended for him, as well. As a return for his literary efforts, according to al-Tan\u016bkh\u012b, al-Isfahani frequently received rewards from the vizier. Furthermore, for the sake of their long-term friendship and out of his respect for al-Isfahani's genius, al-Muhallab\u012b exceptionally tolerated al-Isfahani's uncouth manners and poor personal hygiene. The sources say nothing about al-Isfahani's fate, after al-Muhallab\u012b\u2019s death. In his last years, according to his student, Muhammad b. Ab\u012b al-Faw\u0101ris, he suffered from senility (\"khalla\u1e6da\").\nPersonality, preferences, and beliefs.\nAs a boon companion, al-Isfahani was unconventional in the sense that he does not seem to have been bothered to observe the social decorum of his time, as noted by a late biographical source: with his uncleanliness and gluttony, he presented a counterexample to elegance (\"\u1e93arf\"), as defined by one of his teachers, Abu al-\u1e6cayyib al-Washsh\u0101\u02be (d. 325/937). His unconformity to the social norms did not hinder him from being part of al-Muhallab\u012b\u2019s entourage or participation in the literary assemblies, but, inevitably, it resulted in frictions with other scholars and detraction from his enemies. Although al-Isfahani appeared eccentric to his human associates, he was a caring owner to his cat, named Yaqaq (white): he treated Yaqaq's colic (\"qulanj\") with an enema (\"al-\u1e25uqna\").\nIn contrast to his uncomely \"modus vivendi\", al-Isfahani's prose style is lucid, \u201cin clear and simple language, with unusual sincerity and frankness\u201d. Al-Isfahani's capacity as a litterateur is well illustrated by Abu Deeb, who depicts al-Isfahani as \"one of the finest writers of Arabic prose in his time, with a remarkable ability to relate widely different types of \"a\u1e35b\u0101r\" in a rich, lucid, rhythmic, and precise style, only occasionally exploiting such formal effects as \"sa\u01f0\u02bf\" (rhyming prose). He was also a fine poet with an opulent imagination. His poetry displays preoccupations similar to those of other urban poets of his time\". His pinpoint documentation of \"as\u0101n\u012bd\" and meticulous verification of information, provided in all his works, embody a truly scholarly character. Usually, in his treatment of a subject or an event, al-Isfahani lets his sources speak, but, occasionally, he voices his evaluation of poems and songs, as well as their creators. When dealing with conflicting reports, al-Isfahani either leaves his readers to decide or issues his judgment as to the most credible account. Yet, he frankly condemns sources whom he holds to be unreliable, for instance, Ibn Khurd\u0101dhbih on musicological information and Ibn al-Kalb\u012b on genealogy. Indeed, al-Isfahani assesses his source material with a critical eye, while striving to present a more balanced view on his biographeis, by focusing on their merits instead of elaborating on their flaws.\nThat said, al-Isfahani's personal preferences and sectarian partisanship are not absent from his works. In terms of music and songs, al-Isfahani is a fan of Ishaq b. Ibrahim al-Mawsili (155\u2013235/772\u2013850). In al-Isfahani's view, Ishaq b. Ibrahim was a multi-talented man, who excelled in a number of subjects, but, most importantly, music. Ishaq b. Ibrahim, as a collector of the reports about poets and singers, is an important source in his \"Agh\u0101n\u012b\". Besides being a mine of information, Ishaq b. Ibrahim's terminology for the description of the melodic modes is preferred over that of his opponent, Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi (162\u2013224/778\u2013839), and adopted by al-Isfahani in his \"Aghani\". Furthermore, al-Isfahani embarked on the compilation of the \"Agh\u0101n\u012b\" because he was commissioned by his patron to reconstruct the list of the exquisite songs selected by Ishaq. In other words, the \"raison d\u2019etre\" of the \"Agh\u0101n\u012b\" is partly related to al-Isfahani's idol, Ishaq b. Ibrahim, and its information about singers, songs and performance owes a tremendous amount to him. Al-Isfahani's admiration for scholars or men of letters can be detected from time to time, usually in the passing comments in the chains of transmission. Yet al-Isfahani outspokenly expresses his admiration, in some cases, such as that of Ibn al-Mu\u02bftazz (247\u2013296/862\u2013909).\nAs an Umayyad by ancestry, al-Isfahani's later biographers mention his Shi'i affiliation with surprise. Yet, in the light of the history of the family's connections with the Abbasid elite of Shi'i inclination and the \u1e6c\u0101libids, and of his learning experience in K\u016bfa, his Shi'i conviction is understandable. Al-Tusi (385\u2013460/995\u20131067) is the only early source specifying the exact sect to which he pertains in the fluid Shi'i world: al-Isfahani is a Zayd\u012b. Although al-\u1e6c\u016bs\u012b\u2019s view is widely accepted, its veracity is not beyond doubt. Al-Isfahanidoes not seem to have been informed of the latest Zayd\u012b movements in Yemen and \u1e6cabarist\u0101n of his time, while his association with the K\u016bfan Zayd\u012b community, which to some degree became less distinguishable from the Sunn\u012bs, is yet to be studied in depth. It is clear, based on examination of how al-Isfahani redacts the reports at his disposal, that he does honour Ali, who plays a far more prominent role in his works than the first three caliphs, and some of his descendants, including Zaydi Shi'ism's eponym, Zayd ibn Ali (75\u2013122/694\u2013740), by presenting them positively, while, in some cases, leaving their enemies\u2019 rectitude in question. In spite of that, al-Isfahani is neither keen to identify the imams in the past, nor articulate as to the qualities of an imam. As a matter of fact, he hardly uses the word, not even applying it to Zayd b. Ali. Furthermore, he does not unconditionally approve any Alid revolt and seems somewhat lukewarm towards the group he refers to as Zaydis. Taken together, al-Isfahani's Shi'i conviction is better characterised as moderate love for Ali without impugning the dignity of the caliphs before him.\nLegacy.\nAl-Isfahani authored a number of works, but only a few survive. Three of them are preserved through the quotations: \"al-Qiyan\" (\"The Singing Girls Enslaved by Men\"), \"al-Diyarat\" (\"The Monasteries\"), and \"Mujarrad al-aghani\" (\u201cThe Abridgement of the Book of Songs\u201d). A fragment of the \"Mujarrad al-aghani\" can be found in Ibn Abi U\u1e63aybi'a's \u02bf\"Uyun al-anba' fi tabaqat al-atibba\"\u02be, which quotes a poem by the caliph, al-Ma\u02bem\u016bn (r. 198\u2013218/813\u2013833), which was arranged as a song by Mutayyam. The first two have been reconstructed and published by al-\u02bfAtiyya, who collects and collates the passages from later works that quote from al-Isfahani. The former, \"al-Qiy\u0101n\", is a collection of the biographies of the enslaved singing girls. In it, al-Isfahani provides the basic information about the biographical subjects, the men who enslaved them, and their interaction with poets, notables such as caliphs, and their admirers, with illustration of their poetic and/or musical talents. The latter, \"al-Diy\u0101r\u0101t\", provides information related to monasteries, with the indication of their geographical locations and, sometimes, history and topographical characteristics. However, it is questionable to what extent the reconstructed editions can represent the original texts, since the passages, which quote al-Isfahani as a source for the given subject and are thus included by the editor, seldom identify the titles of the works.\nFour works survive in manuscripts and have been edited and published: \"Maq\u0101til al-\u1e6c\u0101lib\u012by\u012bn\" (\"The \u1e6c\u0101libid Martyrs\"), \"Kitab al-Aghani\" (\"The Book of the Songs\"), \"Adab al-ghuraba\" (\"The Etiquettes of the Strangers\"), and \"al-Ima al-shawair\" (\"The Enslaved Women Who Composed Poetry\"). As noted above, al-Isfahani's authorship of the \"Adab al-ghuraba\u02be\" is disputed. The author, whoever he may have been, mentions in the preface his sufferings from the hardship of time and vicissitude of fate, and the solace which he seeks through the stories of bygone people. Hence, he collects in the \"Adab al-ghuraba\" the reports about the experiences of strangers \u2014 those away from their homes or their beloved ones. Some of the stories centre on the hardship which strangers, anonymous or not, encountered in their journey or exile, usually shown in the epigrams written on monuments, rocks, or walls. Others relate excursions to the monasteries for drinking.\nThe \"al-Im\u0101\u02be al-shaw\u0101\u02bfir\" was composed at the order of the vizier al-Muhallab\u012b, al-Isfahani's patron, who demanded collection of the reports about the enslaved women who composed poetry from the Umayyad to the Abbasid periods. Al-Isfahani confesses that he could not find any noteworthy poetess in the Umayyad period, because the people at that time were not impressed with the verses featuring tenderness and softness. Thus, he only records the Abbasid poetesses, with mention of the relevant fine verses or the pleasant tales, and arranges them in chronological order. There are 31 sections, addressing 32 poetesses, most of which are short and usually begin with al-Isfahani's summary of the subject.\nThe \"Maq\u0101til al-\u1e6c\u0101lib\u012by\u012bn\" is a historical-biographical compilation concerning the descendants of Abu Talib, who died under the following circumstances: being killed, poisoned to death in a treacherous way, on the run from the rulers\u2019 persecution, or confined until death. The \"Maq\u0101til\" literature was rather common, amongst Shi'is particularly, before al-Isfahani and he used many works of this genre as sources for the \"Maq\u0101til al-\u1e6c\u0101lib\u012by\u012bn\". Al-Isfahani does not explain the motivation behind this compilation nor mention any dedicatee, but, according to the preface of this work, he sets out as a condition to recount the reports about the \u1e6c\u0101libids who were \u201cpraiseworthy in their conduct and rightly guided in their belief (\"ma\u1e25m\u016bd al-\u1e6dar\u012bqa wa-sad\u012bd al-madhhab\")\u201d. Like the \"al-Im\u0101\u02be\", the work is structured in chronological order, beginning with the first \u1e6c\u0101lib\u012b martyr, Ja\u02bffar b. Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib, and ends in the year of its compilation \u2014 Jum\u0101d\u0101 I 313/August 925. For each biographical entry, al-Isfahani gives the full name, the lineage (sometimes adding the maternal side). Less often, he additionally gives the virtues and personal traits of the subject and other material he thinks noteworthy, for example the prophetic \"\u1e25ad\u012bth\" about, or transmitted by, the subject of the biography in question. Then, al-Isfahani gives the account of the death, which more often than not constitutes the end of the entry. Sometimes poetry for or by the subject is attached. The \"Maq\u0101til\" was adduced by many Shi'i and non-Shi'i compilers of the following centuries.\nThe \"Kitab al-Aghani\", al-Isfahanis best known work, is an immense compilation, including songs provided with musical indications (melodic modes and meters of songs), the biographies of poets and musicians of different periods in addition to historical material. As noted above, al-Isfahani embarks on compiling the \"Aghani\" first under the command of a patron, whom he calls \"ra'is\" (chief), to reconstruct the list of one hundred fine songs, selected by Ishaq b. Ibrahim. Due to an obscure report in Yaqut's \"Mu'jam\", this \"ra\u02be\u012bs\" is often assumed to be Sayf al-Dawla al-\u1e24amd\u0101n\u012b (r. 333\u2013356/945\u2013967), but recent studies suggest that a more plausible candidate for the dedicatee of the \"Aghani\" is the vizier al-Muhallab\u012b. The \"Aghani\" is divided into three parts: first, The Hundred Songs (\"al-mi'a al-\u1e63awt \u00a0al-mukhtara\") and other song collections; second, the songs of the caliphs and of their children and grandchildren (\"aghani al-khulafa wa-awladihim wa-awlad awladihim\"); third, al-Isfahanis selection of songs. The articles in each part are arranged based on different patterns, but it is mostly the song which introduces the articles on biographies or events. The \"Kitab al-Aghani\" is not the first book or collection of songs in Arabic, but one can assert that it is the most important one, for it \"is a unique mine of information not only on hundreds of song texts with their modes and meters, but also on the lives of their poets and composers, and on the social context of music making in early Islam and at the courts of the caliphs in Damascus and Baghdad\". Because of al-Isfahanis pedantic documentation of his sources, the \"Kitab al-Aghani\" can also be used to reconstruct earlier books of songs or biographical dictionaries on musicians that are otherwise lost.\nAs for the works that did not survive, based on their contents, as implied by their titles, they can be divided into the following categories:\nThe genealogical works: \"Nasab Bani Abd Shams\" (\"The Genealogy of the Banu Abd Shams\"), \"Jamharat al-nasab\" (\"The Compendium of Genealogies\"), \"Nasab Bani Shayban\" (\"The Genealogy of the Banu Shayban\"), and \"Nasab al-Mahaliba\" (\"The Genealogy of the Muhallabids\"), this last probably dedicated to his patron, the vizier al-Muhallabi.\nThe reports about specified or unspecified topics, such as \"Kitab al-Khammarin wa-l-khammarat\" (\"The Book of Tavern-Keepers, Male and Female\"), \"Akhbar al-tufayliyin\" (\"Reports about Party Crashers\"), \"al-Akhbar wa-l-nawadir\" (\"The Reports and Rare Tales\"), and \"Ayyam al-arab\" (\"The Battle-Days of the Arabs\"), which mentions 1700 days of the pre-Islamic tribal battles and was in circulation only in Andalusia.\nThe reports about music, musicians and singers: the aforementioned \"Manajib al-khisyan\" (\"The Noble Eunuchs\"), \"Akhbzr Jahza al-Barmaki\" (\"The Reports concerning Jahza al-Barmaki\"), \"al-Mamalik al-shu'ara\" (\"The Slave Poets\"), \"Adab al-samz\" (\"The Etiquettes of Listening to Music\"), and \"Risala fi 'ilal al-nagham\" (\"The Treatise on the Rules of Tones\").\nThere are two works, only mentioned by al-Tusi: \"Kitab ma nazala min al-Qur'an fi amir al-mu'min\u012bn wa-ahl baytih 'alayhim al-salam\" (\"The Book about the Qur'anic Verses Revealed regarding the Commander of the Faithful and the People of His Family, Peace upon Them\") and \"Kitab fihi kalam Fatima alayha al-salam fi Fadak\" (\"The Book concerning the Statements of F\u0101\u1e6dima, Peace upon Her, regarding Fadak\"). Should the attribution of these two works to al-Isfahani be correct, together with the \"Maqatil al-Talibiyin\", they reveal al-Isfahanis Shi'i partisanship.\nWorks.\nAl-Isfahani is best known as the author of \"Kitab al-Aghani\" (\"The Book of Songs\"), an encyclopedia of over 20 volumes and editions. However, he additionally wrote poetry, an anthology of verses on the monasteries of Mesopotamia and Egypt, and a genealogical work.\nThe first printed edition, published in 1868, contained 20 volumes. In 1888 Rudolf Ernst Br\u00fcnnow published a 21st volume being a collection of biographies not contained in the Bul\u0101q edition, edited from MSS in the Royal Library of Munich."}
{"id": "3041", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3041", "title": "Acamthocephala", "text": ""}
{"id": "3042", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3042", "title": "Alcobaca", "text": ""}
{"id": "3043", "revid": "39189323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3043", "title": "Alcoba\u00e7a, Portugal", "text": "Alcoba\u00e7a () is a city and a municipality in the Oeste region, in Central Portugal, formerly included in the Estremadura Province. The city grew along the valleys of the rivers Alcoa and Ba\u00e7a, from which it derives its name. The municipality population in 2011 was 56,693, in an area of 408.14\u00a0km\u00b2. The city proper has a population of 15,800 inhabitants.\nThe city of Alcoba\u00e7a became notable after the first king of Portugal, Afonso Henriques, decided to build a church to commemorate the Conquest of Santar\u00e9m from the Moors in 1147. The church later evolved into the Monastery of Alcoba\u00e7a, one of the most magnificent gothic monuments in the country. In the church are the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress In\u00eas de Castro. Over the centuries this monastery played an important role in shaping Portuguese culture.\nA few kilometers to the north of Alcoba\u00e7a is the Monastery of Batalha, another gothic building constructed in memory of a different important battle, that of Aljubarrota. To the west of Alcoba\u00e7a is the fishing village of Nazar\u00e9, now a popular resort town. To the south is the city of Caldas da Rainha and the medieval town of \u00d3bidos. Also to the northeast is the town of Porto de M\u00f3s with its rebuilt castle.\nHistory.\nA town that only became notable in the 12th century when it was chosen as the future site of Portugal's largest church. In March 1147, the fledgling King Dom Afonso Henriques, defeated the Moors by capturing the city of Santar\u00e9m. As a tribute to his victory he vowed to build a magnificent home for the Order of Cistercians. It took another 76 years before this task was completed. The monarchy continued to carry out further construction and 60 years later King Dinis built the main cloister. The Monastery was consecrated in 1262.\nThe church contains the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress In\u00eas de Castro and with it the story of the tragic liaison between Pedro and In\u00eas. Forced at an early age as a royal duty, he was to marry Constanza, the \"Infanta\" (Princess) of Castile, but died shortly after the marriage. Dom Pedro escape with his true love and later lived in the city of Coimbra. His father, King Afonso IV, believing that the family of In\u00eas was a threat to his own kingdom had her murdered. Shortly after the death of his father Dom Pedro declared that he had married In\u00eas in a prior secret ceremony in Bragan\u00e7a, and promptly took a gruesome revenge on the killers and exhumed her body. He presented the embalmed corpse at the court with a crown on her head and demanded that all his courtiers kneel and individually pay homage to her decomposed hand. Today, their ornate tombs face each other so that on Judgment Day his first sight would be of his beloved In\u00eas.\nDuring the following centuries the monks from this monastery had a major influence on the development of Portuguese culture. Notably, in 1269 they were the first to give public lessons to their flock, and later they produced the first authoritative history on Portugal in a series of books. In 1810 the invading French pillaged the Abbey taking with them most of its most important treasures, including the noteworthy library. The items that remained were later stolen in 1834 during an anti-clerical riot and the banning of the religious Orders in Portugal.\nClimate.\nAlcoba\u00e7a has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen:\"Csb\") with warm, dry summers and mild, wet winters.\nParishes.\nAdministratively, the municipality is divided into 13 civil parishes (\"freguesias\"):\nCity information.\nThe main feature of the city is essentially the monastery that proudly presents a long and sombre fa\u00e7ade with 18th-century embellishments. This austerity is further emphasized in the cloisters with its apt name of \"Cloister of Silence\". In contrast within the Abbey is the massive kitchen with a running stream specially diverted to pass through as a supply of fresh water. The open area of the kitchen chimney is large enough to take a whole ox for roasting. The surround to the sacristy doorway is an outstanding example of Manueline decoration. In 1794, Lord Beckford visited the Abbey and commented that he found some 300 monks \"living in a very splendid manner\"!\nNearby locations.\nA few kilometers to the north of Alcoba\u00e7a is another wondrous building constructed in memory of a different important battle, that of Aljubarrota in 1385, when King John I of Portugal defeated the Castilians and ensuring two hundred years of independence from the Castilian invaders. The construction of the Abbey at Batalha commenced in 1388 and was added to by various Portuguese Kings over these next two centuries. To the east of Batalha is the world-famous location of F\u00e1tima and a point of pilgrimage for the Roman Catholic religion due to the vision of the Virgin Mary in 1917 by three young children whilst tending their flock. To the west of Alcoba\u00e7a is the well-known fishing village of Nazar\u00e9. Today, the village is now a small town and a popular holiday resort with most of its past and traditions having rapidly evaporated in the course of time. A very successful Portuguese feature film was made in the early 20th century that dramatically captured the primitive and dangerous life of these fishermen. Stoutly Catholic, the inhabitants have retained some of their past as can be still seen in their own particular style of costume. To the south is Caldas da Rainha and the quaint medieval town of \u00d3bidos that is an attraction for any tourists that enjoys a true glimpse of the past. Also to the south is the town of Porto de M\u00f3s with its fanciful rebuilt castle. This town borders the Nature Reserve Parque Natural das Serras de Aire e Candeeiros. These 390 square kilometres of limestone-covered landscape is also known for its caverns. The best known being the Grutas de Mira de Aire can be visited and consists of tunnels, caverns with stalactites, stalagmites, lakes, and a music and light finale.\nMajor events.\nNotable people from Alcoba\u00e7a include:\nInternational relations.\nAlcoba\u00e7a is twinned with:"}
{"id": "3044", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3044", "title": "Amphisbaena", "text": "The amphisbaena (, plural: amphisbaenae; ) is a mythological, ant-eating serpent with a head at each end. The creature is alternatively called the amphisbaina, amphisbene, amphisboena, amphisbona, amphista, amfivena, amphivena, or anphivena (the last two being feminine), and is also known as the \"Mother of Ants\". Its name comes from the Greek words \"amphis\", meaning \"both ways\", and \"bainein\", meaning \"to go\".\nMythology.\nAccording to Greek mythology, the amphisbaena was spawned from the blood that dripped from the Gorgon Medusa's head as Perseus flew over the Libyan Desert with her head in his hand, after which Cato's army then encountered it along with other serpents on the march. Amphisbaena fed on the corpses left behind. The amphisbaena has been referred to by various poets such as Nicander, John Milton, Alexander Pope, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire, A. E. Housman and Allen Mandelbaum; as a mythological and legendary creature, it has been referenced by Lucan, Pliny the Elder, Isidore of Seville, and Thomas Browne, the last of whom debunked its existence.\nAppearance.\nThese early descriptions of the amphisbaena depicts a venomous, dual-headed snakelike creature. However, Medieval and later drawings often show it with two or more scaled feet, particularly chicken feet, and feathered wings. Some even depict it as a horned, dragon-like creature with a serpent-headed tail and small, round ears, while others have both \"necks\" of equal size so that it cannot be determined which is the rear head. Many descriptions of the amphisbaena say its eyes glow like candles or lightning, but the poet Nicander seems to contradict this by describing it as \"always dull of eye\". He also says: \"From either end protrudes a blunt chin; each is far from each other.\" Nicander's account seems to be referring to what is indeed called the Amphisbaenia, a group of real lizards.\nHabitat.\nThe amphisbaena is said to make its home in the desert.\nFolk medicine.\nIn ancient times, the supposedly dangerous amphisbaena had many uses in the art of folk medicine and other such remedies. Pliny notes that expecting women wearing a live amphisbaena around their necks would have safe pregnancies; however, if one's goal was to cure ailments such as arthritis or the common cold, one should wear only its skin. By eating the meat of the amphisbaena, one could supposedly attract many lovers of the opposite sex, and slaying one during the full moon could give power to one who is pure of heart and mind. Lumberjacks suffering from cold weather on the job could nail its carcass or skin to a tree to keep warm, while in the process allowing the tree to be felled more easily.\nOrigins.\nIn \"The Book of Beasts\", T.H. White suggests that the creature derives from sightings of the worm lizards of the same name. These creatures are found in the Mediterranean countries where many of these legends originated.\nIn media.\nIn John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\", after the Fall and the return of Satan to Hell, some of the fallen angelic host are transformed into the amphisbaena, to represent the animal by which the Fall was caused, i.e. a snake.\nThe amphisbaena is mentioned in the first book of Andrzej Sapkowski's \"The Witcher\" series, i.e. \"The Last Wish\", when \"The Witcher\"'s protagonist, Geralt of Rivia, is recalling past events when he meets an old acquaintance named Irion. The amphisbaena was endangering the region of Kovir until the beast was slain by Geralt's hand.\nBrandon Sanderson's novel \"Skyward\" has a character whose name is Arturo Mendez. His call sign is amphisbaena.\nIn the 1984 Scandinavian animated film \"Gallavants\", an amphisbaena (called in the film as a 'Vanterviper') appears as a minor antagonist. The two heads, a red one named Edil and a blue one called Fice, frequently disagree and argue, and sing a song about their miserable plight.\nAmphisbaena appears in some editions of the tabletop roleplaying game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nThe Amphisbaena appears in the \"Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" episode \"Battle Nexus: New York.\" This version is one of the known champions of the Battle Nexus. Big Mama had Michelangelo and Meat Sweats compete to feed each of its heads in order to satisfy. They managed to work together to pull it off.\nAmphisbaena has appeared in several video games as an enemy or boss monster, including \"La-Mulana\" and \".\" A creature called Amphisbaena appears in the games ' and ' but bears little resemblance to other renditions of the creature, appearing as an eyeless 4-legged reptile creature with the upper body of a human woman sprouting from its long tail instead of a double-headed serpent."}
{"id": "3045", "revid": "48742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3045", "title": "Amyl alcohol", "text": "An amyl alcohol is any of 8 alcohols with the formula C5H12O. A mixture of amyl alcohols (also called amyl alcohol) can be obtained from fusel alcohol. Amyl alcohol is used as a solvent and in esterification, by which is produced amyl acetate and other important products. The name \"amyl alcohol\" without further specification applies to the normal (straight-chain) form, 1-pentanol.\nThese are the 8 alcohols that are structural isomers with molecular formula C5H12O:\nThree of these alcohols, 2-methyl-1-butanol, 2-pentanol, and 3-methyl-2-butanol (methyl isopropyl carbinol), contain an asymmetric carbon atom and are therefore optically active.\nIn addition to those, the structural isomers of include the ethers methyl butyl ether, methyl \"sec\"-butyl ether, ethyl propyl ether, ethyl isopropyl ether, and methyl \"tert\"-butyl ether.\nThe most important amyl alcohol is isoamyl alcohol, the chief one generated by fermentation in the production of alcoholic beverages and a constituent of fusel oil. The other amyl alcohols may be obtained synthetically. Of these, tertiary butyl carbinol has been the most difficult to obtain, with the first reported synthesis in 1891 by L. Tissier using the reduction of a mixture of trimethyl acetic acid and trimethylacetyl chloride with sodium amalgam. It is a solid that melts at 48 to 50\u00a0\u00b0C and boils at 112.3\u00a0\u00b0C."}
{"id": "3046", "revid": "1008285591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3046", "title": "Amyl nitrite", "text": "Amyl nitrite is a chemical compound with the formula C5H11ONO. A variety of isomers are known, but they all feature an amyl group attached to the nitrite functional group. The alkyl group is unreactive and the chemical and biological properties are mainly due to the nitrite group. Like other alkyl nitrites, amyl nitrite is bioactive in mammals, being a vasodilator, which is the basis of its use as a prescription medicine. As an inhalant, it also has a psychoactive effect, which has led to its recreational use with its smell being described as that of old socks or dirty feet. It is also referred to as \"banapple gas\".\nIt was first documented in 1844 and came into medical use in 1867.\nNomenclature.\nThe term \"amyl nitrite\" encompasses several isomers. In older literature, the common non-systematic name amyl was often used for the pentyl group, where the amyl group is a linear or normal (n) alkyl group, and the resulting amyl nitrite would have the structural formula CH3(CH2)4ONO, also referred to as n-amyl nitrite.\nA common form of amyl nitrite is the isomer with the formula (CH3)2CHCH2CH2ONO, which may be more specifically referred to as isoamyl nitrite.\nThe similarly-named amyl nitrate has very different properties. At the same time, isopropyl nitrite has a similar structure and similar uses (also called 'poppers') but with worse side-effects.\nSynthesis and reactions.\nAlkyl nitrites are prepared by the reaction of alcohols with nitrous acid:\nThe reaction is called esterification. Synthesis of alkyl nitrites is, in general, straightforward and can be accomplished in home laboratories. A common procedure includes the dropwise addition of concentrated sulfuric acid to a cooled mixture of an aqueous sodium nitrite solution and an alcohol. The intermediately-formed stoichiometric mixture of nitrogen dioxide and nitric oxide then converts the alcohol to the alkyl nitrite, which, due to its low density, will form an upper layer that can be easily decanted from the reaction mixture.\nIsoamyl nitrite decomposes in the presence of base to give nitrite salts and the isoamyl alcohol:\nAmyl nitrite, like other alkyl nitrites, reacts with carbanions to give oximes.\nAmyl nitrites are also useful as reagents in a modification of the Sandmeyer reaction. The reaction of the alkyl nitrite with an aromatic amine in a halogenated solvent produces a radical aromatic species, this then frees a halogen atom from the solvent. For the synthesis of aryl iodides diiodomethane is used, whereas bromoform is the solvent of choice for the synthesis of aryl bromides.\nPhysiological effects.\nAmyl nitrite, in common with other alkyl nitrites, is a potent vasodilator; it expands blood vessels, resulting in lowering of the blood pressure. Amyl nitrite may be used during cardiovascular stress testing in patients with suspected hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to cause vasodilation and thereby reduce afterload and provoke obstruction of blood flow towards the aorta from the ventricle by increasing the pressure gradient, thereby causing left ventricular outflow obstruction. Alkyl nitrites are a source of nitric oxide, which signals for relaxation of the involuntary muscles. Physical effects include decrease in blood pressure, headache, flushing of the face, increased heart rate, dizziness, and relaxation of involuntary muscles, especially the blood vessel walls and the internal and external anal sphincter. There are no withdrawal symptoms. Overdose symptoms include nausea, vomiting, hypotension, hypoventilation, shortness of breath, and fainting. The effects set in very quickly, typically within a few seconds and disappear within a few minutes. Amyl nitrite may also intensify the experience of synesthesia.\nToxicity.\nAlthough there are case reports of life threatening toxicity involving unusually large amounts, typical inhaled doses of amyl nitrite is considered relatively safe. However, liquid amyl nitrite is highly toxic when ingested because of the unsafely high concentration it effects in blood. Regardless of the form or route of administration, acute toxicity principally results when the nitrite oxidizes a significant proportion of haemoglobin in the blood without oxygen, forming methemoglobin, which cannot carry oxygen. Severe poisoning cases will progress to methemoglobinemia, characterized by a blue-brown discoloration under the skin which could be mistaken for cyanosis. Treatment with oxygen and intravenous methylene blue frustrates visual confirmation further as methylene blue itself is, as its name suggests, a blue dye; the patient's changes in different shades of blue notwithstanding, it is an effective antidote by way of catalyzing the production of the enzyme responsible for reducing the methemoglobin in the blood back to haemoglobin. \nThe discoloration does mean that regular near-infrared based pulse oximetry becomes useless. More fundamentally, blood gas analysis on the whole has limited effectiveness, as increased methemoglobin levels increases the oxygen binding affinity of regular haemoglobin. Therefore the measurement of actual ratios and levels of methemoglobin and hemoglobin must accompany any blood gas partial pressure sample in these cases."}
{"id": "3049", "revid": "41435852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3049", "title": "Autumn", "text": "Autumn, also known as Fall in American English and Canadian English, is one of the four temperate seasons. Outside the tropics, autumn marks the transition from summer to winter, in September (Northern Hemisphere) or March (Southern Hemisphere), when the duration of daylight becomes noticeably shorter and the temperature cools considerably. Day length decreases and night length increases as the season progresses until the Winter Solstice in December (Northern Hemisphere) and June (Southern Hemisphere). One of its main features in temperate climates is the shedding of leaves from deciduous trees.\nSome cultures regard the autumnal equinox as \"mid-autumn\", while others with a longer temperature lag treat the equinox as the start of autumn. In the English-speaking world, Autumn traditionally began with Lammas Day and ended around Hallowe'en, the approximate mid-points between Midsummer, the autumnal equinox, and Midwinter. Meteorologists (and most of the temperate countries in the southern hemisphere) use a definition based on Gregorian calendar months, with autumn being September, October, and November in the northern hemisphere, and March, April, and May in the southern hemisphere.\nIn North America, autumn traditionally starts with the September equinox (21 to 24 September) and ends with the winter solstice (21 or 22 December). Popular culture in the United States associates Labor Day, the first Monday in September, as the end of summer and the start of autumn; certain summer traditions, such as wearing white, are discouraged after that date. As daytime and nighttime temperatures decrease, trees change color and then shed their leaves. In traditional East Asian solar term, autumn starts on or around 8 August and ends on or about 7 November. In Ireland, the autumn months according to the national meteorological service, Met \u00c9ireann, are September, October and November. However, according to the Irish Calendar, which is based on ancient Gaelic traditions, autumn lasts throughout the months of August, September and October, or possibly a few days later, depending on tradition. In the Irish language, September is known as \"Me\u00e1n F\u00f3mhair\" (\"middle of autumn\") and October as \"Deireadh F\u00f3mhair\" (\"end of autumn\"). Persians celebrate the beginning of the autumn as Mehregan to honor Mithra (Mehr).\nIn southern hemisphere countries such as Australia and New Zealand, which base their seasonal calendars meteorologically rather than astronomically, autumn officially begins on 1 March and ends on 31 May.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"autumn\" () is derived from Latin \"autumnus\", archaic \"auctumnus\", possibly from the ancient Etruscan root \"autu-\" and has within it connotations of the passing of the year. Alternative etymologies include Proto-Indo-European *\"h\u2083ew\u01f5\"- (\"cold\") or *\"h\u2082sows\"- (\"dry\").\nAfter the Greek era, the word continued to be used as the Old French word ' (' in modern French) or \"\" in Middle English, and was later normalised to the original Latin. In the Medieval period, there are rare examples of its use as early as the 12th century, but by the 16th century, it was in common use.\nBefore the 16th century, \"harvest\" was the term usually used to refer to the season, as it is common in other West Germanic languages to this day (cf. Dutch ', German ' and Scots \"\"). However, as more people gradually moved from working the land to living in towns, the word \"harvest\" lost its reference to the time of year and came to refer only to the actual activity of reaping, and \"autumn\", as well as \"fall\", began to replace it as a reference to the season.\nThe alternative word \"fall\" for the season traces its origins to old Germanic languages. The exact derivation is unclear, with the Old English ' or ' and the Old Norse \"\" all being possible candidates. However, these words all have the meaning \"to fall from a height\" and are clearly derived either from a common root or from each other. The term came to denote the season in 16th-century England, a contraction of Middle English expressions like \"fall of the leaf\" and \"fall of the year\". Compare the origin of \"spring\" from \"spring of the leaf\" and \"spring of the year\".\nDuring the 17th century, English emigration to the British colonies in North America was at its peak, and the new settlers took the English language with them. While the term \"fall\" gradually became nearly obsolete in Britain, it became the more common term in North America.\nThe name \"backend\", a once common name for the season in Northern England, has today been largely replaced by the name \"autumn\".\nAssociations.\nHarvest.\nAssociation with the transition from warm to cold weather, and its related status as the season of the primary harvest, has dominated its themes and popular images. In Western cultures, personifications of autumn are usually pretty, well-fed females adorned with fruits, vegetables and grains that ripen at this time. Many cultures feature autumnal harvest festivals, often the most important on their calendars. Still extant echoes of these celebrations are found in the autumn Thanksgiving holiday of the United States and Canada, and the Jewish Sukkot holiday with its roots as a full-moon harvest festival of \"tabernacles\" (living in outdoor huts around the time of harvest). There are also the many festivals celebrated by indigenous peoples of the Americas tied to the harvest of ripe foods gathered in the wild, the Chinese Mid-Autumn or Moon festival, and many others. The predominant mood of these autumnal celebrations is a gladness for the fruits of the earth mixed with a certain melancholy linked to the imminent arrival of harsh weather.\nThis view is presented in English poet John Keats' poem \"To Autumn\", where he describes the season as a time of bounteous fecundity, a time of 'mellow fruitfulness'.\nIn North America, while most foods are harvested during the autumn, foods particularly associated with the season include pumpkins (which are integral parts of both Thanksgiving and Halloween) and apples, which are used to make the seasonal beverage apple cider.\nMelancholia.\nAutumn, especially in poetry, has often been associated with melancholia. The possibilities and opportunities of summer are gone, and the chill of winter is on the horizon. Skies turn grey, the amount of usable daylight drops rapidly, and many people turn inward, both physically and mentally. It has been referred to as an unhealthy season.\nSimilar examples may be found in Irish poet William Butler Yeats' poem \"The Wild Swans at Coole\" where the maturing season that the poet observes symbolically represents his own ageing self. Like the natural world that he observes, he too has reached his prime and now must look forward to the inevitability of old age and death. French poet Paul Verlaine's \"Chanson d'automne\" (\"Autumn Song\") is likewise characterised by strong, painful feelings of sorrow. Keats' \"To Autumn\", written in September 1819, echoes this sense of melancholic reflection, but also emphasises the lush abundance of the season. The song \"Autumn Leaves\", based on the French song \"Les Feuilles mortes\", uses the melancholic atmosphere of the season and the end of summer as a metaphor for the mood of being separated from a loved one.\nHalloween.\nAutumn is associated with Halloween (influenced by Samhain, a Celtic autumn festival), and with it a widespread marketing campaign that promotes it. Halloween, 31 October, is in autumn in the northern hemisphere. The television, film, book, costume, home decoration, and confectionery industries use this time of year to promote products closely associated with such a holiday, with promotions going from late August or early September to 31 October, since their themes rapidly lose strength once the holiday ends, and advertising starts concentrating on Christmas.\nOther associations.\nIn some parts of the northern hemisphere, autumn has a strong association with the end of summer holiday and the start of a new school year, particularly for children in primary and secondary education. \"Back to School\" advertising and preparations usually occurs in the weeks leading to the beginning of autumn.\nEaster falls in autumn in the southern hemisphere.\nThanksgiving Day is a national holiday celebrated in Canada, in the United States, in some of the Caribbean islands and in Liberia. Thanksgiving is celebrated on the second Monday of October in Canada and on the fourth Thursday of November in the United States, and around the same part of the year in other places. Similarly named festival holidays occur in Germany and Japan.\nTelevision stations and networks, particularly in North America, traditionally begin their regular seasons in their autumn, with new series and new episodes of existing series debuting mostly during late September or early October (series that debut outside the fall season are usually known as mid-season replacements). A sweeps period takes place in November to measure Nielsen Ratings.\nAmerican football is played almost exclusively in the autumn months; at the high school level, seasons run from late August through early November, with some playoff games and holiday rivalry contests being played as late as Thanksgiving. In many American states, the championship games take place in early December. College football's regular season runs from September through November, while the main professional circuit, the National Football League, plays from September through to early January. Summer sports, such as Major League Soccer, Canadian football, stock car racing, tennis, golf, cricket, and professional baseball, wrap up their seasons in early to late autumn; Major League Baseball's championship World Series is known popularly as the \"Fall Classic\". (Amateur baseball is usually finished by August.) Likewise, professional winter sports, such as ice hockey, basketball, and most leagues of association football in Europe, are in the early stages of their seasons during autumn; American college basketball and college ice hockey play teams outside their athletic conferences during the late autumn before their in-conference schedules begin in winter.\nThe Christian religious holidays of All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day are observed in autumn in the Northern hemisphere.\nSince 1997, Autumn has been one of the top 100 names for girls in the United States.\nIn Indian mythology, autumn is considered to be the preferred season for the goddess of learning Saraswati, who is also known by the name of \"goddess of autumn\" (Sharada).\nIn Asian mysticism, Autumn is associated with the element of metal, and subsequently with the colour white, the White Tiger of the West, and death and mourning.\nTourism.\nAlthough colour change in leaves occurs wherever deciduous trees are found, coloured autumn foliage is noted in various regions of the world: most of North America, Eastern Asia (including China, Korea, and Japan), Europe, southeast, south and part of the midwest of Brazil, the forest of Patagonia, eastern Australia and New Zealand's South Island.\nEastern Canada and New England are famous for their autumnal foliage, and this attracts major tourism (worth billions of US dollars) for the regions."}
{"id": "3051", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3051", "title": "Angus McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "3052", "revid": "1011351855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3052", "title": "Alameda, California", "text": "Alameda ( ; ) is a city in Alameda County, California, United States. It spans Alameda Island and Bay Farm Island. It is adjacent to and south of Oakland and east of San Francisco across the San Francisco Bay. Bay Farm Island, a portion of which is also known as \"Harbor Bay Isle\", is part of the mainland adjacent to Oakland International Airport. The city's estimated 2019 population was 77,624. Alameda is a charter city, rather than a general law city and adopted a council\u2013manager government in 1916.\nHistory.\nEarly history and settlement.\nAlameda occupies what was originally a peninsula connected to Oakland. Much of it was low-lying and marshy. The higher ground nearby and adjacent parts of what is now downtown Oakland were the site of one of the largest coastal oak forests in the world. Spanish colonists called the area \"Encinal\", meaning \"forest of evergreen oak\". \"Alameda\" is Spanish for \"grove of poplar trees\" or \"tree-lined avenue.\" It was chosen as the name of the city in 1853 by popular vote.\nThe inhabitants at the time of the arrival of the Spanish in the late 18th century were a local band of the Ohlone tribe. The peninsula was included in the vast Rancho San Antonio granted in 1820 to Luis Peralta by the Spanish king who claimed California. The grant was later confirmed by the Republic of Mexico upon its independence in 1821 from Spain.\nOver time, the place became known as Bolsa de Encinal or Encinal de San Antonio.\nCity development.\nThe city was founded on June 6, 1853, after the United States acquired California following the Mexican-American War of 1848. The town originally contained three small settlements. \"Alameda\" referred to the village at Encinal and High streets, Hibbardsville was located at the North Shore ferry and shipping terminal, and Woodstock was on the west near the ferry piers of the South Pacific Coast Railroad and the Central Pacific. Eventually, the Central Pacific's ferry pier became the Alameda Mole, featuring transit connections among the San Francisco ferries, local trollies, and Southern Pacific (formerly Central Pacific) commuter lines.\nThe first post office opened in 1854. The first school, Schermerhorn School, was opened in 1855 (and eventually was renamed as Lincoln School); Encinal School was opened in 1860 (and closed in 1980). The San Francisco and Alameda Railroad opened the Encinal station in 1864. The Encinal area was also known as Fasskings Station in honor of Frederick Louis Fassking. Encinal's own post office opened in 1876, was renamed West End in 1877, and closed in 1891. The West End area was originally called Bowman's Point in honor of Charles G. Bowman, an early United States settler.\nOn September 6, 1869, the Alameda Terminal made history; it was the site of the arrival of the first train via the First Transcontinental Railroad to reach the shores of San Francisco Bay, thus achieving the first coast to coast transcontinental railroad in North America. The transcontinental terminus was switched to the Oakland Pier two months later, on November 8, 1869.\nThe borders of Alameda were made coextensive with the island in 1872, incorporating Woodstock into Alameda. In his autobiography, writer Mark Twain described Alameda as \"The Garden of California.\" \nNeptune Beach.\nIn 1917, a private entertainment park called Neptune Beach was built in the area now known as Crab Cove. Often compared to Coney Island in Brooklyn, New York, the park was a major recreation destination in the 1920s and 1930s. The original owners, the Strehlow family, partnered with a local confectioner to create treats unique to Neptune Beach. Both the American snow cone and the popsicle were first sold at Neptune Beach. The Kewpie doll, hand-painted and dressed in unique hand-sewn dresses, became the original prize for winning games of chance at the beach\u00a0\u2013 another Neptune Beach innovation. The Strehlows owned and operated the beach on their own. They filled in a section of the bay to add an additional Olympic-size swimming pool and a roller coaster, which must have given riders a tremendous view of the bay. The \"Cottage Baths\" were available for rent.\nNeptune Beach's two large outdoor pools hosted swimming races and exhibitions by such notable swimmers such as Olympian Johnny Weissmuller and Jack LaLanne. Weissmuller later starred in films as the original Tarzan character. LaLanne started a longlasting chain of health clubs and appeared on television. The park closed down in 1939 because the Great Depression left many people without much money, the completion of the San Francisco\u2013Oakland Bay Bridge changed traffic patterns, people avoided paying the admission price, and the rise of car culture gave people many more choices for recreation destinations.\nOnce the Bay Bridge was complete, the rail lines, which ran past the entrance to Neptune Beach on the way to the Alameda Mole and the Ferry, lost passengers in great number as people shifted to automobiles. People began using their cars to escape the city and the close suburbs like Alameda and traveled further afield in California. More distant locations appealed to cash-rich San Francisco tourists in the postwar years. Youngsters in town became aware of ways to avoid paying the dime for admission to the park. Strong swimmers or waders could sneak in on the bayside just by swimming around the fence.\nSome resort homes and buildings from the Neptune Beach era still exist in present-day Alameda. The Croll Building, on the corner of Webster Street and Central Avenue, was the site of Croll's Gardens and Hotel, used as training quarters for some of the greatest fighters in boxing history from 1883 to 1914. James J. Corbett, Bob Fitzsimmons, Jim Jeffries, Jack Johnson, and several other champions all stayed and trained here. Today, this preserved building has been adapted for retail and restaurants. Neptune Court, a block away on the corner of Central and McKay avenues, is also a surviving building from the resort era.\nThe vast majority of the Neptune Beach structures\u00a0\u2013 the hand-carved carousel from the world-famed Dentzel Company, the Ferris wheel, the roller coaster, and other rides\u00a0\u2013 were auctioned off in 1940, yielding pennies on the dollar of their original cost. the city did not construct any swimming facilities or develop a local beach to replace that of Neptune Beach.\nTransportation.\nWhen the railroad came to town in 1860s, Park Street developed as the major thoroughfare of the city. After the main Alameda train station was located here, residents of Old Alameda pulled up stakes and moved across town to the new downtown. The street's location was chosen by two landowners who wished to attract tenants and development to their land. They designated their mutual property line as Park Street.\nThe need for expanded shipping facilities and increased flow of current through the estuary led to the dredging of a tidal canal through the marshland between Oakland and Alameda. Construction started in 1874, but it was not completed until 1902, resulting in Alameda becoming an island.\nMost of the soil from the canal dredging was used to fill in the nearby marshland. The area of Alameda called Bay Farm Island is no longer an island but is attached by fill to Oakland. In his youth, author Jack London was known to take part in oyster pirating in the highly productive oyster beds near Bay Farm Island, today long gone.\nThe Alameda Works Shipyard was one of the largest and best-equipped shipyards in the country. Together with other industrial facilities, it became part of the defense industry buildup before and during World War II, which attracted many African-American and European-American migrants from other parts of the United States for the high-paying jobs. In the 1950s, Alameda's industrial and shipbuilding industries thrived along the Alameda Estuary. This was the site of operation of the world's first-ever, land-based, containerized shipping crane.\nIn the early 21st century, the Port of Oakland, across the estuary, has become one of the largest ports on the West Coast. Its operators use shipping technologies originally experimented within Alameda. As of March 21, 2006, Alameda is a \"Coast Guard City\", one of seven then designated in the country. As of 2018, it is one of twenty-one within the country.\nIn addition to the regular trains running to the Alameda Mole, Alameda was also served by local steam commuter lines of the Southern Pacific (initially, the Central Pacific). Alameda was the site of the Southern Pacific's West Alameda Shops, where all the electric trains were maintained and repaired. These were later adapted as the East Bay Electric Lines. Southern Pacific's electrified trains were not streetcars, but full-sized railroad cars that connected to the mainland via bridges at Webster Street and Fruitvale (only the latter bridge survives today). The trains ran to both the Oakland Mole and the Alameda Mole. A line that ran between the two moles was dubbed the \"Horseshoe Line\" for the shape of the route on a map. Soon after completion of the Bay Bridge, Alameda trains connected directly to San Francisco by the lower deck of the bridge. The ferries became unnecessary.\nIn the 1930s Pan American Airways established a seaplane port along with the fill that led to the Alameda Mole. This was the original home base for the China Clipper flying boat.\nIn 1929, the University of California established the San Francisco Airdrome located near the current Webster Street tube as a public airport. The Bay Airdrome had its gala christening party in 1930. The airfield was a busy place, as an early home base for Coastal Air Freight, Varney Air Lines, West Coast Air Transport, Western Air Express, the Transbay Air Ferries, and Boeing's Pacific Air Transport. The Airdrome was closed in 1941 when its air traffic interfered with the newly built Naval Air Station Alameda (NAS Alameda). With the advent of World War II, a vast stretch of the marshy area southwest of the Alameda Mole was filled and the NAS Alameda established. This major Naval facility included a large airfield, as well as docks for several aircraft carriers. It closed in 1997.\nStarting in the 1940s and continuing into the 1970s, multiple proposals were considered to build a highway bridge from Alameda to the San Francisco Peninsula, known as the Southern Crossing.\nThe Bay Area Rapid Transit is currently studying the creation of a second Transbay Tube; some potential alignments would bring BART service to Alameda Island.\n1950\u2013present.\nIn the late 1950s, the Utah Construction Company began a landfill beyond the \"Old Sea Wall\" and created \"South Shore\".\nOn February 7, 1973, a USN Vought A-7E Corsair II fighter jet on a routine training mission from Lemoore Naval Air Station suddenly caught fire, over the San Francisco Bay and crashed into the Tahoe Apartments in Alameda. Eleven people, including pilot Lieutenant Robert Lee Ward, died in the crash and fire.\nGeography.\nAlameda's nickname is \"The Island City\" (or simply \"the island\"). The current city occupies two islands as well as a small section of the mainland. Today, the city consists of the main original section, with the former Naval Air Station Alameda (NAS Alameda) at the west end of Alameda Island, Southshore along the southern side of Alameda Island, and Bay Farm Island, which is part of the mainland proper. The area of the former NAS is now known as \"Alameda Point.\" The Southshore area is separated from the main part of Alameda Island by a lagoon; the north shore of the lagoon is located approximately where the original south shore of the island was. Alameda Point and Southshore are built on bay fill.\nNot all of Alameda Island is part of the City of Alameda, a small portion of a dump site west of the former runway at Alameda Naval Air Station extends far enough into San Francisco Bay that it is over the county line and part of the City and County of San Francisco. \nCoast Guard Island, a small island between Alameda Island and Oakland, is also part of Alameda and is the home of Integrated Support Command Alameda\nClimate.\nThis region experiences warm (but not hot) and dry summers, with no average monthly temperatures above . According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Alameda has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate, abbreviated \"Csb\" on climate maps. Annual precipitation is about , all rain (snow is extremely rare at sea level in the San Francisco Bay area).\nDemographics.\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States Census reported that Alameda had a population of 73,812. (2015 census estimates place the population at 78,630)\nThe population density was 3,214.9 people per square mile (1,241.3/km). The racial makeup of Alameda was 37,460 (50.8%) White, 23,058 (31.2%) Asian, 4,759 (6.4%) African American, 426 (0.6%) Native American, 381 (0.5%) Pacific Islander, 2,463 (3.3%) from other races, and 5,265 (7.1%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8,092 persons (11.0%).\nThe Census reported that 72,316 people (98.0% of the population) lived in households, 857 (1.2%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 639 (0.9%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 30,123 households, out of which 9,144 (30.4%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 13,440 (44.6%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 3,623 (12.0%) had a female householder with no husband present, 1,228 (4.1%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 1,681 (5.6%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 459 (1.5%) same-sex married couples or same-sex partnerships. 9,347 households (31.0%) were made up of individuals, and 2,874 (9.5%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40. There were 18,291 families (60.7% of all households); the average family size was 3.06.\nThe age distribution of the population shows 15,304 people (20.7%) under the age of 18, 5,489 people (7.4%) aged 18 to 24, 21,000 people (28.5%) aged 25 to 44, 22,044 people (29.9%) aged 45 to 64, and 9,975 people (13.5%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.7 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.5 males.\nPer capita money income in past 12 months (2013 dollars), 2009 \u2013 2013 was $41,340.00 per US Census. Median household income, 2009 \u2013 2013 was $74,606.00 per US Census.\nThere were 32,351 housing units at an average density of 1,409.0 per square mile (544.0/km), of which 30,123 were occupied, of which 14,488 (48.1%) were owner-occupied, and 15,635 (51.9%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.1%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.7%. 37,042 people (50.2% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 35,274 people (47.8%) lived in rental housing units.\n2000.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 72,259 people, 30,226 households, and 17,863 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,583.3/km (6,693.4/mi2). There were 31,644 housing units at an average density of 1,131.3/km (2,931.2/mi2). The racial makeup of the city was 56.95% White, 6.21% Black or African American, 0.67% Native American, 26.15% Asian, 0.60% Pacific Islander, 3.29% from other races, and 6.13% from two or more races. 9.31% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 30,226 households, out of which 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.7% were married couples living together, 11.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.9% were non-families. 32.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 3.04.\nIn the city, the age distribution of the population shows 21.5% under the age of 18, 7.0% from 18 to 24, 33.6% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $56,285, and the median income for a family was $68,625. Males had a median income of $49,174 versus $40,165 for females. The per capita income for the city was $30,982. About 6.0% of families and 8.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.4% of those under age 18 and 6.1% of those age 65 or over.\nThere is a large Filipino community; and also a major Portuguese community, from which Tom Hanks' mother came and where Lyndsy Fonseca was raised for some time. Alameda also has a historic Japanese American community and had a small Japanese business district on a portion of Park Street before World War II, when the city's Japanese population was interned. A Japanese Buddhist church is one of the few remaining buildings left of Alameda's pre-war Japanese American community.\nPolitics.\nAccording to the California Secretary of State, as of February 10, 2019, Alameda has 48,609 registered voters. Of those, 27,323 (56.2%) are registered Democrats, 5,240 (10.8%) are registered Republicans, and 13,950 (28.7%) have declined to state a political party.\nTransportation.\nVehicle access to Alameda Island is via three bridges from Oakland (Park Street, Fruitvale Avenue, and High Street Bridges), as well as the two one-way Posey and Webster Street Tubes leading into Oakland's Chinatown. Connections from Alameda to Bay Farm Island are provided via the Bay Farm Island Bridge for vehicular traffic as well as the Bay Farm Island Bicycle Bridge (the only pedestrian/bicycle-only drawbridge in the United States). California State Route 61 runs down city streets from the Posey and Webster Street Tubes, across the Bay Farm Island Bridge, and south to the Oakland Airport. The island is just minutes off Interstate 880 in Oakland. The speed limit for the city is 25\u00a0mph (40\u00a0km/h) on almost every road.\nPublic transportation options include:\nAttractions.\nVictorian houses comprise 9% of all single-family houses (1,500) in Alameda and many more have been divided into two- to four-unit dwellings.\nDue to its proximity to the Bay, wind surfers and kite surfers can often be seen at Robert W. Crown Memorial State Beach. From the beach, there are also views of the San Francisco skyline and the San Francisco\u2013Oakland Bay Bridge.\nThe aircraft carrier , a museum ship, has been moored at the former Naval Air Station as the USS \"Hornet\" Museum since 1998. This ship was originally named the USS \"Kearsarge\", but was renamed in honor of the previous \"Hornet\" (CV-8) (famous for the Doolittle raid), which was lost in October 1942.\nAlameda was twice home to the official offices and training facility of the National Football League Oakland Raiders. First from 1966 until 1983 when the team moved to Los Angeles and the offices and training facility moved to El Segundo, California, and again from 1996 until 2020 when the team moved to Las Vegas and the offices and training facility moved to Henderson, Nevada.\nAt the turn of the 19th century, the city of Alameda took a large chunk of Charles Froling's land away to build a street. Froling had planned to build his dream house on the plot of land he received through inheritance. To spite the city and an unsympathetic neighbor, Froling built a house wide, long and high on the tiny strip of land left to him. The Froling spite house is still standing and occupied.\nThe Fourth of July parade is advertised as the second oldest and second-longest Fourth of July parade in the United States. It features homemade floats, classic cars, motorized living room furniture, fire-breathing dragons, and marching bands.\nThe Historic Park Street Business District has many buildings that date back to the 1800s and is a designated Historic Commercial District on the National Register. This main thoroughfare of downtown Alameda Is filled with local shops, restaurants, drinking establishments, and services. The renovated 1932 Alameda Theatre &amp; Cineplex is the cultural centerpiece of the commercial district.\nEconomy.\nAlameda Point.\nNaval Air Station Alameda (NAS) which was decommissioned in 1997, has been turned over to the City of Alameda for civilian development.\nAmerica's Cup.\nThe 33rd America's Cup Race was won by Golden Gate Yacht Club racing team BMW Oracle, founded by Larry Ellison. Possible use of the air station that was considered was to partner with San Francisco for 34th America's Cup.\nWithin 2 weeks of the Golden Gate Yacht Club winning the America's Cup, Alameda city council with local support sent a unanimous letter of support to hold AC 34 in San Francisco Bay Area. In early 2011, the City Council created an ad hoc America's Cup Citizens Advisory Committee to look for ways that Alameda could draw interest from teams and potential spectators. Through these efforts, the Swedish Artemis Racing team created their team based in one of the former air station hangars on Alameda Point, with a dock at Seaplane Lagoon.\nBeer, wine and spirits production.\nA cluster of artisan distilleries, wineries, breweries and tasting rooms along Monarch Street at Alameda Point is now referred to by the City of Alameda as \"Spirits Alley\". These business include Rock Wall Winery, Building 43 Winery, Hangar 1, St. George Spirits and Faction Brewing. In 2017, Admiral Maltings opened at Alameda Point. Designed to supply craft brewers and whisky producers, it is the first craft malting house in California.\nThe modern era of winemaking in Alameda begins in 1978 when Alameda veterinarian Kent Rosenblum and his wife Kathy founded Rosenblum Cellars. In 2008, the company was purchased by Diageo Estates for $105 million. In 2014, the Rosenblum tasting room at Alameda Point closed and moved to Jack London Square in Oakland. Shauna Rosenblum, daughter of Kent and Kathy, is the winemaker for Rock Wall Winery. In December 2007, St. George Absinthe Verte, produced by St. George Spirits became the first brand of American-made absinthe to be legally produced in the United States since a ban was enacted in 1912.\nAlameda Island Brewing is located on Park Street.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2016 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\nMedia.\nAlameda's first newspaper, the \"Encinal\", appeared in the early 1850s and the paper's editor was instrumental in the movement to incorporate the city. Following the \"Encinal\", several other papers appeared along geographic lines, and the \"Daily Argus\" eventually rose to prominence. A young Alameda native, Joseph R. Knowland, wrote political and historical articles for the Alameda papers. Later, Knowland owned the powerful \"Oakland Tribune\". Around 1900, the \"Daily Argus\" began to fade in importance and east and west papers \"The Times\" and \"The Star\" combined to take the leading role as the \"Alameda Times-Star\" in the 1930s. The \"Times-Star\" was sold to the Alameda Newspaper Group in the 1970s.\nIn 1997, the Hills Newspaper chain was bought by Knight Ridder, at the time, the second-largest newspaper chain in the U.S. Following the buyout, former Hills Newspapers employees recognized the lack of a local community voice in Alameda, and again formed a new locally based newspaper, the \"Alameda Sun\", in 2001. In 2006, Knight Ridder announced its impending sale to McClatchy Corp., a Sacramento-based publishing firm. McClatchy Corp. has put the \"Contra Costa Times\", which under the Knight-Ridder reorganization included all five of the original Hills Newspapers, up for sale. The current owners of the \"Alameda Times-Star\", Digital First Media, based in Colorado, have announced a strong interest in buying both the \"Contra Costa Times\" chain and the \"San Jose Mercury News\", consolidating the daily newspaper market of the East Bay, effectively under one owner. MediaNews closed the \"Times-Star\" in 2011.\nThe Alameda community is currently served by two weekly newspapers, the Alameda Journal, owned by the Digital First Media, and the Alameda Sun.\nServices.\nAlameda Free Library.\nAfter two previous failures, voters in the city passed a ballot measure in 2000 authorizing a bond measure for construction of a new main library to replace the city's Carnegie Library, damaged during the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake. The city also received state funds for the new main library and opened the doors to the new facility in November 2006.\nThere are three library locations: the Main Library in downtown Alameda and two library branches; the Bay Farm Island Library serving the Bay Farm and Harbor Bay communities and the West End Library serving the West End of Alameda.\nAlameda Hospital.\nFounded in 1894, Alameda Hospital is located at Clinton Avenue and Willow Street.\nAlameda Municipal Power.\nUnlike surrounding communities, Alameda has a municipal power service, Alameda Municipal Power (AMP), that delivers services directly to consumers. AMP sold the majority of its telecommunications business to Comcast in 2008 but continues to provide telecommunication service at Alameda Point.\nDuring the California electricity crisis of 2000 and 2001, Alameda Municipal Power did not raise electricity rates, while residents in most of the state endured significant price increases.\nArts and culture.\nThe Alameda Arts Council (AAC) serves as the local Alameda City arts council. The Alameda Civic Ballet is the ballet troupe of the city. The Alameda Museum features displays on the history of Alameda. The Alameda Art Association has about 80 members as of January 2011, and has a gallery space at South Shore Center mall. The Association began in 1944. An annual benefit, Circus for Arts in the Schools, was started by clown artist Jeff Raz in 2004. Photo-realist Robert Bechtle has painted numerous Alameda subjects, including \"Alameda Gran Torino\", which was acquired by SFMOMA in 1974 and remains one of Bechtle's most famous works.\nFilms shot in Alameda.\nAlameda has been home to many movie sets. Some of the movies filmed on the island have included \"Bicentennial Man\", \"The Net\", \"The Matrix Reloaded\", \"The Matrix Revolutions\", \"Bee Season\", the original 1968 \"Your, Mine and Ours\" and the movie musical \"Rent\". Parts of Alameda High School were animated for the \"Animatrix\" episode \"Kid's Story\". A massive hangar at the former Naval Air Station Alameda was used to film special scenes requiring computer-generated imagery for movies such as \"Bicentennial Man\", \"Flubber\", \"What Dreams May Come\", ' and many scenes from the \"Matrix\" trilogy, including the signature bullet time scene. The open space of the decommissioned naval base often hosts \"MythBusters more dangerous experiments. The movie \"Spirit Of '76\" was filmed all throughout Alameda.\nThe documentary, \"Shallow Waters: The Public Death of Raymond Zack\" was filmed at Alameda locations, and chronicled the 2011 Death of Raymond Zack on Crown Beach in Alameda. The film was screened in 2016 at the Michaan Auction House Theater in Alameda.\nThe USS \"Hornet\" Museum, permanently moored at Alameda Point, has been the site for scenes used in major theatrical releases: Pearl Harbor (2001), \"\", \"Rescue Dawn\", and \"The Master\". In addition, the aircraft carrier has been used for television shows such as \"JAG\", \"Carrier\", \"Looking\", \"The Great Escape\", and the special military episode of \"Fear Factor\"; plus a number of television commercials.\nTheaters.\nThe city restored the historic Art Deco city landmark Alameda Theatre, expanding it to include a theater multiplex. The public opening was May 21, 2008.\nThe Altarena Playhouse, which performs comedies, dramas, and musicals, was founded in 1938 and is the longest continuously operating community theater in the San Francisco Bay Area.\nRhythmix Cultural Works.\nRhythmix Cultural Works (RCW) brings people of all ages together to experience and explore music, dance, visual art, and educational opportunities. RCW's programs are housed in a restored industrial waterfront building that speaks to Alameda's history while creating an inclusive venue that reflects the Bay Area's rich diversity. The organization offers an array of arts programming to the community including Island Arts, Island City Waterways, Round the World Festival and its Performance Art and Learning program (PAL) that serves more than 2000 youth with free cultural arts assemblies each year.\nFestivals on Webster Street.\nWebster Street in Alameda has long been the host of many arts, crafts and holiday festivals. During some of these festivals, the Chamber of Commerce along with the West Alameda Business Association (WABA) will block off a portion of Webster St. for the entertainment of festival-goers. Festivals such as The Island JAM formerly known as the Peanut Butter Jam Festival bring a lot of local and outside visitors. Other events on the \"West End\" include Trick-or-Treat on Webster Street where merchants supply goodies for local children and culminate with a parade and costume contest; in December \"Santa Claus Meet-n-Greet on Webster Street\" happens with elves, and a photo with Santa Claus.\nFestivals on Park Street.\nThere are three major events when the street in Alameda's historic downtown district is closed to vehicular traffic. The \"Park Street Spring Festival\" takes place every May during the weekend of Mother's Day and attracts over 50,000 visitors. The \"Park Street Art &amp; Wine Faire\" takes place the last weekend of every July and attracts over 100,000 visitors. Both street fairs feature over 150 arts &amp; crafts vendors, food vendors, beer and wine pouring, a children's area, and two stages with regional entertainment. The \"Park Street Classic Car Show\" is held on the second Saturday every October and displays over 400 vintage vehicles.\nSand Castle and Sculpture Contest.\nThe annual Sand Castle and Sculpture Contest takes place in June at the Robert Crown Memorial State Beach. The first contest was held in 1967. Participants compete in three different categories: Ages 12 and Under, Ages 13 and Over and Family.\nEducation.\nPublic primary and secondary education in Alameda is the responsibility of the Alameda Unified School District, which is legally separate from the City of Alameda government (as is common throughout California). The College of Alameda, a two-year community college in the West End is part of the Peralta Community College District. The city has numerous private primary schools, and one private high school, St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, a Catholic school.\nSister cities.\nAlameda's relationships with Wuxi and Jiangyin were initiated in 2005, in part, by Stewart Chen, who then served on the City of Alameda Social Service and Human Relations board, and who went on to be elected to Alameda City Council in November, 2012.\nWuxi, China, is a so-called friendship city, because the diplomacy organization Sister Cities International does not recognize the relationship.\nControversy.\nIn September 2013, a Tibetan rights group initiated a social media and e-mail campaign targeting the Mayor of Alameda, complaining that City of Alameda's participation in, and association with, a flag-raising ceremony to recognize National Day of the People's Republic of China on October 1 was tantamount to endorsing the communist regime in China, its human rights abuses, and the occupation of Tibet. The City of Alameda responded that the ceremony was a function of the Alameda Sister City Association and the Alameda Wuxi Friendship Committee, not a function of the City of Alameda. The Tibetan rights group responded that on September 26, the City of Alameda Social Service and Human Relations board appointed a member, Michael Robles-Wong, as a representative to the Sister City Association.\nOn October 1, 2013, the Tibetan rights groupsTibetTruth and Bay Area Friends of Tibet sent roughly 75 protesters to Alameda City Hall to protest the ceremony, which organizers ultimately canceled before it began. Former City of Alameda Councilmember Frank Matarrese announced the cancellation. Then-city councilmember Stewart Chen subsequently defended the ceremony, as a diplomatic, not political, exercise."}
{"id": "3054", "revid": "31737083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3054", "title": "Alpha helix", "text": "The alpha helix (\u03b1-helix) is a common motif in the secondary structure of proteins and is a right hand-helix conformation in which every backbone N\u2212H group hydrogen bonds to the backbone C=O group of the amino acid located four residues earlier along the protein sequence.\nThe alpha helix is also called a classic Pauling\u2013Corey\u2013Branson \u03b1-helix. The name 3.613-helix is also used for this type of helix, denoting the average number of residues per helical turn, with 13 atoms being involved in the ring formed by the hydrogen bond.\nAmong types of local structure in proteins, the \u03b1-helix is the most extreme and the most predictable from sequence, as well as the most prevalent.\nDiscovery.\nIn the early 1930s, William Astbury showed that there were drastic changes in the X-ray fiber diffraction of moist wool or hair fibers upon significant stretching. The data suggested that the unstretched fibers had a coiled molecular structure with a characteristic repeat of \u2248.\nAstbury initially proposed a kinked-chain structure for the fibers. He later joined other researchers (notably the American chemist Maurice Huggins) in proposing that:\nAlthough incorrect in their details, Astbury's models of these forms were correct in essence and correspond to modern elements of secondary structure, the \u03b1-helix and the \u03b2-strand (Astbury's nomenclature was kept), which were developed by Linus Pauling, Robert Corey and Herman Branson in 1951 (see below); that paper showed both right- and left-handed helices, although in 1960 the crystal structure of myoglobin showed that the right-handed form is the common one. Hans Neurath was the first to show that Astbury's models could not be correct in detail, because they involved clashes of atoms. Neurath's paper and Astbury's data inspired H. S. Taylor, Maurice Huggins and Bragg and collaborators to propose models of keratin that somewhat resemble the modern \u03b1-helix.\nTwo key developments in the modeling of the modern \u03b1-helix were: the correct bond geometry, thanks to the crystal structure determinations of amino acids and peptides and Pauling's prediction of \"planar\" peptide bonds; and his relinquishing of the assumption of an integral number of residues per turn of the helix. The pivotal moment came in the early spring of 1948, when Pauling caught a cold and went to bed. Being bored, he drew a polypeptide chain of roughly correct dimensions on a strip of paper and folded it into a helix, being careful to maintain the planar peptide bonds. After a few attempts, he produced a model with physically plausible hydrogen bonds. Pauling then worked with Corey and Branson to confirm his model before publication. In 1954, Pauling was awarded his first Nobel Prize \"for his research into the nature of the chemical bond and its application to the elucidation of the structure of complex substances\" (such as proteins), prominently including the structure of the \u03b1-helix.\nStructure.\nGeometry and hydrogen bonding.\nThe amino acids in an \u03b1-helix are arranged in a right-handed helical structure where each amino acid residue corresponds to a 100\u00b0 turn in the helix (i.e., the helix has 3.6 residues per turn), and a translation of along the helical axis. Dunitz describes how Pauling's first article on the theme in fact shows a left-handed helix, the enantiomer of the true structure. Short pieces of left-handed helix sometimes occur with a large content of achiral glycine amino acids, but are unfavorable for the other normal, biological -amino acids. The pitch of the alpha-helix (the vertical distance between consecutive turns of the helix) is , which is the product of 1.5 and 3.6. What is most important is that the N-H group of an amino acid forms a hydrogen bond with the C=O group of the amino acid \"four\" residues earlier; this repeated \"i\"\u00a0+\u00a04 \u2192 \"i\" hydrogen bonding is the most prominent characteristic of an \u03b1-helix. Official international nomenclature specifies two ways of defining \u03b1-helices, rule 6.2 in terms of repeating \"\u03c6\", \"\u03c8\" torsion angles (see below) and rule 6.3 in terms of the combined pattern of pitch and hydrogen bonding. The \u03b1-helices can be identified in protein structure using several computational methods, one of which is DSSP (Define\u00a0Secondary Structure of Protein).\nSimilar structures include the 310 helix (\"i\"\u00a0+\u00a03 \u2192 \"i\" hydrogen bonding) and the \u03c0-helix (\"i\"\u00a0+\u00a05 \u2192 \"i\" hydrogen bonding). The \u03b1-helix can be described as a 3.613 helix, since the \"i\"\u00a0+\u00a04 spacing adds three more atoms to the H-bonded loop compared to the tighter 310 helix, and on average, 3.6 amino acids are involved in one ring of \u03b1-helix. The subscripts refer to the number of atoms (including the hydrogen) in the closed loop formed by the hydrogen bond.\nResidues in \u03b1-helices typically adopt backbone (\"\u03c6\",\u00a0\"\u03c8\") dihedral angles around (\u221260\u00b0,\u00a0\u221245\u00b0), as shown in the image at right. In more general terms, they adopt dihedral angles such that the \"\u03c8\" dihedral angle of one residue and the \"\u03c6\" dihedral angle of the \"next\" residue sum to roughly \u2212105\u00b0. As a consequence, \u03b1-helical dihedral angles, in general, fall on a diagonal stripe on the Ramachandran diagram (of slope \u22121), ranging from (\u221290\u00b0,\u00a0\u221215\u00b0) to (\u221235\u00b0,\u00a0\u221270\u00b0). For comparison, the sum of the dihedral angles for a 310 helix is roughly \u221275\u00b0, whereas that for the \u03c0-helix is roughly \u2212130\u00b0. The general formula for the rotation angle \"\u03a9\" per residue of any polypeptide helix with \"trans\" isomers is given by the equation\nThe \u03b1-helix is tightly packed; there is almost no free space within the helix. The amino-acid side-chains are on the outside of the helix, and point roughly \"downward\" (i.e., toward the N-terminus), like the branches of an evergreen tree (Christmas tree effect). This directionality is sometimes used in preliminary, low-resolution electron-density maps to determine the direction of the protein backbone.\nStability.\nHelices observed in proteins can range from four to over forty residues long, but a typical helix contains about ten amino acids (about three turns). In general, short polypeptides do not exhibit much \u03b1-helical structure in solution, since the entropic cost associated with the folding of the polypeptide chain is not compensated for by a sufficient amount of stabilizing interactions. In general, the backbone hydrogen bonds of \u03b1-helices are considered slightly weaker than those found in \u03b2-sheets, and are readily attacked by the ambient water molecules. However, in more hydrophobic environments such as the plasma membrane, or in the presence of co-solvents such as trifluoroethanol (TFE), or isolated from solvent in the gas phase, oligopeptides readily adopt stable \u03b1-helical structure. Furthermore, crosslinks can be incorporated into peptides to conformationally stabilize helical folds. Crosslinks stabilize the helical state by entropically destabilizing the unfolded state and by removing enthalpically stabilized \"decoy\" folds that compete with the fully helical state. It has been shown that \u03b1-helices are more stable, robust to mutations and designable than \u03b2-strands in natural proteins, and also in artificial designed proteins.\nExperimental determination.\nSince the \u03b1-helix is defined by its hydrogen bonds and backbone conformation, the most detailed experimental evidence for \u03b1-helical structure comes from atomic-resolution X-ray crystallography such as the example shown at right. It is clear that all the backbone carbonyl oxygens point downward (toward the C-terminus) but splay out slightly, and the H-bonds are approximately parallel to the helix axis. Protein structures from NMR spectroscopy also show helices well, with characteristic observations of nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) couplings between atoms on adjacent helical turns. In some cases, the individual hydrogen bonds can be observed directly as a small scalar coupling in NMR.\nThere are several lower-resolution methods for assigning general helical structure. The NMR chemical shifts (in particular of the C\u03b1, C\u03b2 and C\u2032) and residual dipolar couplings are often characteristic of helices. The far-UV (170\u2013250\u00a0nm) circular dichroism spectrum of helices is also idiosyncratic, exhibiting a pronounced double minimum at around 208 and 222\u00a0nm. Infrared spectroscopy is rarely used, since the \u03b1-helical spectrum resembles that of a random coil (although these might be discerned by, e.g., hydrogen-deuterium exchange). Finally, cryo electron microscopy is now capable of discerning individual \u03b1-helices within a protein, although their assignment to residues is still an active area of research.\nLong homopolymers of amino acids often form helices if soluble. Such long, isolated helices can also be detected by other methods, such as dielectric relaxation, flow birefringence, and measurements of the diffusion constant. In stricter terms, these methods detect only the characteristic prolate (long cigar-like) hydrodynamic shape of a helix, or its large dipole moment.\nAmino-acid propensities.\nDifferent amino-acid sequences have different propensities for forming \u03b1-helical structure. Methionine, alanine, leucine, glutamate, and lysine uncharged (\"MALEK\" in the amino-acid 1-letter codes) all have especially high helix-forming propensities, whereas proline and glycine have poor helix-forming propensities. Proline either breaks or kinks a helix, both because it cannot donate an amide hydrogen bond (having no amide hydrogen), and also because its sidechain interferes sterically with the backbone of the preceding turn inside a helix, this forces a bend of about 30\u00b0 in the helix's axis. However, proline is often seen as the \"first\" residue of a helix, it is presumed due to its structural rigidity. At the other extreme, glycine also tends to disrupt helices because its high conformational flexibility makes it entropically expensive to adopt the relatively constrained \u03b1-helical structure.\nTable of standard amino acid alpha-helical propensities.\nEstimated differences in free energy, \u0394(\u0394\"G\"), estimated in kcal/mol per residue in an \u03b1-helical configuration, relative to alanine arbitrarily set as zero. Higher numbers (more positive free energies) are less favoured. Significant deviations from these average numbers are possible, depending on the identities of the neighbouring residues.\nDipole moment.\nA helix has an overall dipole moment due to the aggregate effect of the individual microdipoles from the carbonyl groups of the peptide bond pointing along the helix axis. The effects of this macrodipole are a matter of some controversy. \u03b1-helices often occur with the N-terminal end bound by a negatively charged group, sometimes an amino acid side chain such as glutamate or aspartate, or sometimes a phosphate ion. Some regard the helix macrodipole as interacting electrostatically with such groups. Others feel that this is misleading and it is more realistic to say that the hydrogen bond potential of the free NH groups at the N-terminus of an \u03b1-helix can be satisfied by hydrogen bonding; this can also be regarded as set of interactions between local microdipoles such as .\nCoiled coils.\nCoiled-coil \u03b1 helices are highly stable forms in which two or more helices wrap around each other in a \"supercoil\" structure. Coiled coils contain a highly characteristic sequence motif known as a heptad repeat, in which the motif repeats itself every seven residues along the sequence (\"amino acid\" residues, not DNA base-pairs). The first and especially the fourth residues (known as the \"a\" and \"d\" positions) are almost always hydrophobic; the fourth residue is typically leucine this gives rise to the name of the structural motif called a \"leucine zipper\", which is a type of coiled-coil. These hydrophobic residues pack together in the interior of the helix bundle. In general, the fifth and seventh residues (the \"e\" and \"g\" positions) have opposing charges and form a salt bridge stabilized by electrostatic interactions. Fibrous proteins such as keratin or the \"stalks\" of myosin or kinesin often adopt coiled-coil structures, as do several dimerizing proteins. A pair of coiled-coils a four-helix bundle is a very common structural motif in proteins. For example, it occurs in human growth hormone and several varieties of cytochrome. The Rop protein, which promotes plasmid replication in bacteria, is an interesting case in which a single polypeptide forms a coiled-coil and two monomers assemble to form a four-helix bundle.\nFacial arrangements.\nThe amino acids that make up a particular helix can be plotted on a helical wheel, a representation that illustrates the orientations of the constituent amino acids (see the article for leucine zipper for such a diagram). Often in globular proteins, as well as in specialized structures such as coiled-coils and leucine zippers, an \u03b1-helix will exhibit two \"faces\" one containing predominantly hydrophobic amino acids oriented toward the interior of the protein, in the hydrophobic core, and one containing predominantly polar amino acids oriented toward the solvent-exposed surface of the protein.\nChanges in binding orientation also occur for facially-organized oligopeptides. This pattern is especially common in antimicrobial peptides, and many models have been devised to describe how this relates to their function. Common to many of them is that the hydrophobic face of the antimicrobial peptide forms pores in the plasma membrane after associating with the fatty chains at the membrane core.\nLarger-scale assemblies.\nMyoglobin and hemoglobin, the first two proteins whose structures were solved by X-ray crystallography, have very similar folds made up of about 70% \u03b1-helix, with the rest being non-repetitive regions, or \"loops\" that connect the helices. In classifying proteins by their dominant fold, the Structural Classification of Proteins database maintains a large category specifically for all-\u03b1 proteins.\nHemoglobin then has an even larger-scale quaternary structure, in which the functional oxygen-binding molecule is made up of four subunits.\nFunctional roles.\nDNA binding.\n\u03b1-Helices have particular significance in DNA binding motifs, including helix-turn-helix motifs, leucine zipper motifs and zinc finger motifs. This is because of the convenient structural fact that the diameter of an \u03b1-helix is about including an average set of sidechains, about the same as the width of the major groove in B-form DNA, and also because coiled-coil (or leucine zipper) dimers of helices can readily position a pair of interaction surfaces to contact the sort of symmetrical repeat common in double-helical DNA. An example of both aspects is the transcription factor Max (see image at left), which uses a helical coiled coil to dimerize, positioning another pair of helices for interaction in two successive turns of the DNA major groove.\nMembrane spanning.\n\u03b1-Helices are also the most common protein structure element that crosses biological membranes (transmembrane protein), it is presumed because the helical structure can satisfy all backbone hydrogen-bonds internally, leaving no polar groups exposed to the membrane if the sidechains are hydrophobic. Proteins are sometimes anchored by a single membrane-spanning helix, sometimes by a pair, and sometimes by a helix bundle, most classically consisting of seven helices arranged up-and-down in a ring such as for rhodopsins (see image at right) or for G protein\u2013coupled receptors (GPCRs).\nMechanical properties.\n\u03b1-Helices under axial tensile deformation, a characteristic loading condition that appears in many alpha-helix-rich filaments and tissues, results in a characteristic three-phase behavior of stiff-soft-stiff tangent modulus. Phase I corresponds to the small-deformation regime during which the helix is stretched homogeneously, followed by phase II, in which alpha-helical turns break mediated by the rupture of groups of H-bonds. Phase III is typically associated with large-deformation covalent bond stretching.\nDynamical features.\nAlpha-helices in proteins may have low-frequency accordion-like motion as observed by the Raman spectroscopy and analyzed via the quasi-continuum model. Helices not stabilized by tertiary interactions show dynamic behavior, which can be mainly attributed to helix fraying from the ends.\nHelix\u2013coil transition.\nHomopolymers of amino acids (such as polylysine) can adopt \u03b1-helical structure at low temperature that is \"melted out\" at high temperatures. This helix\u2013coil transition was once thought to be analogous to protein denaturation. The statistical mechanics of this transition can be modeled using an elegant transfer matrix method, characterized by two parameters: the propensity to initiate a helix and the propensity to extend a helix.\nIn art.\nAt least five artists have made explicit reference to the \u03b1-helix in their work: Julie Newdoll in painting and Julian Voss-Andreae, Bathsheba Grossman, Byron Rubin, and Mike Tyka in sculpture.\nSan Francisco area artist Julie Newdoll, who holds a degree in Microbiology with a minor in art, has specialized in paintings inspired by microscopic images and molecules since 1990. Her painting \"Rise of the Alpha Helix\" (2003) features human figures arranged in an \u03b1 helical arrangement. According to the artist, \"the flowers reflect the various types of sidechains that each amino acid holds out to the world\". This same metaphor is also echoed from the scientist's side: \"\u03b2 sheets do not show a stiff repetitious regularity but flow in graceful, twisting curves, and even the \u03b1-helix is regular more in the manner of a flower stem, whose branching nodes show the influence of environment, developmental history, and the evolution of each part to match its own idiosyncratic function.\"\nJulian Voss-Andreae is a German-born sculptor with degrees in experimental physics and sculpture. Since 2001 Voss-Andreae creates \"protein sculptures\" based on protein structure with the \u03b1-helix being one of his preferred objects. Voss-Andreae has made \u03b1-helix sculptures from diverse materials including bamboo and whole trees. A monument Voss-Andreae created in 2004 to celebrate the memory of Linus Pauling, the discoverer of the \u03b1-helix, is fashioned from a large steel beam rearranged in the structure of the \u03b1-helix. The , bright-red sculpture stands in front of Pauling's childhood home in Portland, Oregon.\nRibbon diagrams of \u03b1-helices are a prominent element in the laser-etched crystal sculptures of protein structures created by artist Bathsheba Grossman, such as those of insulin, hemoglobin, and DNA polymerase. Byron Rubin is a former protein crystallographer now professional sculptor in metal of proteins, nucleic acids, and drug molecules many of which featuring \u03b1-helices, such as subtilisin, human growth hormone, and phospholipase A2.\nMike Tyka is a computational biochemist at the University of Washington working with David Baker. Tyka has been making sculptures of protein molecules since 2010 from copper and steel, including ubiquitin and a potassium channel tetramer."}
{"id": "3055", "revid": "12332712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3055", "title": "Accrington", "text": "Accrington is a town in the Hyndburn borough of Lancashire, England. It lies about east of Blackburn, west of Burnley, east of Preston, north of Manchester city centre and is situated on the mostly culverted River Hyndburn. Commonly abbreviated by locals to \"Accy\", the town has a population of 35,456 according to the 2011 census.\nAccrington is a former centre of the cotton and textile machinery industries. The town is famed for manufacturing the hardest and densest building bricks in the world, \"The Accrington NORI\" (iron), which were used in the construction of the Empire State Building and for the foundations of Blackpool Tower; famous for Accrington Stanley F.C. and the Haworth Art Gallery which holds Europe's largest collection of Tiffany glass.\nHistory.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe name Accrington appears to be Anglo-Saxon in origin. In the records it variously appears as \"Akarinton\" in 1194; \"Akerunton\", \"Akerinton\" and \"Akerynton\" in 1258; \"Acrinton\" in 1292; \"Ackryngton\" in 1311 and \"Acryngton\" in 1324.\nThe name may mean \"acorn farmstead\" from Anglo-Saxon \"\u00e6cern\" meaning \"acorn\" and \"tun\" meaning \"farmstead\" or \"village\". The southern part of Accrington, the township of New Accrington, was formerly in the Forest of Blackburnshire and the presence of oak trees may be inferred from local place names like Broad Oak and Oak Hill. The products of oak trees were once an important food for swine and a farmstead may have been named for such produce. Anglo-Saxon \"\u00c6cerntun\" might become Middle English \"Akerenton\", \"Akerinton\" and the like. Also worth considering is that in the Lancashire dialect \"acorn\" was \"akran\".\nThere is no known Old English personal name from which the first element can be derived. But if the Frisian names \"Akkrum\", \"Akkeringa\" and Dutch name \"Akkerghem\", are derived from the personal name \"Akker\" there may be a corresponding Old English name from which \"Accrington\" may be derived.\nEarly history.\nAccrington covers two townships which were established in 1507 following disafforestation; those of Old Accrington and New Accrington which were merged in 1878 with the incorporation of the borough council. There have been settlements there since the medieval period, likely in the Grange Lane and Black Abbey area, and the King's Highway which passes above the town was at one time used by the kings and queens of England when they used the area for hunting when the Forest of Accrington was one of the four forests of the hundred of Blackburnshire.\nRobert de Lacy gave the manor of Accrington to the monks of Kirkstall in the 12th century. The monks built a grange there; removing the inhabitants to make room for it. The locals got their revenge by setting fire to the new building, destroying its contents and in the process killing the three lay brothers who occupied it. An area of the town is named 'Black Abbey', a possible reference to the murders. Regardless of whatever happened, Accrington did not remain under monastic control for long before reverting to the de Lacys.\nIt is thought the monks of Kirkstall may have built a small chapel there during their tenure for the convenience of those in charge residing there and their tenants, but the records are uncertain. What is known is that there was a chapel in Accrington prior to 1553 where the vicar of Whalley was responsible for the maintenance of divine worship. However it did not have its own minister and it was served, when at all, by the curate of one of the adjacent chapels. In 1717 Accrington was served by the curate of Church, who preached there only once a month. St. James's Church was built in 1763, replacing the old chapel however it did not achieve parochial status until as late as 1870.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nUntil around 1830, visitors considered Accrington to be just a \"considerable village\". The Industrial Revolution, however, resulted in large changes and Accrington's location on the confluence of a number of streams made it attractive to industry and a number of mills were built in the town in the mid-18th century. Further industrialisation then followed in the late-18th century and local landowners began building mansions in the area on the outskirts of the settlement where their mills were located while their employees lived in overcrowded unsanitary conditions in the centre.\nIndustrialisation resulted in rapid population growth during the 19th century, as people moved from over North West England to Accrington, with the population increasing from 3,266 in 1811 to 10,376 in 1851 to 43,211 in 1901 to its peak in 1911 at 45,029.\nThis fast population growth and slow response from the established church allowed non-conformism to flourish in the town. By the mid-19th century, there were Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, United Free Methodist, Congregationalist, Baptist, Swedenborgian, Unitarian, Roman Catholic and Catholic Apostolic churches in the town. The Swedenborgian church was so grand that it was considered to be the \u2018Cathedral' of that denomination.\nFor many decades the textiles industry, the engineering industry and coal mining were the central activities of the town. Cotton mills and dye works provided work for the inhabitants, but often in very difficult conditions. There was regular conflict with employers over wages and working conditions. On 24 April 1826 over 1,000 men and women, many armed, gathered at Whinney Hill in Clayton-le-Moors to listen to a speaker from where they marched on Sykes's Mill at Higher Grange Lane, near the site of the modern police station and magistrates' courts, and smashed over 60 looms. These riots spread from Accrington through Oswaldtwistle, Blackburn, Darwen, Rossendale, Bury and Chorley. In the end after three days of riots 1,139 looms were destroyed, 4 rioters and 2 bystanders shot dead by the authorities in Rossendale and 41 rioters sentenced to death (all of whose sentences were commuted).\nIn the 1842 'plug riots' a general strike spread from town to town due to conditions in the town. In a population of 9,000 people as few as 100 were fully employed. From 15 August 1842 the situation boiled over and bands of men entered the mills which were running and stopped the machinery by knocking out the boiler plugs. This allowed the water and steam to escape shutting down the mill machinery. Thousands of strikers walked over the hills from one town to another to persuade people to join the strike in civil disturbances that lasted about a week. The strike was associated with the Chartist movement but eventually proved unsuccessful in its aims.\nIn the early 1860s the Lancashire cotton famine badly affected Accrington, although less so than the wider area due to its more diverse economy, with as many as half of the town's mill employees out of work at one time.\nConditions were such that a Local Board of Health was constituted in 1853 and the town itself incorporated in 1878 allowing the enforcement of local laws to improve the town.\nAccrington Pals.\nOne well-known association the town has is with the 'Accrington Pals', the nickname given to the smallest home town battalion of volunteers formed to fight in the First World War. The Pals battalions were a peculiarity of the 1914-18 war: Lord Kitchener, the Secretary of State for War, believed that it would help recruitment if friends and work-mates from the same town were able to join up and fight together. Strictly speaking, the 'Accrington Pals' battalion is properly known as the '11th East Lancashire Regiment': the nickname is a little misleading, since of the four 250-strong companies that made up the original battalion only one was composed of men from Accrington. The rest volunteered from other east Lancashire towns such as Burnley, Blackburn and Chorley.\nThe Pals' first day of action, 1 July 1916, took place in Serre, near Montauban in the north of France. It was part of the 'Big Push' (later known as the Battle of the Somme) that was intended to force the German Army into a retreat from the Western Front, a line they had held since late 1914. The German defences in Serre were supposed to have been obliterated by sustained, heavy, British shelling during the preceding week; however, as the battalion advanced it met with fierce resistance. 235 men were killed and a further 350 wounded \u2014 more than half of the battalion \u2014 within half an hour. Similarly desperate losses were suffered elsewhere on the front, in a disastrous day for the British Army (approximately 19,000 British soldiers were killed in a single day).\nLater in the year, the East Lancashire Regiment was rebuilt with new volunteers \u2014 in all, 865 Accrington men were killed during World War I. All of these names are recorded on a war memorial, an imposing white stone cenotaph, which stands in Oak Hill Park in the south of the town. The cenotaph also lists the names of 173 local fatalities from World War II. The trenches from which the Accrington Pals advanced on 1 July 1916 are still visible in John Copse west of the village of Serre, and there is a memorial there made of Accrington brick.\nAfter the war and until 1986, Accrington Corporation buses were painted in the regimental colours of red and blue with gold lining. The mudguards were painted black as a sign of mourning. The current Mayor of Accrington is Lance Sergeant Gary Archer of the Scots Guards.\nDemography.\nThe 2001 census gave the population of Accrington town as 35,200. The figure for the urban area was 71,220, increased from 70,442 in 1991. This total includes Accrington, Church, Clayton-le-Moors, Great Harwood and Oswaldtwistle. For comparison purposes that is approximately the same size as Aylesbury, Carlisle and Guildford urban areas.\nThe 2011 census gave a population of 35,456 for the Accrington built-up area subdivision (which includes Huncoat, Baxenden and Rising Bridge in Rossendale) and a population of 125,000 for the wider Accrington/Rossendale Built-up area. The area in 2001 was listed as , whereas in 2011 it was .\nThe borough of Hyndburn as a whole has a population of 80,734. This includes Accrington Urban Area and other outlying towns and villages such as; Altham, Rishton, part of Belthorn, and Knuzden and Whitebirk (considered suburbs of Blackburn).\nEconomy.\nFormerly cotton and textile machinery were important industries in the town. NORIs, a type of iron hard engineering brick, were produced nearby in Huncoat which was closed in 2013, but later reopened in 2015. Mills and factories are Accrington's past but there a few factories and garages which now occupy the old buildings.\nAccrington power station was a coal and refuse fired electricity generating station located in Argyle Street adjacent to the gasworks. It supplied electricity to Accrington, Haslingden and the Altham and Clayton-le-Moors areas between 1900 and 1958.\nRegeneration and investment.\nThe council has a regeneration plan in place, which will, according to the council, boost the local economy. The plan is to upgrade many old shops and to build a bus station. A memorial for the Accrington Pals may be built outside the town hall.\nThe Hyndburn Borough Council plans to spend \u00a310 million to refurbish the town centre, which includes:\nHalf of Blackburn Road is being refurbished and is now being made into a more attractive shopping street, upgrading shops, adding more trees, and repaving the pavements.\nAs of 2014, two new phases were being built: the first one called the Acorn Park, where new houses were being built with balconies and greener spaces, and Project Phoenix, which will also include new housing.\nGeography.\nAccrington is a hill town located at the western edge of the Pennines within a bowl and largely encircled by surrounding hills to heights of 300-400m. The Hyndburn or Accrington Brook flows through the centre of the town. Hill settlements origins were as the economic foci of the district engaging in the spinning and weaving of woolen cloth. Wool, lead and coal were other local industries.\nGeographical coordinates: 53\u00b0 46' 0\" North, 2\u00b0 21' 0\" West. Height above sea level: there is a spot height outside the Market Hall which is 133.5m; the bench mark on the side of the neighbouring Town Hall is 441.10 feet. The highest height in the town is 320m which is in Baxenden and the lowest is the town hall which is at 132.5m. most of the town is around 200m.\nTransport.\nThe town has strong local travel links as Accrington railway station lies on the East Lancashire Line serving trains running locally and trains running from Blackpool to York. However, recent changes to the train timetables have been a disservice to Accrington, increasing the journey time to Preston (a vital link to London or Scotland) by up to 1.5 hours. However, there are still buses to Manchester every thirty minutes as well as more frequent services to other towns in east Lancashire. The main road running through the town centre is the A680 running from Rochdale to Whalley. The town is served by junction seven of the M65 and is linked from the A680 and the A56 dual carriageway which briefly merge; linking to the M66 motorway heading towards Manchester. The closest airports are Manchester Airport at , Blackpool Airport at and Leeds Bradford Airport at .\nThere was once a rail link south to Manchester via Haslingden and Bury, but this was closed in the 1960s as part of cuts following the Beeching Report. The trackbed from Accrington to Baxenden is now a linear treelined cycleway/footpath. A train service to Manchester via the Todmorden Curve opened in 2015. A new bus station is being built in Accrington too.\nBus operator Pilkington Bus are based in Accrington, and Holmeswood Coaches, Rosso and Transdev Blazefield subsidiaries Blackburn Bus Company and Burnley Bus Company also provide bus services in the town; routes serve places such as Blackburn, Oswaldtwistle, Rishton, Burnley and Clitheroe. However M&amp;M Coaches ceased business suddenly on 21 September 2016\nPublic services.\nAccrington Library, on St James Street, is a Carnegie library that opened in 1908. It is noted for its stained glass window designed by Gustav Hiller and as a place of inspiration for the young Jeanette Winterson.\nNear the Tesco supermarket, there is Accrington Skate Park which is popular during the school holidays. On Broadway, Accrington Police Station serves the Borough of Hyndburn. In April 2003, Hyndburn Community Fire Station opened, also serving the Borough of Hyndburn.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe town is served by the Lancashire Constabulary Police station on Broadway after moving into town from its previous location on Manchester Road as an effort to save money due to rising expenses and decreasing funding by the government. Crime is very low in Accrington compared to nearby towns.\nPolicing of the Railway station and railway-owned properties is served by the British Transport Police, nearest post in Preston.\nSocial.\nGovernance.\nAccrington is represented in parliament as a part of the constituency of Hyndburn. The constituency boundaries do not align exactly with those of the district of the same name.\nAccrington was first represented nationally after the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 after the 1885 general election by Accrington (UK Parliament constituency). This seat was abolished in the 1983 general election and replaced with the present constituency of Hyndburn (UK Parliament constituency).\nAccrington became incorporated as a municipal borough in 1878. Under the Local Government Act 1972, since 1974, the town has formed part of the larger Borough of Hyndburn including the former Urban Districts of Oswaldtwistle, Church, Clayton-le-Moors, Great Harwood and Rishton.\nHyndburn consists of 16 wards, electing a total of 35 councillors. Due to its size Accrington is represented by a number of wards in the Borough of Hyndburn. The town largely consists of the Milnshaw, Peel, Central, Barnfield and Spring Hill wards, although some parts of those wards are in other towns in the borough.\nHealth.\nThe local hospital is Accrington Victoria Hospital however, as it only deals with minor issues, Accident and Emergency is provided by the Royal Blackburn Hospital. Other services are provided at the Accrington Pals Primary Health Care Centre and the Accrington Acorn Primary Health Care Centre.\nMedia.\nThe chief publications in the area are the weekly \"Accrington Observer\", part of MEN media, and the \"Lancashire Telegraph\". Accrington Observer is currently stationed within the Market Hall.\nSpecial events.\nA Ron Hill 10K marathon happens every year at the end of March or start of April and is named for the local Olympic runner for Britain Ron Hill. The marathon goes around town and through the local countrysides, and is organised by the council and local businesses. There is also an annual 1K family run which began in 2014. In 2015 more than five hundred runners ran in the race. Their also a race held by the local rotary around August time.\nSport.\nFootball team.\nAccrington Stanley F.C., entered the Football League in 1921 with the formation of the old Third Division (North); after haunting the lower reaches of English football for forty years, they eventually resigned from the League in 1962, due to financial problems, and folded in 1965. The club was reformed three years later and then worked its way through the non-league divisions to reach the Nationwide Conference in 2003. In the 2005\u201306 season, Stanley, after winning against Woking with three matches to spare, secured a place back in the Football League and the town celebrated with a small parade and honours placed on senior executives of the team. One of the teams relegated\u2014and thus being replaced by Stanley\u2014were Oxford United, who were voted into the Football League to replace the previous Accrington Stanley. The football stadium is called the Crown Ground. Until the 2012\u201313 season, when Fleetwood Town entered the league, Accrington was the smallest town in England and Wales with a Football League club.\nAccrington Stanley Football Club has had its own pub in the town, the Crown, since July 2007.\nTeam history.\nAn earlier club, Accrington F.C., were one of the twelve founder members of the Football League in 1888. However, their time in league football was even less successful and considerably briefer than that of Accrington Stanley: they dropped out of the league in 1893 and folded shortly afterwards due to financial problems. The town of Accrington thus has the unique \"distinction\" of having lost two separate clubs from league football. They are currently placed in EFL League One after winning the EFL League Two title in the 2017/18 season.\nCricket.\nAccrington Cricket Club plays at Thorneyholme Road in the Lancashire League. Cricket is also played in parks. Schools nearby have shown major interest in cricket and have held cricket training and tournaments.\nGolf.\nAccrington has a golf course.\nOther sports.\nThere are many gyms in the town and the council has held fitness classes for the women and old people. There are two sports centres, the main one being the Hyndburn Sports Centre, which recently renovated their swimming pool area and is situated near Lidl.\nEducation.\nAccrington has the following primary schools:\nThe secondary schools serving Accrington are:\nThe college in the town centre is Accrington and Rossendale College; nearby universities include University Centre at Blackburn College, and the University of Central Lancashire in Preston.\nLandmarks.\nThe Haworth Art Gallery was previously a mansion named as Hollins Hill Mansion. The museum houses a collection of Tiffany glassware presented to the town by Joseph Briggs, an Accrington man who had joined Tiffany's in the late 19th century and eventually became art director and assistant manager. It is situated in Haworth Park on Manchester Road.\nThe Viaduct is a bridge which has a railway line on it, it goes through the town and has many storage units and shop on sale by National Rail. The Viaduct ends at the Accrington Eco Station.\nAccrington Town Hall was built in memory of Sir Robert Peel and opened as the Peel Institute in 1858; it is also listed.\nThe Arcade is a Victorian shopping Centre with about 10-15 outlets and has many restaurants there. It is on Church street near the town hall. The arcade has hardware shops and shops like Argos. There are some restaurants in there too. Sadly most outlets are closing since the year 2013. In 2016, there was a revamp of the Arcade which saw specialist shops such as Darts, Vinyl and Knitted Wear added into the Arcade. \nOakhill Park is a large and old park with a sceneric view of Accrington. It has won many awards such as the best park in Lancashire. It has also been awarded an Eco Award. The Haworth Art Gallery is in the park. It is on Manchester Road.\nPeel Park is a park in Accrington which was opened by William Peel on 29 September 1909. The Coppice is a hill within the park, and provides a 2.2 mile scenic walk around the park. There was a centenary celebration marking 100 years from the Coppice being handed over to the people of Accrington on 26 September 2009. There was also a refurbishment of the paths and monument at the top of the Coppice at this time. Since then there has been several revamps to the Playground area of the park."}
{"id": "3057", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3057", "title": "April, May and June Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "3058", "revid": "41106093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3058", "title": "Armageddon", "text": "According to the Book of Revelation in the New Testament of the Christian Bible, Armageddon (, from \"Harmaged\u014dn\", Late Latin: , from Hebrew: \"Har M\u0259g\u012bdd\u014d\") is the prophesied location of a gathering of armies for a battle during the end times, which is variously interpreted as either a literal or a symbolic location. The term is also used in a generic sense to refer to any end of the world scenario. In Islamic theology, the Armageddon is also mentioned in Hadith as the Greatest Armageddon or Al-Malhama Al-Kubra (the great battle).\nThe \"mount\" of Megiddo in northern Israel is not actually a mountain, but a tell (a mound or hill created by many generations of people living and rebuilding on the same spot) on which ancient forts were built to guard the Via Maris, an ancient trade route linking Egypt with the northern empires of Syria, Anatolia and Mesopotamia. Megiddo was the location of various ancient battles, including one in the 15th century BC and one in 609 BC. The nearby modern Megiddo is a kibbutz in the Kishon River area.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Armageddon\" appears only once in the Greek New Testament, in . The word is a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew \"har m\u0259gidd\u00f4\" (). \"Har\" means \"a mountain or range of hills\". This is a shortened form of \"harar\" meaning \"to loom up; a mountain\". \"Megiddo\" refers to a fortification made by King Ahab that dominated the Plain of Jezreel. Its name means \"place of crowds\".\nChristianity.\nMegiddo is mentioned twelve times in the Old Testament, ten times in reference to the ancient city of Megiddo, and twice with reference to \"the plain of Megiddo\", most probably simply meaning \"the plain next to the city\". None of these Old Testament passages describes the city of Megiddo as being associated with any particular prophetic beliefs. The one New Testament reference to the city of Armageddon found in also makes no specific mention of any armies being predicted to one day gather in this city, but instead seems to predict only that \"they (will gather) the kings together to... Armageddon\". The text does however seem to imply, based on the text from the earlier passage of Revelation 16:14, that the purpose of this gathering of kings in the \"place called Armageddon\" is \"for the war of the great day of God, the Almighty.\" Because of the seemingly highly symbolic and even cryptic language of this one New Testament passage, some Christian scholars conclude that Mount Armageddon must be an idealized location. R. J. Rushdoony says, \"There are no mountains of Megiddo, only the Plains of Megiddo. This is a deliberate destruction of the vision of any literal reference to the place.\" Other scholars, including C. C. Torrey, Kline and Jordan argue that the word is derived from the Hebrew \"moed\" (), meaning \"assembly\".\u00a0 Thus, \"Armageddon\" would mean \"Mountain of Assembly,\" which Jordan says is \"a reference to the assembly at Mount Sinai, and to its replacement, Mount Zion.\"\nMost traditions interpret this Bible prophecy to be symbolic of the progression of the world toward the \"great day of God, the Almighty\" in which God pours out his just and holy wrath against unrepentant sinners, led by Satan, in a literal end-of-the-world final confrontation. Armageddon is the symbolic name given to this event based on scripture references regarding divine obliteration of God's enemies. The hermeneutical method supports this position by referencing Judges 4 and 5 where God miraculously destroys the enemy of their elect, Israel, at Megiddo.\nChristian scholar William Hendriksen writes:\nDispensationalism.\nIn his discussion of Armageddon, J. Dwight Pentecost has devoted a chapter to the subject, \"The Campaign of Armageddon\", in which he discusses it as a campaign and not a specific battle, which will be fought in the Middle East. Pentecost writes:\nPentecost then discusses the location of this campaign, and mentions the \"hill of Megiddo\" and other geographic locations such as \"the valley of Jehoshaphat\" and \"the valley of the passengers\", \"Lord coming from Edom or Idumea, south of Jerusalem, when he returns from the judgment\"; and Jerusalem itself.\nPentecost further describes the area involved:\nPentecost then outlines the biblical time period for this campaign to occur and with further arguments concludes that it must take place with the 70th week of Daniel. The invasion of Israel by the Northern Confederacy \"will bring the Beast and his armies to the defense of Israel as her protector\". He then uses Daniel to further clarify his thinking: (Dan. 11:40b-45).\nAgain, events are listed by Pentecost in his book:\nAfter the destruction of the Beast at the Second Coming of Jesus, the promised Kingdom is set up, in which Jesus and the saints will rule for a thousand years. Satan is then loosed \"for a season\" and goes out to deceive the nations, specifically, Gog and Magog. The army mentioned attacks the saints in the New Jerusalem, they are defeated by a judgment of fire coming down from heaven, and then comes the Great White Throne judgment, which includes all of those through the ages and these are cast into the Lake of Fire, which event is also known as the \"second death\" and Gehenna, not to be confused with Hell, which is Satan's domain. Pentecost describes this as follows:\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that Armageddon is the means by which God will fulfill his purpose for the Earth to be populated with happy healthy humans who will be free from sin and death. They teach that the armies of heaven will eradicate all who oppose the Kingdom of God, wiping out all wicked humans on Earth, only leaving righteous mankind.\nThey believe that the gathering of all of the nations of the earth refers to the uniting of the world's political powers, as a gradual process which began in 1914 and was later seen in manifestations such as the League of Nations and the United Nations following the First and Second World Wars. These political powers are said to be influenced by Satan and his demons in opposition to God's kingdom. Babylon the Great is interpreted as being the world empire of false religions, and it will be destroyed by the beast just prior to Armageddon. Witnesses believe that after all other religions have been destroyed, the governments of the world will begin persecuting Witnesses, and God will then intervene, precipitating Armageddon.\nJehovah's Witnesses teach that the armies of heaven, led by Jesus, will then destroy all forms of human government and then Jesus, along with a selected 144,000 humans, will rule Earth for 1,000 years. They believe that Satan and his demons will be bound for that period, unable to influence mankind. After the 1,000 years are ended, and the second resurrection has taken place, Satan is released and allowed to tempt the perfect human race one last time. Those who follow Satan will be destroyed, along with him, leaving the earth, and humankind at peace with God forever, free from sin and death.\nThe religion's current teaching on Armageddon originated in 1925 with former Watch Tower Society president J. F. Rutherford, who based his interpretations on passages that are found in the books of Exodus, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Psalms as well as additional passages that are found in the books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles. The doctrine marked a further break from the teachings of the Watch Tower Society's founder Charles Taze Russell, who for decades had taught that the final war would be an anarchistic struggle for domination on earth. Tony Wills, the author of a historical study of Jehovah's Witnesses, wrote that Rutherford seemed to relish his descriptions of how completely the wicked would be destroyed at Armageddon, dwelling at great length on prophecies of destruction. He stated that towards the close of his ministry, Rutherford allocated about half the space that was available in \"The Watchtower\" magazines to discussions about Armageddon.\nSeventh-day Adventist.\nThe teachings of the Seventh-day Adventist Church state that the terms \"Armageddon\", \"Day of the Lord\" and \"The Second Coming of Christ\" all describe the same event. Seventh-day Adventists further teach that the current religious movements taking place in the world are setting the stage for Armageddon, and they are concerned by an anticipated unity between spiritualism, American Protestantism and Roman Catholicism. A further significant difference in Seventh-day Adventist theology is the teaching that the events of Armageddon will leave the earth desolate for the duration of the millennium. They teach that the righteous will be taken to heaven while the rest of humanity will be destroyed, leaving Satan with no one to tempt and effectively \"bound.\" The final re-creation of a \"new heaven and a new earth.\" then follows the millennium.\nChristadelphians.\nFor Christadelphians, Armageddon marks the \"great climax of history when the nations would be gathered together 'into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon', and the judgment on them would herald the setting up of the Kingdom of God.\" \nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nFrom Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed literature, a number of interpretations of the expectations surrounding the Battle of Armageddon may be inferred, three of them being associated with events surrounding the World Wars.\nThe first interpretation deals with a series of tablets written by Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, to be sent to various kings and rulers. The second, and best-known one, relates to events near the end of World War I involving General Allenby and the Battle of Megiddo (1918) wherein World Powers are said to have drawn soldiers from many parts of the world to engage in battle at Megiddo. In winning this battle Allenby also prevented the Ottomans from killing 'Abdu'l-Baha, then head of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, whom they had intended to crucify. A third interpretation reviews the overall progress of the World Wars, and the situation in the world before and after."}
{"id": "3059", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3059", "title": "AMD Athlon", "text": ""}
{"id": "3060", "revid": "1009561811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3060", "title": "Athlon", "text": "Athlon is the brand name applied to a series of x86-compatible microprocessors designed and manufactured by Advanced Micro Devices (AMD). The original Athlon (now called Athlon Classic) was the first seventh-generation x86 processor and was the first desktop processor to reach speeds of one gigahertz (GHz). It made its debut as AMD's high-end processor brand on June 23, 1999. Over the years AMD has used the Athlon name with the 64-bit Athlon 64 architecture, the Athlon II, and Accelerated Processing Unit (APU) chips targeting the Socket AM1 desktop SoC architecture, and Socket AM4 Zen microarchitecture. The modern Zen-based Athlon with a Radeon Graphics processor was introduced in 2019 as AMD's highest-performance entry-level processor.\nAthlon comes from the Ancient Greek (\"athlon\") meaning \"(sport) contest\", or \"prize of a contest\", or \"place of a contest; arena\". With the Athlon name originally used for AMD's mid-range processors with combined CPU/GPU processors with the GPU disabled, AMD currently uses Athlon for budget APUs with integrated graphics. AMD positions the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0against its rival, the Intel Pentium.\nBrand history.\nK7 design and development.\nThe first\u00a0Athlon\u00a0processor was a result of AMD's development of K7 processors in the 1990s. AMD founder and then-CEO Jerry Sanders aggressively pursued strategic partnerships and engineering talent in the late 1990s, working to build on earlier successes in the PC market with the AMD K6 processor line. One major partnership announced in 1998 paired AMD with semiconductor giant Motorola to co-develop copper-based semiconductor technology, resulting in the K7 project being the first commercial processor to utilize copper fabrication technology. In the announcement, Sanders referred to the partnership as creating a \"virtual gorilla\" that would enable AMD to compete with Intel on fabrication capacity while limiting AMD's financial outlay for new facilities. The K7 design team was led by Dirk Meyer, who had previously worked as a lead engineer at DEC on multiple Alpha microprocessors. When DEC was sold to Compaq in 1998 and discontinued Alpha processor development, and Sanders brought most of the Alpha design team to the K7 project. This added to the previously acquired NexGen K6 team, which already included engineers such as Vinod Dham.\nOriginal release.\nThe AMD\u00a0Athlon\u00a0processor launched on June 23, 1999, with general availability by August 1999. Subsequently, from August 1999 until January 2002, this initial K7 processor was the fastest x86 chip in the world. Wrote the \"Los Angeles Times\" on October 5, 1999, \"AMD has historically trailed Intel\u2019s fastest processors, but has overtaken the industry leader with the new\u00a0Athlon. Analysts say the\u00a0Athlon, which will be used by Compaq Computer, IBM and other manufacturers in their most powerful PCs, is significantly faster than Intel\u2019s flagship Pentium III, which runs at a top speed of 600MHz.\" A number of features helped the chips compete with Intel. By working with Motorola, AMD had been able to refine copper interconnect manufacturing about one year before Intel, with the revised process permitting 180-nanometer processor production. The accompanying die-shrink resulted in lower power consumption, permitting AMD to increase\u00a0Athlon\u00a0clock speeds to the 1\u00a0GHz range. The\u00a0Athlon\u00a0architecture also used the EV6 bus licensed from DEC as its main system bus, allowing AMD to develop its own products without needing to license Intel's GTL+ bus. By the summer of 2000, AMD was shipping\u00a0Athlons\u00a0at high volume and the chips were being used in systems by Gateway, Hewlett-Packard, and Fujitsu Siemens Computers among others.\nLater\u00a0Athlon\u00a0iterations.\nThe second generation\u00a0Athlon, the Thunderbird, debuted in 2000. AMD released the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP the following year, and the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP's immediate successor, the Athlon\u00a064, was an AMD64-architecture microprocessor released in 2003. While the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0name was originally used for combined CPU/GPU processors with the GPU disabled, after the 2007 launch of the Phenom processors, the Athlon name was also used for mid-range processors, positioned above brands such as Sempron. The Athlon\u00a064 X2 was released in 2005 as the first native dual-core desktop CPU designed by AMD, and the Athlon\u00a0X2 was a subsequent family based on the\u00a0Athlon\u00a064 X2. \u00a0Introduced in 2009, Athlon\u00a0II was a dual-core family of\u00a0Athlon\u00a0chips.\nA USD$55 low-power Athlon 200GE with a Radeon graphics processor was introduced in September 2018, sitting under the Ryzen 3 2200G. This iteration of\u00a0Athlon\u00a0used AMD's Zen-based \"Raven Ridge\" core, which in turn had debuted in Ryzen with Radeon graphics processors. With the release, AMD began using the Athlon brand name to refer to \"low cost, high volume products,\" in a situation similar to both Intel's Celeron and Pentium Gold. The modern Athlon 3000G was introduced in 2019, and was positioned as AMD's highest-performance entry-level processor. AMD positions the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0against its rival, the Intel Pentium. While CPU processing performance is in the same ballpark, the\u00a0Athlon\u00a03000G uses Radeon Vega graphics, which are rated as more powerful than the Pentium's Intel UHD Graphics.\nGenerations.\nAthlon\u00a0Classic (1999).\nThe AMD\u00a0Athlon\u00a0processor launched on June 23, 1999, with general availability by August 1999. Subsequently, from August 1999 until January 2002, this initial K7 processor was the fastest x86 chip in the world. At launch it was, on average, 10% faster than the Pentium III at the same clock for business applications, and 20% faster for gaming workloads. In commercial terms, the Athlon \"Classic\" was an enormous success.\nThe\u00a0Athlon\u00a0Classic is a cartridge-based processor, named Slot A and similar to Intel's cartridge Slot 1 used for Pentium II and Pentium III. It used the same, commonly available, physical 242 pin connector used by Intel Slot 1 processors but rotated by 180 degrees to connect the processor to the motherboard. The cartridge assembly allowed the use of higher speed cache memory modules than could be put on (or reasonably bundled with) motherboards at the time. Similar to the Pentium II and the Katmai-based Pentium III, the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0Classic contained 512\u00a0KB of L2 cache. This high-speed SRAM cache was run at a divisor of the processor clock and was accessed via its own 64-bit back-side bus, allowing the processor to service both front-side bus requests and cache accesses simultaneously, as compared to pushing \"everything\" through the front-side bus.\nThe Argon-based\u00a0Athlon\u00a0contained 22 million transistors and measured 184\u00a0mm2. It was fabricated by AMD in a version of their CS44E process, a 0.25\u00a0\u03bcm complementary metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor (CMOS) process with six levels of aluminium interconnect. \"Pluto\" and \"Orion\" Athlons were fabricated in a 0.18\u00a0\u03bcm process.\nThe Athlon's CPU cache consisted of the typical two levels. Athlon was the first x86 processor with a 128\u00a0KB split level 1 cache; a 2-way associative cache separated into 2\u00d764\u00a0KB for data and instructions (a concept from Harvard architecture). SRAM cache designs at the time were incapable of keeping up with the\u00a0Athlon's clock scalability, resulting in compromised CPU clock speeds in some computers. With later\u00a0Athlon\u00a0models, AMD would integrate the L2 cache onto the processor itself, removing dependence on external cache chips. The Slot-A\u00a0Athlons\u00a0were the first multiplier-locked CPUs from AMD, preventing users from settting their own desired clock speed. This was done by AMD in part to hinder CPU remarking and overclocking by resellers, which could result in inconsistent performance. Eventually a product called the \"Goldfingers device\" was created that could unlock the CPU.\nAMD designed the CPU with more robust x86 instruction decoding capabilities than that of K6, to enhance its ability to keep more data in-flight at once. The critical branch predictor unit was enhanced compared to the K6. Deeper pipelining with more stages allowed higher clock speeds to be attained. Like the AMD K5 and K6, the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0dynamically buffered internal micro-instructions at runtime resulting from parallel x86 instruction decoding. The CPU is an out-of-order design, again like previous post-5x86 AMD CPUs. The\u00a0Athlon\u00a0utilizes the Alpha 21264's EV6 bus architecture with double data rate (DDR) technology.\nAMD ended its long-time handicap with floating point x87 performance by designing a super-pipelined, out-of-order, triple-issue floating point unit (FPU). Each of its three units could independently calculate an optimal type of instructions with some redundancy, making it possible to operate on more than one floating point instruction at once. This FPU was a huge step forward for AMD, helping compete with Intel's P6 FPU. The 3DNow! floating point SIMD technology, again present, received some revisions and was renamed \"Enhanced 3DNow!\" Additions included DSP instructions and the extended MMX subset of Intel SSE.\nAthlon\u00a0Thunderbird (2000-2001).\nThe second generation\u00a0Athlon, the Thunderbird or T-Bird, debuted on June 4, 2000. This version of the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0had a traditional pin-grid array (PGA) format that plugged into a socket (\"Socket A\") on the motherboard or the slot A package. The major difference between it and the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0Classic was cache design, with AMD adding in 256\u00a0KB of on-chip, full-speed exclusive cache. In moving to an exclusive cache design, the L1 cache's contents were not duplicated in the L2, increasing total cache size and functionally creating a large L1 cache with a slower region (the L2) and a fast region (the L1), making the L2 cache into basically a victim cache. With the new cache design, need for high L2 performance and size was lessened, and the simpler L2 cache was less likely to cause clock scaling and yield issues. Thunderbird also moved to a 16-way associative layout.\nThe Thunderbird was \"cherished by many for its overclockability,\" and proved commercially successful, as AMD's most successful product since the Am386DX-40 ten years earlier. AMD's new fab facility in Dresden increased production for AMD overall and put out Thunderbirds at a fast rate, with the process technology improved by a switch to copper interconnects. After several versions were released in 2000 and 2001 of the Thunderbird, the last\u00a0Athlon\u00a0processor using the Thunderbird core was released in 2001 in the summer, at which point speeds were at 1.4 GHz.\nThe locked multipliers of Socket A Thunderbirds could often be disabled through adding conductive bridges on the surface on the chip, a practice widely known as \"the pencil trick\".\nAthlon\u00a0XP (2001-2003).\nOverall, there are four main variants of the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP desktop CPU: the \"Palomino,\" the \"Thoroughbred,\" the \"Thorton,\" and the \"Barton.\" A number of mobile processors were also released, including the \"Corvette\" models, and the \"Dublin\" model among others.\n\"Palomino\".\nOn May 14, 2001, AMD released the Athlon\u00a0XP processor. It debuted as the Mobile\u00a0Athlon\u00a04, a mobile version codenamed \"Corvette\" with the desktop\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP released in the fall. \u00a0The third-generation\u00a0Athlon, code-named \"Palomino\", came out on October 9, 2001 as the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP, with the suffix signifying \"extended performance\" and unofficially referencing Windows XP. \"Palomino's\" design used 180\u00a0nm fabrication process size. The\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP was marketed using a performance rating (PR) system comparing it to the Thunderbird predecessor core. Among other changes, \"Palomino\" consumed 20% less power than the Thunderbird, \u00a0comparatively reducing heat output, and was roughly 10% faster than Thunderbird. \"Palomino\" also had enhanced K7's TLB architecture and included a hardware data prefetch mechanism to take better advantage of memory bandwidth. \"Palomino\" was the first K7 core to include the full SSE instruction set from the Intel Pentium III, as well as AMD's 3DNow! Professional. \"Palomino\" was also the first socketed\u00a0Athlon\u00a0officially supporting dual processing, with chips certified for that purpose branded as the Athlon\u00a0MP, which had different specifications. According to HardwareZone, it was possible to modify the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP to function as an MP.\n\"Thoroughbred\".\nThe fourth-generation of\u00a0Athlon\u00a0was introduced with the \"Thoroughbred\" core, or \"T-Bred,\" on April 17, 2002. The \"Thoroughbred\" core marked AMD's first production 130\u00a0nm silicon, with smaller die size than its predecessor. There came to be two steppings (revisions) of this core commonly referred to as \"Tbred-A\" and \"Tbred-B\". Introduced in June 2002, the initial A version was mostly a direct die shrink of the preceding \"Palomino\" core, but did not significantly increase clock speeds over the \"Palomino\". A revised \"Thoroughbred\" core, \"Thoroughbred-B\", added a ninth \"metal layer\" to the eight-layered \"Thoroughbred-A\", offering improvement in headroom over the A and making it popular for overclocking.\n\"Barton / Thorton\".\nFifth-generation\u00a0Athlon\u00a0\"Barton\"-core processors were released in early 2003. While not operating at higher clock rates than \"Thoroughbred\"-core processors, they featured an increased L2 cache, and later models had an increased 200\u00a0MHz (400\u00a0MT/s) front side bus. The \"Thorton\" core, a portmanteau of \"Thoroughbred\" and \"Barton\", was a later variant of the \"Barton\" with half of the L2 cache disabled. The \"Barton\" was used to officially introduce a higher 400\u00a0MT/s bus clock for the Socket A platform, which was used to gain some \"Barton\" models more efficiency. By this point with the \"Barton\", the four-year-old\u00a0Athlon\u00a0EV6 bus architecture had scaled to its limit and required a redesign to exceed the performance of newer Intel processors. By 2003, the Pentium 4 had become more than competitive with AMD's processors, and \"Barton\" only saw a small performance increase over the \"Thoroughbred-B\" it derived from, insufficient to outperform the Pentium 4. The K7 derived\u00a0Athlons\u00a0such as \"Barton\" were replaced in September 2003 by the Athlon\u00a064 family, which featured an on-chip memory controller and a new HyperTransport bus.\nNotably, the 2500+ Barton with 11x multiplier was effectively identical to the 3200+ part other than the FSB speed it was binned for meaning seamless overlocking was possible more often than not. Early Thortons could be restored to the full Barton specification with the enabling of the other half of the L2 cache from a slight CPU surface modification but the result was not always reliable.\n\"Barton (130\u00a0nm)\"\n\"Thorton (130\u00a0nm)\"\nMobile Athlon XP.\nThe \"Palomino\" core debuted in the mobile market before the PC market, where it was branded as Mobile\u00a0Athlon\u00a04 with the codename \"Corvette\". It distinctively used a ceramic interposer much like the \"Thunderbird\" instead of the organic pin grid array package used on all later \"Palomino\" processors. In November 2001, AMD released a 1.2\u00a0GHz\u00a0Athlon\u00a04 and a 950\u00a0MHz Duron. The Mobile\u00a0Athlon\u00a04 processors included the PowerNow! function, which controlled a laptop's \"level of processor performance by dynamically adjusting its operating frequency and voltage according to the task at hand,\" thus extending \"battery life by reducing processor power when it isn't needed by applications.\" Duron chips also included PowerNow! In 2002, AMD released a version of PowerNow! called Cool'n'Quiet, implemented on the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP but only adjusting clock speed frequency instead of voltage.\nIn 2002 the Athlon\u00a0XP-M (Mobile\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP) replaced the Mobile\u00a0Athlon\u00a04 using the newer \"Thoroughbred\" core, with \"Barton\" cores for full-size notebooks. The\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP-M was also offered in a compact microPGA socket 563 version. Mobile XPs were not multiplier-locked, making them popular with desktop overclockers.\nAthlon\u00a064 (2003-2009).\nThe immediate successor to the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0XP, the Athlon\u00a064 is an AMD64-architecture microprocessor produced by AMD, released on September 23, 2003. A number of variations, all named after cities, were released with 90\u00a0nm architecture in 2004 and 2005. Versions released in 2007 and 2009 utilized 65\u00a0nm architecture.\nAthlon\u00a064 X2 (2005-2009).\nThe Athlon\u00a064 X2 was released in 2005 as the first native dual-core desktop CPU designed by AMD using an\u00a0Athlon\u00a064. The Athlon\u00a0X2 was a subsequent family of microprocessors based on the\u00a0Athlon\u00a064 X2. The original \"Brisbane\"\u00a0Athlon\u00a0X2 models used 65\u00a0nm architecture, and were released in 2007.\nAthlon\u00a0II (2009-2012).\nAthlon\u00a0II is a family of central processing units. Initially a dual-core version of the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0II, the K-10-based \"Regor\" was released in June 2009 with 45 nanometer architecture. This was followed by a single-core version, \"Sargas\", followed by the quad-core \"Propus\", the triple-core \"Rana\" in November 2009, and the \"Llano\" 32\u00a0nm version released in 2011.\nZen-based\u00a0Athlon\u00a0(2018-present).\nThe Zen-based Athlon with Radeon graphics processors was launched in September 2018 with the Athlon 200GE. Based on AMD's \"Raven Ridge\" core previously used in variants of the Ryzen 3 and Ryzen 5, the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0200GE had half of the cores but left SMT enabled. It also kept the same 4 mb L3 cache, but the L2 cache was halved to 1 mb.\nIn addition, the number of graphics compute units was limited to 3 in the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0200GE, and the chip was multiplier-locked. Despite its limitations, the\u00a0Athlon\u00a0200GE performed competitively against the 5000-series Intel Pentium-G, displaying similar CPU performance but an advantage in GPU performance.\nOn November 19, 2019, AMD released the Athlon 3000G, with a higher 3.5\u00a0GHz core clock and 1100\u00a0MHz graphics clock compared to the Athlon 200GE also with two cores. The main functional difference between the 200GE was the Athlon 3000G's unlocked multiplier, allowing the latter to be overclocked on B450 and X470 motherboards.\nSpecifications \"(see Zen desktop APUs for more details)\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"Raven Ridge\" (14\u00a0nm), \"Picasso\" (12\u00a0nm)\nSupercomputers.\nA number of supercomputers have been built using\u00a0Athlon\u00a0chips, largely at universities. Among them:"}
{"id": "3062", "revid": "8042699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3062", "title": "Abner Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "3063", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3063", "title": "Aspergers disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "3065", "revid": "30585864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3065", "title": "Amnon", "text": "Amnon ( \"\u2019Amn\u014dn\", \"faithful\") was, in the Hebrew Bible, the oldest son of King David and his second wife, Ahinoam of Jezreel. He was born in Hebron during his father's reign in Judah. He was the heir apparent to the throne of Israel until he was assassinated by his half-brother Absalom to avenge the rape of their sister Tamar.\nBiblical account.\nAmnon's background.\nAmnon was born in Hebron to Ahinoam and King David. As the presumptive heir to the throne of Israel, Amnon enjoyed a life of power and privilege.\nRape of Tamar.\nAlthough he was the heir-apparent to David's throne, Amnon is best remembered for the rape of his half-sister Tamar, daughter of David and Maachah. Despite the biblical prohibition on sexual relations between half siblings, Amnon had an overwhelming desire for her. He acted on advice from his cousin, Jonadab son of Shimeah, David's brother, to lure Tamar into his quarters by pretending to be sick and desiring her to cook a special meal for him. While in his quarters, and over her protests, he raped her, then had her expelled from his house. While King David was angry about the incident, he could not bring himself to punish his eldest son, while Absalom, Amnon's half-brother and Tamar's full brother, nursed a bitter grudge against Amnon for the rape of his sister.\nAccording to Michael D. Coogan's claims, however, it would have been perfectly all right for Amnon to have married his sister (he claims that the Bible was incoherent about prohibiting incest).\nAccording to the Torah, per Leviticus 18, \"the children of Israel\" -- Israelite men and women alike -- are forbidden from sexual relations between people who are \"near of kin\" (cf. verse 6). Siblings and half siblings (cf. verses 9 and 11). Relationships between these are particularly singled out for a curse in Deuteronomy 27, and they are of the only two kinds incestuous relationships that are among the particularly-singled-out relationships\u2014with the other particularly-singled-out relationships, being ones of non-incestuous family betrayal (cf. verse 20) and bestiality (cf. verse 21). Incestuous relationships are considered so severe among c\"hillul hashem\", acts which bring shame to the name of God, as to be, along with the other forbidden relationships that are mentioned in Leviticus 18, punishable by death as specified in Leviticus 20.\nTwo years later, to avenge Tamar, Absalom invited all of David's sons to a feast at sheep-shearing time, then had his servants kill Amnon after he had become drunk with wine. As a result, Absalom fled to Geshur.\n records that in time David came to terms with the death of Amnon, his first-born. Methodist founder John Wesley is critical of David: \"He can almost find in his heart to receive into favour the murderer of his brother. How can we excuse David from the sin of Eli, who honoured his sons more than God?\"\nDeath.\nIbn Kathir, a famous Islamic historian, notes Gujrat, Pakistan to be the burial place of Amnon. Khawaja Gohor din or Hafiz Sham-ud-din Ghulyanvi first identified the tomb."}
{"id": "3066", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3066", "title": "Authoritarinism", "text": ""}
{"id": "3067", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3067", "title": "Amu Darya", "text": "The Amu Darya (also called the Amu, Amo River, or Jay-hoon, and historically known by its Latin name or Greek ) is a major river in Central Asia and Afghanistan. Rising in the Pamir Mountains, north of the Hindu Kush, the Amu Darya is formed by the confluence of the Vakhsh and Panj rivers, in the Tigrovaya Balka Nature Reserve on the border between Afghanistan and Tajikistan, and flows from there north-westwards into the southern remnants of the Aral Sea. In its upper course, the river forms part of Afghanistan's northern border with Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan. In ancient history, the river was regarded as the boundary of Greater Iran with \"Turan\", which roughly corresponded to present-day Central Asia.\nNames.\nIn classical antiquity, the river was known as the in Latin and () in Greek \u2014 a clear derivative of Vakhsh, the name of the largest tributary of the river. In Vedic Sanskrit, the river is also referred to as (). The Brahmanda Purana refers to the river as . The Avestan texts too refer to the River as Yakhsha/Vakhsha (and Yakhsha Arta (\"upper Yakhsha\") referring to the Jaxartes/Syr Darya twin river to Amu Darya). In Middle Persian sources of the Sassanid period the river is known as (lit. 'good river'). Amu Darya, has a flow of about 70 cubic kilometres per year on average. \nThe name \"Amu\" is said to have come from the medieval city of \"\u0100mul\", (later, Chahar Joy/Charjunow, and now known as T\u00fcrkmenabat), in modern Turkmenistan, with \"Darya\" being the Persian word for \"river\". Medieval Arabic and Islamic sources call the river \"Jayhoun\" (; also \"Jaihun\", \"Jayhoon\", or \"Dzhaykhun\") which is derived from \"Gihon\", the biblical name for one of the four rivers of the Garden of Eden. River Amu Darya passes through one of the\u00a0 world's highest deserts.\nAs the river Gozan.\nWestern travellers in the 19th century mentioned that one of the names by which the river was known in Afghanistan was \"Gozan\", and that this name was used by Greek, Mongol, Chinese, Persian, Jewish, and Afghan historians. However, this name is no longer used.\nDescription.\nThe river's total length is and its drainage basin totals in area, providing a mean discharge of around of water per year. The river is navigable for over . All of the water comes from the high mountains in the south where annual precipitation can be over . Even before large-scale irrigation began, high summer evaporation meant that not all of this discharge reached the Aral Sea \u2013 though there is some evidence the large Pamir glaciers provided enough meltwater for the Aral to overflow during the 13th and 14th centuries.\nSince the end of the 19th century there have been four different claimants as the true source of the Oxus:\nA glacier turns into the Wakhan River and joins the Pamir River about downstream. Bill Colegrave's expedition to Wakhan in 2007 found that both claimants 2 and 3 had the same source, the Chelab stream, which bifurcates on the watershed of the Little Pamir, half flowing into Lake Chamaktin and half into the parent stream of the Little Pamir/Sarhad River. Therefore, the Chelab stream may be properly considered the true source or parent stream of the Oxus. The Panj River forms the border of Afghanistan and Tajikistan. It flows west to Ishkashim where it turns north and then north-west through the Pamirs passing the Tajikistan\u2013Afghanistan Friendship Bridge. It subsequently forms the border of Afghanistan and Uzbekistan for about , passing Termez and the Afghanistan\u2013Uzbekistan Friendship Bridge. It delineates the border of Afghanistan and Turkmenistan for another before it flows into Turkmenistan at Atamurat. It flows across Turkmenistan south to north, passing T\u00fcrkmenabat, and forms the border of Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan from Halkabat. It is then split by the Tuyamuyun Hydro Complex into many waterways that used to form the river delta joining the Aral Sea, passing Urgench, Da\u015foguz, and other cities, but it does not reach what is left of the sea any more and is lost in the desert. Use of water from the Amu Darya for irrigation has been a major contributing factor to the shrinking of the Aral Sea since the late 1950s. Historical records state that in different periods, the river flowed into the Aral Sea (from the south), into the Caspian Sea (from the east), or both, similar to the Syr Darya (Jaxartes, in Ancient Greek).\nWatershed.\nThe of the Amu Darya drainage basin include most of Tajikistan, the southwest corner of Kyrgyzstan, the northeast corner of Afghanistan, a narrow portion of eastern Turkmenistan and the western half of Uzbekistan. Part of the Amu Darya basin divide in Tajikistan forms that country's border with China (in the east) and Pakistan (to the south). About 61% of the drainage lies within Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, while 39% is in Afghanistan.\nThe abundant water flowing in the Amu Darya comes almost entirely from glaciers in the Pamir Mountains and Tian Shan,\nwhich, standing above the surrounding arid plain, collect atmospheric moisture which otherwise would probably escape somewhere else. Without its mountain water sources, the Amu Darya would not exist\u2014because it rarely rains in the lowlands through which most of the river flows. Of the total drainage area only about actively contribute water to the river.\nThis is because many of the river's major tributaries (especially the Zeravshan River) have been diverted, and much of the river's drainage is arid. Throughout most of the steppe, the annual rainfall is about .\nHistory.\nThe ancient Greeks called the Amu Darya the \"Oxus\". In ancient times, the river was regarded as the boundary between Greater Iran and \u1e6a\u016br\u0101n (). The river's drainage lies in the area between the former empires of Genghis Khan and Alexander the Great, although they occurred at very different times. When the Mongols came to the area, they used the water of the Amu Darya to flood Konye-Urgench. One southern route of the Silk Road ran along part of the Amu Darya northwestward from Termez before going westwards to the Caspian Sea.\nIt is believed that the Amu Darya's course across the Kara-Kum Desert has gone through several major shifts in the past few thousand years. Much of the time \u2013 most recently from the 13th century to the late 16th century \u2013 the Amu Darya emptied into both the Aral and the Caspian Seas, reaching the latter via a large distributary called the Uzboy River. The Uzboy splits off from the main channel just south of the river's delta. Sometimes the flow through the two branches was more or less equal, but often most of the Amu Darya's flow split to the west and flowed into the Caspian.\nPeople began to settle along the lower Amu Darya and the Uzboy in the 5th century, establishing a thriving chain of agricultural lands, towns, and cities. In about AD 985, the massive Gurganj Dam at the bifurcation of the forks started to divert water to the Aral. Genghis Khan's troops destroyed the dam in 1221, and the Amu Darya shifted to distributing its flow more or less equally between the main stem and the Uzboy. But in the 18th century, the river again turned north, flowing into the Aral Sea, a path it has taken since. Less and less water flowed down the Uzboy. When Russian explorer Bekovich-Cherkasski surveyed the region in 1720, the Amu Darya did not flow into the Caspian Sea anymore.\nBy the 1800s, the ethnographic makeup of the region was described by Peter Kropotkin as the communities of \"the vassal Khanates of Maimene, Khulm, Kunduz, and even the Badakshan and Wahkran.\" An Englishman, William Moorcroft, visited the Oxus around 1824 during the Great Game period. Another Englishman, a naval officer called John Wood, came with an expedition to find the source of the river in 1839. He found modern-day Lake Zorkul, called it Lake Victoria, and proclaimed he had found the source. Then, the French explorer and geographer Thibaut Vin\u00e9 collected a lot of information about this area during five expeditions between 1856 and 1862.\nThe question of finding a route between the Oxus valley and India has been of concern historically. A direct route crosses extremely high mountain passes in the Hindu Kush and isolated areas like Kafiristan. Some in Britain feared that the Empire of Russia, which at the time wielded great influence over the Oxus area, would overcome these obstacles and find a suitable route through which to invade British India \u2013 but this never came to pass. The area was taken over by Russia during the Russian conquest of Turkestan.\nThe Soviet Union became the ruling power in the early 1920s and expelled Mohammed Alim Khan. It later put down the Basmachi movement and killed Ibrahim Bek. A large refugee population of Central Asians, including Turkmen, Tajiks and Uzbeks, fled to northern Afghanistan. In the 1960s and 1970s the Soviets started using the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya to irrigate extensive cotton fields in the Central Asian plain. Before this time, water from the rivers was already being used for agriculture, but not on this massive scale. The Qaraqum Canal, Karshi Canal, and Bukhara Canal were among the larger of the irrigation diversions built. However, the Main Turkmen Canal, which would have diverted water along the dry Uzboy River bed into central Turkmenistan, was never built. The 1970s, in the course of the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, Soviet forces used the valley to invade Afghanistan through Termez. The Soviet Union fell in the 1990s and Central Asia split up into the many smaller countries that lie within or partially within the Amu Darya basin.\nDuring the Soviet era, a resource-sharing system was instated in which Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan shared water originating from the Amu and Syr Daryas with Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan in summer. In return, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan received Kazakh, Turkmen, and Uzbek coal, gas, and electricity in winter. After the fall of the Soviet Union this system disintegrated and the Central Asian nations have failed to reinstate it. Inadequate infrastructure, poor water-management, and outdated irrigation methods all exacerbate the issue.\nSiberian Tiger Introduction Project.\nThe Caspian tiger used to occur along the river's banks. After its extirpation, the Darya's delta was suggested as a potential site for the introduction of its closest surviving relative, the Siberian tiger. A feasibility study was initiated to investigate if the area is suitable and if such an initiative would receive support from relevant decision makers. A viable tiger population of about 100 animals would require at least of large tracts of contiguous habitat with rich prey populations. Such habitat is not available at this stage and cannot be provided in the short term. The proposed region is therefore unsuitable for the reintroduction, at least at this stage.\nLiterature.\nThe Oxus river, and Arnold's poem, fire the imaginations of the children who adventure with ponies over the moors of the West Country in the 1930s children's book \"The Far-Distant Oxus\". There were two sequels, \"Escape to Persia\" and \"Oxus in Summer\".\nRobert Byron's 1937 travelogue, \"The Road to Oxiana\", describes its author's journey from the Levant through Persia to Afghanistan, with the Oxus as his stated goal.\nGeorge MacDonald Fraser's \"Flashman at the Charge\", (1973), places Flashman on the Amu Darya and the Arral Sea during the (fictitious) Russian advance on India during The Great Game period."}
{"id": "3068", "revid": "29405084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3068", "title": "Muslim conquests of Afghanistan", "text": "The Muslim conquests of Afghanistan began during the Muslim conquest of Persia as the Arab Muslims migrated eastwards to Khorasan, Sistan and Transoxiana. 15 years after the Battle of Nah\u0101vand, they controlled all Sasanian domains except southern and eastern Afghanistan. Fuller Islamization wasn't achieved until the period between 10th and 12th centuries under Ghaznavid and Ghurid dynasty's rule who patronized Muslim religious institutions.\nKhorasan and Sistan, where Zoroastrianism was well-established, were conquered. The Arabs had begun to move towards the lands east of Persia and in 652 they captured the city of Herat, establishing an Arab governor there. The Muslim frontier in modern Afghanistan had become stabilized after the first century of Hijri calendar as the relative importance of the Afghan areas diminished. From historical evidence, it appears Tokharistan (Bactria) was the only area heavily colonized by Arabs where Buddhism flourished. Balkh's final conquest was undertaken by Qutayba ibn Muslim in 705. Hui'Chao, who visited around 726, mentions that the Arabs ruled it and all the inhabitants were Buddhists.\nThe eastern regions of Afghanistan were at times considered politically as parts of India. Buddhism and Hinduism held sway over the region until the Muslim conquest. Kabul and Zabulistan which housed Buddhism and other Indian religions, offered stiff resistance to the Muslim advance for two centuries, with the Kabul Shahi and Zunbils remaining unconquered until the Saffarid and Ghaznavid conquests. The significance of the realm of Zun and its rulers Zunbils had laid in them blocking the path of Arabs in invading the Indus Valley.\nThe Caliph Al-Ma'mun (r. 813\u2013833 A.D.) was paid double the tribute by the Rutbil. His were the last Arab expeditions on Kabul and Zabul. The king of Kabul was captured by him and converted to Islam. The last Zunbil was killed by Ya'qub bin al-Layth along with his former overlord Salih b. al-Nadr in 865. Meanwhile, the Hindu Shahi of Kabul were defeated under Mahmud of Ghazni. Indian soldiers were a part of the Ghaznavid army, Baihaki mentioned Hindu officers employed by Ma'sud. The 14th-century scholar Muslim scholar Ibn Battuta described the Hindu Kush as meaning \"slayer of Indians\", because large numbers of slaves brought from India died from its treacherous weather.\nThe geographer Ya'qubi states that the rulers of Bamiyan, called the \"Sher\", converted in the late 8th century. Ya'qub is recorded as having plundered its pagan idols in 870 while a much later historian Shabankara'i claims that Alp-Tegin obtained conversion of its ruler in 962. No permanent Arab control was established in Ghur and it became Islamised after Ghaznavid raids. By the time of Bahram-Shah, Ghur was converted and politically united.\nIn the late 15th century, Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire, arrived from Fergana and captured Kabul from the Arghun dynasty. Between the 16th and 18th centuries, Emperor Shah Jahan and Aurangzeb ruled parts of the eastern territory.\nThe Afghan habitat during their conquest by Mahmud was located in the Sulaiman Mountains in the South of Afghanistan. They were enlisted by both Sabuktigin and Mahmud according to \"Tarikh-i-Yamini\". Prior to Pashtun migration to the Kabul River valley, Tajiks formed the dominant population of Kabul, Nangarhar, Logar valley and Laghman in east Afghanistan. The Pashtuns later began migrating westward from Sulaiman mountains in the South, and displaced or subjugated the indigenous populations such as Tajiks, Hazaras, the Farsiwanis, before or during 16th and 17th centuries. The successive wave of Pashtun immigration displaced the original \"Kafir\" and Pashayi people from Kunar Valley and Laghman valley, the two eastern provinces near Jalalabad, to the less fertile mountains.\nBefore their conversion, the \"Kafir\" people of Kafiristan practiced a form of ancient Hinduism infused with locally developed accretions. The region from Nuristan to Kashmir (styled \"Peristan\" by A. M. Cacopardo) was host to a vast number of \"Kafir\" cultures. They were called Kafirs due to their enduring paganism, remaining politically independent until being conquered and forcibly converted by Afghan Amir Abdul Rahman Khan in 1895\u20131896 while others also converted to avoid paying \"jizya\".\nArab conquests.\nDuring the Muslim conquest of Persia, the Arabs were drawn eastwards from the Iraqi plains to central and eastern Persia, then to Media, into Khorasan, Sistan and Transoxania. 15 years after the Battle of Nah\u0101vand, the Arabs controlled all Sasanian domain except the parts of Afghanistan and Makran. Nancy Dupree states that advancing Arabs carrying the religion of Islam easily took over Herat and Sistan, but the other areas often revolted and converted back to their old faiths whenever the Arab armies withdrew. The harshness of the Arab rule caused the native dynasties to revolt after the Arab power weakened like the Saffarids founded by the zealous Yaqub who conquered many cities of the region.\nMediaeval Islamic scholars divided modern-day Afghanistan into two regions - the provinces of Khorasan and Sistan. Khorasan was the eastern satrapy of Sasanian Empire, containing Balkh and Herat. Sistan included a number of Afghan cities and regions including Ghazna, Zarang, Bost, Qandahar (also called al-Rukhkhaj or Zamindawar), Kabul, Kabulistan and Zabulistan.\nBefore Muslim rule, the regions of Balkh (Bactria or \"Tokharistan\"), Herat and Sistan were under Sasanian rule. Further south in Balkh region, in Bamiyan, indication of Sasanian authority diminishes, with a local dynasty seeming ruling from the late antiquity, probably Hepthalites subject to the Yabgu of Western Turks. While Herat was controlled by Sasanians, its hinterlands were controlled by northern Hepthalites who continued to rule the Ghurid mountains and river valleys well into the Islamic era. Sistan was under Arabs but Qandahar remained out of Arab rule. Kabul and Zabulistan, housed Indic religions with the Zunbils and Kabul Shahis offering stiff resistance to Muslim rule for two centuries until Saffarid and Ghaznavid conquests.\nIn Afghanistan, the frontier of the Islamic conquest had become more or less stationary by the end of the first century of Hijri calendar. One reason was the relative importance of Sistan and Baluchistan had begun to diminish by the time of Mu'awiyah I, when the conquests of Bactria and Transoxania were undertaken. In addition, the conquest in the eastern direction were extended to Makran and Sind, with Muslim colonies becoming established there in 711\u201312.\nSistan.\nThe earlier Arabs called Sistan as \"Sijistan\", from the Persian \"Sagestan\". It is a lowland region, lying round and eastwards from the Zarah lake, which includes deltas of Helmand and other rivers which drain into it. Muslim conquest of Sistan began in 23 A.H. (643-644 A.D.) when Asim bin Amr and Abdallah ibn Amir invaded the region and besieged Zaranj. The Sistanis concluded a treaty with Muslims, mandating them to pay the kharaj.\nThe cash-strapped Sasanian king Yazdegerd III who had a large retinue, had fled to Kerman in 650. He had to flee from Kerman to Sistan after his arrogance angered the marzban of the place, eluding an Arab force from Basra which defeated and killed the marzban. Yazdegerd lost the support of governor of Sistan after demanding taxes from him and had to leave for Merv. It is not known whether this governor was a Sasanian prince or a local ruler at that time. The Arabs had campaigned in Sistan a few years earlier and Abdallah b. Amir had now gone in pursuit of Yazdegerd. He arrived in Kirman in 651 and sent a force under Rabi ibn Ziyad al-Harithi to Sistan.\nRabi crossed the desert between Kirman and Sistan, reaching the fortress of Zilaq which was within five farsangs of the Sistan frontier. The fort was surrendered by its dihqan. The fortress of Karkuya, whose fire temple is mentioned in the anonymously authored \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\", along with Haysun and Nashrudh, surrendered to Rabi. Rabi then encamped in Zaliq and projected the seizure of Zarang, which though had earlier submitted to Arabs, needed to be subdued again. Although its marzaban Aparviz put up a strong resistance, he was forced to surrender.\nThe Zaranj forces had received heavy casualties during the battle with Arab forces and were driven back to the city. According to sources, when Aparviz appeared before Rabi to discuss the terms, he found the Arab general was sitting on a chair made out of two dead soldiers and his entourage had been instructed to make seats and bolsters in the same fashion. Aparviz was terrified into submission and wished to spare his people of this fate. A peace treaty was concluded with payments of heavy dues. The treaty mandated one million dirhams as annual tribute, in addition to a 1,000 slave boys bearing 1,000 gold vessels. The city was garrisoned by Rabi.\nRabi thus succeeded in gaining Zarang with considerable difficulty and remained at the place for several years. Two years later, the people of Zarang rebelled and expelled Rabi's lieutenant and garrison. Abdallah b. Amir sent 'Abd ar-Rahman b. Samura to take back the city, who also added Bust and Zabul to Arab gains. 'Abd ar-Rahman besieged Zaranj and after the marzban surrendered, the tribute was doubled. The tribute imposed on Zarang was 2 million dirhams and 2,000 slaves.\nDuring the period of the first civil war in the Arab caliphate (656-661), rebels in Zarang imprisoned their governor while Arab bandits started raiding remote towns in Sistan to enslave people. They gave in to the new governor Rib'i, who took control of the city and restored law and order. 'Abdallah b. Amir was made the governor of Basra and its eastern dependencies again from 661 to 664. Samura was sent back to Sistan in 661. An expedition to Khorasan was sent under Samura, a Qurayshite, that included reputed leaders like 'Umar b. 'Ubaydillah b. Ma'mar, 'Abdullah b. Khazim, Qatariyy b. al-Fuja'a and Al-Muhallab ibn Abi Sufra. He reconquered Zarang, attacked Zabulistan's ruler Zunbil and entered Kabul after a brief siege.\nZiyad ibn Abihi was appointed governor of Basra in 664 and was also made governor of Kufa and its dependencies in 670, making him the viceroy of the entire eastern half of the Islamic empire. He sent his kinsman Ubaydallah b. Abi Bakra to destroy the Zoroastrian fire temples in Fars and Sistan, confiscate their property and kill their priests. While the fire temple of Kariyan was destroyed, the one at Karkuya survived along with its herbad. Ziyad's son Abbad was appointed governor of Sijistan by Mu'awiya I in 673 and served until 681. During the course of his governorship, the province apparently remained stable and Abbad led an eastward expedition which brought Kandahar to the caliphate. Caliph Yazid I replaced Abbad with his brother Salm, who was already governor of Khurasan.\nKhorasan.\nThere is general agreement among Arabic sources that Khorasan's conquest began in the reign of Uthman under Abdallah b. Amir who had been appointed the governor of Basra (r. 649-655). Sayf's tradition however disagrees with this, dating it to 639 under the reign of Umar with Ahnaf ibn Qais leading the expedition. Al-Tabari meanwhile relates that Ahnaf's conquests occurred in 643. This could be because of confusion of Ahnaf's later activities under Ibn Amir and an attempt to magnify his role in Khorasan's conquest.\nThe conquest of southern Persia was completed by 23 A.H. with Khorasan remaining the only region remaining unconquered. Since the Muslims didn't want any Persian land to remain under Persian rule, Umar ordered Ahnaf b. Qais to march upon it. After capturing towns of Tabas and Tun, he attacked the region's easternmost city Herat. The Persians put up stiff resistance but were defeated and surrendered. A garrison was deployed in the city, while a column was detached which subjugated Nishapur and Tus. Umar had despatched Ahnaf with 12,000 men from Kufa and Basra after Yazdegerd who had fled to Merv. After the Arabs arrived there, Yazdegerd fled to Marw al-Rudh from where he sent ambassadors to the Khakan of the Turks, the ruler of Soghd and the Chinese emperor, asking for their assistance. Yazdegerd later fled to Balkh, where he was defeated by the Arabs and fled across Oxus River.\nUmar forbade Ahnaf from crossing the river as the land beyond it was unknown to Arabs and was very far for them. Yazdegerd proceeded to Soghd whose ruler supplied him a large army. The Khaqan of Turks after assembling the troops from Ferghana, crossed the Oxus along with Yazdegerd and marched to Balkh. Ribi' b. Amir meanwhile retired with Kufan troops to Marw al-Rudh where he joined al-Ahnaf. The Sasanian king and the Khakan leading an army of 50,000 cavalry composed of men from Soghd, Turkestan, Balkh and Tokharistan, arrived at Marw al-Rudh. Ahnaf had an army of 20,000 men. The two sides fought each other from morning till evening for two months at a place called Deir al-Ahnaf.\nThe fighting at Deir al-Ahnaf went on until Ahnaf, after being informed of a Turkic chief inspecting the outposts, went there during a particular night and successively killed three Turkic chiefs during their inspection. After learning of their deaths, the Khakan became afflicted by it and withdrew to Balkh, then he withdrew across the river to Turkestan. Yazdegerd meanwhile left from Marw al-Rudh to Merv, from where he took his empire's wealth and proceeded to Balkh to join the Khakan. He told his officials he wanted to hand himself to the protection of the Turks, but they advised him against it and asked him to seek protection from the Arabs which he refused. He left for Turkestan while his officials took away his treasures and gave them to Ahnaf, submitting to the Arabs and were allowed to go back to their respective homes.\nAbdullah b. Amir went to Khorasan from Kerman in 650 and sent out along with a vanguard of Tamimi Arabs and 1,000 asawira via Quhistan. The people of Tabasayn had broken their peace treaty and had allied with the Hepthalites of Herat. al-Ahnaf reconquered Quhistan and defeated Herat's Hepthalites at Nishapur. The kanarang or marzaban of Tus asked the Arabs for assistance against the raiding Hepthalites of Herat and Badghis. He agreed to a peace agreement for 600,000 dinars.\nThe Hepthalite action prompted the Muslims undertaking military operation to secure their positions in Khorasan. After fall of Tus, Ibn Amir sent out an army against Herat. The ruler (marzaban or \"azim\") of the place agreed to a peace treaty for Herat, Badghis and Pushang for a tribute of 1 million dirhams. The ruler who was known as \"azim\" or the \"mighty one\" in Futuh al-Buldan, may have been a Hepthalite chief. The \"Rightly Guided Caliphs\" followed the earlier rule of Muhammad of imposing \"jizya\" on several bodies jointly and in some cases also imposed the condition they host Muslims. This rule was followed in most Iranian towns, with the jizya not specified on per capita basis, but was left to the local rulers though some Muslim commanders stressed the amount on the ability of the ruler to pay. The same wording can be seen in Ibn Amir's treaty.\nIn 652, Ibn Amir sent al-Ahnaf to invade Tokharistan with 4,000 Arabs and 1,000 Iranian Muslims (evidently the Tamimis and asawira), probably because of assistance of its ruler to Yazdegerd's son Peroz. While Marw al-Rudh's garrison agreed to a peace term for the entire district under 300,000 dirhams, the town itself remained besieged. The last major stronghold of Sasanians, Marw al-Rudh, fell to him after a fierce battle. After bloody fighting, its marzaban agreed to a peace treaty for 60,000 or 600,000 dirhams as well as a mutual defence pact. He was also allowed to keep his ancestral lands, for the office of marzaban to be hereditary in his family and to be exempt from taxes along with his whole family. Baladhuri quotes Abu Ubayda as stating that the Turks were supporting the inhabitants of the town. These Turks were Hepthalites, probably from Guzgan which may explain the reason behind Arabs next attacking Guzgan, Faryab and Talqan.\nAl-Mada'ini specifically states that Ahnaf while leading the next expedition, didn't want to ask for assistance from the non-Muslims of Marw al-Rudh, probably as he didn't trust them. The Arabs camped at Qasr al-Ahnaf, a day's march to north of Marw al-Rudh. The 30,000-strong army comprising troops of Guzgan, Faryab and Talqan, supported by the Chaghanian troops, advanced to meet them. The battle was inconclusive, but the opposing side dispersed with some remaining at Guzgan while Arabs withdrew to Marw al-Rudh. Ahnaf sent an expedition, led by al-Aqra' b. Habis and apparently consisting exclusively of Tamims, to Guzgan. The Arabs defeated Guzgan and entered it by force. Ahnaf meanwhile advanced towards Balkh, making peace treaties with Faryab and Taloqan along the way.\nThe permanent pacification of Khorasan was a protracted affair with the local potentates often rebelling and appealing to outside powers like the Hepthalites, Western Turks or Turgesh, Sogdians and the imperial Chinese who claimed a degree of suzerainty over Central Asia, for help. Within a year after Yazdegerd's death, a local Iranian notable named Qarin started a revolt against the Arabs in Quhistan. He gathered his supporters from Tabasayn, Herat and Badghis, assembling a reported army of 40,000 insurgents against Arabs in Khorasan. The Arabs made a surprise attack however, killing him and many of his people while many others were taken captive. It was expected that the recently subjugated people would revolt. However, in Khorasan, no all-out effort seems to have been undertaken to the expel the Arabs after Qarin's rebellion. Chinese sources state that there was an attempt to restore Peroz by Tokharistan's army, however this episode is not confirmed by Arab sources.\nPeroz had settled among the Turks, took a local wife and had received troops from king of Tokharistan. In 661, he established himself as king of Po-szu (Persia) with Chinese help in a place the Chinese called Ja-ling (Chi-ling), which is assumed to be Zarang. His campaigns are reflected in Muslim sources, which mention revolts in Zarang, Balkh, Badghis, Herat, Bushanj and also in Khorasan during the First Fitna period in reigns of Ali and Muawiyah. Though they don't mention Peroz, they do state that Ali's newly appointed governor of Khorasan had heard in Nishapur that governors of the Sasanian king had come back from Kabul and Khorasan had rebelled. However, the region was reconquered under Muawiyah. Piroz went back to Tang Empire's capital and was given a grandiose title as well as permission to build a fire temple in 677.\nYazid ibn al-Muhallab succeeded his father as governor of Khorasan in 702 and campaigned in Central Asia, but achieved little success apart from Nezak Tarkhan's submission at Badghis.\nTokharistan.\nTokharistan, roughly ancient Bactria, is today divided between Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. According to the most general usage of the name, Tokharistan is the wide valley around the upper Oxus river surrounded by mountains on three sides before the river moves into open plains. The major city was Balkh, one of the greatest urban centers of northeastern Iran. It was located upon crossroads and conduits of trade in many directions, enabling control of these routes if it was conquered. During the governorship of Abu 'l Abbas 'Abdallah b. Tahir (r. 828\u2013845), a list of districts (\"kuwar\") of the region exists, including as far as Saghaniyan in the north and Kabul in the south. Other places listed are Tirmidh, Juzjan, Bamiyan, R\u016bb and Samanjan. Some Arab geographers used the name only for southern part of Oxus valley.\nBalkh was also a part of Khorasan along with other areas through varying extensions of time. Per al-Tabari, Yazdegerd fled from Marw-al Rudh to Balkh during Ahnaf's conquest of Khorasan in 643. He fortified himself but was defeated by the Arabs and fled across the Oxus River. Yazdegerd proceeded to Soghd whose ruler supplied him a large army. The Khaqan of Turks after assembling the troops from Ferghana, crossed the Oxus along with Yazdegerd and marched to Balkh.\nIn 652, Ibn Amir sent al-Ahnaf to invade Tokharistan with 4,000 Arabs and 1,000 Iranian Muslims (evidently the Tamimis and asawira), probably because of assistance of its ruler to Yazdegerd's son Peroz. He approached Balkh after conquering Marw al-Rudh and fighting an inconclusive battle with a 30,000-strong force from Guzgan, Faryab and Talqan. After arriving at Balkh, he besieged the city, with its inhabitants offering a tribute of 400,000 or 700,000 dirhams. He deputed his cousin to collect the tribute and advanced to Khwarezm but returned to Balkh as winter approached. It was in Balkh in fall of 652 when the local people introduced his cousin Asid to gifting gold and silver to their governor during Mihrijan.\nZiyad b. Abi Sufyan reorganised Basra and Kufa, excluding many from the \"diwan\" and inspiring him to settle 50,000 families in Khorasan. Both Baladhuri and Mad'aini agree upon the number, though the latter states each half were from Basra and Kufa. Al-'Ali disagrees, stating the Kufans were 10,000. Ghalib had been unsuccessful in his expedition, and Rabi b. Ziyad al-Harithi who was appointed governor of Khorasan in 671 led the settlement expedition. He advanced to Balkh and made a peace treaty with the locals who had revolted after al-Ahnaf's earlier treaty.\nQutayba ibn Muslim led the final conquest of Balkh. He was tasked with subduing the revolt in Lower Tokharistan. His army was assembled in spring of 705 and marched through Marw al-Rudh and Talqan to Balkh. Per one version in Tarikh al-Tabari, the city was surrendered peacefully. Another version, probably to promote a Bahilite claim on the Barmakids, speaks of a revolt among the residents. The latter may be the correct version as Tabari describes the city as ruined four years later. The wife of Barmak, a physician of Balkh, was taken captive during the war and given to 'Abdullah, Qutayba's brother. She was later restored to her lawful husband after spending a period in 'Abdullah's harem. Khalid was thus born in 706 and Abdallah accepted the implications of paternity without disturbing Barmak's conventional responsibilities or affecting Khalid's upbringing.\nIn 708\u2013709, the Ispahbadh who was a local ruler, received a letter from the Hepthalite rebel Nizak Tarkhan who was trying to unite the aristocracy of Tokharistan against Qutayba. The Arabs built a new military encampment called \"Baruqan\" two farsangs away from the city. In 725, the governor Asad ibn Abdallah al-Qasri had the city restored after a feud among Arab troops with Barmak being employed as his agent for the task.\nEarly Arabs tended to treat Iran as a single cultural unit, however it was a land of many countries with distinct populations and cultures. From historical evidence, it appears Tokharistan was the only area heavily colonized by Arabs where Buddhism flourished and the only area incorporated into the Arab empire where Sanskrit studies were pursued up to the conquest. The grandson of Barmak was the \"vizier\" of the empire and took personal interest in Sanskrit works and Indian religions. The eighth-century Korean traveller Hui'Chao records Hinayanists in Balkh under Arab rule. He visited the area around 726, mentioning that the true king of Balkh was still alive and in exile. He also describes all the inhabitants of the regions as Buddhists under Arab rule. Other sources indicate however that the Bactrians practiced many different religions.\nAmong Balkh's Buddhist monasteries, the largest was \"Nava Vihara\", later Persianized to \"Naw Bahara\" after the Islamic conquest of Balkh. It is not known how long it continued to serve as a place of worship after the conquest. Accounts of early Arabs offer contradictory narratives. Per al-Baladhuri, its stupa-vihara complex was destroyed under Muawiyah in 650s. Tabari while reporting about the expedition in 650s, does not mention any tension around the temple, stating Balkh was conquered by Rabi peacefully. He also states that Nizak went to pray at the site during his revolt against Qutayba in 709, implying it may not have been destroyed. Also the tenth-century geographical treatise \"Hudud al-'Alam\" describes remaining royal buildings and Naw Bahara's decorations including painted image and wonderful works, probably secco or fresco murals and carvings on the temple's walls that survived into the author's time.\nSanskrit, Greek, Latin and Chinese sources from the 2nd century BCE to the 7th century CE, identify a people called \"Tukharas\", in the country later called Tukharistan. Badakhshan was earlier the seat of the Tukharas. There is no precise date for the Arab conquest of Badakhshan nor any record of how Islam was introduced there. Al-Tabari too mentions this region only once. In 736, Asad ibn Abdallah al-Qasri sent an expedition into Upper Tokharistan and Badakhshan against the rebel Al-Harith ibn Surayj who had occupied the fortress of Tabushkhan. Juday' b. 'Ali al-Kirmani who was sent on the expedition against al-Harith, captured Tabushkhan. Juday also had its captive defenders killed while its women and children were enslaved and sold in Balkh despite being of Arab origin. al-Harith later allied with the Turgesh and continued his rebellion until being pardoned by Caliph Yazid b. Walid in 744.\nTaking advantage of the factional fighting among the Arabs, Transoxania started rebelling and Asad b. 'Abdallah in response attacked Khuttal in 737. Armed forces of Soghd, Chach and many Turks, led by the Turkish Khagan Sulu, arrived to assist them. Asad fled leaving behind the baggage of plunder from Khuttal. When Asad returned with the main body of his troops, the Turks retired to Tokharistan and he returned to Balkh. In December 737, the Turgesh attacked Khulm but were repelled by Arabs. Bypassing Balkh, they captured Guzgan's capital and sent out raiding parties. Asad mounted a surprise attack on the Turks at Kharistan who only had 4,000 troops. The Turgesh suffered a devastating defeat and lost almost whole of their army. Sulu and al-Harith fled to the territory of Tokharistan's Yabghu, with Sulu returning to his territory in winter of 737\u2013738.\nThe Zunbils.\nThe Zunbils in the pre-Saffarid period ruled in Zabulistan and Zamindawar, stretching between Ghazna and Bost, and had acted as a barrier against Muslim expansion for a long time. Zamindawar is known to have a shrine dedicated to the god Zun. It has been linked with the Hindu god Aditya at Multan, pre-Buddhist religious and kingship practices of Tibet as well as Shaivism. The followers of the Zunbils were called Turks by the Arabic sources, however they applied the name to all their enemies in eastern fringes of Iran. They are described as having Turkish troops in their service by sources like Tabari and \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\".\nThe kingdom of Zabulistan (ar-Rukhkhaj) with its capital at Ghazna, where the king Zunbil or Rutbil resided, is mentioned by Chinese sources under the suzerainty of Jabghu of Turkestan. The significance for Arabs of the realm of Zun and its rulers was them preventing their campaigns from invading the Indus Valley through eastern and southern Afghanistan. It was only under the early Saffarids that mass-Islamization and conquests of the region took place unlike the plunder-raids or tribute levies of Arabs. The expeditions under Caliph al-Ma'mun against Kabul and Zabul were the last ones and the long conflict ended with the dissolution of the Arab empire following soon thereafter.\nSakawand in Zabulistan was a major centre of pilgrimage.\n7th century.\nAfter appearing at Zarang, 'Abd ar-Rahman b. Samura and his force of 6,000 Arabs penetrated to the shrine of Zun in 653\u2013654. He broke off a hand from the idol of Zun and plucked out the rubies used as its eyes to demonstrate to the marzban of Sistan that the idol could neither hurt nor benefit anyone. He also took Zabul by treaty by 656. Per Baldhuri, after being reappointed to Sistan under Muawiyah, Samura defeated Zabulistan whose people had broken the earlier agreement.\nSamura was replaced by Rabi b. Ziyad and died in 50 A.H. (670 A.D.), after which the king of Zabul rebelled and conquered Zabulistan and Rukhkhaj. Ar-Rabi, the Arab governor, attacked him at Bust and made him flee. He then pursued him to Rukhkhaj where he attacked him and then subdued the city of ad-Dawar. Ziyad b. Abi Sufyan was appointed governor of Basra in 665, with Khorasan and Sistan coming under his mandate as well. He had first appointed Rabi to Sistan but replaced him later with 'Ubaydallah b. Abi Bakra. During this period, Zunbil's fierce resistance continued until he finally agreed to pay one million dirhams per Baladhuri and \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\".\nAl-Baladhuri records that under Muawiyah, Sistan's governor 'Abbad b. Ziyad b. Abihi raided and captured the city of Qandahar after bitter fighting. He also mentions the characteristic high caps of the people of the city. Though his text is somewhat ambiguous, it seems that 'Abbad had renamed the town as \"'Abbadiya\" after himself. The Muslim rule was probably toppled and the name is never heard after his governorship ended in 680\u20131, by 698 there was no Muslim-controlled region east of Bost. The city was ruled by Arab Muslims and Zunbils, and then later Saffarids and Ghaznavids. It is infrequently mentioned in the early Islamic sources.\nIn 681, Salm b Ziyad was appointed the governor of Khorasan and Sistan by Yazid I. He appointed his brother Yazid b. Ziyad, apparently to lead a military expedition against the Zunbil of Zabulistan. The expedition however was disastrous, with Yazid being killed, his brother Abu-'Ubayda captured, while Arabs received heavy casualties. Salm sent an expedition by Talha b. 'Abdillah al-Khuzai to rescue his brother and pacify the region. The Arab captives were ransomed for half million dirhams and the region was pacified more through diplomacy than force.\nAfter Talha's death in 683\u2013684, a virtual anarchy was unleashed amongst Sistan's Arabs. His army refused allegiance to Yazid or Muawiyah II and his son 'Abadallah had to abandon Zarang, which was left without any incharge. Many Arabs took over various quarters of Zarang and areas of Sistan. This prompted Zunbil and his allies who had already inflicted a humiliating defeat on the Arabs earlier, to intervene in the Arab affairs at Sistan and Bust. Baladhuri says of this period:\nDuring the Second Fitna period, the Zunbil attacked Sistan in 685 but was defeated and killed by the Arabs.\nAbdalmalik appointed Umayya b. 'Abdillah b. Khalid b. Asid as governor of Khorasan in 74 A.H. (693-4 A.D.), with Sistan included under his governorship. Umayya sent his son Abdullah as head of the expedition in Sistan. Though initially successful, the new Zunbil was able to defeat them. Per some accounts, Abdullah himself was killed. Umayya was dismissed and Sistan added to governorship of al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf.\nUnder Al-Hajjaj.\nAl-Hajjaj, who had become governor of Iraq and the East in 78 A.H. (697\u201398), had appointed Ubaidallah, who was a \"mawla\" of mixed Abyssinian and Iraqi-Persian origins, as his deputy in Sistan. The Zunbils who had been left unchecked had completely stopped paying the tribute. This provided a pretext to terminate the peace between the both sides. Ubaidallah was appointed for an expedition against them in 698 and was ordered by Al-Hajjaj to \"attack until he laid waste to Zunbil's territories, destroyed his strongholds, killed all his fighting men and enslaved his progeny\". The ensuing campaign was called the \"Army of Destruction\" (\"Jaish al-Fana\"'). However, it ended disastrously for the Arabs.\nAl-Baladhuri's account on the authority of Al-Mada'ini in \"Futuh al-Buldan\" and \"Ansab al-Ashraf\", is the fullest documentation of the campaign. Tabari's account runs parallel but is based on Abu Mikhnaf and does not include the poem of A'sha Hamdan included in \"Ansab al-Ashraf\". Ibn Qutaybah's \"Kitab al-Ma'arif\" only makes a bare mention. \"Ta'rikh al-khulafa\"' has a more detailed account and epitomises accounts of Tabari and Baladhuri. \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\" confuses the campaign with another one against the Khwarij of Zarang. The army consisted of Iraqis from Basra and Kufa, though Baladhuri mentions presence of some Syrians. Ubaidallah himself led the Basrans while the Tabi Shuraih b. Hani' al-Harithi ad-Dabbi led the Kufans.\nThey marched to Zamindawar or al-Rukhkhaj (the classical Arachosia) but found it was barren and foodless. Their advance probably happened in summer of 698 as A'sha Hamdan's poem refers to the scorching heat they had to endure. In Zabulistan's regions of Ghazna and Gardiz, they plundered a significant amount of cattle and other animals in addition to destroying various strongholds. The Zunbils who were devastating the countryside whilst retreating, were luring the Arabs into a trap to an inhospitable and foodless terrain. \"Futuh al-Buldan\" states that the Muslims almost penetrated Kabul. Tabari meanwhile says that they came within 18 farsakhs of the summer capital of Zunbils in the Qandahar region.\nThe plan of the Zunbils worked and they trapped the Arabs into a valley. Ubaidallah realizing the gravity of the situation, offered 500,000 or 700,000 dirhams as well as his three sons along with some Arab leaders as hostages while promising not to raid again during his tenure as Sistan's governor. Shuraih, who had earlier advised retreat, felt a withdrawal would be dishonorable. He was joined by a group of people into the battle, and all but a handful of them were killed. The remnant of the Arab army withdrew back to Bust and Sistan, suffering from starvation and thirst. Many died in the \"Desert of Bust\", presumably the Registan Desert, with only 5,000 making it back to Bust. Many of those who survived died by gorging themselves on the food sent to them according to Tabari. Ubaidallah had arranged food for them after seeing their suffering and himself died, either from grief or an ear affliction.\nAl-Hajjaj prepared another expedition in 699, reportedly of 40,000 troops from Kufa and Basra under Abdurrahman b. Muhammad b. al-Ash'ath. Though disguised as a military expedition, it was actually a forced migration of the elements from the two Iraqi cities troublesome to Hajjaj. It was equipped to the best standards and was called the \"Army of Peacocks\" because of the men included in its ranks. It included proudest and most distinguished leaders of Iraq led by Ibn al-Ash'ath, grandson of Al-Ash'ath ibn Qays. It also included distinguished elders who served in the first armies of conquest as well as those who fought at Battle of Siffin. This Arab army arrived in Sistan in the spring of 699.\nThe Arabs advanced east into Zabulistan and won several victories. However the troops didn't want to fight in this inhospitable region and started becoming restive. Al-Hajjaj instructed them to continue the advance into Zabulistan's heart no matter what it took, making it clear to them he wanted them to return to their homes. Ibn al-Ash'ath also made an agreement with the Zunbils, that no tribute would be demanded if he won and in case he lost, he would be sheltered to protect him from Al-Hajjaj. The troops mutinied against Hajjaj's enforced emigration and returned to Iraq but were crushed by the Syrian troops. They fled back to the east while Ibn al-Ash'ath fled to Sistan where he died in 704 A.D.\nWhen Ibn al-Ash'ath returned to Sistan in 702-703 A.D., he wasn't allowed into Zarang and fled to Bust where he was abducted by Iyad b. Himyan al-Bakri as-Sadusi, who he had appointed as the deputy over Bust, so Iyad could resecure favor of al-Hajjaj. Zunbil however attacked the town and threatened to slaughter or enslave everyone there unless Ibn al-Ash'ath was handed over to him. Iyad set him free and he went to Zunbil's territory along with his army. Zunbil was persuaded by Al-Hajjaj's representative to surrender him. His fate is however unclear. Per some accounts, he committed suicide while according to others he was killed by the Zunbil who sent his head to the Umayyads in Sistan. Following this, a truce was declared between Al-Hajjaj and Zunbil in return for the latter paying tribute in kind and in return, Al-Hajjaj promised not to attack him.\nFrom 8th century.\nQutayba b. Muslim, the conqueror of Transoxiana, preferred not to fight the Zunbils and accepted an offer of a rather minimal tribute from them, calling Sijistan an \"ill-omened front\". Until the reign of Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik, the Sijistan front had ceased to be volatile as the Arabs had given up on conquering the area and no fighting occurred for a long period. This in turn holding led to Zunbils not even paying a token tribute. The policy began to change under Hisham. Khalid al-Qasri in Iraq appointed Yazid b. al Ghurayf al-Hamdani as Sistan's governor, a Syrian from Jund al-Urdunn, in 725. Yazid resumed the campaign by sending an army under the command of Balal b. Abi Kabsha. They however did not obtain anything from the Zunbils.\nThe new governor of Sistan, al-Asfah b. 'Abd Allah al-Kalbi, a Syrian, embarked on ambitious policy of campaigning against the Zunbils. The first one was carried out in 726. During the second one in late 727\u2013728, he was warned by the Sijistanis who were with him to not campaign in winter especially in mountain defiles. Per Ya'qubi, his army was completely annihilated by the Zunbils. Per \"Tarikh al-Sistani\", al-Asfah managed to get back to Sistan where he died. The next two governors didn't undertake any campaigns. Zunbil was unable to take advantage of the annihilation of al-Asfah's army but the defeat was a heavy one. It would become one in a series of blows for the caliphate.\nThe Sistan front remained quiet in latter part of Abd al-Malik's reign except perhaps the Kharjite activity, with long tenures and blank records of 'Abd Allah b. Abi Baruda and Ibrahim b. 'Asim al-'Uqayli suggesting that the instability in the region had been controlled to extent. It appears this was only possible because no more campaigns were undertaken against the Zunbils.\nAl-Mansur sent Ma'n b. Zaida ash-Shabani sent to Sistan in response to disturbances in Sistan. Ma'n along with his nephew Yazid b. Ziyad undertook an expedition against the Zunbil for making him obedient and restoring the tribute not paid since the time of al-Hajjaj. It is especially well-documented by al-Baladhuri. He ordered the Zunbil to pay the tribute and was offered camels, Turkish tents and slaves, but this did not placate him. Per al-Baldahuri, under the reign of al-Mansur, Hisham b. 'Amr al-Taghlibi after conquering Kandahar, destroyed its idol-temple and built a mosque in its place.\nMa'n and Yazid advanced into Zamindawar but the Zunbil had fled to Zabulistan. They nonetheless pursued and defeated him, taking 30,000 as captives including Faraj al-Rukhkhaji, who would later become a secretary of the department of private estates of the Caliph under al-Ma'mun. Zunbil's deputy Mawand (Zunbil's son-in-law Mawld in \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\") offered submission which was requested and he was sent with 5,000 of their soldiers to Baghdad where he was treated kindly and given pensions along with his chieftains per Baladhuri.\nThe tribute was paid by the Zunbils to \"amils\" of caliphs al-Mahdi and ar-Rashid, though rather irregularly. When the Caliph Al-Ma'mun (r. 813\u2013833 A.D.) visited Khorasan, he was paid double the tribute by Rutbil, but was evidently left unmolested and the Arabs later subdued Kabul.\nKabul Shahi.\nThe area had been under the rule of the Turk Shahi who took over the rule of Kabul in the seventh century and later were attacked by the Arabs. The Turk Shahi dynasty was Buddhist and were followed by a Hindu dynasty shortly before the Saffarid conquest in 870 A.D. Al-Ma'mun's expeditions were the last Arab conflict against Kabul and Zabul and the long-drawn conflict ended with the dissolution of the empire. Muslim missionaries converted many people to Islam; however, the entire population did not convert, with repetitive revolts from the mountain tribes in the Afghan area taking place. The Hindu Shahi were defeated by Mahmud of Ghazna (r. 998-1030) who expelled them from Gandhara and also encouraged mass-conversions in Afghanistan and India.\nWhen Ar-Rabi b. Ziyad reached Helmand, the Zunbils held power as far as Zarang. The \"Kabulshah\" was a subordinate of the Zunbil. Subsequent to the first Arab clashes with the Zunbils and Kabulshahs, we find the Zunbil negotiating with the representatives of the Caliph \"for his own country and the land of Kabul.\" The Zunbils were linked to the Turki Shahi dynasty of Kabul, which was at the time a cultural and religious outpost of the Indian world.\nDuring the caliphate of Uthman, new popular uprisings had broken out in Persia and continued for five years from 644\u2013649. The revolts were suppressed and Abdullah b. Amir, who was appointed governor of Basra, had captured many cities including Balkh, Herat and Kabul. After Muawiyah became the Caliph, he prepared an expedition under 'Abd ar-Rahman b. Samura to Khorasan. Per Baladhuri, after recapturing Zarang as well as conquering other cities, they besieged Kabul for a few months and finally entered it. Per the historian Firishta, while capturing Kabul in 664 A.D., Samura had made converts of some 12,000 people. Kabul's ruler was obliged to pay a tribute. This didn't last long as he soon drove out the Arabs from his lands after Samura's death. A treaty was renegotiated but about the time of death of Yazid I, \"the people of Kabul treacherously broke the compact\". The Arab army sent to reimpose it was routed.\nIn about 680\u2013683, the Shah fled from his brother Rutbil and approached Salm b. Ziyad at Amul in Khorasan where he accepted his suzerainty. The reason for the Shah's refuge is not known. After his successes in Zabulistan, the Rutbil may have assumed a threatening position to him, causing him to seek help of Arabs. A treaty was agreed with the Shah though its terms are not known. He was allowed to settle down in Amul (or at least under Amul's jurisdiction somewhere north of Hindu Kush). Per Tabari, Salm was elated at this and wrote to Mu'awiyah who disapproved of it. When asked the reason, he responded that \"there is a lot of ill-will and bad feeling in Zaranj and Amul. The people living in the lands between these two places are disloyal and treacherous. They are likely to take advantage of the moment of our weakness and, then, it would be easier for them to capture the territory up to Amul\". And it precisely happened after Muawiyah's death per Tabari.\nThe Shah captured Amul and became powerful enough to threaten Rutbil who went into hiding. Zunbil's brother, \"'al-Shah\" also besieged Zaranj, but the Turks retreated after reinforcements arrived from Basra. Abdur Rehman who studied the descriptions of Tabari however stated that these events should be seen as having happened in Yazid's time since Salm was governor under his reign. In 152 A.H. (769 A.D.), Humayd ibn Qahtaba, the governor of Khorasan, raided Kabul. According to Ibn al-Athir, al-'Abbas b. Ja'far led an expedition against Kabul sent by his father Ja'far b. Muhamamad in 787\u201378, which Bosworth claims is the one attributed to Ibrahim b. Jibril by Al-Ya'qubi.\nThe only record of an event in early Abbasid period obviously related to the area south of the Hindu Kush, is the expedition against Kabul in 792-793 ordered by Al-Fadl ibn Yahya and led by Ibrahim b. Jibril. It is mentioned by al-Tabari's chronicle, the tenth century \"Kit\u0101b al-Wuzar\u0101'wa al-Kutt\u0101b\" of al-Jahshiyari and by al-Ya'qubi. Per al-Jahshiyari, he conquered Kabul and acquired a lot of wealth. Al-Ya'qubi states that rulers and landlords of Tukharistan, including Bamiyan's king, joined this army, implying it crossed Hindu Kush from the north. It also mentions subjugation of \"Ghurwand\" (present-day Ghorband). He also mentions the \"Pass of Ghurwand\" which judging by the itinerary of the expedition from Tukharistan to Bamiyan to Ghorband valley, is identical to Shibar Pass. They then marched to Shah Bahar where an idol venerated by the locals was destroyed. The inhabitants of various towns then concluded peace treaties with Fadl, one of which was identified by Josef Markwart as Kapisa.\nAl-Ma'mun (r. 813\u2013833 A.D.) while visiting Khorasan, launched an attack on Kabul, whose ruler submitted to taxation. The king of Kabul was captured and he then converted to Islam. Per sources, when the Shah submitted to al-Ma'mun, he sent his crown and bejeweled throne, later seen by the Meccan historian al-Azraqi to the Caliph who praised Fadl for \"curbing polytheists, breaking idols, killing the refractory\" and refers to his successes against Kabul's king and \"ispahabad\". Other near-contemporary sources however refer to the artifacts as a golden jewel-encrusted idol sitting on a silver throne by the Hindu Shahi ruler or by an unnamed ruler of \"Tibet\" as a sign of his conversion to Islam.\nQutayba's campaigns.\nQutayba b. Muslim was appointed the governor of Khorasan in 705 by al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf, the governor of Iraq and the East. He began his rule with the reconquest of western Tokharistan in the same year. Qutayba who was tasked with subduing the revolt in Lower Tokharistan, led the final conquest of Balkh. His army was assembled in spring of 705 and marched to Balkh. Per one version of al-Tabari, the city was surrendered peacefully. Another version, speaks of a revolt among the residents. In 706, he received the submission of Nizak, the leader of Badghis. In 707, he marched on Bukhara oasis along with Nizak in his army but the campaign didn't achieve any major objective.\nAccording to Baldhuri, when Qutayba ibn Muslim became the governor of Khorasan and Sistan, he appointed his brother 'Amr to Sistan. 'Amr asked the Zunbil to pay tribute in cash but he refused, prompting Qutayba to march against him. The campaign was also partially encouraged by his desire to eliminate the support of the southern Hepthalites, the Zabulites, for their northern brethren to revolt. Zunbil who was surprised by this unexpected move and scared of his reputation, quickly capitulated. Qutayba, realizing the real strength of the Zunbils, accepted it and returned to Merv, leaving only an Arab representative in Sistan.\nPer Al-Mada'ini, Qutayba returned to Merv after conquering Bukhara in 709. The rebellion of the Hepthalite principalities from region of Guzgan including Taloqan and Faryab, led Qutayba to dispatch 12,000 men from Merv to Balkh in winter of 709. The rebellion was led and organized by Nizak Tarkhan and was supported by Balkh and Marw al-Rudh's dihqan B\u0101d\u0101m. Nizak had realised that independence wouldn't be possible if Arab rule was strengthened in Khorasan, and perhaps was also encouraged by Qutayba's attempts to achieve his objectives through diplomacy. The success of Zunbils may also have encouraged him.\nNizak wrote to the Zunblis asking for help. In addition, he also forced the weak J\u0101bgh\u016b of Tokharistan to join his cause to persuade all princes of the Principalities of Tukharistan to do the same. His plan to stage the revolt in spring of 710 was however spoilt by Qutayba. Badham fled when Qutayba advanced on Marw al-Rudh but his two sons were caught and crucified by Qutayba who next marched to Taloqan. Taloqan was the only place in his campaign where the inhabitants weren't given a complete amnesty, concerning which H.A.R. Gibb states the \"traditions are hopelessly confused\". Per one account, he executed and crucified a band of bandits there, though it is possible it was selected for this severity as it was the only place where there was an open revolt.\nFaryab and Guzgan both submitted and their inhabitants were not harmed. From there he went on to receive the submission of people of Balkh. Almost all of Nizak's princely allies had reconciled themselves with him and there were Arab governors in all towns of Tokharistan, spoiling his plans. He fled south to the Hindu Kush, hoping to reach Kabul and entrenched himself in an inaccessible mountain pass guarded by a fortress. The Arabs succeeded in gaining the fort with help of Ru'b Khan, ruler of Ru'b and Siminjan. Nizak fled along the modern road that leads from the Oxus valley to Salang Pass and holed up in an unidentified mountain refuge in a site of Baghlan Province. Qutayba caught up with him and besieged him for two months.\nSulaym al-Nasih (the counsellor), a \"mawla\" of Khorasan, helped in obtaining his surrender to Qutayba who promised a pardon. Nonetheless, he was executed along with 700 of his followers after orders from al-Hajjaj. The Jabghu of Tokharistan was sent as a valuable hostage to Damascus. He then went in pursuit of Juzjan's king, who requested amnesty and called for exchange of hostages as precautionary measure. This was agreed upon and Habib b. 'Abd Allah, a Bahilite, was sent as prisoner by Qutayba while the king sent some of his family members in return. The peace treaty was agreed but the king died in Taloqan on his return journey. His subjects accused the Muslims of poisoning him and killed Habib, with Qutayba retaliating by executing Juzjan's hostages.\nOther regions.\nGhur.\nTabari records that in 667 A.D., Ziyad b. Abihi had sent Hakam b. 'Amr al-Ghafri to Khorasan as Amir. Hakam raided Ghur and Farawanda, bringing them to submission through force of arms and conquered them. He obtained captives and a large amount of plunder from them. A larger expedition was undertaken under Asad ibn Abdallah al-Qasri, the governor of Khorasan, who raided Gharchistan in 725, receiving its submission as well as the conversion of its king to Islam. He next attacked Ghur whose residents hid their valuables in an inaccessible cave, but he was able to plunder the wealth by lowering men in crates.\nAsad's success prompted him to undertake a second expedition in 108-109 A.H. against Ghur. The poet Thabit Qutna's eulogical poem of Asad recorded by Tabari called it a campaign against the Turks saying, \"Groups of the Turks who live between Kabul and Ghurin came to you, since there was no place in which they might find refuge from you.\" Bosworth states that this campaign may have actually taken place in Guzgan or Bamiyan rather than the purely-Iranian Ghur. He also states that no doubt further sporadic raids continued throughout the Umayyad rule, though not noted by historians. It is known that Nasr ibn Sayyar's commander Sulaiman b. Sul had raided Gharchistan and Ghur some time before 739 A.D.\nThe early history of Ghor is unclear. Minhaj-i-Siraj in Tabaqat-i-Nasiri states that Shansab, who established the Ghurid dynasty, was converted by the Arab Caliph Ali which Mohammad Habib and K. A. Nizami dismissed as unlikely. He further adds that the Ghurid Amir Faulad assisted Abu Muslim in overthrowing the Umayyads during the Abbasid Revolution. He also recounts a legend about a dispute between two prominent families of the area. They sought the intercession of the Abbasids and the ancestor of the Shansabi family, Amir Banji, was subsequently confirmed as the ruler by Harun al-Rashid.\nNo permanent control was ever established on Ghur. According to Bosworth, its value was only for its slaves which could best be obtained in occasional temporary raids. Arab and Persian geographers never considered it important. In all sources it is cited as supplying slaves to slave markets in Khorasan, indicating it had a mostly \"infidel\" population. Istakhari called it a land of infidels (\"dar al-kufr\") annexed to Islamic domain because of its Muslim minority. However \"Hudud al-'Alam\" stated it had a mostly-Muslim population.\nGhazna.\nThe pre-Ghaznavid royal dynasty of Ghazna were the Lawiks. Afghan historian 'Abd al-Hayy Habibi Qandahari who in 1957 examined a manuscript containing tales about miracles (\"karamat\") of \"Shaikh\" Sakhi Surur of Multan who lived in the 12th century, concluded it dated to 1500. He recorded one of its anecdotes which records history of Ghazna by the Indian traditionalist and lexicographer Radi ad-Din Hasan b. Muhammad al-Saghani [died 1252] from Abu Hamid az-Zawuli. According to it, a great mosque at Ghazna was earlier a great idol-temple built in honor of the Rutbils and Kabul-Shahs by Wujwir Lawik. His son Khanan converted to Islam and was sent a poem by the Kabul-Shah saying, \"Alas! The idol of Lawik has been interred beneath the earth of Ghazna, and the Lawiyan family have given away [the embodiment of] their kingly power. I am going to send my own army; do not yourself follow the same way of the Arabs [ie., Islam].\"\nHabibi continues stating that Khanan later reconverted to the faith of the Hindu-Shahis. His grandson Aflah however upon assuming power demolished the idol-temple and built a mosque in its place. When the saint Surur arrived at the mosque, he is said to have found the idol of Lawik and destroyed it. The \"Siyasatnama\" of Nizam al-Mulk, the \"Tabaqat-i Nasiri\" of Juzjani and the \"Majma' al-ans\u0101b f\u012b't-taw\u0101r\u012bkh\" of Muhammad Shabankara'i (14th century) mention Lawik. Juzjani gives the Lawik who was defeated by Alp-tegin the Islamic \"kunya\" of \"Abu Bakr\" though Shabankara'i claims he was a pagan. A variant of his name appears as Anuk in \"Tabaqat-i Nasiri\".\nBamyan.\nYa'qubi states that lord of Bamyan called the \"Sh\u0113r\", was converted to Islam under Caliph Al-Mansur (d.775) by Muzahim b. Bistam who married his son Abu Harb Muhammad to his daughter. However, in his history he changes it to the rule of Al-Mahdi (r. 775\u2013785). Ya'qubi also states that Al-Fadl ibn Yahya made Hasn, Abu Harb Muhammad's son, as the new \"Sh\u0113r\" after his successful campaign in Ghorband. Ya'qubi states that the ruler of Bamiyan had accompanied an expedition dispatched by Al-Fadl ibn Yahya in 792\u2013793 against Kabul Shahi.\nLater Shers remained Muslim and were influential at the Abbasid court. However, Muslim sources describe the Saffarid ruler Ya'qub ibn al-Layth al-Saffar looting Bamiyan's pagan idols. A much later historian Shabankara'i claims that Alp-Tegin obtained conversion of Sher to Islam in 962. It seems there were lapses to Buddhism among some of the rulers as the Muslim influence grew weak. However, there is no evidence about the role of Buddhism during these periods or whether Buddhist monasteries remained the center of religious life and teaching.\nPost-Arab rule.\nTahirids.\nKhurasan was the base for early recruitment of Abbasid armies, especially the Abbasid takeover received support from Arab settlers aiming to undermine the important sections of non-Muslim aristocracy. The Abbasids succeeded in integrating Khorasan and the East into the central Islamic lands. The state was gradually Persianized through political influence and financial support of the \"dihqans\". Al-Ma'mun emerged as the victor in Fourth Fitna with the help of Khorasani forces. But this also ended up turning the province into a virtually independent state under the Tahirids, founded by a Persian \"mawla\" who rose to favour under Al-Ma'mun.\nAccording to Ibn Khordadbeh, the Shah of Kabul had to send 2,000 Oghuz slaves worth 600,000 dirhams as annual tribute to the governor of Khorasan Abdallah ibn Tahir (828-845). In addition to the Oghuz slaves, he also had to pay an annual tribute of 1.5 million dirhams. Mid-9th century, one of their tributaries Abu Da'udid or Banijurid Amir Da'ud b. Abu Da'ud Abbas, undertook an obscure campaign into eastern Afghanistan and Zabulistan that was profitable. It is recorded that in 864 Muhammad ibn Tahir sent two elephants captured at Kabul, idols and aromatic substances to the caliph.\nSaffarids.\nYa'qub b. al-Layth.\nThe Tahirid rule was overthrown by Ya'qub ibn al-Layth al-Saffar of Sistan, the first independent Iranian ruler in the post-Islamic era and fought the Abbasid Caliphate. He joined the 'ayyar band of Salih b. al-Nadr/Nasr, who was recognised as Bust's amir in 852. al-Nasr aimed at taking over whole of Sistan and drove out the Tahirid governor in 854, with Sistan ceasing to be under direct control of the Caliphate. al-Nasr himself was overthrown by Dirham b. Nasr who was overthrown by Ya'qub in 861. Ya'qub and his brother Amr advanced as far as Baghdad and to Kabul itself in eastern Afghanistan with their dynamism, advancing along the historic route taken by the modern Lashkargah-Qandahar-Ghazni-Kabul road. Their eastern campaigns are documented by Arabic sources of Al-Masudi's \"Mur\u016bj adh-dhahab\", Ibn al-Athir's \"al-K\u0101mil fi't-t\u0101'r\u012bkh\" and \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\". The Persian historian Gardizi's \"Zain al-akhb\u0101r\" also mentions the Saffarid campaigns.\nSalih fled to ar-Rukhkhaj or Arachosia, where he received the help of the Zunbil. Both Salih and the Zunbil were killed by Ya'qub in 865. Abu Sa'id Gardezi mentions that Ya'qub advanced from Sistan to Bust and occupied the city. From here he advanced to Panjway and Tiginabad (two of the chief towns of Arachosia), defeating and killing the Zunbil, though the date isn't given. This account matches with that of \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\". Satish Chandra states that, \"We are told that it was only in 870 AD that Zabulistan was finally conquered by one Yakub who was the virtual ruler of the neighbouring Iranian province of Siestan. The king was killed and his subjects were made Muslims.\"\nMuhammad Aufi's \"Jawami ul-Hikayat\" meanwhile states that during his invasion of Zabul, he employed a ruse to surrender after being allowed to pay homage to the ruler along with his troops lest they disperse and become dangerous to both sides. Yaqub's troops \"carried their lances concealed behind their horses and were wearing coats of mail under their garments. The Almighty made the army of Rusal (probably Rutbil), blind, so that they did not see the lances. When Yaqub drew near Rusal, he bowed his head as if to do homage, but raised a lance and thrust it in the back of Rusal so that he died on the spot. His people also fell like lightning upon the enemy, cutting them down with their swords and staining the earth with the blood of the enemies of the religion. The infidels when they saw the head of Rusal upon the point of a spear took to flight and great bloodshed ensued. This victory, which he achieved, was the result of treachery and deception, such as no one had ever committed.\"\nAshirbadi Lal Srivastava states that after this victory by Yaqub over Zabul, the position of Lallya alias Kallar, the Brahmin minister who had overthrown the last Kshatriya king of Kabul Lagaturman, seems to have become untenable. He shifted his capital to Udhaband in 870 A.D. Lallya, credited as an able and strong ruler by Kalhana in \"Rajatarangini\", was driven out by Ya'qub from Kabul within a year of his usurpation according to Srivastava.\nGardezi states that after defeating Zunbil, he then advanced into Zabulistan and then Ghazna, whose citadel he destroyed and forced Abu Mansur Aflah b. Muhammad b. Khaqan, local ruler of nearby Gardez, to tributary status. \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\" however in contrast states that he returned to Zarang after killing Salih. This campaign may be related to Gardizi's account of later expedition in 870 where he advanced as far as Bamiyan and Kabul. Salih b. al-Hujr, described as a cousin of the Zunbil, was appointed as the Saffarid governor of ar-Rukhkhaj, but rebelled two years after Zunbil's death and committed suicide to avoid capture.\nYa'qub had captured several relatives of the Zunbil's family after defeating Salih b. al-Nasr. Zunbil's son escaped from captivity in 869 and quickly raised an army in al-Rukhkhaj, later seeking refuge with the Kabul-Shah. Per Gardizi, Ya'qub undertook another expedition in 870 which advanced as far as Kabul and Bamiyan. According to \"Tarikh-e-Sistan\", Bamiyan was captured in 871. He wrested Bamiyan from its ruler, the \"Sher\", and plundered its idol-temple. He defeated Kabul in 870 and again had to march to there in 872 when Zunbil's son took possession of Zabulistan. Ya'qub captured the Zunbil's son from the fortress of Nay-Laman where he had fled. In 871, Ya'qub sent 50 gold and silver idols he gained by campaigning from Kabul to Caliph Al-Mu'tamid, who sent them to Mecca.\nAccording to Tabaqat-i-Nasiri, Ghor which was ruled by Amir Suri in the 9th century entered into a war against him, but escaped conquest due to its difficult and mountainous terrain.\nAmr b. al-Layth.\nAfter Ya'qub's death in 879, Al-Mu'tamid recognised his brother and successor 'Amr b. al-Layth (r. 879\u2013902), as governor of Khorasan, Isfahan, Fars, Sistan and Sindh. The caliph however announced divesting him of all his governorships in 885 and reappointed Muhammad b. Tahir as the governor of Khorasan. He was reappointed governor of Khorasan in 892 by Al-Mu'tadid.\nAmr led an expedition as far as Sakawand in the Logar valley, between Ghazna and Kabul, described as a Hindu pilgrimage-centre. In 896, he sent idols captured from Zamindawar and the Indian frontier, including a female copper idol with four arms and two girdles of silver set with jewels pulled on a trolley by camels, to Baghdad. Al-Baihaki mentions Sakawand as a pass from Kabul to India. It was situated at or near Jalalabad. The idol taken from somewhere in eastern Afghanistan by Amr was displayed for three days in Basra and then for three days in Baghdad. Jamal J. Elias states that it may have been of Lakshmi or Sukhavati at Sakawand. Al-Masudi emphasises the attention it received as a spectacle, with crowds gathering to gawk at it.\nAufi states that Amr had sent Fardaghan as the prefect over Ghazna and he launched the raid on Sakawand, which was a part of the territory of Kabul Shahi and had a temple frequented by Hindus. The Shah of Kabul at this time was Kamaluka, called \"Kamalu\" in Persian literature. Fardaghan entered it and succeeded in surprising Sakawand. Sakawand was plundered, and its temple destroyed.\nKamalu counter-attacked Fardaghan who realising his forces were no match for his, resorted to spreading a false rumour that he knew his intentions and had organised a formidable army against him with 'Amr on the way to join him. The rumour had the desired effect and the opposing army slowed its advance knowing that they could be ambushed and slaughtered if they advanced impetuously into the narrow defiles. Meanwhile, Fardaghan received reinforcements from Khorasan according to Aufi. According to Aufi he cleverly averted the danger.\n\"Tarikh-e-Sistan\" doesn't mention any attack by Fardaghan on Sakawand however, instead beginning with the attack by Kamalu. Per it, when Amr was in Gurgan, he heard that \"Nasad Hindi\" and \"Alaman Hindi\" had allied and invaded Ghazna. The Saffarid governor 'Fard 'Ali was defeated and fled.\nSamanids.\nThe Samanids came to rule over areas including Khorasan, Sistan, Tokharistan and Kabulistan after Ismail (r. 892907) in 900 A.D. had defeated the Saffarids, who had taken over Zabulistan and the Kabul region. The Turks were highly noted for their martial prowess by the Muslim sources and were in high demand as slave-soldiers (\"ghulam\", \"mamluk\") by the Caliphate in Baghdad and the provincial emirs. The slaves were acquired either in military campaigns or through trade. The Samanids were heavily involved in this trade of Turkish slaves from lands to the north and east of their state. As the enslavement was limited to non-Muslims and with the Turks increasingly adopting Islam beyond Samanid borders, they also entered Transoxiana as free men due to various causes.\nThe Ghaznavids arose indirectly from the atmosphere of disintegration, palace revolutions and succession putschs of the Samanid Empire. Abu-Mansur Sabuktigin was one of the Samanid slave guards who rose from the ranks to come under the patronage of the Chief \"Hajib\" Alp-Tegin. After the death of the Samanid Amir 'Abd al-Malik b. Nuh, the commander of forces in Khorasan Alp-Tegin along with the \"vizier\" Muhammad Bal'ami attempted to place a ruler of their choice on the throne. The attempt failed however and Alp-Tegin decided to withdraw to the eastern fringes of the empire. Per the sources, he wanted to flee to India to avoid his enemies and earn divine merit by raiding the Hindus. He didn't intend to capture Ghazna, but was forced to take it when denied transit by its ruler.\nAlp-Tegin proceeded with his small force of \"ghulams\" and \"ghazis\" (200 ghulams and 800 ghazis according to \"Siyasatnama\", while \"Majma al-ansab\" of Muhammad b. Ali al-Shabankara'i (d. 1358) states 700 ghulams and 2,500 Tajiks). En route, he subdued the Iranian \"Sher\" of Bamiyan and the Hindu-Shahi king of Kabul. He then came to Ghazna whose citadel he besieged for four months and wrested the town from its ruler, Abu 'Ali or Abu Bakr Lawik or Anuk. The origin of this chief was Turkic, though it is not known if he was a Samanid vassal or an independent ruler. Josef Markwart suggests he was a late representative of the Zunbils. The Lawik dynasty of Ghazna was linked to the Hindu-Shahi dynasty through marriage. Alp-Tegin was accompanied by Sabuktigin during the conquest of Ghazna.\nMinhaj al-Siraj Juzjani states that Alp-Tegin had his position regularised by Amir Mansur b. Nuh through an investiture, however \"Siyasatnama\" mentions an expedition against Alp-Tegin from Bukhara which was defeated outside Ghazna. His ambiguous, semi-rebel status seems to be reflected in his coins, with two of his coins minted at Parwan mentioning his authority from the Samanids to mint coins only in an indirect way. He was succeeded by his son Abu Ishaq Ibrahim, who lost Ghazna to Abu Ali Lawik, the son of its expelled ruler. He recovered it however with Samanid help in 964\u201365.\nAlp-Tegin's ghulams were reconciled with the Samanids in 965 but maintained their autonomy. After Ibrahim's death in 966, Bilge-Tigin was made the successor and he acknowledged the Samanids as his overlords. He died in 976 and was succeeded by B\u00f6ritigin or Piri. Piri's misrule led to resentment among the people who invited Abu Ali to take back the throne. The Kabul Shahis allied with him and the king, most likely Jayapala, sent his son to assist Lawik in the invasion. When the allied forces reached near Charkh on Logar River, they were attacked by Sabuktigin who killed and captured many of them while also capturing ten elephants. Piri was expelled and Sabuktigin became governor in 977 A.D. The accession was endorsed by the Samanid ruler Nuh II.\nThe Hudud al-\u2018Alam states Ghor was under the overlordship of Farighunids. Both Gardezi and Baihaqi state in 379 A.H. (979\u2013980 A.D.), the Samanid Amir Nuh b. Mansur despatched an expedition under Abu Ja'far Zubaidi to conquer Ghur but he had to return after capturing several forts. As the Samanid governor of Zabulistan and Ghazni, Sabuktigin attacked it several times. He was able to conquer eastern Ghur after initial set-backs and was acknowledged as a sovereign by Muhammad ibn Suri.\nGhaznavids.\nSabuktigin.\nFirst war against Jayapala.\nThe Ghaznavid campaigns from the time of Sabuktigin are recorded as \"jihad\" against the people of \"al-Hind\" to destroy idolatry and replace it by expanding Islam. The Kabul Shahis only retained Lamghan in the Kabul-Gandhara area by the time of Alp-tegin. According to Firishta, Sabuktigin had already begun raiding Lamghan under Alp-tegin. This precipitated an alliance between the Shahi ruler Jayapala and the Muslim Amirs of Multan. He crossed the Khyber Pass many times and raided the territory of Jaipala.\nSabuktigin plundered the forts in the outlying provinces of the Kabul Shahi and captured many cities, acquiring huge booty. He also established Islam at many places. Jaipal in retaliation marched with a large force into the valley of Lamghan (Jalalabad) where he clashed with Sabuktigin and his son. The battle stretched on several days until a snow storm affected Jaipala's strategies, forcing him to plead for peace. He was inclined to grant peace to Jayapala but his son Mahmud wanted total victory.\nJaypala upon hearing Mahmud's plans warned, \"You have seen the impetuosity of the Hindus and their indifference to death... If therefore, you refuse to grant peace in the hope of obtaining plunder, tribute, elephants and prisoners, then there is no alternative for us but to mount the horse of stern determination, destroy our property, take out the eyes of our elephants, cast our children into fire, and rush out on each other with sword and spear, so that all that will be left to you to conquer and seize is stones and dirt, dead bodies, and scattered bones.\" Knowing he could carry it out, Sabuktigin granted him peace on promise of paying tribute and ceding some of his territory.\nSecond war against Jayapala.\nAfter making peace with Sabuktigin, Jayapala returned to Waihind but broke the treaty and mistreated the amirs sent to collect the tribute. Sabuktigin launched another invasion in retaliation. While the mamluks remained the core of his army, he also hired the \"Afghans\", especially the Ghilji tribe, in his dominion. According to al-Utbi, Sabuktigin attacked Lamghan, conquering it and burning the residences of the \"infidels\" while also demolishing its idol-temples and establishing Islam. He proceeded to butcher the idolaters, destroyed their temples and plundered their shrines. It is said his forces even risked frostbite on their hands while counting the large booty.\nTo avenge the savage attack of Sabuktigin, Jayapala, who had earlier taken his envoys as hostage, decided to go to war again in revenge. According to al-Utbi, he assembled an army of 100,000 against Sabuktigin. The much later account of Ferishta states that it included troops from Kanauj, Ajmer, Delhi and Kalinjar. The two sides fought an open battlefield in Laghman. Sabuktigin divided his army into packs of 500 who attacked the Indians in succession. After sensing that they were weakened, his forces mounted a concerted attack. The forces of Kabul Shahi were routed and those still alive were killed in the forest or drowned in the river.\nThe second battle that took place between Sabuktigin and Jayapala in 988 A.D., resulted in the former capturing territory between Lamghan and Peshawar. Al-Utbi also states that the Afghans and Khaljis, living there as nomads, took the oath of allegiance to him and were recruited into his army. He helped Nuh II in expelling the rebel and heretic Abu Ali Simjur from Khorasan, resulting in its governorship being given to Sabuktigin who appointed Mahmud as his deputy there. He appointed Ismail as successor to his kingdom and died in 997. A succession war erupted between Ismail and Mahmud, with the latter gaining the throne in 998.\nSultan Mahmud.\nThe Samanid amir Mansur II appointed Bektuzun as Khorasan's governor after Sabuktigin's death. Mahmud however wished to reacquire the governorship after defeating his brother Ismail and his allies. Bektuzun and Fa'iq, the \"de facto\" power behind the Samanid throne, toppled Mansur II as they did not trust him and replaced him with Abu'l Fawaris 'Abd al-Malik. Their forces were however defeated in 999 by Mahmud, who acquired all the lands south of Oxus with even those to the north of the river submitting to him. The Samanid dynasty was later ended by the Karakhanids. In 1002, Mahmud also defeated the Saffarid Amir Khalaf ibn Ahmad and annexed Sistan.\nWars against Kabul Shahi.\nMahmud systemized plunder raids into India as a long-term policy of the Ghaznavids. The first raid was undertaken in September 1000, but was meant for reconnaissance and identifying the possible terrain and roads that could be used for future raids. He reached Peshawar by September 1001 and was attacked by Jayapala. The two sides clashed on 27\u201328 November 1001 with Jayapala captured. Anandapala who was at Waihand had to pay a heavy ransom to have his father and others released. Jaypala self-immolated out of shame and Anandpala succeeded him. Mahmud attacked Anandpala later over his refusal to allow him passage during the attack on Multan controlled by Fateh Daud. The two sides clashed in 1009 in the eastern side of Indus at Chhachh, with Mahmud defeating Anandapala and capturing the fort of Bhimnagar. He was allowed to rule as a feudatory in Punjab for some time.\nAn alliance between Anandpala's son, Trilochanpala, and Kashmiri troops was defeated. During the warfare from 990\u201391 to 1015, Afghanistan, and later Punjab and Multan were lost to the Ghaznavids. Trilochanpala's rule was limited to eastern Punjab and he gained respite from the Muslim invasions with retreat to Sirhind. He allied with the Chandellas\nand in 1020-21 was defeated at a river called Rahib by Al-Utbi, while Firishta and Nizamuddin Ahmad identify it as Yamuna. He was killed in 1021 A.D. by his mutinous troops and succeeded by Bhimapala. Bhimapala who was the last ruler, was killed fighting the Ghaznavids in 1026 A.D. The remnants of the royal family sought refuge with the Lohara dynasty of Kashmir and Punjab passed under the control of Muslim conquerors.\nMahmud used his plundered wealth to finance his armies which included mercenaries. The Indian soldiers, presumably Hindus, who were one of the components of the army with their commander called \"sipahsalar-i-Hinduwan\" lived in their quarter of Ghazna practicing their own religion. Indian soldiers under their commander Suvendhray remained loyal to Mahmud. They were also used against a Turkic rebel, with the command given to a Hindu named Tilak according to Baihaki.\nThe renowned 14th-century Moroccan Muslim scholar Ibn Battuta remarked that the Hindu Kush meant the \"slayer of Indians\", because slaves brought from India who had to pass through there died in large numbers due to the extreme cold and quantity of snow. He states:\nInvasions of Ghur.\nThe conversion of Ghur occurred over a long period and it was mostly pagan until the 10th century, which Mohammad Habib and Khaliq Ahmad Nizami say was probably a result of the missionary activities by the Karramiyya movement established in the region in 10th-11th centuries. Its imperfect conversion is visible by the fact that while the people of Ghur had Muslim names, they led the life of pagans. Muhammad b. Suri who had acknowledged Sabuktigin as his sovereign, withheld tribute after his death, started plundering caravans and harassed the subjects of Sultan Mahmud. Raw\u017cat a\u1e63-\u1e63af\u0101\u02be called him a pagan, al-Utbi stated he was a Hindu.\nIn 1011, Mahmud despatched an expedition to conquer Ghur under Altuntash, governor of Herat, and Arslan Hajib, governor of Tus. Muhammad b. Suri, the king, placed himself in inaccessible hills and ravines. The Ghurids were however defeated and Suri was captured along with his son Shith. Abu Ali, who had remained on good terms with the Sultan, was made the ruler of Ghur by him. Eastern Ghur was brought under Ghaznavid control. In 1015, Mahmud attacked Ghur's southwestern district of Khwabin and captured some forts.\nIn 1020, Mahmud's son Ma'sud was despatched to take Ghur's northwestern part called Tab. He was helped by Abul Hasan Khalaf and Shirwan, chieftains of the south-western and north-eastern regions respectively. He captured many forts, bringing entire Ghur except maybe the inaccessible interior under Ghaznavid control. He also captured the stronghold of the chieftain Warmesh-Pat of Jurwas, levying a tribute of arms. Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani praises Abu Ali for firmly establishing Islamic institutions in Ghur. The progress of Islam in this divided region after his death is however unknown.\nGhur remained a pagan enclave until the 11th century. Mahmud who raided it, left Muslim precepts to teach Islam to the local population. The region became Muslim by 12th century though the historian Satish Chandra states that Mahayana Buddhism is believed to have existed until the end of the century. Neither Mahmud nor Ma'sud conquered the interior. Habib and Nizami say Ghurids were gradually converted by propagandists of new mystic movements. The Shansabani succeeded in establishing their seniority, if not its unification. By the time of Sultan Bahram, Ghur was converted and politically unified. According to Minhaj, both Ghiyasuddin and Mu'izzuddin were Karamis who later converted to Shafi\u2018i and Hanafi Islam respectively. The Tarikh-i guzida however says the Ghorids were only converted to Islam by Mahmud.\nConversion of Pashtun-Afghan people.\nThe name \"Afghanistan\" was first used in a political sense by Saifi Herawi in the 14th century. It was even used during the height of the Durrani Empire. Only after the Durand line was fixed, did its modern usage for the land between it and the Oxus river became usual. The people who were mostly responsible for establishing the Afghan kingdom are referred to as \"Pashtun\". The name \"Pashtun\" (or \"Pakthun\") is the original and oldest name.\nThe tenth-century Persian geography \"Hudud al-'Alam\" is the earliest known mention of the Afghans. In \"Discourse on the Country of Hindistan and Its Towns\", he states that, \"Saul, a pleasant village on a mountain. In it live Afghans.\" Ibn Battuta described Saul being situated between Gardez and Husaynan along a common trade route, the exact location of Husaynan is unknown. Akhund Darweza states their original homeland was Qandahar from where they migrated in 11th century upon Mahmud of Ghazni's request to assist him in his conquests. Afghan tradition considers \"Kase Ghar\" in Sulayman range as the homeland. \"Hudud al-'Alam\" also mentions that the king of Ninhar (Nangarhar) had many wives including \"Moslem, Afghan and Hindu\".\nThe Pashtun traditions speak of Islamization during Muhammad's time through Khalid ibn Walid. Qais Abdur Rashid, the presumed ancestor of the Afghans, is said to have led a delegation to Mecca from Ghor after being summoned by Khalid b. Walid and converted to Islam while also distinguishing himself in the service of the prophet. Adopting the name Abdul Rashid, three sons - Saraban, Ghurghust, Karlani, and a foundling Karlanri linked to Saban, are the progenitors of the major Afghan divisions.\nNi'matullah's \"Makhzan-i-Afghani\" traces their history to an Israelite called Afghana who constructed the al-Aqsa mosque. Per it under the time of King Suleiman, a figure named Bokhtnasser was responsible for \"carrying away the Israelites, whom he settled in the mountainous districts of Ghor, Ghazneen, Kabul, Candahar, Koh Firozeh, and the parts lying within the fifth and sixth climates; where they, especially those descended of Asif and Afghana, fixed their habitations, continually increasing in number, and incessantly making war on the infidels around them.\" Qais traveled to Medina to receive Mohammed's blessings and fought against the Meccans. Muhammad himself conferred the title of \"Pashtun\" upon Qais and his people. They returned to Ghor to spread Islam and pledged loyalty to Mahmud. Per Ni'matullah, the Ghurid ruler Mu'izz al-Din had initiated their eastward migration into present-day north-west Pakistan, in course of his military campaigns.\nThe Arabs, at war with the Kabul Shah, had directed their campaigns in direction of Gandhara. By the time of Muawiya, Sistan's governorship was separated from Khorasan with the governor looking after the region and keeping a check on Kabul Shah. Ahmed Hassan Dani considers that the Arab activities may have led to conversion of Aghans as well, and it may have been wholesale because of their tribal nature ie., all the Afghan tribes adopted Islam at once.\nQuoting \"Matla-al-Anwar\", Ferishta states a man named Khalid, son of Abdullah, stated by some to be a descendant of Khalid bin Walid or Abu Jahl, was for some time governor of Herat, Ghor, Gharjistan and Kabul. After being relieved of the charge, he settled in Koh Sulaiman, with the Lodis and Suris being the descendant of his daughter who married a converted Afghan. Only he continues with Afghan history after this. He states that the Hindu Shahi king gave them a few villages in Laghman in return for guarding against the Arabs. He adds that after being unable to withstand Sabuktigin's raids, Jaipala appointed the Afghan Shiekh Hamid Lodhi to an \"Amirate\" but Lodhi was removed after Sabuktigin became supreme in Ghazni. Ferishta speaks of the Afghans here as Muslims.\nAl-Utbi in \"Tarikh-i-Yamini\" states that the Afghans were enlisted by Sabuktigin and also Mahmud. During this period, the Afghan habitat was in the Sulaiman Mountains. After defeating Jayapala in 988 A.D., Sabuktigin had acquired the territory between Laghman and Peshawar. Al-Utbi states that the Afghans and Khaljis, living there as nomads, took the oath of allegiance to him and were recruited into his army. Iqtidar Husain Siddiqui citing a 13th century Persian translation, claims he mentions the \"Afghans\" were pagans given to rapine and rapacity, they were defeated and converted to Islam.\nWriting in the 11th century AD, Al-Biruni in his \"Tarikh al Hind\", stated that the Afghan tribes lived in mountains west of India. He notes, \"In the western frontier mountains of India there live various tribes of the Afghans and extend up to the neighbourhood of the Sindu valley.\" He earlier also noted about the mountains, \"In marching from our country to Sindh we start from the country of Nimroz, i.e. the country of Sijistan, whilst marching to Hind or India proper we start from the side of Kabul... In the mountains which form the frontier of India towards the west there are tribes of the Hindus, or of people near akin to them \u2014 rebellious savage races \u2014 which extend as far as the farthermost frontiers of the Hindu race.\"\nMahmud had gone to war against pagan Afghan while campaigning in the Sulayman mountains. Firishta states that Afghans fought on both sides during the war between Mu'izz al-Din and Pithorai in 1192 AD, which Encyclopaedia of Islam says probably indicating they weren't completely converted.\nIn 1519, Babur mounted an attack on the fort of Bajaur and sent a Dilazak Afghan as an ambassador to the Gibri Sultan of Bajaur, Mir Haidar 'Ali, to surrender and enter his services. Gibri, a Dardic language of Bajaur, was also spoken by the royal family and nobility of the Swat Valley. The Gibris decided to resist and Babur's forces stormed it in two days. He ordered a general massacre of its inhabitants on the pretext that they had rebelled against Kabul's regime and were infidels who had forsaken Islam.\nThe westward migration of Pashtuns from Sulaiman mountains to Qandahar and Herat is thought to have begun in the 15th century. In the 16th century, the area around Qandahar formed a bone of contention between Ghilzai and Abdalis. The latter gave in and migrated to Herat during the reign of Safavid Shah Abbas I. Their migration displaced or subjugated the indigenous populations especially the Tajiks who were also the dominant population in Kabul, Nangarhar and Laghman in east Afghanistan. Before advent of Ghilzais of the Ahmadzai division in the late 16th century, Logar River was also a Tajik stronghold. The Pashtuns also displaced the original Kafirs and Pashayi people in Kunar Valley and Laghman valley, located south of Kabul in east Afghanistan, to the infertile mountains. Regions to south and east of Ghazni were stronghold of Hazaras before the 16th century. They also lost Wardak to the tribe of the same name when the latter invaded in the 17th century. In Qandahar, the Farsiwanis, Hazaras, Kakars and Baloch people were subjugated.\nConquests of Kafiristan.\nKafiristan is a mountainous region of the Hindu Kush that was isolated and politically independent until the Afghan conquest of 1896. Before their conversion to Islam, the Nuristanis or Kafir people practiced a form of ancient Hinduism infused with locally developed accretions.\nKafiristan proper from west to east comprises basins of Alishang, Alingar, Pech or Prasun, Waigal and Bashgal. The region became a refuge of an old group of Indo-European people probably mixed with an older substratum, as well as a refuge of a distinct Kafiri group of Indo-Iranian languages, forming part of the wider Dardic languages. The inhabitants were known as \"kafirs\" due to their enduring paganism while other regions around them became Muslim. However, the influence from district names in Kafiristan of Katwar or Kator and the ethnic name Kati has also been suggested. The Kafirs were divided into Siyah-Posh, comprising five sub-tribes who spoke Kamkata-vari language while the others were called Safed-Posh comprising Prasungeli, Waigeli, Wamai and Ashkun.\nThe Kafirs called themselves \"Balor\", a term that appeared in Chinese sources as early as the fifth century A.D. Both Chinese sources and Muslim sources like the 16th-century work of Kashmir's conqueror Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, the terms \"Bolor\" and \"Boloristan\" denote the area from the Kabul valley to Kashmir, Yarkand and Kashgar. The country is the most inaccessible part of Hindu Kush. The Muslim conquerors could not achieve a lasting success here.\nThe vast area extending from modern Nuristan to Kashmir (styled \"Peristan\" by A. M. Cacopardo) containing host of \"Kafir\" cultures and Indo-European languages that became Islamized over a long period. Earlier, it was surrounded by Buddhist areas. The Islamization of the nearby Badakhshan began in the 8th century and Peristan was completely surrounded by Muslim states in the 16th century with Islamization of Baltistan. The Buddhist states temporarily brought literacy and state rule into the region. The decline of Buddhism resulted in it becoming heavily isolated.\nThere have been varying theories about the origins of the Kafirs. Oral traditions of some Nuristanis place themselves to be at confluence of Kabul and Kunar River a millennium ago, being driven off from Kandahar to Kabul to Kapisa to Kama with the Muslim invasion. They identify themselves as late arrivals here, being driven by Mahmud of Ghazni who after establishing his empire forced the unsubmissive population to flee. George Scott Robertson considered them to be part of the old Indian population of Eastern Afghanistan and stated they fled to the mountains while refusing to convert to Islam after the Muslim invasion in the 10th century. The name Kator was used by Lagaturman, last king of the Turk Shahi. The title \"Shah Kator\" was assumed by Chitral's ruler Mohtaram Shah who assumed it upon being impressed by the majesty of the erstwhile pagan rulers of Chitral. The theory of Kators being related to Turki Shahis is based on the information of \"Jami- ut-Tawarikh\" and \"Tarikh-i-Binakiti\". The region was also named after its ruling elite. The royal usage may be the origin behind the name of Kator.\nMahmud of Ghazna.\nIn 1020\u201321, Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna led a campaign against Kafiristan and the people of the \"pleasant valleys of Nur and Qirat\" according to Gardizi. The Persian chronicles speak of Qirat and Nur (or Nardin) which H. M. Elliot on authority of Al-Biruni identifies with Nur and Kira tributaries of Kabul river. Ferishta wrongly calls these two valleys as \"Nardin\" and Qirat and confuses this conquest with the one against \"Nardin\" or Nandana. He also wrongly mentions it took place after 412 A.H. Alexander Cunningham identifies the places conquered as \"Bairath\" and \"Narayanpura\".\nThese people worshipped the lion. While Clifford Edmund Bosworth considers that Mahmud attacked \"pagan Afghans\", Joseph Theodore Arlinghaus of Duke University doesn't consider it correct because his source Gardezi simply calls them \"pagan (kafiran)\" and not \"pagan Afghans\", as they weren't known to be pagan or live on borders of Nuristan in the 11th century. Mohammad Habib however considers they might have been worshipping Buddha in form of a lion (\"Sakya Sinha\"). Ramesh Chandra Majumdar states they had a Hindu temple which was destroyed by Mahmud's general. Ram Sharan Sharma states that they may have been Buddhist. Cunningham claims based on the reporting of Ferishta that the place was plundered by 'Amir Ali after being taken.\nAccording to Gardezi, while returning from invasion of India, he had heard about them and the chief of Qirat surrendered without any struggle and accepted to convert, with the inhabitants converting as well. Nur however refused to surrender and his general 'Amir Ali led an attack on it and forcing its people to convert. According to Firshta, the rulers of both of them submitted and accepted Islam in 1022. He adds, \"On breaking a great temple situated there, the ornamented figure of a lion came out of it, which according to the belief of the Hindus was four thousand years old.\"\nHowever, no permanent conquest was attempted. \"Iqbal namah-i-Jahangiri\" stated that Kafirs still lived in Darrah-i-Nur Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni claimed to have converted. Mughal Emperor Jahangir had received a delegation of these pure Kafirs in Jalalabad and had honored them with gifts.\nTimurids.\nThe campaigns of Timur are recorded by Zafarnama written by Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi, based on another work.\n On his way to India, Timur attacked the Siyah-Posh in 1398 A.D. after receiving complaints from the trading city of Andarab by raids from Kafirs. He penetrated it from Khawak pass and restored an old fortress there. He personally proceeded against the Kator region which extended from Kabul to Kashmir.\nTimur sent a detachment of 10,000 soldiers against Siyah-Poshas under Burhan Aglan and had the fort of Kator deserted by Kafirs destroyed while the houses of the city were burnt. The infidels took refuge on top of a hill and many were killed in the ensuing clash. Some held out for three days but agreed to convert after Timur offered them the choice between death and Islam. They however soon apostatised and ambushed Muslim soldiers in the night. They were however repelled and a number of the Kafirs were killed, with 150 taken prisoner and later executed. Timur ordered his men \"to kill all the men, to make prisoners of women and children, and to plunder and lay waste all their property.\" His soldiers carried out the order and he directed them to build a tower of skulls of the dead Kafirs.\nTimur had his expedition engraved on a neighboring hill in the month of Ramazan. His detachment sent against Siyah-Poshas however met with disaster with Aglan routed and fleeing. A small detachment of 400 men under Muhammad Azad was sent and defeated the Kafirs, retrieving the horses and armour Aglan lost. Timur later captured a few more places, though nothing more is stated, presumably he left the Siyah-poshas alone. He proceeded to exterminate the rebellious Afghan tribes and crossed the Sindhu River in September 1398.\nThe Timurid Sultan Mahmud Mirza is said to have raided Kafiristan twice by \"Baburnama\", which earned him the title of \"ghazi\".\nYarkand Khanate.\nMirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat invaded Balor under orders of Sultan Said Khan in 1527-1528 A.D. and was accompanied by Khan's eldest son Rashid Khan. The expedition was an Islamic frontier raid or \"ghaza\". Dughlat undertook highly devastating plundering raids on Bolor.\nRashid Khan (r. 1533\u20131569) undertook further expeditions against Bolor (Kafiristan) which are recorded by \"Tarikh-i-Kashgar\" and \"Bahr al-asar\" of Mahmud b. Amir Wali. The Kashgari author mentions it briefly though Wali goes into detail. The first campaign failed with a number of Kashgari captured and enslaved by the people of Bolor. A second invasion was successful and forced them to submit. \"Tarikh-i-Kashgar\" states that Bolor was governed by Shah Babur after Abdullah Khan's successful campaign in 1640.\nMughals.\nBabur writing in his memoirs notes that when he captured Chigha Sarai in 1514, the \"Kafirs of Pech came to their assistance.\" He mentions some Muslim \"n\u012bm\u010das\" or half-breeds, probably converted Kafirs, who married with the Kafirs and lived at Chigha Sarai, located at confluence of Kunar River and Pech River.\nBabur himself came to the region in the winter of 1507\u20131508 and had an inscription carved commemorating his transit. While fleeing to India to take refuge in Afghan-Indian borderlands after Shibani Khan attacked Qandahar, which Babur had recently conquered, he marched from Kabul to Lamghan in September 1507. He eventually reached Adinapur fort in Nangarhar district. He comments that his men had to forage for food and raided the rice fields of the Kafirs in the Alishang district. In 1520, he mentions sending Haidar Alamdar to the Kafirs who returned and met him under Bandpakht along with some Kafir chiefs who gifted Babur some skins of wine.\nThe relationship of the Siahposh and residents of Panjshir and Andarab remained the same even more than a century after Timur's expedition. Babur records about Panjshir that, \"It lies upon the road, and is in the immediate vicinity of Kafiristan. The inroads of the robbers of Kafiristan are made through Panjshir. In consequence of their vicinity of the Kafirs - the inhabitants of this district are happy to pay them a fixed contribution. Since I last invaded Hindustan, and subdued it (in 1527), the Kafirs have descended into Panjshir, and returned after slaying a great number of people and committing extensive damages.\"\nPer \"Tabakat-i-Akbari\", Mughal Emperor Akbar had dispatched his younger brother Mirza Muhammad Hakim, who was a staunch adherent of the missionary-minded Naqshbandi Sufi order, against the infidels of Katwar in 1582. Hakim was a semi-independent governor of Kabul. The \"Sifat-nama-yi Darvi\u0161 Muhammad H\u0101n-i \u011e\u0101z\u012b\" of Kadi Muhammad Salim who accompanied the expedition mentions its details. The \"Sifat-nama\" gives Muhammad Hakim the epithet of \"Darvi\u0161 Khan Gazi\".\nMuhammad Darvish's religious crusade fought its way from Lamghan to Alishang, and is stated to have conquered and converted 66 valleys to Islam. After conquering Tajau and Nijrau valleys in Panjshir area, the crusaders established a fort at Islamabad at confluence of Alishang and Alingar rivers. They continued the raid up to Alishang and made their last effort against the non-Muslims of Alingar, fighting up to Mangu, the modern border between Pashai and Ashkun-speaking areas.\nThe conquest doesn't seem to have had a lasting effect as Henry George Raverty mentions that Kafirs still lived in upper part of Alishang and Tagau. \"Khulasat al-ansab\" of Hafiz Rahmat Khan stated that the Afghans and Kafirs of Lamghan were still fighting each other during the time of Jahangir.\nFinal subjugation.\nUnder Amir Sher Ali Khan, Afghanistan was divided into provinces (\"wilayats\") of Kabul, Kandahar, Herat and Afghan Turkestan. Uruzgan and Kafiristan were later incorporated into Kabul. Some parts of Kafiristan were already following Islam before its conquest. Amir Abdul Rahman Khan tried to persuade them to convert to Islam by deputing Kafir elders. The Kafirs were poorly armed as compared to Afghans and numbered only 60,000. By 1895, demarcation of nearby Chitral under indirect British rule and conquest of Pamirs by Russia worried him about the endangerment of integration of Afghanistan through the independent Kafiristan. Afghan tribes meanwhile undertook slave raids in places like Kafiristan, Hazarajat, Badakhshan and Chitral.\nThe territory between Afghanistan and British India was demarcated between 1894 and 1896. Part of the frontier lying between Nawa Kotal in outskirts of Mohmand country and Bashgal Valley on outskirts of Kafiristan were demarcated by 1895 with an agreement reached on 9 April 1895. Abdur Rahman wanted to force every community and tribal confederation with his single interpretation of Islam due to it being the only uniting factor. After the subjugation of Hazaras, Kafiristan was the last remaining autonomous part. Field marshal Ghulam Hayder Khan sent a message to Kafirs of Barikut which stated, \"It is not the duty of the government to compel, force or impose on them to accept, or take the path of the religion of Islam. The obligation that does exist is this: they render obedience and pay their taxes. As long as they do not disobey their command, they will not incinerate themselves with the fire of \"padishah's\" [king's] wrath. In addition, they are not to block the building of the road [that was planned through their territory].\"\nEmir Abdur Rahman Khan's forces invaded Kafiristan in the winter of 1895\u20131896 and captured it in 40 days according to his autobiography. Columns invaded it from the west through Panjshir to Kullum, the strongest fort of the region. The columns from the north came through Badakhshan and from the east through Asmar. A small column also came from south-west through Laghman. The Kafirs were forcibly converted to Islam and resettled in Laghman while the region was settled by veteran soldiers and other Afghans. Kafiristan was renamed as Nuristan. Other residents also converted to avoid the \"jizya\".\nHis victory was celebrated with the publishing of a poem in 1896 or 1897 and Faiz Mohammad Katib Hazara gave him the title \"Idol-Smasher\". About 60,000 of the Kafirs became converts. Mullahs were deployed after the conquest to teach them about fundamentals of Islam. The large-scale conversion proved difficult however and the complete Islamization took some time. Kafir elders are known to have offered sacrifices in their shrines on rumors of Rahman's death in 1901. Three main roads connecting Badakhshan with Kunar and Lamghan (Chigha Sirai-Munjan, Asmar-Badakhshan and Munjan-Laghman) were built after the conquest."}
{"id": "3070", "revid": "41266565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3070", "title": "Durrani Empire", "text": "The Durrani Empire (), also called the Sadozai Kingdom and the Afghan Empire, was founded and built by Ahmad Shah Abdali in parts of Central Asia, Middle East and South Asia. At its maximum extent, the empire ruled over the modern-day countries of Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as parts of northeastern and southeastern Iran, eastern Turkmenistan, and northwestern India.\nAhmad Shah Abdali was the son of Muhammad Zaman Khan Abdali (Chieftain of the Abdalis) and the commander of Nader Shah Afshar. After the passing of Ahmad Shah, the Abdalis remained heirs of Afghanistan for generations. Conquering the disunity in his tribe, in June 1747, Ahmad Shah Abdali secured Afghanistan and became the King of Afghanistan. After his accession, Ahmad Shah Abdali changed his tribal name to \"Durrani\", henceforth becoming known as Ahmad Shah Durrani. \nAfter the death of Nader Shah Afshar in June 1747, Ahmad Shah Durrani laid claim to the region of Kandahar. From there, he conquered Ghazni, Kabul, and Peshawar in the same year. In 1749 the Mughal ruler had ceded sovereignty over much of northwest India to the Afghans. Ahmad Shah then set out westward to take possession of Mashhad, which was ruled by Shahrokh Shah. He next sent an army to subdue the areas north of the Hindu Kush, and in short order, all the different tribes began joining his cause. Ahmad Shah and his forces invaded India four times, taking control of Kashmir and the Punjab region. Early in 1757, he sacked Delhi but permitted the Mughal dynasty to remain in nominal control as long as the ruler acknowledged Ahmad Shah Durrani's suzerainty over the Punjab, Sindh, and Kashmir.\nAfter the death of Ahmad Shah Durrani in about 1772, his son Timur Shah Durrani became the next ruler of the Durrani dynasty who decided to make Kabul the new capital of the empire, and used Peshawar as the winter capital. The Durrani Empire is considered the foundation of the modern state of Afghanistan, with Ahmad Shah Durrani being credited as \"Father of the Nation\".\nReign of Ahmad Shah Durrani (1747\u20131772).\nFoundation of the Afghan state.\nIn 1709 Mir Wais Hotak, chief of the Ghilji tribe of Kandahar Province, gained independence from the Safavid Persians. From 1722 to 1725, his son Mahmud Hotak briefly ruled large parts of Iran and declared himself as \"Shah of Persia\". However, the Hotak dynasty came to a complete end in 1738 after being toppled and banished by the Afsharids who were led by Nader Shah Afshar of Persia.\nThe year 1747 marks the definitive appearance of an Afghan political entity independent of both the Persian and Mughal empires. In July 1747 a \"loya jirga\" (grand council) concluded near the city of Kandahar with Ahmad Shah Durrani being selected as the new leader of the Afghans, thus the Durrani dynasty was founded. Despite being younger than the other contenders, Ahmad Shah had several overriding factors in his favor. He belonged to a respectable family of political background, especially since his father served as Governor of Herat who died in a battle defending the Afghans.\nEarly victories.\nOne of Ahmad Shah's first military actions was to capture Qalati Ghilji and Ghazni from the Ghilji, and wrest Kabul and Peshawar from Mughal-appointed governor Nasir Khan. In 1749, the Mughal Emperor Ahmad Shah Bahadur was induced to cede Sindh, the Punjab region and the important trans Indus River to Ahmad Shah Durrani in order to save his capital from Afghan attack. Having thus gained substantial territories to the east without a fight, Ahmad Shah turned westward to take possession of Mashhad, which was ruled by Nader Shah Afshar's grandson, Shahrukh Afshar. Ahmad Shah next sent an army to subdue the areas north of the Hindu Kush mountains. In short order, the powerful army brought under its control the Tajik, Hazara, Uzbek, Turkmen, and other tribes of northern Afghanistan. Ahmad Shah invaded the remnants of the Mughal Empire a third time, and then a fourth, consolidating control over the Kashmir and Punjab regions, with Lahore being governed by Afghans. He sacked Delhi in 1757 but permitted the Mughal dynasty to remain in nominal control of the city as long as the ruler acknowledged Ahmad Shah's suzerainty over Punjab, Sindh, and Kashmir. Leaving his second son Timur Shah to safeguard his interests, Ahmad Shah left India to return to Afghanistan.\nRelations with China.\nAlarmed by the expansion of China's Qing Dynasty up to the eastern border of Kazakhstan, Ahmad Shah attempted to rally neighboring Muslim khanates and the Kazakhs to unite and attack China, ostensibly to liberate its western Muslim subjects. Ahmad Shah halted trade with Qing China and dispatched troops to Kokand. However, with his campaigns in India exhausting the state treasury, and with his troops stretched thin throughout Central Asia, Ahmad Shah lacked sufficient resources to do anything except to send envoys to Beijing for unsuccessful talks.\nThird Battle of Panipat.\nThe Mughal power in northern India had been declining after the death of Emperor Aurangzeb, who died in 1707. In 1751\u201352, \"Ahamdiya\" treaty was signed between the Marathas and Mughals, when Balaji Bajirao was the Peshwa. Through this treaty, the Marathas controlled virtually the whole of India from their capital at Pune and the Mughal rule was restricted only to Delhi (the Mughals remained the nominal heads of Delhi). Marathas were now straining to expand their area of control towards the Northwest of India. Ahmad Shah sacked the Mughal capital and withdrew with the booty he coveted. To counter the Afghans, Peshwa Balaji Bajirao sent Raghunathrao. He defeated the Rohillas and Afghan garrisons in Punjab and succeeded in ousting Timur Shah and his court from India and brought Lahore, Multan, Kashmir and other subahs on the Indian side of Attock under Maratha rule. Thus, upon his return to Kandahar in 1757, Ahmad was forced to return to India and face the formidable attacks of the Maratha Confederacy.\nAhmad Shah declared a jihad (or Islamic holy war) against the Marathas, and warriors from various Afghan tribes joined his army, including the Baloch people under the command of Khan of Kalat Mir Nasir I of Kalat. Suba Khan Tanoli (Zabardast Khan) was selected as army chief of all military forces. Early skirmishes were followed by victory for the Afghans against the much larger Maratha garrisons in Northwest India and by 1759 Ahmad Shah and his army had reached Lahore and were poised to confront the Marathas. Ahmad Shah Durrani was famous for winning wars much larger than his army. By 1760, the Maratha groups had coalesced into a big enough army under the command of Sadashivrao Bhau. Once again, Panipat was the scene of a confrontation between two warring contenders for control of northern India. The Third Battle of Panipat (14 January 1761), fought between largely Muslim and largely Hindu armies was waged along a twelve-kilometer front. Despite decisively defeating the Marathas, what might have been Ahmad Shah's peaceful control of his domains was disrupted by many challenges. As far as losses are concerned, Afghans too suffered heavily in the Third Battle of Panipat. This weakened his grasp over Punjab which fell to the rising Sikh misls. There were rebellions in the north in the region of Bukhara. The Durranis decisively defeated the Marathas in the Third Battle of Panipat on 14 January 1761. The defeat at Panipat resulted in heavy losses for the Marathas, and was a huge setback for Peshwa Balaji Rao. He received the news of the defeat of Panipat on 24 January 1761 at Bhilsa, while leading a reinforcement force. Besides several important generals, he had lost his own son Vishwasrao in the Battle of Panipat. He died on 23 June 1761, and was succeeded by his younger son Madhav Rao I.\nFinal years.\nThe victory at Panipat was the high point of Ahmad Shah's\u2014and Afghan\u2014power. However, even prior to his death, the empire began to unravel. In 1762, Ahmad Shah crossed the passes from Afghanistan for the sixth time to subdue the Sikhs. From this time and on, the domination and control of the Empire began to loosen, and by the time of Durrani's death he had completely lost Punjab to the Sikhs, as well as earlier losses of northern territories to the Uzbeks, necessitating a compromise with them.\nHe assaulted Lahore and, after taking their holy city of Amritsar, massacred thousands of Sikh inhabitants, destroyed their revered Golden Temple. Within two years, the Sikhs rebelled again and rebuilt their holy city of Amritsar. Ahmad Shah tried several more times to subjugate the Sikhs permanently, but failed. Durrani's forces instigated the Va\u1e0d\u1e0d\u0101 Ghall\u016bgh\u0101r\u0101 when they killed thousands of Sikhs in the Punjab in 1762. Ahmad Shah also faced other \nrebellions in the north, and eventually he and the Uzbek Emir of Bukhara agreed that the Amu Darya would mark the division of their lands. Ahmad Shah retired to his home in the mountains east of Kandahar, where he died on April 14, 1773. He had succeeded to a remarkable degree in balancing tribal alliances and hostilities, and in directing tribal energies away from rebellion. He earned recognition as Ahmad Shah Baba, or \"Father\" of Afghanistan.\nThe Durrani Empire lost its control over Kashmir to the Sikh Empire in the Battle of Shopian in 1819.\nOther Durrani rulers (1772\u20131823).\nAhmad Shah's successors governed so ineptly during a period of profound unrest that within fifty years of his death, the Durrani empire \"per se\" was at an end, and Afghanistan was embroiled in civil war. Much of the territory conquered by Ahmad Shah fell to others in this half century. By 1818, the Sadozai rulers who succeeded Ahmad Shah controlled little more than Kabul and the surrounding territory within a 160-kilometer radius. They not only lost the outlying territories but also alienated other tribes and lineages among the Durrani Pashtuns.\nTimur Shah (1772\u20131793).\nAhmad Shah was succeeded by his son, Timur Shah, who had been deputed to administer his father's conquests in Northern India, but had been driven out by the Marathas. Upon Ahmad Shah's death, the Durrani chieftains only reluctantly accepted Timur's accession. Most of his reign was spent fighting a civil war and resisting rebellion; Timur was even forced to move his capital from Kandahar to Kabul due to the insurgency. Timur Shah proved an ineffectual ruler, during whose reign the Durrani empire began to crumble. He is notable for having had 24 sons, several of whom became rulers of the Durrani territories. Timur died in 1793 and was then succeeded by his fifth son Zaman Shah\nZaman Shah (1793\u20131801).\nAfter the death of Timur Shah, three of his sons, the governors of Kandahar, Herat and Kabul, contended for the succession. Zaman Shah, governor of Kabul, held the field by virtue of being in control of the capital, and became shah at the age of twenty-three. Many of his half-brothers were imprisoned on their arrival in the capital for the purpose, ironically, of electing a new shah. The quarrels among Timur's descendants that threw Afghanistan into turmoil also provided the pretext for the interventions of outside forces.\nThe efforts of the Sadozai heirs of Timur to impose a true monarchy on the truculent Pashtun tribes, and their efforts to rule absolutely and without the advice of the other major Pashtun tribal leaders, were ultimately unsuccessful. The Sikhs started to rise under the command of Sikh chief, Ranjit Singh, who succeeded in wresting power from Zaman's forces. Later, when Zaman was blinded by his brother, Ranjit Singh gave him asylum in Punjab.\nZaman's downfall was triggered by his attempts to consolidate power. Although it had been through the support of the Barakzai chief, Painda Khan Barakzai, that he had come to the throne, Zaman soon began to remove prominent Barakzai leaders from positions of power and replace them with men of his own lineage, the Sadozai. This upset the delicate balance of Durrani tribal politics that Ahmad Shah had established and may have prompted Painda Khan and other Durrani chiefs to plot against the shah. Painda Khan and the chiefs of the Nurzai and the Alizai Durrani clans were executed, as was the chief of the Qizilbash clan. Painda Khan's son fled to Iran and pledged the substantial support of his Barakzai followers to a rival claimant to the throne, Zaman's younger brother, Mahmud Shah. The clans of the chiefs Zaman had executed joined forces with the rebels, and they took Kandahar without bloodshed.\nMahmud Shah (first reign, 1801\u20131803).\nZeman Shah's overthrow in 1801 was not the end of civil strife in Afghanistan, but the beginning of even greater violence. Mahmud Shah's first reign lasted for only two years before he was replaced by Shuja Shah.\nShuja Shah (1803\u20131809 and 1839\u20131842).\nYet another of Timur Shah's sons, Shuja Shah (or Shah Shuja), ruled for only six years. On June 7, 1809, Shuja Shah signed a treaty with the British, which included a clause stating that he would oppose the passage of foreign troops through his territories. This agreement, the first Afghan pact with a European power, stipulated joint action in case of Franco-Persian aggression against Afghan or British dominions. Only a few weeks after signing the agreement, Shuja was deposed by his predecessor, Mahmud. Much later, he was reinstated by the British, ruling during 1839\u20131842. Two of his sons also ruled for a brief period in 1842.\nMahmud Shah (second reign, 1809\u20131818).\nMahmud's second reign lasted nine years. Mahmud alienated the Barakzai, especially Fateh Khan, the son of Painda Khan, who was eventually seized and blinded. Revenge would later be sought and obtained by Fateh Khan's youngest brother, Dost Mohammad Khan.\nSultan Ali Shah (1818\u20131819).\nAli Shah was another son of Timur Shah. He seized power for a brief period in 1818\u20131819.\nAyub Shah (1819\u20131823).\nAyub Shah was another son of Timur Shah, who deposed Sultan Ali Shah. The Durrani Empire lost its control over Kashmir to the Sikh Empire in the Battle of Shopian in 1819. Ayub Shah was himself later deposed, and presumably killed in 1823.\nMilitary.\nThe Durrani military was based on cavalry armed with flintlocks who performed hit-and-run attacks, combining new technology in firearms with Turco-Mongol tactics. The core of the Durrani army were the 10,000 \"sher-bacha\" (blunderbuss)-carrying mounted ghulams (slave-soldiers) of which a third were previously Qizilbash of Nader Shah. Many others were also former troops of Nader Shah. The bulk of the army were Afghan irregular tribal cavalry armed with lance and broadsword. Mounted archers were still used but were uncommon due to the difficulty of training them. Infantry played a very small role in the Durrani army and, with the exception of light swivel guns mounted on camels, the Zamburak, so did artillery."}
{"id": "3071", "revid": "35406715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3071", "title": "Aimaq people", "text": "The Aimaq () or Chahar Aimaq (), also transliterated as Aimagh, Aimak and Aymaq, are a collection of Sunni and mostly Persian and Pashto-speaking nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes. They live mostly in the central and western highlands of Afghanistan, especially in Ghor, Badghis, and Herat Provinces, and to a lesser extent in the Khorasan Province of Iran. Aimaqs were originally known as \"chahar\" (\"four\") Aymaqs: the \"Taymani\" (the main element in the population of Ghor), the \"Firozkohi\" (mostly in Badghis), the \"Jamshidi\" and the \"Timuri\". Other sources state that the Aimaq Hazara are one of the \"Chahar\", with the Timuri instead being of the \"lesser Aimaqs\" or \"Aimaq-e digar\" (\"other Aimaqs\").\nThe Aimaq speak a number of subdialects of the Aimaq dialect of Persian language, but some southern groups of Taymani, Firozkohi, and northeastern Timuri Aimaqs have adopted the Pashto language.\nOrigin and culture.\nThe Aimaqs claim to be descended from the troops of Genghis Khan.\nAimaq is a Mongolic word that means \"tribe\" or \"grazing territory\". Of all Aimaqs, Aimaq Hazara and Timuri are closest to the Mongol tradition since they live in yurts, whereas other Aimaqs live in traditional Afghan black tents. The Aimaq are largely nomadic to semi-nomadic goat and sheep herders. They also trade with villages and farmers during migrations for pastures for their livestock. The material culture and foodstuffs of the Aimaq include skins, carpets, milk, dairy products and more. They tend to trade these products to settled peoples in return for vegetables, grains, fruits, nuts, and other types of foods and goods.\nClassification of tribes.\nAimaq tribes\nDemographics.\nEstimates of the Aimaq population vary between 250,000 and 500,000. They are largely Sunni Muslims\u2014except for the Jamshidi who are mainly Ismaili Shia in the main\u2014and in contrast to the Hazara, who are mostly Shia Muslims."}
{"id": "3072", "revid": "13050769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3072", "title": "Arcturus", "text": "Arcturus, designation \u03b1\u00a0Bo\u00f6tis (Latinized to Alpha\u00a0Bo\u00f6tis, abbreviated Alpha\u00a0Boo, \u03b1\u00a0Boo), is the brightest star in the constellation of Bo\u00f6tes, the fourth-brightest in the night sky, and the brightest in the northern celestial hemisphere. Together with Spica and Denebola (or Regulus, depending on the source), Arcturus is part of the Spring Triangle asterism and, by extension, also of the Great Diamond along with the star Cor Caroli. When viewed from Earth, it appears to be positioned almost at the north galactic pole of the Milky Way.\nRelatively close at 36.7 light-years from the Sun, Arcturus is a red giant of spectral type K0III\u2014an aging star around 7.1 billion years old that has used up its core hydrogen and moved off the main sequence. It is times as massive as the Sun, but has expanded to times its size and is around 170 times as luminous. The size in km is 35.56 million kilometres.\nNomenclature.\n\"\u03b1 Bo\u00f6tis\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Bo\u00f6tis\") is the star's Bayer designation.\nThe traditional name \"Arcturus\" derives from Ancient Greek \u1f08\u03c1\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (\"Arktouros\") and means \"Guardian of the Bear\", ultimately from \u1f04\u03c1\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 (\"arktos\"), \"bear\" and \u03bf\u1f56\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (\"ouros\"), \"watcher, guardian\". It has been known by this name since at least the time of Hesiod, circa 700 BC.\nMythology.\nOne astronomical tradition associates Arcturus with the mythology around Arcas, who was about to shoot and kill his own mother Callisto who had been transformed into a bear. Zeus averted their imminent tragic fate by transforming the boy into the constellation Bo\u00f6tes, called Arctophylax \"bear guardian\" by the Greeks, and his mother into Ursa Major (Greek: Arctos \"the bear\"). The account is given in Hyginus's \"Astronomy\".\nAratus in his \"Phaenomena\" said that the star Arcturus lay below the belt of Arctophylax, although according to Ptolemy in the \"Almagest\" it lay between his thighs.\nAn alternative lore associates the name with the legend around Icarius, who gave the gift of wine to other men, but was murdered by them, because they had had no experience with intoxication and mistook the wine for poison. It is stated this Icarius, became Arcturus, while his dog, Maira, became Canicula (Procyon), although \"Arcturus\" here may be used in the sense of the constellation rather than the star.\nStandardization.\nIn 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Arcturus\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\nObservation.\nWith an apparent visual magnitude of\u00a0\u22120.05, Arcturus is the brightest star in the northern celestial hemisphere and the fourth-brightest star in the night sky, after Sirius (\u22121.46\u00a0apparent magnitude), Canopus (\u22120.72) and \u03b1 Centauri (combined magnitude of \u22120.27). However, \u03b1 Centauri AB is a binary star, whose components are both fainter than Arcturus. This makes Arcturus the third-brightest individual star, just ahead of \u03b1 Centauri\u00a0A (officially named \"Rigil Kentaurus\"), whose apparent magnitude . The French mathematician and astronomer Jean-Baptiste Morin observed Arcturus in the daytime with a telescope in 1635, a first for any star other than the Sun and supernovae. Arcturus has been seen at or just before sunset with the naked eye.\nArcturus is visible from both of Earth's hemispheres as it is located 19\u00b0 north of the celestial equator. The star culminates at midnight on 27 April, and at 9 p.m. on June 10 being visible during the late northern spring or the southern autumn. From the northern hemisphere, an easy way to find Arcturus is to follow the arc of the handle of the Big Dipper (or Plough). By continuing in this path, one can find Spica, \"Arc to Arcturus, then spike (or speed on) to Spica\".\nPtolemy described Arcturus as \"subrufa\" (\"slightly red\"): it has a B-V color index of +1.23, roughly midway between Pollux (B-V +1.00) and Aldebaran (B-V +1.54).\n\u03b7 Bo\u00f6tis, or Muphrid, is only 3.3 light-years distant from Arcturus, and would have a visual magnitude \u22122.5, about as bright as Mercury from Earth, whereas an observer on the former system would find Arcturus as bright as Venus as seen from Earth.\nIn 1984, the 90\u00a0cm (36-inch) reflecting Yapp telescope at Herstmonceux was tested with an echelle spectrograph from Queen's University Belfast and a CCD camera. Observations of the stars Arcturus and Deneb (Alpha Cygni) were conducted in the summer of 1984.\nPhysical characteristics.\nBased upon an annual parallax shift of 88.83\u00a0milliarcseconds as measured by the Hipparcos satellite, Arcturus is from the Sun. The parallax margin of error is 0.54 milliarcseconds, translating to a distance margin of error of \u00b1. Because of its proximity, Arcturus has a high proper motion, two arcseconds a year, greater than any first magnitude star other than \u03b1\u00a0Centauri.\nArcturus is moving rapidly () relative to the Sun, and is now almost at its closest point to the Sun. Closest approach will happen in about 4,000 years, when the star will be a few hundredths of a light-year closer to Earth than it is today. (In antiquity, Arcturus was closer to the centre of the constellation.) Arcturus is thought to be an old-disk star, and appears to be moving with a group of 52 other such stars, known as the Arcturus stream.\nWith an absolute magnitude of \u22120.30, Arcturus is, together with Vega and Sirius, one of the most luminous stars in the Sun's neighborhood. It is about 110 times brighter than the Sun in visible light wavelengths, but this underestimates its strength as much of the light it gives off is in the infrared; total (bolometric) power output is about 180\u00a0times that of the Sun. With a near-infrared J band magnitude of \u22122.2, only Betelgeuse (\u22122.9) and R Doradus (\u22122.6) are brighter. The lower output in visible light is due to a lower efficacy as the star has a lower surface temperature than the Sun.\nArcturus is an evolved red giant star with a stellar classification of K0\u00a0III. As the brightest K-type giant in the sky, it was the subject of an atlas of its visible spectrum, made from photographic spectra taken with the coud\u00e9 spectrograph of the Mt. Wilson 2.5m telescope published in 1968, a key reference work for stellar spectroscopy. Subsequent spectral atlases with greater wavelength coverage and superior signal-to-noise ratio made with digital detectors have supplanted the older work, but the Arcturus spectrum remains an important standard for stellar spectroscopy.\nAs a single star, the mass of Arcturus cannot be measured directly, but models suggest it is slightly larger than that of the Sun. Evolutionary matching to the observed physical parameters gives a mass of , while the oxygen isotope ratio for a first dredge-up star gives a mass of . The star displays magnetic activity that is heating the coronal structures, and it undergoes a solar-type magnetic cycle with a duration that is probably less than 14 years. A weak magnetic field has been detected in the photosphere with a strength of around half a gauss. The magnetic activity appears to lie along four latitudes and is rotationally-modulated.\nArcturus is estimated to be around 6 billion to 8.5 billion years old, but there is some uncertainty about its evolutionary status. Based upon the color characteristics of Arcturus, it is currently ascending the red-giant branch and will continue to do so until it accumulates a large enough degenerate helium core to ignite the helium flash. It has likely exhausted the hydrogen from its core and is now in its active hydrogen shell burning phase. However, Charbonnel et al. (1998) placed it slightly above the horizontal branch, and suggested it has already completed the helium flash stage.\nOscillations.\nAs one of the brightest stars in the sky, Arcturus has been the subject of a number of studies in the emerging field of asteroseismology. Belmonte and colleagues carried out a radial velocity (Doppler shift of spectral lines) study of the star in April and May 1988, which showed variability with a frequency of the order of a few microhertz (\u03bcHz), the highest peak corresponding to 4.3\u00a0\u03bcHz (2.7\u00a0days) with an amplitude of 60 ms\u22121, with a frequency separation of c.\u00a05\u00a0\u03bcHz. They suggested that the most plausible explanation for the variability of Arcturus is stellar oscillations.\nAsteroseismological measurements allow direct calculation of the mass and radius, giving values of and . This form of modelling is still relatively inaccurate, but a useful check on other models.\nElement abundance.\nAstronomers term \"metals\" those elements with higher atomic numbers than helium. Arcturus has an enrichment of alpha elements relative to iron but only about a third of solar metallicity. Arcturus is possibly a Population II star.\nPossible planetary system.\nHipparcos satellite astrometry also suggested that Arcturus is a binary star, with the companion about twenty times dimmer than the primary and orbiting close enough to be at the very limits of humans' current ability to make it out. Recent results remain inconclusive, but do support the marginal \"Hipparcos\" detection of a binary companion.\nIn 1993, radial velocity measurements of Aldebaran, Arcturus and Pollux showed that Arcturus exhibited a long-period radial velocity oscillation, which could be interpreted as a \"substellar companion\". This substellar object would be nearly 12\u00a0times the mass of Jupiter and be located roughly at the same orbital distance from Arcturus as the Earth is from the Sun, at 1.1\u00a0astronomical units. However, all three stars surveyed showed similar oscillations yielding similar companion masses, and the authors concluded that the variation was likely to be intrinsic to the star rather than due to the gravitational effect of a companion. So far no substellar companion has been confirmed.\nOther names.\nIn Arabic.\nIn Arabic, Arcturus is one of two stars called \"al-sim\u0101k\" \"the uplifted ones\" (the other is Spica). Arcturus is specified as \u0627\u0644\u0633\u0645\u0627\u0643 \u0627\u0644\u0631\u0627\u0645\u062d \"as-sim\u0101k ar-r\u0101mi\u0127\" \"the uplifted one of the lancer\". The term \"Al Simak Al Ramih\" has appeared in Al Achsasi Al Mouakket catalogue (translated into Latin as \"Al Simak Lanceator\").\nThis has been variously romanized in the past, leading to obsolete variants such as \"Aramec\" and \"Azimech\". For example, the name \"Alramih\" is used in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"A Treatise on the Astrolabe\" (1391). Another Arabic name is \"Haris-el-sema\", from \"\u062d\u0627\u0631\u0633 \u0627\u0644\u0633\u0645\u0627\u0621\" \"\u0127\u0101ris al-sam\u0101\u2019\" \"the keeper of heaven\". or \"\u062d\u0627\u0631\u0633 \u0627\u0644\u0634\u0645\u0627\u0644\" \"\u0127\u0101ris al-sham\u0101l\u2019\" \"the keeper of north\".\nArcturus was once again called by its classical name from the Renaissance onwards.\nAsia.\nIn Chinese astronomy, Arcturus is called \"Da Jiao\" (), because it is the brightest star in the Chinese constellation called \"Jiao Xiu\" (). Later it became a part of another constellation \"Kang Xiu\" ().\nOther languages.\nThe Wotjobaluk Koori people of southeastern Australia knew Arcturus as \"Marpean-kurrk\", mother of \"Djuit\" (Antares) and another star in Bo\u00f6tes, \"Weet-kurrk\" (Muphrid). Its appearance in the north signified the arrival of the larvae of the wood ant (a food item) in spring. The beginning of summer was marked by the star's setting with the Sun in the west and the disappearance of the larvae. The people of Milingimbi Island in Arnhem Land saw Arcturus and Muphrid as man and woman, and took the appearance of Arcturus at sunrise as a sign to go and harvest \"rakia\" or spikerush. The Wailwun of northern New South Wales knew Arcturus as \"Guembila\" \"red\".\nIn Inuit astronomy, Arcturus is called the Old Man (\"Uttuqalualuk\" in Inuit languages) and The First Ones (\"Sivulliik\" in Inuit languages).\nThe Mi'kmaq of eastern Canada saw Arcturus as \"Kookoogw\u00e9ss\", the owl.\nArcturus had several names that described its significance to indigenous Polynesians. In the Society Islands, Arcturus, called \"Ana-tahua-taata-metua-te-tupu-mavae\" (\"a pillar to stand by\"), was one of the ten \"pillars of the sky\", bright stars that represented the ten heavens of the Tahitian afterlife. In Hawaii, the pattern of Bo\u00f6tes was called \"Hoku-iwa\", meaning \"stars of the frigatebird\". This constellation marked the path for Hawaiiloa on his return to Hawaii from the South Pacific Ocean. The Hawaiians called Arcturus \"Hoku-le\u02bba\". It was equated to the Tuamotuan constellation \"Te Kiva\", meaning \"frigatebird\", which could either represent the figure of Bo\u00f6tes or just Arcturus. However, Arcturus may instead be the Tuamotuan star called \"Turu\". The Hawaiian name for Arcturus as a single star was likely \"Hoku-le\u02bba\", which means \"star of gladness\", or \"clear star\". In the Marquesas Islands, Arcturus was probably called \"Tau-tou\" and was the star that ruled the month approximating January. The M\u0101ori and Moriori called it \"Tautoru\", a variant of the Marquesan name and a name shared with Orion's Belt.\nEarly 20th-century Armenian scientist Nazaret Daghavarian theorized that the star commonly referred to in Armenian folklore as \"Gutani astgh\" (Armenian: \u0533\u0578\u0582\u0569\u0561\u0576\u056b \u0561\u057d\u057f\u0572; lit. star of the plow) was in fact Arcturus, as the constellation of Bo\u00f6tes was called \"Ezogh\" (Armenian: \u0535\u0566\u0578\u0572; lit. the person who is plowing) by Armenians.\nIn culture.\nAs one of the brightest stars in the sky, Arcturus has been significant to observers since antiquity.\nHistorical cultures.\nPrehistoric Polynesian navigators knew Arcturus as \"H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba\", the \"Star of Joy\". Arcturus is the zenith star of the Hawaiian Islands. Using H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba and other stars, the Polynesians launched their double-hulled canoes from Tahiti and the Marquesas Islands. Traveling east and north they eventually crossed the equator and reached the latitude at which Arcturus would appear directly overhead in the summer night sky. Knowing they had arrived at the exact latitude of the island chain, they sailed due west on the trade winds to landfall. If H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba could be kept directly overhead, they landed on the southeastern shores of the Big Island of Hawai\u02bbi. For a return trip to Tahiti the navigators could use Sirius, the zenith star of that island. Since 1976, the Polynesian Voyaging Society's \"H\u014dk\u016ble\u02bba\" has crossed the Pacific Ocean many times under navigators who have incorporated this wayfinding technique in their non-instrument navigation.\nIn ancient Mesopotamia, it was linked to the god Enlil, and also known as Shudun, \"yoke\", or SHU-PA of unknown derivation in the \"Three Stars Each\" Babylonian star catalogues and later MUL.APIN around 1100 BC.\nIn Ancient Rome, the star's celestial activity was supposed to portend tempestuous weather, and a personification of the star acts as narrator of the prologue to Plautus' comedy \"Rudens\" (circa 211 BC).\nIn the Middle Ages, Arcturus was considered a Behenian fixed star and attributed to the stone Jasper and the plantain herb. Cornelius Agrippa listed its kabbalistic sign under the alternate name \"Alchameth\".\nThe Karandavyuha sutra, compiled at the end of the 4th century or beginning of the 5th century, names one of Avalokiteshvara's meditative absorptions as \"The face of Arcturus\".\nOne of the possible etymologies offered for the name \"Arthur\" assumes that it is derived from \"Arcturus\" and that the early Medieval character on whom the myth of King Arthur is based was originally named for the star.\nModern cultures.\nArcturus achieved fame when its light was rumored to be the mechanism used to open the 1933 Chicago World's Fair. The star was chosen as it was thought that light from Arcturus had started its journey at about the time of the previous Chicago World's Fair in 1893 (at 36.7\u00a0light-years away, the light actually started in 1896).\nThe star is mentioned in the 1977 documentary film \"Powers of Ten\", in which it is seen when a camera zooms from Earth to the whole of the known universe."}
{"id": "3074", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3074", "title": "Androphagi", "text": "Androphagi (, literally \"man-eaters\") was an ancient nation of cannibals north of Scythia (according to Herodotus), probably in the forests between the upper waters of the Dnepr and Don. These people may have assisted the Scythians when King Darius the Great led a Persian invasion into what is now Southern Russia.\nEtymology.\nHistorian Marija Gimbutas has hypothesized that \"Androphagoi\" is a Greek translation of *mard-xwaar \"man-eater\" in the old North Iranian language of the Scythians. From *mard-xwaar one can derive \"Mordva\" or \"Mordvin\", the Russian name of the Finno-Ugrian Erzya and Moksha peoples of east-central European Russia. From Herodotus we can deduce a location for the Androphagoi that is approximately the same as that occupied by the modern Mordvins. Max Vasmer rejected this etymology as unsubstantiated.\nAncient accounts.\nHerodotus first wrote of \"andropophagi\" in his \"Histories\", where he described them as one of several tribes near Scythia. An extra note indicates that the \"andropophagi\" are cannibals, as reflected in their name:\nPliny the Elder later wrote in his \"Naturalis Historia\" that the same cannibals near Scythia wore the scalps of men on their chest."}
{"id": "3075", "revid": "824740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3075", "title": "Albert Brooks", "text": " \nAlbert Brooks (born Albert Lawrence Einstein; July 22, 1947) is an American actor, comedian, writer, and director.\nHe received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor for 1987's \"Broadcast News\" and was widely praised for his performance as a ruthless Jewish mobster in the 2011 neo-noir film \"Drive\". Brooks has also notably starred in \"Taxi Driver\" (1976), \"Private Benjamin\" (1980), \"Unfaithfully Yours\" (1984) and \"My First Mister\" (2001). He has written, directed, and starred in several comedy films, such as \"Modern Romance\" (1981), \"Lost in America\" (1985), and \"Defending Your Life\" (1991). He is also the author of \"2030: The Real Story of What Happens to America\" (2011).\nHis voice acting credits include Marlin in \"Finding Nemo\" (2003) and \"Finding Dory\" (2016), Tiberius in \"The Secret Life of Pets\" (2016), and recurring guest voices for \"The Simpsons\", including Russ Cargill in \"The Simpsons Movie\" (2007) and Hank Scorpio in \"You Only Move Twice\".\nEarly life.\nBrooks was born Albert Lawrence Einstein into a Jewish show business family in Beverly Hills, California, to Thelma Leeds (n\u00e9e Goodman), a singer and actress, and Harry Einstein, a radio comedian who performed on Eddie Cantor's radio program and was known as \"Parkyakarkus\". His brothers are the late comedic actor Bob Einstein, better known as a character he created named \"Super Dave Osborne\", and for a recurring role in \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\"; and Cliff Einstein, a partner and longtime chief creative officer at Los Angeles advertising agency Dailey &amp; Associates. His half-brother was Charles Einstein, a writer for such television programs as \"Playhouse 90\" and \"Lou Grant\". His grandparents emigrated from Austria and Russia. He grew up among show business families in southern California, attending Beverly Hills High School with Richard Dreyfuss and Rob Reiner.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nBrooks attended Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, but dropped out after one year to focus on his comedy career. By the age of 19, he had changed his professional name to Albert Brooks, joking that \"the real Albert Einstein changed his name to sound more intelligent\". He began a comedy career and quickly became a regular on variety and talk shows during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Brooks led a new generation of self-reflective baby-boomer comics appearing on NBC's \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\". His onstage persona, that of an egotistical, narcissistic, nervous comic, an ironic showbiz insider who punctured himself before an audience by disassembling his mastery of comedic stagecraft, influenced other '70s post-modern comedians, including Steve Martin, Martin Mull, and Andy Kaufman.\nAfter two successful comedy albums, \"Comedy Minus One\" (1973) and the Grammy Award\u2013nominated \"A Star Is Bought\" (1975), Brooks left the stand-up circuit to try his hand as a filmmaker. He had already made his first short film, \"The Famous Comedians School\", a satiric short and an early example of the mockumentary subgenre that was aired in 1972 on the PBS show \"The Great American Dream Machine\".\nIn 1975, Brooks directed six short films for the first season of NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\":\nIn 1976, he appeared in his first mainstream film role, in Martin Scorsese's landmark \"Taxi Driver\"; Scorsese allowed Brooks to improvise much of his dialogue. Brooks had landed the role after moving to Los Angeles to enter the film business. In an interview, Brooks mentioned a conversation he had had with \"Taxi Driver\" screenwriter Paul Schrader, in which Schrader said that Brooks's character was the only one in the movie that he could not \"understand\" \u2013 a remark that Brooks found amusing, as the movie's antihero was a psychotic loner.\nBrooks directed his first feature film, \"Real Life\", in 1979. The film, in which Brooks (playing a version of himself) films a typical suburban family in an effort to win both an Oscar and a Nobel Prize, was a sendup of PBS's \"An American Family\" documentary. It has also been viewed as foretelling the future emergence of reality television. Brooks also made a cameo appearance in the film \"Private Benjamin\" (1980), starring Goldie Hawn. (He got a starring credit in the film, although his character dies within roughly the first half-hour of the film.)\n1981\u20131999.\nThrough the 1980s and 1990s, Brooks co-wrote (with longtime collaborator Monica Johnson), directed and starred in a series of well-received comedies, playing variants on his standard neurotic and self-obsessed character. These include 1981's \"Modern Romance\", where Brooks played a film editor desperate to win back his ex-girlfriend (Kathryn Harrold). The film received a limited release and ultimately grossed under $3\u00a0million domestically. It was well received by critics, with one reviewer commenting that the film was \"not Brooks at his best, but still amusing\". His best-received film, \"Lost in America\" (1985), featured Brooks and Julie Hagerty as a couple who leave their yuppie lifestyle and drop out of society to live in a motor home as they have always dreamed of doing, meeting disappointment.\nBrooks's \"Defending Your Life\" (1991) placed his lead character in the afterlife, put on trial to justify his human fears and determine his cosmic fate. Critics responded to the offbeat premise and the chemistry between Brooks and Meryl Streep, as his post-death love interest. His later efforts did not find large audiences, but still retained Brooks's touch as a filmmaker. He garnered positive reviews for \"Mother\" (1996), which starred Brooks as a middle-aged writer moving back home to resolve tensions between himself and his mother (Debbie Reynolds). 1999's \"The Muse\" featured Brooks as a Hollywood screenwriter who has \"lost his edge\", using the services of an authentic muse (Sharon Stone) for inspiration. In an interview with Brooks with regards to \"The Muse\", Gavin Smith wrote, \"Brooks's distinctive film making style is remarkably discreet and unemphatic; he has a light, deft touch, with a classical precision and economy, shooting and cutting his scenes in smooth, seamless successions of medium shots, with clean, high-key lighting.\"\nBrooks has appeared as a guest voice on \"The Simpsons\" seven times during its run (always under the name \"A. Brooks\"). He is described as the best guest star in the show's history by IGN, particularly for his role as supervillain Hank Scorpio in the episode \"You Only Move Twice\".\nBrooks also acted in other writers' and directors' films during the 1980s and 1990s. He had a cameo in the opening scene of \"\", playing a driver whose passenger (Dan Aykroyd) has a shocking secret. In James L. Brooks's hit \"Broadcast News\" (1987), Albert Brooks was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for playing an insecure, supremely ethical network TV reporter, who offers the rhetorical question, \"Wouldn't this be a great world if insecurity and desperation made us more attractive?\" He also won positive notices for his role in 1998's \"Out of Sight\", playing an untrustworthy banker and ex-convict.\n2000\u2013present.\nBrooks received positive reviews for his portrayal of a dying retail store owner who befriends disillusioned teen Leelee Sobieski in \"My First Mister\" (2001). Brooks continued his voiceover work in Pixar's \"Finding Nemo\" (2003), as the voice of Marlin, one of the film's protagonists.\nIn 2005, his film \"Looking for Comedy in the Muslim World\" was dropped by Sony Pictures due to their desire to change the title. Warner Independent Pictures purchased the film and gave it a limited release in January 2006; the film received mixed reviews and a low box office gross. As with \"Real Life\", Brooks plays a fictionalized \"Albert Brooks\", a filmmaker ostensibly commissioned by the U.S. government to see what makes the Muslim people laugh, and sending him on a tour of India and Pakistan.\nIn 2006 he appeared in the documentary film \"Wanderlust\" as David Howard from \"Lost in America\". The documentary included many other well-known people. In 2007, he continued his long-term collaboration with \"The Simpsons\" by voicing Russ Cargill, the central antagonist of \"The Simpsons Movie\".\nHe has played Lenny Botwin, Nancy Botwin's estranged father-in-law, on Showtime's television series \"Weeds\". St. Martin's Press published his first novel, \"2030: The Real Story of What Happens to America\", on May 10, 2011.\nIn 2011, Brooks co-starred as the vicious gangster Bernie Rose, the main antagonist in the film \"Drive\", alongside Ryan Gosling and Carey Mulligan. His performance received much critical praise and positive reviews, with several critics proclaiming Brooks' performance as one of the film's best aspects. After receiving awards and nominations from several film festivals and critic groups, but not an Academy Award nomination, Brooks responded humorously on Twitter, \"And to the Academy: \u2018You don't like me. You really don't like me\u2019.\"\nIn 2016, Brooks voiced Tiberius, a curmudgeonly red-tailed hawk in \"The Secret Life of Pets\", and reprised the role of Marlin from \"Finding Nemo\" in the 2016 sequel \"Finding Dory\". \"Dory\" is Brooks's largest grossing film to date.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1997, Brooks married artist Kimberly Shlain, daughter of surgeon and writer Leonard Shlain. They have two children, Jacob and Claire."}
{"id": "3076", "revid": "67403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3076", "title": "Antares", "text": "Antares , designated \u03b1 Scorpii (Latinised to Alpha Scorpii, abbreviated Alpha Sco, \u03b1 Sco), is on average the fifteenth-brightest star in the night sky, and the brightest object in the constellation of Scorpius. Distinctly reddish when viewed with the naked eye, Antares is a slow irregular variable star that ranges in brightness from apparent magnitude +0.6 to +1.6. Often referred to as \"the heart of the scorpion\", Antares is flanked by \u03c3 Scorpii and \u03c4 Scorpii near the center of the constellation.\nClassified as spectral type M1.5Iab-Ib, Antares is a red supergiant, a large evolved massive star and one of the largest stars visible to the naked eye. Its exact size remains uncertain, but if placed at the center of the Solar System, it would reach to somewhere between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Its mass is calculated to be around 12 times that of the Sun.\nAntares is the brightest, most massive, and most evolved stellar member of the nearest OB association, the Scorpius\u2013Centaurus Association. Antares is a member of the Upper Scorpius subgroup of the association, which contains thousands of stars with a mean age of 11 million years, about from Earth.\nAntares appears as a single star when viewed with the naked eye, but it is actually a binary star, with its two components called \u03b1 Scorpii A and \u03b1 Scorpii B. The brighter of the pair is the red supergiant, while the fainter is a hot main sequence star of magnitude 5.5.\nNomenclature.\n\"\u03b1 Scorpii\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Scorpii\") is the star's Bayer designation. Antares has the Flamsteed designation 21 Scorpii, as well as catalogue designations such as HR 6134 in the Bright Star Catalogue and HD 148478 in the Henry Draper Catalogue. As a prominent infrared source, it appears in the Two Micron All-Sky Survey catalogue as 2MASS J16292443-2625549 and the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) Sky Survey Atlas catalogue as IRAS 16262\u20132619. It is also catalogued as a double star WDS J16294-2626 and CCDM J16294-2626. Antares is a variable star and is listed in the General Catalogue of Variable Stars but as a Bayer-designated star it does not have a separate variable star designation.\nIts traditional name \"Antares\" derives from the Ancient Greek , meaning \"rival to-Ares\" (\"opponent to-Mars\"), due to the similarity of its reddish hue to the appearance of the planet Mars. The comparison of Antares with Mars may have originated with early Mesopotamian astronomers. Some scholars have speculated that the star may have been named after Antar, or Antarah ibn Shaddad, the Arab warrior-hero celebrated in the pre-Islamic poems Mu'allaqat. In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organised a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardise proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN, which included \"Antares\" for the star \u03b1 Scorpii A. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\nObservation.\nAntares is visible all night around May 31 of each year, when the star is at opposition to the Sun. Antares then rises at dusk and sets at dawn as seen at the equator.\nFor two to three weeks on either side of November 30, Antares is not visible in the night sky from mid-northern latitudes, because it is near conjunction with the Sun. In higher northern latitudes, Antares is only visible low in the south in summertime. Higher than 64\u00b0 northern latitude, the star does not rise at all.\nAntares is easier to see from the southern hemisphere due to its southerly declination. In the whole of Antarctica, the star is circumpolar as the whole continent is above 64\u00b0 S latitude. \nHistory.\nRadial velocity variations were observed in the spectrum of Antares in the early 20th century and attempts were made to derive spectroscopic orbits. It became apparent that the small variations could not be due to orbital motion, and were actually caused by pulsation of the star's atmosphere. Even in 1928, it was calculated that the size of the star must vary by about 20%.\nAntares was first reported to have a companion star by Johann Tobias B\u00fcrg during an occultation on April 13, 1819, although this was not widely accepted and dismissed as a possible atmospheric effect. It was then observed by Scottish astronomer James William Grant FRSE while in India on 23 July 1844. It was rediscovered by Ormsby M. Mitchel in 1846, and measured by William Rutter Dawes in April 1847.\nIn 1952, Antares was reported to vary in brightness. A photographic magnitude range from 3.00 to 3.16 was described. The brightness has been monitored by the American Association of Variable Star Observers since 1945, and it has been classified as an \"LC\" slow irregular variable star, whose apparent magnitude slowly varies between extremes of +0.6 and +1.6, although usually near magnitude +1.0. There is no obvious periodicity, but statistical analyses have suggested periods of 1,733 days or days. No separate long secondary period has been detected, although it has been suggested that primary periods longer than a thousand days are analogous to long secondary periods.\nResearch published in 2018 demonstrated that Ngarrindjeri Aboriginal people from South Australia observed the variability of Antares and incorporated it into their oral traditions as Waiyungari (meaning 'red man').\nOccultations and conjunctions.\nAntares is 4.57 degrees south of the ecliptic, one of four first magnitude stars within 6\u00b0 of the ecliptic (the others are Spica, Regulus and Aldebaran), so it can be occulted by the Moon. On 31 July 2009, Antares was occulted by the Moon. The event was visible in much of southern Asia and the Middle East. Every year around December 2 the Sun passes 5\u00b0 north of Antares. Lunar occultations of Antares are fairly common, depending on the 18.6-year cycle of the lunar nodes. The last cycle ended in 2010 and the next begins in 2023. Shown at right is a video of a reappearance event, clearly showing events for both components.\nAntares can also be occulted by the planets, e.g. Venus, but these events are rare. The last occultation of Antares by Venus took place on September 17, 525 BC; the next one will be November 17, 2400. Other planets have been calculated not to have occulted Antares over the last millennium, nor will they in the next millennium, as most planets stay near the ecliptic and pass north of Antares. Venus will be extremely near Antares on October 19, 2117 and every eight years thereafter through to October 29, 2157 it will pass \"south\" of the star.\nIllumination of Rho Ophiuchi cloud complex.\nAntares illuminates in the foreground parts of the Rho Ophiuchi cloud complex. The illuminated cloud is sometimes called Antares Nebula or otherwise identified as VdB 107, Ced 132, DG 141, LBN 1107 and Magakian 668.\nStellar system.\n\u03b1 Scorpii is a double star that are thought to form a binary system. The best calculated orbit for the stars is considered to be unreliable. It describes an almost circular orbit seen nearly edge-on, with a period of 1,218 years and a semi-major axis of about . Other recent estimates of the period have ranged from 880 years for a calculated orbit, to 2,562 years for a simple Kepler's Law estimate.\nEarly measurements of the pair found them to be about apart in 1847\u201349, or apart in 1848. More modern observations consistently give separations around . The variations in the separation are often interpreted as evidence of orbital motion, but are more likely to be simply observational inaccuracies with very little true relative motion between the two components.\nThe pair have a projected separation of about 529 astronomical units (AU) (\u2248 80 billion km) at the estimated distance of Antares, giving a minimum value for the distance between them. Spectroscopic examination of the energy states in the outflow of matter from the companion star suggests that it is over beyond the primary (more than 110 billion km).\nAntares.\nAntares is a red supergiant star with a stellar classification of M1.5Iab-Ib, and is indicated to be a spectral standard for that class. Due to the nature of the star, the derived parallax measurements have large errors, so that the true distance of Antares is approximately from the Sun.\nThe brightness of Antares at visual wavelengths is about 10,000 times that of the Sun, but because the star radiates a considerable part of its energy in the infrared part of the spectrum, the true bolometric luminosity is around 100,000 times that of the Sun. There is a large margin of error assigned to values for the bolometric luminosity, typically 30% or more. There is also considerable variation between values published by different authors, for example and published in 2012 and 2013.\nThe mass of the star has been calculated to be about , or . Comparison of the effective temperature and luminosity of Antares to theoretical evolutionary tracks for massive stars suggest a progenitor mass of and an age of 12 million years (MYr), or an initial mass of and an age of 11 to 15 MYr. Massive stars like Antares are expected to explode as supernovae.\nLike most cool supergiants, Antares's size has much uncertainty due to the tenuous and translucent nature of the extended outer regions of the star. Defining an effective temperature is difficult due to spectral lines being generated at different depths in the atmosphere, and linear measurements produce different results depending on the wavelength observed. In addition, Antares appears to pulsate, varying its radius by 19%. It also varies in temperature by 150 K, lagging 70 days behind radial velocity changes which are likely to be caused by the pulsations.\nThe diameter of Antares can be measured most accurately using interferometry or observing lunar occultations events. An apparent diameter from occultations 41.3 \u00b1 0.1 milliarcseconds has been published. Interferometry allows synthesis of a view of the stellar disc, which is then represented as a limb-darkened disk surrounded by an extended atmosphere. The diameter of the limb-darkened disk was measured as in 2009 and in 2010. The linear radius of the star can be calculated from its angular diameter and distance. However, the distance to Antares is not known with the same accuracy as modern measurements of its diameter.\nThe Hipparcos satellite's trigonometric parallax of leads to a radius of about . Older radii estimates exceeding were derived from older measurements of the diameter, but those measurements are likely to have been affected by asymmetry of the atmosphere and the narrow range of infrared wavelengths observed; Antares has an extended shell which radiates strongly at those particular wavelengths. Despite its large size compared to the Sun, Antares is dwarfed by even larger red supergiants, such as VY Canis Majoris or VV Cephei A and Mu Cephei.\nAntares, like the similarly-sized red supergiant Betelgeuse in the constellation Orion, will almost certainly explode as a supernova, possibly in the next ten thousand years. For a few months, the Antares supernova could be as bright as the full moon and be visible in daytime.\nAntares B.\nAntares B is a magnitude 5.5 blue-white main-sequence star of spectral type B2.5V; it also has numerous unusual spectral lines suggesting it has been polluted by matter ejected by Antares. It is assumed to be a relatively normal early-B main sequence star with a mass around , a temperature around , and a radius of about .\nAntares B is normally difficult to see in small telescopes due to glare from Antares, but can sometimes be seen in apertures over . It is often described as green, but this is probably either a contrast effect, or the result of the mixing of light from the two stars when they are seen together through a telescope and are too close to be completely resolved. Antares B can sometimes be observed with a small telescope for a few seconds during lunar occultations while Antares is hidden by the Moon. Antares B appears a profound blue or bluish-green color, in contrast to the orange-red Antares.\nEtymology and mythology.\nIn the Babylonian star catalogues dating from at least 1100 BCE, Antares was called GABA GIR.TAB, \"the Breast of the Scorpion\". In MUL.APIN, which dates between 1100 and 700 BC, it is one of the stars of Ea in the southern sky and denotes the breast of the Scorpion goddess Ishhara. Later names that translate as \"the Heart of Scorpion\" include ' from the Arabic \u0642\u064e\u0644\u0652\u0628\u064f \u0671\u0644\u0652\u0639\u064e\u0642\u0652\u0631\u064e\u0628\u0650 '. This had been directly translated from the Ancient Greek '. ' was a calque of the Greek name rendered in Latin.\nIn ancient Mesopotamia, Antares may have been known by various names: Urbat, Bilu-sha-ziri (\"the Lord of the Seed\"), Kak-shisa (\"the Creator of Prosperity\"), Dar Lugal (\"The King\"), Masu Sar (\"the Hero and the King\"), and Kakkab Bir (\"the Vermilion Star\"). In ancient Egypt, Antares represented the scorpion goddess Serket (and was the symbol of Isis in the pyramidal ceremonies). It was called \"tms n hntt\" \"the red one of the prow\". \nIn Persia Antares was known as \"Satevis\", one of the four \"royal stars\". In India, it with \u03c3 Scorpii and \u03c4 Scorpii were Jyeshth\u0101 (the eldest or biggest, probably attributing its huge size), one of the \"nakshatra\" (Hindu lunar mansions).\nThe ancient Chinese called Antares \u5fc3\u5bbf\u4e8c (\"X\u012bnxi\u00f9'\u00e8r\", \"second star of the Heart\"), because it was the second star of the mansion \"Xin\" (\u5fc3). It was the national star of the Shang Dynasty, and it was sometimes referred to as () because of its reddish appearance.\nThe M\u0101ori people of New Zealand call Antares \"R\u0113hua\", and regard it as the chief of all the stars. R\u0113hua is father of \"Puanga/Puaka\" (Rigel), an important star in the calculation of the M\u0101ori calendar. The Wotjobaluk Koori people of Victoria, Australia, knew Antares as \"Djuit\", son of \"Marpean-kurrk\" (Arcturus); the stars on each side represented his wives. The Kulin Kooris saw Antares (\"Balayang\") as the brother of \"Bunjil\" (Altair).\nIn culture.\nAntares appears in the flag of Brazil, which displays 27 stars, each representing a federated unit of Brazil. Antares represents the state of Piau\u00ed."}
{"id": "3077", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3077", "title": "Aldebaran", "text": "Aldebaran , designated \u03b1 Tauri (Latinized to Alpha Tauri, abbreviated Alpha Tau, \u03b1 Tau), is a giant star measured to be about 65 light-years from the Sun in the zodiac constellation Taurus. It is the brightest star in Taurus and generally the fourteenth-brightest star in the night sky, though it varies slowly in brightness between magnitude 0.75 and 0.95. Aldebaran is believed to host a planet several times the mass of Jupiter, named .\nAldebaran is a giant star, cooler than the sun with a surface temperature of , but its radius is about 44 times the sun's, so it is over 400 times as luminous. It spins slowly and takes 520 days to complete a rotation.\nThe planetary exploration probe Pioneer 10 is heading in the general direction of the star and should make its closest approach in about two million years.\nNomenclature.\nThe traditional name Aldebaran derives from the Arabic \"al Dabar\u0101n\" (\"\u0627\u0644\u062f\u0628\u0631\u0627\u0646\"), meaning \"the follower\", because it seems to follow the Pleiades. In 2016, the International Astronomical Union Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) approved the proper name \"Aldebaran\" for this star.\nAldebaran is the brightest star in the constellation Taurus and so has the Bayer designation \u03b1 Tauri, Latinised as Alpha Tauri. It has the Flamsteed designation 87 Tauri as the 87th star in the constellation of approximately 7th magnitude or brighter, ordered by right ascension. It also has the Bright Star Catalogue number 1457, the HD number 29139, and the Hipparcos catalogue number 21421, mostly seen in scientific publications.\nIt is a variable star listed in the General Catalogue of Variable Stars, but it is listed using its Bayer designation and does not have a separate variable star designation.\nAldebaran and several nearby stars are included in double star catalogues such as the Washington Double Star Catalog as WDS\u00a004359+1631 and the Aitken Double Star Catalogue as ADS\u00a03321. It was included with an 11th-magnitude companion as a double star as H\u00a0IV\u00a066 in the Herschel Catalogue of Double Stars and \u03a3\u00a0II\u00a02 in the Struve Double Star Catalog, and together with a 14th-magnitude star as \u03b2\u00a0550 in the Burnham Double Star Catalogue.\nObservation.\nAldebaran is one of the easiest stars to find in the night sky, partly due to its brightness and partly due to being near one of the more noticeable asterisms in the sky. Following the three stars of Orion's belt in the opposite direction to Sirius, the first bright star encountered is Aldebaran.\nThe star is, by chance, in the line of sight between the Earth and the Hyades, so it has the appearance of being the brightest member of the open cluster, but the cluster that forms the bull's-head-shaped asterism is more than twice as far away, at about 150 light years.\nAldebaran is 5.47 degrees south of the ecliptic and so can be occulted by the Moon. Such occultations occur when the Moon's ascending node is near the autumnal equinox. A series of 49 occultations occurred starting on 29 January 2015 and ending at 3 September 2018. Each event was visible from points in the northern hemisphere or close to the equator; people in e.g. Australia or South Africa can never observe an Aldebaran occultation since it is too far south of the ecliptic. A reasonably accurate estimate for the diameter of Aldebaran was obtained during the occultation of 22 September 1978. Aldebaran is in conjunction with the Sun around June 1 of each year.\nWith a near-infrared J band magnitude of \u22122.1, only Betelgeuse (\u22122.9), R Doradus (\u22122.6), and Arcturus (\u22122.2) are brighter at that wavelength.\nObservational history.\nOn 11 March AD\u00a0509, a lunar occultation of Aldebaran was observed in Athens, Greece. English astronomer Edmund Halley studied the timing of this event, and in 1718 concluded that Aldebaran must have changed position since that time, moving several minutes of arc further to the north. This, as well as observations of the changing positions of stars Sirius and Arcturus, led to the discovery of proper motion. Based on present day observations, the position of Aldebaran has shifted 7\u2032 in the last 2000 years; roughly a quarter the diameter of the full moon. Due to precession of the equinoxes, 5,000 years ago the equinox (Northern Hemisphere)|vernal equinox was close to Aldebaran.\nEnglish astronomer William Herschel discovered a faint companion to Aldebaran in 1782; an 11th-magnitude star at an angular separation of 117\u2033. This star was shown to be itself a close double star by S. W. Burnham in 1888, and he discovered an additional 14th-magnitude companion at an angular separation of 31\u2033. Follow on measurements of proper motion showed that Herschel's companion was diverging from Aldebaran, and hence they were not physically connected. However, the companion discovered by Burnham had almost exactly the same proper motion as Aldebaran, suggesting that the two formed a wide binary star system.\nWorking at his private observatory in Tulse Hill, England, in 1864 William Huggins performed the first studies of the spectrum of Aldebaran, where he was able to identify the lines of nine elements, including iron, sodium, calcium, and magnesium. In 1886, Edward C. Pickering at the Harvard College Observatory used a photographic plate to capture fifty absorption lines in the spectrum of Aldebaran. This became part of the Draper Catalogue, published in 1890. By 1887, the photographic technique had improved to the point that it was possible to measure a star's radial velocity from the amount of Doppler shift in the spectrum. By this means, the recession velocity of Aldebaran was estimated as (48\u00a0km/s), using measurements performed at Potsdam Observatory by Hermann C. Vogel and his assistant Julius Scheiner.\nAldebaran was observed using an interferometer attached to the Hooker Telescope at the Mount Wilson Observatory in 1921 in order to measure its angular diameter, but it was not resolved in these observations.\nThe extensive history of observations of Aldebaran led to it being included in the list of 33 stars chosen as benchmarks for the Gaia mission to calibrate derived stellar parameters. It had previously been used to calibrate instruments on board the Hubble Space Telescope.\nPhysical characteristics.\nAldebaran is listed as the spectral standard for type K5+ III stars. Its spectrum shows that it is a giant star that has evolved off the main sequence band of the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram after exhausting the hydrogen at its core. The collapse of the centre of the star into a degenerate helium core has ignited a shell of hydrogen outside the core and Aldebaran is now on the red giant branch (RGB).\nThe effective temperature of Aldebaran's photosphere is . It has a surface gravity of , typical for a giant star, but around 25 times lower than the Earth's and 700 times lower than the sun's. Its metallicity is about 30% lower than the sun's.\nMeasurements by the Hipparcos satellite and other sources put Aldebaran around away. Asteroseismology has determined that it is about 16% more massive than the Sun, yet it shines with 518 times the Sun's luminosity due to the expanded radius. The angular diameter of Aldebaran has been measured many times. The value adopted as part of the Gaia benchmark calibration is . It is 44 times the diameter of the Sun, approximately 61 million kilometres.\nAldebaran is a slightly variable star, assigned to the slow irregular type \"LB\". The General Catalogue of Variable Stars indicates variation between apparent magnitude 0.75 and 0.95 from historical reports. Modern studies show a smaller amplitude, with some showing almost no variation. Hipparcos photometry shows an amplitude of only about 0.02 magnitudes and a possible period around 18 days. Intensive ground-based photometry showed variations of up to 0.03 magnitudes and a possible period around 91 days. Analysis of observations over a much longer period still find a total amplitude likely to be less than 0.1 magnitudes, and the variation is considered to be irregular.\nThe photosphere shows abundances of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen that suggest the giant has gone through its first dredge-up stage\u2014a normal step in the evolution of a star into a red giant during which material from deep within the star is brought up to the surface by convection. With its slow rotation, Aldebaran lacks a dynamo needed to generate a corona and hence is not a source of hard X-ray emission. However, small scale magnetic fields may still be present in the lower atmosphere, resulting from convection turbulence near the surface. The measured strength of the magnetic field on Aldebaran is 0.22\u00a0Gauss. Any resulting soft X-ray emissions from this region may be attenuated by the chromosphere, although ultraviolet emission has been detected in the spectrum. The star is currently losing mass at a rate of (about one Earth mass in 300,000 years) with a velocity of . This stellar wind may be generated by the weak magnetic fields in the lower atmosphere.\nBeyond the chromosphere of Aldebaran is an extended molecular outer atmosphere (MOLsphere) where the temperature is cool enough for molecules of gas to form. This region lies at about 2.5 times the radius of the star and has a temperature of about . The spectrum reveals lines of carbon monoxide, water, and titanium oxide. Outside the MOLSphere, the stellar wind continues to expand until it reaches the termination shock boundary with the hot, ionized interstellar medium that dominates the Local Bubble, forming a roughly spherical astrosphere with a radius of around 1,000\u00a0AU, centered on Aldebaran.\nVisual companions.\nFive faint stars appear close to Aldebaran in the sky. These double star components were given upper-case Latin letter designations more or less in the order of their discovery, with the letter A reserved for the primary star. Some characteristics of these components, including their position relative to Aldebaran, are shown in the table.\nSome surveys, for example Gaia Data Release 2, have indicated that Alpha Tauri B may have about the same proper motion and parallax as Aldebaran and thus may be a physical binary system. These measurements are difficult, since the dim B component appears so close to the bright primary star, and the margin of error is too large to establish (or exclude) a physical relationship between the two. So far neither the B component, nor anything else, has been unambiguously shown to be physically associated with Aldebaran. A spectral type of M2.5 has been published for Alpha Tauri B.\nAlpha Tauri CD is a binary system with the C and D component stars gravitationally bound to and co-orbiting each other. These co-orbiting stars have been shown to be located far beyond Aldebaran and are members of the Hyades star cluster. As with the rest of the stars in the cluster they do not physically interact with Aldebaran in any way.\nPlanetary system.\nIn 1993 radial velocity measurements of Aldebaran, Arcturus and Pollux showed that Aldebaran exhibited a long-period radial velocity oscillation, which could be interpreted as a substellar companion. The measurements for Aldebaran implied a companion with a minimum mass 11.4 times that of Jupiter in a 643-day orbit at a separation of in a mildly eccentric orbit. However, all three stars surveyed showed similar oscillations yielding similar companion masses, and the authors concluded that the variation was likely to be intrinsic to the star rather than due to the gravitational effect of a companion.\nIn 2015 a study showed stable long-term evidence for both a planetary companion and stellar activity. An asteroseismic analysis of the residuals to the planet fit has determined that Aldebaran\u00a0b has a minimum mass of Jupiter masses, and that when the star was on the main sequence it would have given this planet Earth-like levels of illumination and therefore, potentially, temperature. This would place it and any of its moons in the habitable zone.\nEtymology and mythology.\nAldebaran was originally \u0646\u064a\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0636\u0628\u0631\u0627\u0646 (\"N\u0101\u1fbdir al Dabar\u0101n\" in Arabic), meaning \"the bright one of the follower\". \"al Dabar\u0101n\" (\u0627\u0644\u062f\u0628\u0631\u0627\u0646) then applied to the whole of the lunar mansion containing the Hyades. It is assumed that what it was following is the Pleiades. A variety of transliterated spellings have been used, with the current \"Aldebaran\" becoming standard relatively recently.\nMythology.\nThis easily seen and striking star in its suggestive asterism is a popular subject for ancient and modern myths.\nIn modern culture.\nThe name Aldebaran or Alpha Tauri has been adopted many times, including\nThe star also appears in works of fiction such as \"Far From the Madding Crowd\" and \"Down and Out in Paris and London\". It is frequently seen in science fiction, including the \"Lensman series\" and \"Fallen Dragon\". As the brightest star in a Zodiac constellation, it is also given great significance within astrology.\nAldebaran regularly features in conspiracy theories as one of the origins of extraterrestrial aliens, often linked to Nazi UFOs. A well-known example is the German conspiracy theorist Axel Stoll, who considered the star the home of the Aryan race and the target of expeditions by the Wehrmacht.\nThe planetary exploration probe Pioneer 10 is no longer powered or in contact with Earth, but its trajectory is taking it in the general direction of Aldebaran. It is expected to make its closest approach in about two million years."}
{"id": "3078", "revid": "713587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3078", "title": "Altair", "text": "Altair () designated \u03b1\u00a0Aquilae (Latinised to Alpha\u00a0Aquilae, abbreviated Alpha\u00a0Aql, \u03b1\u00a0Aql), is the brightest star in the constellation of Aquila and the twelfth brightest star in the night sky. It is currently in the G-cloud\u2014a nearby interstellar cloud, an accumulation of gas and dust. Altair is an A-type main sequence star with an apparent visual magnitude of 0.77 and is one of the vertices of the Summer Triangle asterism (the other two vertices are marked by Deneb and Vega). It is 16.7 light-years (5.13 parsecs) from the Sun and is one of the most visible stars to the naked eye.\nAltair rotates rapidly, with a velocity at the equator of approximately 286\u00a0km/s. This is a significant fraction of the star's estimated breakup speed of 400\u00a0km/s. A study with the Palomar Testbed Interferometer revealed that Altair is not spherical, but is flattened at the poles due to its high rate of rotation. Other interferometric studies with multiple telescopes, operating in the infrared, have imaged and confirmed this phenomenon.\nNomenclature.\n\"\u03b1 Aquilae\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Aquilae\") is the star's Bayer designation. The traditional name \"Altair\" has been used since medieval times. It is an abbreviation of the Arabic phrase \"(the right, first word having forms from Al Nesr, ranging to An-nisr) Al-ta'ir\", \"\".\nIn 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN, which included \"Altair\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\nPhysical characteristics.\nAlong with \u03b2 Aquilae and \u03b3 Aquilae, Altair forms the well-known line of stars sometimes referred to as the \"Family of Aquila\" or \"Shaft of Aquila\".\nAltair is a type-A main sequence star with about 1.8 times the mass of the Sun and 11 times of its luminosity. Altair rotates rapidly, with a rotational period of about 9 hours; for comparison, the equator of the Sun makes a complete rotation in a little more than 25 days. Its rapid rotation forces the star to be oblate; its equatorial diameter is over 20 percent greater than its polar diameter.\nSatellite measurements made in 1999 with the Wide Field Infrared Explorer showed that the brightness of Altair fluctuates slightly, varying by just a few thousandths of a magnitude with several different periods less than 2 hours. As a result, it was identified in 2005 as a Delta Scuti variable star. Its light curve can be approximated by adding together a number of sine waves, with periods that range between 0.8 and 1.5 hours. It is a weak source of coronal X-ray emission, with the most active sources of emission being located near the star's equator. This activity may be due to convection cells forming at the cooler equator.\nRotational effects.\nThe angular diameter of Altair was measured interferometrically by R. Hanbury Brown and his co-workers at Narrabri Observatory in the 1960s. They found a diameter of 3milliarcseconds. Although Hanbury Brown et al. realized that Altair would be rotationally flattened, they had insufficient data to experimentally observe its oblateness. Altair was later observed to be flattened by infrared interferometric measurements made by the Palomar Testbed Interferometer in 1999 and 2000. This work was published by G. T. van Belle, David R. Ciardi and their co-authors in 2001.\nTheory predicts that, owing to Altair's rapid rotation, its surface gravity and effective temperature should be lower at the equator, making the equator less luminous than the poles. This phenomenon, known as gravity darkening or the von Zeipel effect, was confirmed for Altair by measurements made by the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer in 2001, and analyzed by Ohishi et al. (2004) and Peterson et al. (2006). Also, A. Domiciano de Souza et al. (2005) verified gravity darkening using the measurements made by the Palomar and Navy interferometers, together with new measurements made by the VINCI instrument at the VLTI.\nAltair is one of the few stars for which a direct image has been obtained. In 2006 and 2007, J. D. Monnier and his coworkers produced an image of Altair's surface from 2006 infrared observations made with the MIRC instrument on the CHARA array interferometer; this was the first time the surface of any main-sequence star, apart from the Sun, had been imaged. The false-color image was published in 2007. The equatorial radius of the star was estimated to be 2.03 solar radii, and the polar radius 1.63 solar radii\u2014a 25% increase of the stellar radius from pole to equator. The polar axis is inclined by about 60\u00b0 to the line of sight from the Earth.\nEtymology, mythology, and culture.\nThe term \"Al Nesr Al Tair\" appeared in Al Achsasi al Mouakket's catalogue, which was translated into Latin as \"Vultur Volans\". This name was applied by the Arabs to the asterism of Altair, \u03b2 Aquilae, and \u03b3 Aquilae and probably goes back to the ancient Babylonians and Sumerians, who called Altair \"the eagle star\". The spelling \"Atair\" has also been used. Medieval astrolabes of England and Western Europe depicted Altair and Vega as birds.\nThe Koori people of Victoria also knew Altair as \"Bunjil\", the wedge-tailed eagle, and \u03b2 and \u03b3 Aquilae are his two wives the black swans. The people of the Murray River knew the star as \"Totyerguil\". The Murray River was formed when \"Totyerguil\" the hunter speared \"Otjout\", a giant Murray cod, who, when wounded, churned a channel across southern Australia before entering the sky as the constellation Delphinus.\nIn Chinese belief, the asterism consisting of Altair, \u03b2 Aquilae, and \u03b3 Aquilae is known as \"H\u00e9 G\u01d4\" (; lit. \"river drum\"). The Chinese name for Altair is thus \"H\u00e9 G\u01d4 \u00e8r\" (; lit. \"river drum two\", meaning the \"second star of the drum at the river\"). However, Altair is better known by its other names: \"Qi\u0101n Ni\u00fa X\u012bng\" ( / ) or \"Ni\u00fa L\u00e1ng X\u012bng\" (), translated as the \"cowherd star\". These names are an allusion to a love story, \"The Cowherd and the Weaver Girl\", in which Niulang (represented by Altair) and his two children (represented by \u03b2 Aquilae and \u03b3 Aquilae) are separated from respectively their wife and mother Zhinu (represented by Vega) by the Milky Way. They are only permitted to meet once a year, when magpies form a bridge to allow them to cross the Milky Way.\nThe people of Micronesia called Altair \"Mai-lapa\", meaning \"big/old breadfruit\", while the M\u0101ori people called this star \"Poutu-te-rangi\", meaning \"pillar of heaven\".\nIn Western astrology, the star was ill-omened, portending danger from reptiles.\nThis star is one of the asterisms used by Bugis sailors for navigation, called \"binto\u00e9ng timoro\", meaning \"eastern star\" \nAltair Airlines was a regional airline that operated out of Philadelphia from 1966 to 1982.\nNASA announced \"Altair\" as the name of the Lunar Surface Access Module (LSAM) on December 13, 2007. The Russian-made Beriev Be-200 Altair seaplane is also named after the star.\nThe Altair 8800 was one of the first microcomputers intended for home use.\nAltair is the name of three United States navy ships: , and USNS \"Altair\" (T-AKR-291).\nThe Chevron 136,000-DWT Suezmax oil tanker originally named \"Condoleezza Rice\" (1993) was renamed \"Altair Voyager\" (2001).\nOne of the tankers attacked and damaged in the June 2019 Gulf of Oman incident was named \"Front Altair\".\n\"Altair\" is the name of a 1919 poem by Karle Wilson Baker. \nVisual companions.\nThe bright primary star has the multiple star designation WDS\u00a019508+0852A and has several faint visual companion stars, WDS\u00a019508+0852B, C, D, E, F, and G. All are much more distant than Altair and not physically associated."}
{"id": "3079", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3079", "title": "Australian Broadcasting Corporation", "text": "The Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) is Australia's national broadcaster. It is principally funded by the direct grants from the Australian government, and is administered by a board appointed by the government of the day. The ABC plays a leading role in journalistic independence, and is fundamental in the history of broadcasting in Australia.\nThe ABC has its origins in the Australian Broadcasting Company, which began in 1924 as a private company and was contracted to provide public broadcasting from 1929. It was replaced by the state-owned Australian Broadcasting Commission in 1932, adopting its current name in 1983. Modelled on the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which is funded by a television licence, the ABC was originally financed by consumer licence fees on broadcast receivers. Licence fees were abolished in 1973 and replaced principally by direct government grants, as well as revenue from commercial activities related to its core broadcasting mission.\nThe ABC now provides radio, television, online, and mobile services throughout metropolitan and regional Australia and overseas through ABC Australia and Radio Australia. The ABC's headquarters is in Ultimo, an inner-city suburb of Sydney, New South Wales.\nOrigins.\nFounded in 1924 as the Australian Broadcasting Company, the ABC was a government-licensed consortium of private entertainment and content providers, authorised under government supervision to broadcast on the airwaves using a two-tiered system. The \"A\" system derived its funds primarily from the licence fees levied on the purchasers of the radio receivers, with an emphasis on building the radio wave infrastructure into regional and remote areas, whilst the \"B\" system relied on privateers and their capacity to establish viable enterprises using the new technology. Following the general downward economic trends of the era, as entrepreneurial ventures in national infrastructure struggled with viability, the \"Company\" was subsequently acquired to become a fully state-owned corporation on 1 July 1932 and renamed as Australian Broadcasting Commission, realigning more closely to the British, BBC model.\nThe \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\" changed the name of the organisation to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, effective 1 July 1983. Although funded and owned by the government, the ABC remains editorially independent as ensured, also through the 1983 act.\nThe ABC is sometimes informally referred to as \"Aunty\", originally in imitation of the British Broadcasting Corporation's nickname.\nHistory.\n1920s\u201340s.\nThe first public radio station in Australia opened in Sydney on 23 November 1923 under the call sign 2SB, with other stations in Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, and Hobart following. A licensing scheme, administered by the Postmaster-General's Department, was soon established allowing certain stations government funding, albeit with restrictions placed on their advertising content.\nFollowing a 1927 royal commission inquiry into radio licensing, the government established the National Broadcasting Service, which subsequently took over a number of the larger funded stations. It also nationalised the Australian Broadcasting Company, which had been created by entertainment interests to supply programs to various radio stations. On 1 July 1932, the Australian Broadcasting Commission was established, taking over the operations of the National Broadcasting Service and eventually establishing offices in each of Australia's regional capital cities.\nOver the next four years, the stations were reformed into a cohesive broadcasting organisation through regular program relays, coordinated by a centralised bureaucracy. The Australian broadcast radio spectrum was constituted of the ABC and the commercial sector.\nNews broadcasts were initially restricted, due to pressure from Sir Keith Murdoch, who controlled many Australian newspapers. However, journalists such as Frank Dixon and John Hinde began to subvert the agreements in the late 1930s. in 1939, Warren Denning was appointed to Canberra as the first ABC political correspondent, after Murdoch had refused to allow his newspapers to cover a speech by Joseph Lyons.\nIn 1942, \"The Australian Broadcasting Act\" was passed, giving the ABC the power to decide when, and in what circumstances, political speeches should be broadcast. Directions from the minister about whether or not to broadcast any matter now had to be made in writing, and any exercise of the power had to be mentioned in the commission's annual report. It was used only once, in 1963. In the same year, \"Kindergarten of the Air\" began on ABC Radio in Perth, and was later broadcast nationally. In 1944, 18-year-old Patricia Delaney, of Sydney, was the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's only girl cadet announcer, and the youngest member of announcing staff.\n1950s\u201370s.\nThe ABC commenced television broadcasting in 1956, and followed the earlier radio practice of naming the station after the first letter of the base state. ABN-2 (New South Wales) Sydney was inaugurated by Prime Minister Robert Menzies on 5 November 1956, with the first broadcast presented by Michael Charlton, and James Dibble reading the first television news bulletin. ABV-2 (Melbourne, Victoria) followed two weeks later, on 18 November 1956. Stations in other capital cities followed: ABQ-2 (Brisbane, Queensland) (1959), ABS-2 (Adelaide, South Australia) (1960), ABW-2 (Perth, Western Australia) (1960), and ABT-2 (Hobart, Tasmania) (1960). ABC-3 Canberra opened in 1961, and ABD-6 (Darwin, Northern Territory) started broadcasting in 1971, both named after the base city.\nAlthough radio programs could be distributed nationally by landline, television relay facilities were not in place until the early 1960s. This meant that news bulletins had to be sent to each capital city by teleprinter, to be prepared and presented separately in each city, with filmed materials copied manually and sent to each state. Other television programs at the time included the popular \"Six O'Clock Rock\" hosted by Johnny O'Keefe, \"Mr. Squiggle\", and operas and plays.\nIn 1973, New South Wales Rugby League boss Kevin Humphreys negotiated the rugby league's first television deal with the ABC.\nIn 1975, colour television was permanently introduced into Australia after experimental colour broadcasts since 1967, and within a decade, the ABC had moved into satellite broadcasting, greatly enhancing its ability to distribute content nationally. In the same year, the ABC introduced a 24-hour-a-day AM rock station in Sydney, 2JJ (Double Jay), which was eventually expanded into the national Triple J FM network. A year later, a national classical music network was established on the FM band, broadcasting from Adelaide. It was initially known as ABC-FM (now called ABC Classic FM) \u2013 referring both to its 'fine music' programming and radio frequency.\nABC budget cuts began in 1976 and continued until 1985. In 1978, the ABC NSW Staff Association organised a strike against budget cuts and political interference. Sydney ABC was off air for four days. A packed free concert in support was held at the Regent Theatre and compered by Bob Hudson. It featured Fred Dagg and Robyn Archer. In 1991, Tom Molomby wrote:\n1980s\u201390s.\nThe \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\" changed the name of the organisation to the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation\", effective 1 July 1983. At the same time, the newly formed corporation underwent significant restructuring. The ABC was split into separate television and radio divisions, with an overhaul of management, finance, property, and engineering. Geoffrey Whitehead was the initial managing director; however, following his resignation in 1986, David Hill (at the time chair of the ABC Board) took over his position.\nProgram production in indigenous affairs, comedy, social history, and current affairs was significantly expanded, while the corporation's output of drama was boosted. Local production trebled from 1986\u201391 with the assistance of co-production, co-financing, and presales arrangements.\nA new concert music department was formed in 1985 to co-ordinate the corporation's six symphony orchestras, which in turn received a greater level of autonomy to better respond to local needs. Open-air free concerts and tours, educational activities, and joint ventures with other music groups were undertaken at the time to expand the orchestras' audience reach.\nABC Radio was restructured significantly again in 1985 \u2013 Radio One became the Metropolitan network, while Radio 2 became known as Radio National (callsigns, however, were not standardised until 1990). New programs such as \"The World Today\", \"Australia All Over\", and \"The Coodabeen Champions\" were introduced, while ABC-FM established an Australian music unit in 1989. Radio Australia began to focus on the Asia-Pacific region, with coverage targeted at the south-west and central Pacific, south-east Asia, and north Asia. Radio Australia also carried more news coverage, with special broadcasts during the 1987 Fijian coup, Tiananmen Square massacre, and the First Gulf War.\nIn 1991, the corporation's Sydney radio and orchestral operations moved to a new building in the inner-city suburb of Ultimo. In Melbourne, the ABC Southbank Centre was completed in 1994, and now houses the radio division in Victoria, as well as the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra.\nThe ABC Multimedia Unit was established in July 1995, to manage the new ABC website (launched in August). Funding was allocated later that year specifically for online content, as opposed to reliance on funding for television and radio content. The first online election coverage was put together in 1996, and included news, electorate maps, candidate information, and live results.\nBy the early 1990s, all major ABC broadcasting outlets moved to 24-hour-a-day operation, while regional radio coverage in Australia was extended with 80 new transmitters. Live television broadcasts of selected parliamentary sessions started in 1990. ABC NewsRadio, a continuous news network broadcast on the Parliamentary and News Network when parliament is not sitting, was launched on 5 October 1994.\nInternational television service Australia Television International was established in 1993, while at the same time Radio Australia increased its international reach. Reduced funding in 1997 for Radio Australia resulted in staff and programming cuts.\n\"Australia Television\" was sold to the Seven Network in 1998, but the service continued to show ABC news and current-affairs programming until its closure in 2001. The ABC's television operation joined its radio and online divisions at the corporation's Ultimo headquarters in 2000.\n2000s.\nIn 2001, digital television commenced after four years of preparation. In readiness, the ABC had fully digitised its production, postproduction, and transmission facilities \u2013 heralded at the time as \"the greatest advance in television technology since the introduction of colour\". The first programmes to be produced in widescreen were drama series \"Something in the Air\", \"Grass Roots\", and \"In the Mind of the Architect\".\nAt the same time, the ABC's multimedia division was renamed \"ABC New Media\", becoming an output division of the ABC alongside television and radio. Legislation allowed the ABC to provide 'multichannels' \u2013 additional, digital-only, television services managed by the New Media Division. Soon after the introduction of digital television in 2001, Fly TV and the ABC Kids channel launched, showing a mix of programming aimed at teenagers and children.\nIn 2002, the ABC launched ABC Asia Pacific \u2013 the replacement for the defunct Australia Television International operated previously by the Seven Network. Much like its predecessor, and companion radio network Radio Australia, the service provided a mix of programming targeted at audiences throughout the Asia-Pacific region. Funding cuts in 2003 led to the closure of Fly TV and the ABC Kids channel.\nThe ABC launched a digital radio service, ABC DiG, in November 2002, available though the internet and digital television, but not available through any other terrestrial broadcast until DAB+ became available in 2009.\nABC2, a second attempt at a digital-only television channel, launched on 7 March 2005. Unlike its predecessors the new service was not dependent on government funding, instead running on a budget of A$3\u00a0million per year. Minister for Communications Helen Coonan inaugurated the channel at Parliament House three days later. Genre restrictions limiting the types of programming the channel could carry were lifted in October 2006 \u2013 ABC2 was henceforth able to carry programming classified as comedy, drama, national news, sport, and entertainment.\nA high incidence of breast cancer in female staff working at the ABC's offices in Brisbane led to the closure of the site, based in Toowong, on 21 December 2006; 16 women were diagnosed with the disease in a period spanning 1994 to 2007. A progress report released in March 2007 by an independent panel formed to investigate the occurrences found that the rate of occurrence for breast cancer rate at the offices was 11 times higher than elsewhere \u2013 after the closure of the site, the ABC's Brisbane-based television and radio operations were moved to alternate locations around the city, including Ten Brisbane's studios at Mt Coot-tha. The ABC's managing director, Mark Scott, announced in August 2007 that new studios would be built on the site, following the final release of the Review and Scientific Investigation Panel's report. In January 2012 the ABC in Brisbane moved into purpose-built accommodation in South Bank.\nOn 8 February 2008, ABC TV was rebranded as ABC1, complementing the existing ABC2 digital-only channel, which was launched on 7 March 2005. Branding was also added for a new kids' channel that had been announced throughout the Howard government based on their winning the 2007 election, but left to the 2009 Rudd government budget where ABC3 was funded and announced in June. A new online video-on-demand service launched in July of the same year, titled ABC iview, and the ABC launched digital radio broadcasts in the same month.\nIn 2006, the definitive history of the ABC by Ken Inglis was issued by Black Inc., reissuing the 1983 edition of \"This is the ABC - 1932-1983\" and issuing his \"Whose ABC - 1983-2006\". These tomes combined to give a comprehensive overview of the ABC's history to that year.\n2010s.\nABC News launched on 22 July 2010, and brought with it both new programming content, as well as a collaboration of existing news and current-affairs productions and resources. The ABC launched the 24-hour news channel to both complement its existing 24-hour ABC News Radio service and compete with commercial offerings on cable TV. It became the ABC's fifth domestic TV channel and the fourth launched within the past 10 years.\nOn 20 July 2014, ABC1 reverted to its original name of ABC TV.\nIn 2014, the ABC ran its first \"Mental As\" week focusing on improving awareness of mental health issues, as part of Mental Health Week.\nIn December 2015, it was announced that former BSkyB, Star TV, and Google executive Michelle Guthrie would take over from managing director Mark Scott, who was to retire in April 2016.\nIn June 2018, the Liberal Party's annual federal council voted to privatise the ABC. The decision is not binding on the federal government, so is seen as unlikely to impact government policy.\nIn September 2018, Michelle Guthrie was announced as having left the position of managing director, after \"directors resolved that it was not in the best interests of the ABC for Ms Guthrie to continue to lead the organisation\".\nIn February 2019, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison reportedly deen given a shortlist of potential candidates for the role of ABC chair after the company has gone without one or a managing director for over four months. The recruitment process has been started by the global recruitment firm, Korn Ferry. The final choice for chairman has yet to be sent to the cabinet for approval. The ABC board has started the search for a new managing director, though the chairman has yet to be appointed. Ita Buttrose has been named the new chairwoman of the ABC, pending formal approval from the Governor-General.\n2020s.\nIn 2020, the ABC was reported as cutting up to 250 jobs and a number of programs, budgets, and initiatives, after a multiyear indexation freeze reduced its financial capacities.\nCorporation.\nManagement.\nThe operations of the ABC are governed by a board of directors, consisting of a managing director, five to seven directors, and until 2006, a staff-elected director. The managing director is appointed by the board for a period of up to five years, but is eligible for renewal. The authority and guidelines for the appointment of directors is provided for in the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\".\nAppointments to the ABC Board made by successive governments have often resulted in criticism of the appointees' political affiliation, background, and relative merit. Past appointments have associated directly with political parties \u2013 five of fourteen appointed chairmen have been accused of political affiliation or friendship, include Richard Downing and Ken Myer (both of whom publicly endorsed the Australian Labor Party at the 1972 election), as well as Sir Henry Bland. David Hill was close to Neville Wran, while Donald McDonald was considered to be a close friend of John Howard.\nFrom 2003 the Howard Government made several controversial appointments to the ABC Board, including prominent ABC critic Janet Albrechtsen, Ron Brunton, and Keith Windschuttle.\nDuring their 2007 federal election campaign, Labor announced plans to introduce a new system, similar to that of the BBC, for appointing members to the board. Under the new system, candidates for the ABC Board would be considered by an independent panel established \"at arm's length\" from the Communications Minister. If the minister chose someone not on the panel's shortlist, they would be required to justify this to parliament. The ABC chairman would be nominated by the prime minister and endorsed by the leader of the opposition.\nThe new merit-based appointment system was announced on 16 October, in advance of the new triennial funding period starting in 2009.\nCurrent board members are:\nFunding.\nThe ABC is primarily funded by the Australian government, in addition to some revenue received from commercial offerings and its retail outlets. The ABC's funding system is set and reviewed every three years.\nUntil 1948, the ABC was funded directly by radio licence fees; amendments were also made to the \"Australian Broadcasting Act\" that meant the ABC would receive its funding directly from the federal government. Licence fees remained until 1973, when they were abolished by the Whitlam Labor government, on the basis that the near-universality of television and radio services meant that public funding was a fairer method of providing revenue for government-owned radio and television broadcasters.\nIn 2014, the ABC absorbed A$254 million in federal budget deficits.\nSince the 2018 budget handed down by then-Treasurer Scott Morrison, the ABC has been subject to a pause of indexation of operation funding, saving the federal government a total of A$83.7 million over 3 years. In fiscal year 2016-17, the ABC received A$861 million in federal funding, which increased to $865 million per year from 2017-18 to 2018-19, representing a cut in funding of $43 million over three years when accounting for inflation. In 2019-20, the federal budget forecast funding of $3.2 billion over three years ($1.06 billion per year) for the ABC. The \"Enhanced Newsgathering Fund\", a specialised fund for regional and outer-suburban news gathering set up in 2013 by the Rudd government, currently sits at $44 million over three years, a reduction of $28 million per year since the 2016 Australian federal election. This came after speculation that the fund would be removed, to which ABC Acting Managing Director David Anderson wrote to Communications Minister Mitch Fifield expressing concerns.\nThe term \"where your 8 cents a day goes\", coined in the late 1980s during funding negotiations, is often used in reference to the services provided by the ABC. It was estimated that the cost of the ABC per head of population per day was 7.1 cents a day, based on the Corporation's 2007\u201308 'base funding' of $543\u00a0million.\nPolitics and criticism.\nIndependence and impartiality.\nUnder the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\", the ABC Board is bound to \"maintain the independence and integrity of the Corporation\" and to ensure that \"the gathering and presentation by the Corporation of news and information is accurate and impartial according to the recognized standards of objective journalism.\"\nIn relation to impartiality and diversity of perspectives, the current ABC editorial policy requires of the broadcaster that:\nCriticisms.\nAs a publicly funded broadcaster, the ABC is expected not to take editorial stances on political issues, and is required to present a range of views with impartiality. Over the decades, accusations of \"bias\" at the ABC have arisen at different times, and various inquiries were undertaken.\nReviews of the ABC are regularly commissioned and sometimes not released.\nThe ABC's requirement of impartiality has led to persistent debates. External critics have complained in particular of left-wing political bias at the broadcaster, citing a prominence of Labor Party-connected journalists hosting masthead political programs or a tendency to favour \"progressive\" over \"conservative\" political views on issues such as immigration, refugees, the republic, multiculturalism, reconciliation, feminism, environmentalism, anti-Americanism, gay marriage, budgeting.\nBoth internal and external research have been conducted on the question of bias at the ABC. A 2013 University of the Sunshine Coast study of the voting intentions of journalists found that 73.6% of ABC journalists supported Labor or The Greens - with 41% supporting the Greens (whereas only around 10% of people in the general population voted Green). A 2004 Roy Morgan media credibility survey found that journalists regarded ABC Radio as the most accurate news source in the country and the ABC as the second \"most politically biased media organisation in Australia\". Former Prime Minister of Australia Malcolm Turnbull commented on 3AW radio in 2018 that \"some\" journalists and programs \"contain a left-wing bias.\"\nConservative commentators such as Andrew Bolt, Tim Blair, and Gerard Henderson accuse the ABC of a left-wing bias. In rejecting criticisms of bias, ABC journalist Annabel Crabb said in 2015 that the organisation gives \"voices to Australians who otherwise wouldn't be heard, on topics that are too uncommercial or too remote or too hard to be covered by anyone else, broadcasting into areas from which others have long withdrawn resources\". ABC journalist turned NSW Liberal MLA Pru Goward said of the organisation: \" I have no doubt there was left-wing bias, I certainly thought it when I was there\", while ABC journalist turned Federal Labor politician Maxine McKew said there was no left wing bias, though \"what I detected years ago in the ABC, much more of a collectivist philosophy\". However former ABC Chairman Maurice Newman says, \"the ABC bias is absolutely palpable\" and \"the ABC is now 'shameless' and there is no attempt to bring balance to its programs\".\nAt the 2016 federal election, a study commissioned by the ABC and conducted by iSentia compiled share-of-voice data and found that the ABC devoted 42.6% of election coverage to the Coalition government (this compares to the 42.04% vote received by the Coalition in the House of Representatives (HOR)), 35.9% to the Labor opposition (34.73% HOR), 8% to the Greens (10.23% HOR), 3.1% to independents (1.85% HOR), 2.2% to Nick Xenophon's Team (1.85% HOR) and 8.1% to the rest. However, the ABC itself notes the \"significant limitations around the value of share of voice data\" as \"duration says nothing about tone or context\".\nFrom Hawke to Rudd.\nLabor Prime Minister Bob Hawke considered the ABC's coverage of the 1991 Gulf War to be biased. In 1996, conservative Opposition Leader John Howard refused to have Kerry O'Brien of the ABC moderate the television debates with Labor Prime Minister Paul Keating because Howard saw O'Brien as biased against the Coalition.\nDuring the subsequent Howard Government years, ABC TV's masthead political programs were anchored by journalists with Labor affiliations: the \"7.30 Report\" was hosted by former Whitlam staffer Kerry O'Brien; the \"Insiders\" program by former Hawke staffer Barrie Cassidy and the \"Lateline\" program by Maxine McKew who went on to defeat Liberal Prime Minister John Howard as the Labor candidate for the seat of Bennelong in 2007, at the same time as ABC Sydney News weatherman Mike Bailey ran for Labor against Liberal minister Joe Hockey.\nIn the subsequent Rudd-Gillard period, Cassidy retained his position at \"Insiders\", while O'Brien shifted to host \"Four Corners\" in 2011.\nChris Uhlmann, husband of Labor MP Gai Brodtmann, was appointed as co-host of the \"7.30\" current affairs program, and Sydney ABC News anchor Juanita Phillips began a relationship with Labor's Minister for Climate Change, Greg Combet.\nAbbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government (2013\u2013present).\nLiberal Prime Minister Tony Abbott perceived the ABC to be left wing and hostile to his government, while his successor Malcolm Turnbull enjoyed better relations with the National Broadcaster. When the ABC co-published stolen documents purportedly revealing Australian spy agency activities overseas, Abbott told 2GB radio: \"people feel at the moment that the ABC instinctively takes everyone's side but Australia's\". He reportedly called the \"Q&amp;A\" program a \"Lefty Lynch Mob\". Abbott denounced the program for inviting Zaky Mallah, a man convicted of threatening Commonwealth officials, to participate in questioning one of his ministers, asking: \"whose side are you on?\". Abbott initiated a brief ministerial boycott of the \"Q&amp;A\" program following the affair.\nThe broadcaster was critical of Abbott when he broke an election-eve promise not to make cuts to the ABC as part of his \"Budget repair\" program. In early 2015, an internal ABC review of its coverage of Joe Hockey's first Budget criticised the post-budget interviews by \"7:30\" and \"Lateline\", finding that the interviewers had given the impression of bias.\nWhen Abbott lost the leadership to the less conservative Turnbull in the September 2015 Liberal leadership spill, the hosts of the ABC's political programs spoke in favour of Abbott's demise. Kerry O'Brien and Barrie Cassidy, hosts respectively of the ABC's flagship weekly current affairs programs \"Four Corners\" and \"Insiders\", welcomed the replacement of Abbott by Turnbull, as did ABC radio commentators Fran Kelly Paul Bongiorno and Amanda Vanstone. Fairfax and News Limited reported that Leigh Sales, the host of \"7.30\" gave Turnbull an unusually warm first interview following his toppling of Abbott.\nWhen Turnbull lost the leadership after a conservative challenge in August 2018, the hosts of the ABC's political programs denounced the change. The 7pm News political correspondent Andrew Probyn, who had been censured by ACMA earlier in the year for biased reporting against Abbott, said the removal of Turnbull was about \"vengeance pure and simple\". Earlier in the year. \"Insiders\"' Barrie Cassidy called it \"insanity and madness\". \"7:30\" Chief Political Correspondent Laura Tingle was selected by Turnbull first among a handful of journalists to ask questions at his final press conference. She said \"one of frustrations that voters have had with your prime ministership is the sense that you have conceded too regularly to the conservatives\" Vanstone called the challenge \"disgraceful\".\nIn a March 2016 interview with ABC Managing Director Mark Scott, \"Media Watch\" host Paul Barry examined the question of perceptions of left wing bias at the ABC. Scott noted that while perhaps the ABC was more concerned about gay marriage than about electricity prices, he did not accept the criticism of bias because \"a lot of that criticism comes from right wing commentators and they wonder where are the strong right wing commentators on the ABC. We don't do that kind of journalism. We don't ask questions about our journalists' voting pattern and where their ideology are. We look at the journalism that they put to air and we have strong editorial standards...\" Following the interview, conservative ABC critic Andrew Bolt wrote \"How can the man heading our biggest media organisation be so blind to the ABC's unlawful and dangerous Leftist bias?\" while former \"Media Watch\" host Jonathan Holmes wrote for \"The Age\" that this interview indicated that ABC management had failed to recognise a clear problem of left wing bias among some capital city radio presenters.\nOver the period, ABC TV and radio hosts advocated strongly in support of same-sex marriage, upon which the wider Australian community and political parties were divided. When the Turnbull Government announced plans for a postal plebiscite on the issue, advocacy for change continued, prompting a call for restraint from the ABC's editorial policy manager Mark Maley.\nAn interview by ABC presenter Joe O'Brien with Lyle Shelton was the subject of a complaint by the Australian Christian Lobby. Bringing up Ian Thorpe's swimming achievements, O'Brien asked Shelton \"what right do you have to participate in that joy, and take national pride in those achievements, if you now deny him the right to feel like an equal and experience the joy of marriage?\" In rejecting any perceived bias, the ABC said \"It was a 'devil's advocate' question and not inconsistent with standards\".\nAustralia Day.\nThe ABC is criticised for allegedly giving undue support to opposition to Australia Day being held on 26 January. In 2017, the ABC's youth radio network announced that, after extensive consultation and opinion polling, it would no longer play its Hottest 100 Australian music list on Australia Day, choosing instead to broadcast the playlist on the fourth weekend in January. The Federal Communications Minister Mitch Fifield said in response \"I am bewildered by the ABC's decision to move the Hottest 100 from Australia Day. The ABC shouldn't be buying into this debate. Australia Day is our national day. The ABC should honour it and not mess with the Hottest 100.\" In 2018, an opinion piece appeared on ABC's website suggesting the date should be moved to 1 January, citing symbolism. Justin Milne, the chair of the ABC Board, held a meeting trying to convince the board to overrule Triple J's decision.\nCoverage of the Catholic Church.\nThe ABC's coverage of the Catholic Church has been controversial. The Archbishop of Brisbane, Mark Coleridge, condemned the ABC in 2017 for an \"antagonistic, one-sided narrative\" of the Catholic Church. Gerard Henderson of the Sydney Institute has written that \"The ABC's focus on historic child sexual abuse in the Catholic Church stands in contrast to its failure to cover the public broadcaster\u2019s own history in this area.\" In the aftermath of the wrongful conviction of Adelaide archbishop Phillip Wilson in 2018, and the wrongful conviction of Cardinal George Pell by a jury in 2019, journalist Paul Kelly wrote that \"calculated media assaults on Pell\" had been \"spearheaded by the ABC\", contributing to an intense and unjustified public hatred of the Catholic leader and prejudicial environment in which to conduct a trial.\nThe ABC's coverage of the issue has also won praise including the awarding of the 'Melbourne Press Club 2016 Quill for Coverage of an Issue or Event for the report 'George Pell and Sexual Abuse in the Catholic Church' and the 2016 Golden Quill award to Louise Milligan and Andy Burns for their extensive coverage of Cardinal George Pell's evidence given at the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse. In awarding the prize judges noted \"Their interviews with victims were compelling, moving and handled with great humanity. The work delivered a series of scoops, including detailed allegations about the conduct of Cardinal George Pell. This is journalism at its best: giving voice to those who have long suffered in silence.\"\nInitial reports into the accusations against Cardinal Pell were broken by the Herald Sun in February 2016 with the ABC first covering the story in July that year on the program 7.30 which featured two alleged victims. Cardinal Pell was invited to participate however declined and instead issued a statement. The ABC News and Current Affairs programs provided coverage of the investigation and trial of Pell, in particular Four Corners in March 2019 and the series \"Revelation\" in 2020. In its statement the ABC maintained \"In every case, Cardinal Pell was made aware of all the allegations against him well before the programs were broadcast and given every opportunity to address and respond to them.\". In a review of the programming the ABC noted \"Obtaining interviews with Cardinal Pell\u2019s supporters was not always easy; reporters and producers covering the case for ABC News, local radio and daily current affairs often had interview requests declined. Nonetheless, many of the Cardinal\u2019s most prominent supporters have regularly appeared on major ABC programs, and the ABC\u2019s coverage has consistently included a wide diversity of voices, accurate news and authoritative analysis of the many complex legal issues raised by the case\"\nIn the aftermath of the unanimous acquittal of Cardinal George Pell by the High Court of Australia in 2020, Cardinal Pell and a variety of commentators accused the ABC of sustained bias against him and of \"abuse of power\". Asked on Sky News if the ABC's \"persecution\" concerned him, the Cardinal replied: \"Yes it does, because, I mean, it's partly financed by Catholic taxes... in a national broadcaster to have an overwhelming presentation of one view, and only one view, I think that's a betrayal of the national interest.\" Australian Catholic University vice-chancellor Greg Craven accused the ABC of being \"virulent\" in creating \"an atmosphere conducive to a conviction.\"\nIn response the ABC conducted an editorial and legal review of its coverage where it rejected the accusation of bias, and defended its reporting of Pell as having been \"without fear or favour\". A number of ABC presenters and reporters expressed disappointment about the acquittal on personal social media accounts and in the press. ABC Media Watch's Paul Barry reported: \"and to prove that point perhaps, two ex-ABC [sic] titans Barrie Cassidy and Quentin Dempster took to Twitter to declare that just because the high court unanimously acquitted Cardinal Pell that did not mean he was innocent. Technically that may be right but the principle of our legal system is you\u2019re innocent until proven guilty\" ABC reporter Louise Milligan, author of \"Cardinal: The Rise and Fall of George Pell\", asked her Twitter followers to \"Hug your children\" after the High Court published its judgment. Greg Sheridan wrote for \"The Australian\": \"Milligan, an ABC journalist, wrote a book damning Pell. It too was based in part on allegations now dismissed in court. Yet she was used on the ABC as though she were an impartial reporter... Milligan\u2019s book was never searchingly critiqued on the ABC. Given the massive power of the ABC, this is an abuse of power\".\nPaul Kelly wrote: \"The job of the ABC was to inform and educate on one of the most contentious trials in the past half-century. Instead, it campaigned against Pell, essentially offering a one-sided condemnatory view in a coverage that was extensive, powerful and influential with the public.\" Tony Thomas wrote for \"Quadrant\": \"The producers' tricks include hard editing of material favourable to Pell and long lingering on adverse material.\" Gerard Henderson wrote: \"The ABC led the campaign in programs such as 7.30, Four Corners, Lateline (as it then was), Q&amp;A, News Breakfast and Radio National Breakfast.\"\nSummarising his case against the ABC's coverage of Pell, conservative commentator Greg Sheridan wrote on 16 April:\nABC journalists in politics.\nA number of former journalists and presenters have moved from positions at the ABC to politics.\nState Labor premiers and chief ministers Bob Carr,\nAlan Carpenter,\nand Clare Martin are all former ABC journalists. Other ABC journalists who stood as Labor candidates include Mary Delahunty, Maxine McKew, Mike Bailey, Ian Baker, Leon Bignell, John Bowler, Bob Debus, Malarndirri McCarthy, Frank McGuire, Neville Oliver and Diana Warnock. Senior ABC political reporter Kerry O'Brien was press secretary to Labor prime minister Gough Whitlam and Labor deputy leader Lionel Bowen and Barrie Cassidy was press secretary to Labor prime minister Bob Hawke. Susan Templeman's husband, Ron Fuller, is the former Chief of Staff for ABC TV News. Radio National's Phillip Adams is a former member of the Communist Party of Australia and the Labor Party, and Melbourne ABC radio's Jon Faine is a former member of the Labor Party.\nOn the Coalition side of politics, Pru Goward has served as a Minister in the NSW state Liberal Government, Rob Messenger, Peter Collins, Eoin Cameron, Scott Emerson and Sarah Henderson all held, or hold, positions at the ABC. Radio National's \"Counterpoint\" program is hosted by former Liberal minister Amanda Vanstone, who describes herself as \"liberal\" rather than \"conservative\".\nResearch undertaken by the broadcaster in 2007 indicated that out of a total of 19 former employees moving into party political positions, 10 have joined the Labor Party and nine the Liberal Party.\nPlanet Slayer website.\n\"Planet Slayer\" was a controversial environmentalist website for children owned by ABC. The site featured a \"Greenhouse Calculator\" which says the age a person needs to die if they are not to \"overuse their share of the earth\". The site has also been criticized for attacking those who eat meat, blue collared workers such as loggers, and nuclear energy. ABC managing director Mark Scott said the site was not designed to offend anyone, but instead have children think about environmental issues.\n2019 police raid.\nOn 5 June 2019, police raided the headquarters of the ABC looking for articles written in 2017 about alleged misconduct by Australian forces in Afghanistan. Search warrants naming two journalists and news director Gaven Morris were issued.\nThe raid was countered by lawyers for the ABC challenging the examination of over 9,200 documents, including internal emails.\nServices.\nRadio.\nThe ABC operates 54 local radio stations, in addition to four national networks and international service Radio Australia. In addition, DiG Radio launched on digital platforms in 2002, currently offering three separate stations.\nABC Local Radio is the Corporation's flagship radio station in each broadcast area. There are 54 individual stations, each with a similar format consisting of locally presented light entertainment, news, talk back, music, sport and interviews, in addition to some national programming such as \"AM\", \"PM\", \"The World Today\", sporting events and \"Nightlife\".\nThe ABC operates four national radio networks, available on AM and FM as well as on digital platforms and the internet.\nABC Radio broadcasts regular news bulletins across most of its radio stations. Many of these bulletins are heralded by the \"Majestic Fanfare\", written by British composer Charles Williams in 1935.\nIn addition to these, there is also Radio Australia, the international radio station of the ABC.\nThe ABC also operates several stations only available online and on digital platforms, as listed below.\nTelevision.\nThe ABC operates 5 national television channels.\nAlthough the ABC's headquarters in Sydney serve as a base for program distribution nationally, ABC Television network is composed of eight state- and territory-based stations, each based in their respective state capital and augmented by repeaters:\nThe eight ABC stations carry opt outs for local programming. In addition to the nightly 7pm news, the stations also broadcast weekly state editions of \"7.30\" on Friday evenings (until 5 December 2014), state election coverage and in most areas, live sport on Saturday afternoons.\nStudios.\nThe ABC operates ABC Studios. ABC TV, the corporation's original television service, receives the bulk of funding for television and shows first-run news, and ABC Kids.\nOnline.\nAn experimental Multimedia Unit was established in 1995, charged with developing policy for the ABC's work in web publishing. This unit continued until 2000, when the New Media division was formed, bringing together the ABC's online output as a division similar to Television or Radio. The division had over a million pages of material published by late 2003.\nIn 2001 the New Media division became New Media and Digital Services, reflecting the broader remit to develop content for digital platforms such as digital television. In addition to ABC Online, the division also had responsibility over the ABC's two digital television services, Fly TV and the ABC Kids channel, until their closure in 2003. In March 2005 the division oversaw the launch of ABC2, a free-to-air digital television channel, in effect a replacement for ABC Kids and Fly.\nIn conjunction with the ABC's radio division, New Media and Digital Services implemented the ABC's first podcasts in December 2004. By mid-2006 the ABC had become an international leader in podcasting with over fifty podcast programmes delivering hundreds of thousands of downloads per week, including trial video podcasts of The Chaser's War on Everything and jtv.\nIn February 2007, the New Media &amp; Digital Services division was dissolved and divided up amongst other areas of the ABC. It was replaced by a new Innovation division, to manage ABC Online and investigate new technologies for the ABC.\nIn 2015 the Innovation division was replaced with the Digital Network division.\nInternational.\nABC Australia is an international satellite television service operated by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, funded by advertising and grants from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Aimed at the Asia-Pacific region, the service broadcasts a mixture of English language programming, including general entertainment, sport, and current affairs.\nRadio Australia is an international satellite and internet radio service with transmissions aimed at East Asia and the Pacific Islands, although its signals are also audible in many other parts of the world. It features programmes in various languages spoken in these regions, including Mandarin, Indonesian, Vietnamese, Khmer and Tok Pisin. Before 31 January 2017 Radio Australia broadcast shortwave radio signals which were terminated in favour of online and satellite radio.\nRadio Australia bulletins are also carried on WRN Broadcast, available via satellite in Europe and North America.\nCommercial.\nABC Commercial is the division of the ABC responsible for pursuing new sources of revenue for the Corporation. It comprises ABC Retail, ABC Content Sales and Distribution, ABC Publishing and Licensing, ABC Music and Events, and ABC Studio and Media Productions. ABC retail outlets were established in 1974, and closed in 2015. All profits from the sale of consumer product and production services return to the Corporation to reinvest in programme making.\nOrchestras.\nUp until the installation of disc recording equipment in 1935, all content broadcast on the ABC was produced live, including music. For this purpose, the ABC established broadcasting orchestras in each state, and in some centres also employed choruses and dance bands. This became known as the ABC Concert Music Division, which was controlled by the Federal Director of Music \u2013 the first of whom was W. G. James.\nThere are currently six state symphony orchestras:\nThe orchestras were corporatised in the 1990s, and were divested into independent companies on 1 January 2007.\nLissajous curve logo.\nThe ABC logo is one of the most recognisable logos in Australia. In the early years of television, the ABC had been using Lissajous curves as fillers between programmes. In July 1963, the ABC conducted a staff competition to create a new logo for use on television, stationery, publications, microphone badges and ABC vehicles. In 1965, ABC graphics designer Bill Kennard submitted a design representing a Lissajous display, as generated when a sine wave signal is applied to the \"X\" input of an oscilloscope and another at three times the frequency at the \"Y\" input. The letters \"ABC\" were added to the design and it was adopted as the ABC's official logo. Kennard was presented with \u00a325 for his design.\nOn 19 October 1974, the Lissajous curve design experienced its first facelift with the line thickened to allow for colour to be used. It would also be treated to the 'over and under' effect, showing the crossover of the line in the design. This logo would be served as the longest-running design with a lifespan of 44 years and 28 on its first on-air run. To celebrate its 70th anniversary on 1 July 2002, the ABC adopted a new logo, which was created by (Annette) Harcus Design in 2001. This logo utilized a silver 3D texture but the crossover design was left intact. This logo would then be used across the ABC's media outlets. However, some brands may continue to use this logo. The 2002 silver logo is no longer in use by the corporation, with the exception of some of the ABC's radio station logos. After the on-air revival of the 1974 logo since 2014, the ABC gradually reinstated the classic symbol while using a new logotype in 2018. The change comes with a press release that the ABC released on 12 February announcing a new brand positioning under its tagline, \"Yours\"."}
{"id": "3080", "revid": "1013078539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3080", "title": "Alexandria", "text": "Alexandria ( or ; ; ; Coptic: Rakod\u012b; \"Alexandria\") is the third-largest city in Egypt after Cairo and Giza, seventh-largest city in Africa, and a major economic centre. With a total population of 5,200,000, Alexandria is the largest city on the Mediterranean \u2013 also called the \"Bride of the Mediterranean\" by locals \u2013 the sixth-largest city in the Arab world and the ninth-largest urban area \nin Africa. The city extends about at the northern coast of Egypt along the Mediterranean Sea. Alexandria is a popular tourist destination, and also an important industrial centre because of its natural gas and oil pipelines from Suez.\nAlexandria was founded in by Alexander the Great, king of Macedon and leader of the Greek League of Corinth, during his conquest of the Achaemenid Empire. An Egyptian village named Rhacotis existed at the location and grew into the Egyptian quarter of Alexandria. Alexandria grew rapidly to become an important centre of Hellenistic civilization and remained the capital of Ptolemaic Egypt and Roman and Byzantine Egypt for almost 1,000 years, until the Muslim conquest of Egypt in AD\u00a0641, when a new capital was founded at Fustat (later absorbed into Cairo). Hellenistic Alexandria was best known for the Lighthouse of Alexandria (\"Pharos\"), one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World; its Great Library (the largest in the ancient world); and the Necropolis, one of the Seven Wonders of the Middle Ages. Alexandria was the intellectual and cultural centre of the ancient Mediterranean world for much of the Hellenistic age and late antiquity. It was at one time the largest city in the ancient world before being eventually overtaken by Rome.\nThe city was a major centre of early Christianity and was the centre of the Patriarchate of Alexandria, which was one of the major centres of Christianity in the Eastern Roman Empire. In the modern world, the Coptic Orthodox Church and the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria both lay claim to this ancient heritage.\nBy the time of the Arab conquest of Egypt in 641 AD, the city had already been largely plundered and lost its significance before re-emerging in the modern era. From the late 18th century, Alexandria became a major centre of the international shipping industry and one of the most important trading centres in the world, both because it profited from the easy overland connection between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea, and the lucrative trade in Egyptian cotton.\nHistory.\nAncient era.\nRecent radiocarbon dating of seashell fragments and lead contamination show human activity at the location during the period of the Old Kingdom (27th\u201321st centuries BC) and again in the period 1000\u2013800 BC, followed by the absence of activity thereafter. From ancient sources it is known there existed a trading post at this location during the time of Rameses the Great for trade with Crete, but it had long been lost by the time of Alexander's arrival. A small Egyptian fishing village named Rhakotis (Egyptian: \"r\ua725-qdy.t\", 'That which is built up') existed since the 13th century BC in the vicinity and eventually grew into the Egyptian quarter of the city. Just east of Alexandria (where Abu Qir Bay is now), there was in ancient times marshland and several islands. As early as the 7th century BC, there existed important port cities of Canopus and Heracleion. The latter was recently rediscovered under water.\nAlexandria was founded by Alexander the Great in April 331 BC as (\"Alexandreia\"). Passing through Egypt, Alexander wanted to build a large Greek city on Egypt's coast that would bear his name. He chose the site of Alexandria, envisioning the building of a causeway to the nearby island of Pharos that would generate two great natural harbours. Alexandria was intended to supersede the older Greek colony of Naucratis as a Hellenistic centre in Egypt, and to be the link between Greece and the rich Nile valley. A few months after the foundation, Alexander left Egypt and never returned to the city during his life.\nAfter Alexander's departure, his viceroy Cleomenes continued the expansion. The architect Dinocrates of Rhodes designed the city, using a Hippodamian grid plan. Following Alexander's death in 323 BC, his general Ptolemy Lagides took possession of Egypt and brought Alexander's body to Egypt with him. Ptolemy at first ruled from the old Egyptian capital of Memphis. In 322/321 BC he had Cleomenes executed. Finally, in 305 BC, Ptolemy declared himself Pharaoh as Ptolemy I Soter (\"Savior\") and moved his capital to Alexandria.\nAlthough Cleomenes was mainly in charge of overseeing Alexandria's early development, the \"Heptastadion\" and the mainland quarters seem to have been primarily Ptolemaic work. Inheriting the trade of ruined Tyre and becoming the centre of the new commerce between Europe and the Arabian and Indian East, the city grew in less than a generation to be larger than Carthage. In a century, Alexandria had become the largest city in the world and, for some centuries more, was second only to Rome. It became Egypt's main Greek city, with Greek people from diverse backgrounds.\nAlexandria was not only a centre of Hellenism, but was also home to the largest urban Jewish community in the world. The Septuagint, a Greek version of the Tanakh, was produced there. The early Ptolemies kept it in order and fostered the development of its museum into the leading Hellenistic centre of learning (Library of Alexandria), but were careful to maintain the distinction of its population's three largest ethnicities: Greek, Jewish, and Egyptian. By the time of Augustus, the city walls encompassed an area of 5.34\u00a0km, and the total population during the Roman principate was around 500,000\u2013600,000, which would wax and wane in the course of the next four centuries under Roman rule.\nAccording to Philo of Alexandria, in the year 38 of the Common era, disturbances erupted between Jews and Greek citizens of Alexandria during a visit paid by the Jewish king Agrippa I to Alexandria, principally over the respect paid by the Jewish nation to the Roman emperor, and which quickly escalated to open affronts and violence between the two ethnic groups and the desecration of Alexandrian synagogues. This event has been called the Alexandrian pogroms. The violence was quelled after Caligula intervened and had the Roman governor, Flaccus, removed from the city.\nIn AD 115, large parts of Alexandria were destroyed during the Kitos War, which gave Hadrian and his architect, Decriannus, an opportunity to rebuild it. In 215, the emperor Caracalla visited the city and, because of some insulting satires that the inhabitants had directed at him, abruptly commanded his troops to put to death all youths capable of bearing arms. On 21 July 365, Alexandria was devastated by a tsunami (365 Crete earthquake), an event annually commemorated years later as a \"day of horror\".\nIslamic era.\nIn 619, Alexandria fell to the Sassanid Persians. Although the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius recovered it in 629, in 641 the Arabs under the general 'Amr ibn al-'As invaded it during the Muslim conquest of Egypt, after a siege that lasted 14 months. The first Arab governor of Egypt recorded to have visited Alexandria was Utba ibn Abi Sufyan, who strengthened the Arab presence and built a governor's palace in the city in 664\u2013665.\nAfter the Battle of Ridaniya in 1517, the city was conquered by the Ottoman Turks and remained under Ottoman rule until 1798. Alexandria lost much of its former importance to the Egyptian port city of Rosetta during the 9th to 18th centuries, and only regained its former prominence with the construction of the Mahmoudiyah Canal in 1807.\nAlexandria figured prominently in the military operations of Napoleon's expedition to Egypt in 1798. French troops stormed the city on 2 July 1798, and it remained in their hands until the arrival of a British expedition in 1801. The British won a considerable victory over the French at the Battle of Alexandria on 21 March 1801, following which they besieged the city, which fell to them on 2 September 1801. Muhammad Ali, the Ottoman governor of Egypt, began rebuilding and redevelopment around 1810, and by 1850, Alexandria had returned to something akin to its former glory. Egypt turned to Europe in their effort to modernize the country. Greeks, followed by other Europeans and others, began moving to the city. In the early 20th century, the city became a home for novelists and poets.\nIn July 1882, the city came under bombardment from British naval forces and was occupied.\nIn July 1954, the city was a target of an Israeli bombing campaign that later became known as the Lavon Affair. On 26 October 1954, Alexandria's Mansheya Square was the site of a failed assassination attempt on Gamal Abdel Nasser.\nEuropeans began leaving Alexandria following the 1956 Suez Crisis that led to an outburst of Arab nationalism. The nationalization of property by Nasser, which reached its highest point in 1961, drove out nearly all the rest.\nIbn Battuta in Alexandria.\nIn reference to Alexandria, Egypt, Ibn Battuta speaks of great saints that resided here. One of them being Imam Borhan Oddin El Aaraj. He was said to have the power of working miracles. He told Ibn Battuta that he should go find his three brothers, Farid Oddin, who lived in India, Rokn Oddin Ibn Zakarya, who lived in Sindia, and Borhan Oddin, who lived in China. Battuta then made it his purpose to find these people and give them his compliments. Sheikh Yakut was another great man. He was the disciple of Sheikh Abu Abbas El Mursi, who was the disciple of Abu El Hasan El Shadali, who is known to be a servant of God. Abu Abbas was the author of the Hizb El Bahr and was famous for piety and miracles. Abu Abd Allah El Murshidi was a great interpreting saint that lived secluded in the Minyat of Ibn Murshed. He lived alone but was visited daily by emirs, viziers, and crowds that wished to eat with him. The Sultan of Egypt (El Malik El Nasir) visited him, as well. Ibn Battuta left Alexandria with the intent of visiting him.\nIbn Battuta also visited the Pharos lighthouse on 2 occasions; in 1326 he found it to be partly in ruins and in 1349 it had deteriorated further, making entrance to the edifice impossible.\nTimeline.\nThe most important battles and sieges of Alexandria include:\nAncient layout.\nGreek Alexandria was divided into three regions:\nTwo main streets, lined with colonnades and said to have been each about wide, intersected in the centre of the city, close to the point where the Sema (or Soma) of Alexander (his Mausoleum) rose. This point is very near the present mosque of Nebi Daniel; and the line of the great East\u2013West \"Canopic\" street, only slightly diverged from that of the modern Boulevard de Rosette (now Sharia Fouad). Traces of its pavement and canal have been found near the Rosetta Gate, but remnants of streets and canals were exposed in 1899 by German excavators outside the east fortifications, which lie well within the area of the ancient city.\nAlexandria consisted originally of little more than the island of Pharos, which was joined to the mainland by a mole and called the \"Heptastadion\" (\"seven stadia\"\u2014a \"stadium\" was a Greek unit of length measuring approximately ). The end of this abutted on the land at the head of the present Grand Square, where the \"Moon Gate\" rose. All that now lies between that point and the modern \"Ras al-Tin\" quarter is built on the silt which gradually widened and obliterated this mole. The Ras al-Tin quarter represents all that is left of the island of Pharos, the site of the actual lighthouse having been weathered away by the sea. On the east of the mole was the Great Harbour, now an open bay; on the west lay the port of Eunostos, with its inner basin Kibotos, now vastly enlarged to form the modern harbour.\nIn Strabo's time, (latter half of the 1st century BC) the principal buildings were as follows, enumerated as they were to be seen from a ship entering the Great Harbour.\nThe names of a few other public buildings on the mainland are known, but there is little information as to their actual position. None, however, are as famous as the building that stood on the eastern point of Pharos island. There, The Great Lighthouse, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, reputed to be high, was situated. The first Ptolemy began the project, and the second Ptolemy (Ptolemy II Philadelphus) completed it, at a total cost of 800\u00a0talents. It took 12\u00a0years to complete and served as a prototype for all later lighthouses in the world. The light was produced by a furnace at the top and the tower was built mostly with solid blocks of limestone. The Pharos lighthouse was destroyed by an earthquake in the 14th century, making it the second longest surviving ancient wonder, after the Great Pyramid of Giza. A temple of Hephaestus also stood on Pharos at the head of the mole.\nIn the 1st century, the population of Alexandria contained over 180,000 adult male citizens, according to a census dated from 32 CE, in addition to a large number of freedmen, women, children and slaves. Estimates of the total population range from 216,000 to 500,000 making it one of the largest cities ever built before the Industrial Revolution and the largest pre-industrial city that was not an imperial capital.\nGeography.\nAlexandria is located in the country of Egypt, on the southern coast of the Mediterranean. It is in the Nile delta area.\nClimate.\nAlexandria has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: BWh), bordering on a hot semi-arid climate (BSh). As the rest of Egypt's northern coast, the prevailing north wind, blowing across the Mediterranean, gives the city a less severe climate from the desert hinterland. Rafah and Alexandria are the wettest places in Egypt; the other wettest places are Rosetta, Baltim, Kafr el-Dawwar, and Mersa Matruh. The city's climate is influenced by the Mediterranean Sea, moderating its temperatures, causing variable rainy winters and moderately hot and slightly prolonged summers that, at times, can be very humid; January and February are the coolest months, with daily maximum temperatures typically ranging from and minimum temperatures that could reach . temperature sometimes gets lower than 5 and it sometimes rains snow.\nAlexandria experiences violent storms, rain and sometimes sleet and hail during the cooler months; these events, combined with a poor drainage system, have been responsible for occasional flooding in the city in the past though they rarely occur anymore. July and August are the hottest and driest months of the year, with an average daily maximum temperature of .\nThe average annual rainfall is around but has been as high as \nPort Said, Kosseir, Baltim, Damietta and Alexandria have the least temperature variation in Egypt.\nThe highest recorded temperature was on 30 May 1961, and the coldest recorded temperature was on 31 January 1994.\nCityscape.\nDue to the constant presence of war in Alexandria in ancient times, very little of the ancient city has survived into the present day. Much of the royal and civic quarters sank beneath the harbour and the rest has been built over in modern times.\n\"Pompey's Pillar\", a Roman triumphal column, is one of the best-known ancient monuments still standing in Alexandria today. It is located on Alexandria's ancient acropolis\u2014a modest hill located adjacent to the city's Arab cemetery\u2014and was originally part of a temple colonnade. Including its pedestal, it is 30\u00a0m (99\u00a0ft) high; the shaft is of polished red granite, in diameter at the base, tapering to at the top. The shaft is high, and made out of a single piece of granite. Its volume is and weight approximately 396 tons. Pompey's Pillar may have been erected using the same methods that were used to erect the ancient obelisks. The Romans had cranes but they were not strong enough to lift something this heavy. Roger Hopkins and Mark Lehrner conducted several obelisk erecting experiments including a successful attempt to erect a 25-ton obelisk in 1999. This followed two experiments to erect smaller obelisks and two failed attempts to erect a 25-ton obelisk. The structure was plundered and demolished in the 4th century when a bishop decreed that Paganism must be eradicated. \"Pompey's Pillar\" is a misnomer, as it has nothing to do with Pompey, having been erected in 293 for Diocletian, possibly in memory of the rebellion of Domitius Domitianus. Beneath the acropolis itself are the subterranean remains of the Serapeum, where the mysteries of the god Serapis were enacted, and whose carved wall niches are believed to have provided overflow storage space for the ancient Library. In more recent years, many ancient artifacts have been discovered from the surrounding sea, mostly pieces of old pottery.\nAlexandria's catacombs, known as \"Kom El Shoqafa\", are a short distance southwest of the pillar, consist of a multi-level labyrinth, reached via a large spiral staircase, and featuring dozens of chambers adorned with sculpted pillars, statues, and other syncretic Romano-Egyptian religious symbols, burial niches, and sarcophagi, as well as a large Roman-style banquet room, where memorial meals were conducted by relatives of the deceased. The catacombs were long forgotten by the citizens until they were discovered by accident in 1900.\nThe most extensive ancient excavation currently being conducted in Alexandria is known as Kom El Deka. It has revealed the ancient city's well-preserved theater, and the remains of its Roman-era baths.\nPersistent efforts have been made to explore the antiquities of Alexandria. Encouragement and help have been given by the local Archaeological Society, and by many individuals, notably Greeks proud of a city which is one of the glories of their national history. Excavations were performed in the city by Greeks seeking the tomb of Alexander the Great without success.\nThe past and present directors of the museum have been enabled from time to time to carry out systematic excavations whenever opportunity is offered; D. G. Hogarth made tentative researches on behalf of the Egypt Exploration Fund and the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies in 1895; and a German expedition worked for two years (1898\u20131899). But two difficulties face the would-be excavator in Alexandria: lack of space for excavation and the underwater location of some areas of interest.\nSince the great and growing modern city stands immediately over the ancient one, it is almost impossible to find any considerable space in which to dig, except at enormous cost. Cleopatra VII's royal quarters were inundated by earthquakes and tsunami, leading to gradual subsidence in the 4th century AD. This underwater section, containing many of the most interesting sections of the Hellenistic city, including the palace quarter, was explored in 1992 and is still being extensively investigated by the French underwater archaeologist Franck Goddio and his team. It raised a noted head of Caesarion. These are being opened up to tourists, to some controversy. The spaces that are most open are the low grounds to northeast and southwest, where it is practically impossible to get below the Roman strata.\nThe most important results were those achieved by Dr. G. Botti, late director of the museum, in the neighborhood of \"Pompey's Pillar\", where there is a good deal of open ground. Here, substructures of a large building or group of buildings have been exposed, which are perhaps part of the Serapeum. Nearby, immense catacombs and \"columbaria\" have been opened which may have been appendages of the temple. These contain one very remarkable vault with curious painted reliefs, now artificially lit and open to visitors.\nThe objects found in these researches are in the museum, the most notable being a great basalt bull, probably once an object of cult in the Serapeum. Other catacombs and tombs have been opened in Kom El Shoqafa (Roman) and Ras El Tin (painted).\nThe German excavation team found remains of a Ptolemaic colonnade and streets in the north-east of the city, but little else. Hogarth explored part of an immense brick structure under the mound of Kom El Deka, which may have been part of the Paneum, the Mausolea, or a Roman fortress.\nThe making of the new foreshore led to the dredging up of remains of the Patriarchal Church; and the foundations of modern buildings are seldom laid without some objects of antiquity being discovered. The wealth underground is doubtlessly immense; but despite all efforts, there is not much for antiquarians to see in Alexandria outside the museum and the neighborhood of \"Pompey's Pillar\".\nTemple of Taposiris Magna.\nThe temple was built in the Ptolemy era and dedicated to Osiris, which finished the construction of Alexandria. It is located in Abusir, the western suburb of Alexandria in Borg el Arab city. Only the outer wall and the pylons remain from the temple. There is evidence to prove that sacred animals were worshiped there. Archaeologists found an animal necropolis near the temple. Remains of a Christian church show that the temple was used as a church in later centuries. Also found in the same area are remains of public baths built by the emperor Justinian, a seawall, quays and a bridge. Near the beach side of the area, there are the remains of a tower built by Ptolemy II Philadelphus. The tower was an exact scale replica of the destroyed Alexandrine Pharos Lighthouse.\nPlaces of worship.\nIslam.\nThe most famous mosque in Alexandria is Abu al-Abbas al-Mursi Mosque in Bahary. Other notable mosques in the city include Ali ibn Abi Talib mosque in Somouha, Bilal mosque, al-Gamaa al-Bahari in Mandara, Hatem mosque in Somouha, Hoda el-Islam mosque in Sidi Bishr, al-Mowasah mosque in Hadara, Sharq al-Madina mosque in Miami, al-Shohadaa mosque in Mostafa Kamel, Al Qa'ed Ibrahim Mosque, Yehia mosque in Zizinia, Sidi Gaber mosque in Sidi Gaber, Sidi B esher mosque, Rokay el-Islam mosque in Elessway, Elsadaka Mosque in Sidibesher Qebly, Elshatbi mosque and Sultan mosque.\nAlexandria is the base of the Salafi movements in Egypt. Al-Nour Party, which is based in the city and overwhelmingly won most of the Salafi votes in the 2011\u201312 parliamentary election, supports the president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.\nChristianity.\nAfter Rome and Constantinople, Alexandria was considered the third-most important seat of Christianity in the world. The Pope of Alexandria was second only to the bishop of Rome, the capital of the Roman Empire until 430. The Church of Alexandria had jurisdiction over most of the continent of Africa. After the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, the Church of Alexandria was split between the Miaphysites and the Melkites. The Miaphysites went on to constitute what is known today as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. The Melkites went on to constitute what is known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria. In the 19th century, Catholic and Protestant missionaries converted some of the adherents of the Orthodox churches to their respective faiths.\nToday, the Patriarchal seat of the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church is Saint Mark Cathedral . The most important Coptic Orthodox churches in Alexandria include Pope Cyril I Church in Cleopatra, Saint Georges Church in Sporting, Saint Mark &amp; Pope Peter I Church in Sidi Bishr, Saint Mary Church in Assafra, Saint Mary Church in Gianaclis, Saint Mina Church in Fleming, Saint Mina Church in Mandara and Saint Takla Haymanot's Church in Ibrahimeya.\nThe most important Eastern Orthodox churches in Alexandria are Agioi An\u00e1rgyroi Church, Church of the Annunciation, Saint Anthony Church, Archangels Gabriel &amp; Michael Church, Taxiarchon Church, Saint Catherine Church, Cathedral of the Dormition in Mansheya, Church of the Dormition, Prophet Elijah Church, Saint George Church, Saint Joseph Church in Fleming, Saint Joseph of Arimathea Church, Saint Mark &amp; Saint Nektarios Chapel in Ramleh, Saint Nicholas Church, Saint Paraskevi Church, Saint Sava Cathedral in Ramleh, Saint Theodore Chapel and the Russian church of Saint Alexander Nevsky in Alexandria, which serves the Russian speaking community in the city.\nThe Apostolic Vicariate of Alexandria in Egypt-Heliopolis-Port Said has jurisdiction over all Latin Church Catholics in Egypt. Member churches include Saint Catherine Church in Mansheya and Church of the Jesuits in Cleopatra. The city is also the nominal see of the Melkite Greek Catholic titular Patriarchate of Alexandria (generally vested in its leading Patriarch of Antioch) and the actual cathedral see of its Patriarchal territory of Egypt, Sudan and South Sudan, which uses the Byzantine Rite, and the nominal see of the Armenian Catholic Eparchy of Alexandria (for all Egypt and Sudan, whose actual cathedral is in Cairo), a suffragan of the Armenian Catholic Patriarch of Cilicia, using the Armenian Rite.\nThe Saint Mark Church in Shatby, founded as part of Coll\u00e8ge Saint Marc, is multi-denominational and holds liturgies according to Latin Catholic, Coptic Catholic and Coptic Orthodox rites.\nIn antiquity, Alexandria was a major centre of the cosmopolitan religious movement called Gnosticism (today mainly remembered as a Christian heresy).\nJudaism.\nAlexandria's once-flourishing Jewish community declined rapidly following the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, after which negative reactions towards Zionism among Egyptians led to Jewish residents in the city, and elsewhere in Egypt, being perceived as Zionist collaborators. Most Jewish residents of Egypt fled to the newly established Israel, France, Brazil and other countries in the 1950s and 1960s. The community once numbered 50,000 but is now estimated at below 50. The most important synagogue in Alexandria is the Eliyahu Hanavi Synagogue.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nAlexandria has a number of higher education institutions. Alexandria University is a public university that follows the Egyptian system of higher education. Many of its faculties are internationally renowned, most notably its Faculty of Medicine &amp; Faculty of Engineering. In addition, the Egypt-Japan University of Science and Technology in New Borg El Arab city is a research university set up in collaboration between the Japanese and Egyptian governments in 2010. The Arab Academy for Science, Technology &amp; Maritime Transport is a semi-private educational institution that offers courses for high school, undergraduate level, and postgraduate students. It is considered the most reputable university in Egypt after the AUC American University in Cairo because of its worldwide recognition from board of engineers at UK &amp; ABET in US. Universit\u00e9 Senghor is a private French university that focuses on the teaching of humanities, politics and international relations, which mainly recruits students from the African continent. Other institutions of higher education in Alexandria include Alexandria Institute of Technology (AIT) and Pharos University in Alexandria.\nSchools.\nAlexandria has a long history of foreign educational institutions. The first foreign schools date to the early 19th century, when French missionaries began establishing French charitable schools to educate the Egyptians. Today, the most important French schools in Alexandria run by Catholic missionaries include Coll\u00e8ge de la M\u00e8re de Dieu, Coll\u00e8ge Notre Dame de Sion, Coll\u00e8ge Saint Marc, Ecoles des Soeurs Franciscaines (four different schools), \u00c9cole Girard, \u00c9cole Saint Gabriel, \u00c9cole Saint-Vincent de Paul, \u00c9cole Saint Joseph, \u00c9cole Sainte Catherine, and Institution Sainte Jeanne-Antide. As a reaction to the establishment of French religious institutions, a secular (laic) mission established Lyc\u00e9e el-Horreya, which initially followed a French system of education, but is currently a public school run by the Egyptian government. The only school in Alexandria that completely follows the French educational system is Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais d'Alexandrie (\u00c9cole Champollion). It is usually frequented by the children of French expatriates and diplomats in Alexandria. The Italian school is the Istituto \"Don Bosco\".\nEnglish schools in Alexandria are becoming the most popular. English-language schools in the city include: Riada American School, Riada Language School, Alexandria Language School, Future Language School, Future International Schools (Future IGCSE, Future American School and Future German school), Alexandria American School, British School of Alexandria, Egyptian American School, Pioneers Language School, Egyptian English Language School, Princesses Girls' School, Sidi Gaber Language School, Taymour English School, Sacred Heart Girls' School, Schutz American School, Victoria College, El Manar Language School for Girls (previously called Scottish School for Girls), Kawmeya Language School, El Nasr Boys' School (previously called British Boys' School), and El Nasr Girls' College (previously called English Girls' College).\nThere are only two German schools in Alexandria which are Deutsche Schule der Borrom\u00e4rinnen (DSB of Saint Charles Borrom\u00e9) and Neue Deutsche Schule Alexandria, which is run by Frau Sally Hammam.\nThe Montessori educational system was first introduced in Alexandria in 2009 at Alexandria Montessori.\nThe most notable public schools in Alexandria include El Abbassia High School and Gamal Abdel Nasser High School.\nWomen.\nCirca the 1890s, twice the percentage of women in Alexandria knew how to read compared to the same percentage in Cairo. As a result, specialist women's publications like \"al-Fat\u0101h\" by Hind Nawal, the country's first women's journal, appeared.\nTransport.\nAirports.\nThe city's principal airport is currently Borg El Arab Airport, which is located about away from the city centre.\nFrom late 2011, El Nouzha Airport (Alexandria International Airport) was to be closed to commercial operations for two years as it underwent expansion, with all airlines operating out of Borg El Arab Airport from then onwards, where a brand new terminal was completed there in February 2010. In 2017, the government announced that Alexandria International Airport will shut down permanently for operational reasons.\nPort.\nAlexandria has four ports; namely the Western Port also known as \"Alexandria Port\", which is the main port of the country that handles about 60% of the country's exports and imports, Dekhela Port west of the Western Port, the Eastern Port which is a yachting harbour, and Abu Qir Port at the northern east of the governorate. It is a commercial port for general cargo and phosphates.\nRail.\nAlexandria's intracity commuter rail system extends from Misr Station (Alexandria's primary intercity railway station) to Abu Qir, parallel to the tram line. The commuter line's locomotives operate on diesel, as opposed to the overhead-electric tram.\nAlexandria plays host to two intercity railway stations: the aforementioned Misr Station (in the older Manshia district in the western part of the city) and Sidi Gaber railway station (in the district of Sidi Gaber in the centre of the eastern expansion in which most Alexandrines reside), both of which also serve the commuter rail line. Intercity passenger service is operated by Egyptian National Railways.\nTrams.\nAn extensive tramway network was built in 1860 and is the oldest in Africa. The network begins at the El Raml district in the west and ends in the Victoria district in the east. Most of the vehicles are blue in colour. Some smaller yellow-coloured vehicles have further routes beyond the two main endpoints. The tram routes have one of four numbers: 1, 2, 5, and 6. All four start at El Raml, but only two (1 and 2) reach Victoria. There are two converging and diverging points. The first starts at Bolkly (Isis) and ends at San Stefano. The other begins at Sporting and ends at Mostafa Kamel. Route 5 starts at San Stefano and takes the inner route to Bolkly. Route 6 starts at Sidi Gaber El Sheikh in the outer route between Sporting and Mustafa Kamel. Route 1 takes the inner route between San Stefano and Bolkly and the outer route between Sporting and Mustafa Kamel. Route 2 takes the route opposite to Route 1 in both these areas. The tram fares used to be 50 piastres (0.50 pounds), and 100 piastres (1.00 pounds) for the middle car, but have been doubled sometime in 2019. Some trams (that date back the 30s) charge a pound. The tram is considered the cheapest method of public transport. A caf\u00e9 operates in the second floor of the first car of tram 1 (a women-only car) which costs 5 L.E per person, also offering a WiFi service. A luxury light blue tram car operates from San Stefano to Ras El Tin, with free WiFi and movies and songs played inside for 5 L.E per ticket.\nStations:\nRoute 2 serves:\nMetro.\nConstruction of the Alexandria Metro is due to begin in 2020 at a cost of $1.05\u00a0billion.\nTaxis and minibuses.\nTaxis in Alexandria sport a yellow-and-black livery and are widely available. While Egyptian law requires all cabs to carry meters, these generally do not work and fares must be negotiated with the driver on either departure or arrival.\nThe minibus share taxi system, or \"mashr\u016b\"' operates along well-known traffic arteries. The routes can be identified by both their endpoints and the route between them:\nThe route is generally written in Arabic on the side of the vehicle, although some drivers change their route without changing the paint. Some drivers also drive only a segment of a route rather than the whole path; such drivers generally stop at a point known as a major hub of the transportation system (for example, Victoria) to allow riders to transfer to another car or to another mode of transport.\nFare is generally L.E. 3.00 to travel the whole route. Shorter trips may have a lower fare, depending on the driver and the length of the trip.\nCulture.\nLibraries.\nThe Royal Library of Alexandria, in Alexandria, Egypt, was once the largest library in the world. It is generally thought to have been founded at the beginning of the 3rd century BC, during the reign of Ptolemy II of Egypt. It was likely created after his father had built what would become the first part of the library complex, the temple of the Muses\u2014the Museion, Greek \"\u039c\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03b5\u03af\u03bf\u03bd\" (from which the Modern English word \"museum\" is derived).\nIt has been reasonably established that the library, or parts of the collection, were destroyed by fire on a number of occasions (library fires were common and replacement of handwritten manuscripts was very difficult, expensive, and time-consuming). To this day the details of the destruction (or destructions) remain a lively source of controversy.\nThe Bibliotheca Alexandrina was inaugurated in 2002, near the site of the old Library.\nArchitecture.\nThroughout Alexandria, there is art that resembles some of the oldest architectural styles of the Hellenic city, and its ancient decorations, especially in the Bibliotheca Alexandrina, is based on reviving the ancient Library of Alexandria. The Kom el shoqafa Catacombs are considered one of the Seven Wonders of the Middle Ages and date back to the 2nd century. The remnants of Pompey's Pillar still remain today. This single pillar represents the elaborate temple which once stood in Alexandria. It remains at the site of the Serapeum, Alexandria's acropolis. The Serapeum, which stood for ancient tradition, conflicted with the rise of Christianity. It is a large tourist destination, today. the Roman Amphitheatre of Alexandria is another popular destination. Here, there remains a stage with around seven hundred to eight hundred seats. They also have numerous galleries of statues and details leftover form this time. Alexandria's tourism office announced plans to reserve some beaches for tourists in July 2018.\nSports.\nThe main sport that interests Alexandrians is football, as is the case in the rest of Egypt and Africa. Alexandria Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Alexandria, Egypt. It is currently used mostly for football matches, and was used for the 2006 African Cup of Nations. The stadium is the oldest stadium in Egypt, being built in 1929. The stadium holds 20,000 people. Alexandria was one of three cities that participated in hosting the African Cup of Nations in January 2006, which Egypt won. Sea sports such as surfing, jet-skiing and water polo are practiced on a lower scale. The Skateboarding culture in Egypt started in this city. The city is also home to the Alexandria Sporting Club, which is especially known for its basketball team, which traditionally provides the country's national team with key players. The city hosted the AfroBasket, the continent's most prestigious basketball tournament, on four occasions (1970, 1975, 1983, 2003).\nAlexandria has four stadiums:\nOther less popular sports like tennis and squash are usually played in private social and sports clubs, like:\nStarted in 2011, Cross Egypt Challenge is an international cross-country motorcycle and scooter rally conducted throughout the most difficult tracks and roads of Egypt. Alexandria is known as the yearly starting point of Cross Egypt Challenge and a huge celebration is conducted the night before the rally starts after all the international participants arrive to the city.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAlexandria is twinned with:"}
{"id": "3082", "revid": "507787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3082", "title": "Alexandria, Indiana", "text": "Alexandria is a city in Monroe Township, Madison County, Indiana, United States. It is about northeast of Indianapolis. According to the 2010 census, its population was 5,145, a decrease of 17.8% from 6,260 in 2000.\nHistory.\nAlexandria was platted in 1836, when it was certain that the Indiana Central Canal would be extended to that point. It was incorporated as a town in 1898.\nGeography.\nAlexandria is located at . According to the 2010 census, Alexandria has a total area of , all land.\nDemographics.\nAlexandria is part of the Anderson, Indiana metropolitan statistical area.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 5,145 people, 2,113 households, and 1,362 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 2,507 housing units at an average density of . The racial makup of the city was 97.4% White, 0.3% African American, 0.1% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.8% from other races, and 1.1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.7% of the population.\nOf the 2,113 households 33.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.2% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.6% had a male householder with no wife present, and 35.5% were non-families. 30.1% of households were one person and 12.8% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.95.\nThe median age was 38.2 years. 25.6% of residents were under the age of 18; 8.8% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 24.8% were from 25 to 44; 25.1% were from 45 to 64; and 15.6% were 65 or older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.8% male and 52.2% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 6,260 people, 2,481 households, and 1,654 families living in the city. The population density was 2,308.6 people per square mile (891.9/km). There were 2,704 housing units at an average density of 997.2 per square mile (385.2/km). The racial makup of the city was 98.10% White, 0.46% Black or African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.43% from other races, and 0.80% from two or more races. 0.99% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nOf the 2,481 households 33.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.0% were married couples living together, 12.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.3% were non-families. 28.9% of households were one person and 13.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 3.04.\nThe age distribution was 27.8% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 28.0% from 25 to 44, 19.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.9% 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.4 males.\nThe median household income was $35,359 and the median family income was $42,731. Males had a median income of $30,529 versus $23,384 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,578. About 4.2% of families and 7.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.1% of those under age 18 and 15.0% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nThe city council consists of seven members. Five members are elected from individual districts and two are elected at-large. The city is governed by a \"strong\" mayor system who appoints two council members and/or city residents to serve at the mayor's pleasure on the board of public works and safety. The chief financial officer is the clerk-treasurer. The clerk-treasure and mayor are full-time elected officials. The Alexandria City Court has a part-time locally elected judge.\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nAlexandria Airport is a public use airport located southeast of the central business district of Alexandria.\nEducation.\nAlexandria Community School Corporation operates public schools.\nThe town has a lending library, the Alexandria-Monroe Public Library."}
{"id": "3083", "revid": "31685261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3083", "title": "Alexandria, Louisiana", "text": "Alexandria is the ninth-largest city in the state of Louisiana and is the parish seat of Rapides Parish, Louisiana, United States. It lies on the south bank of the Red River in almost the exact geographic center of the state. It is the principal city of the Alexandria metropolitan area (population 153,922) which encompasses all of Rapides and Grant parishes. Its neighboring city is Pineville. In 2010, the population was 47,723, an increase of 3 percent from the 2000 census.\nHistory.\nLocated along the Red River, the city of Alexandria was originally home to a community which supported activities of the adjacent French trader outpost of \"Post du Rapides\". The area developed as an assemblage of traders, Caddo people, and merchants in the agricultural lands bordering the mostly unsettled areas to the north and providing a link from the south to the El Camino Real and then larger settlement of Natchitoches, the oldest permanent settlement in the Louisiana Purchase.\nAlexander Fulton, a businessman from Washington County, near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, received a land grant from Spain in 1762, and the first organized settlement was made at some point in the 1780s. In 1805, Fulton and business partner Thomas Harris Maddox laid out the town plan and named the town in Fulton's honor. The earliest deed that survives for an Alexandria resident is from June 24, 1801, when a William Cochren, who identifies himself as \"Slave master of the Southern Americas\", sold a tract of land across the Red River to a William Murrey.\nThat same year, Fulton was appointed coroner in Rapides Parish by territorial Governor William C.C. Claiborne. Alexandria was incorporated as a town in 1818 and received a city charter in 1832.\nCivil War in Alexandria.\nIn the spring of 1863, Alexandria was occupied by Union forces under the command of Admiral David Dixon Porter and General Nathaniel P. Banks. Porter arrived with his gunboats on May 7. Later in the day Banks reached Alexandria with his cavalry, whose members had marched twenty-five miles that day to reach the city. According to the historian John D. Winters of Louisiana Tech University, Porter disliked Banks but nevertheless turned over Alexandria to him and then departed to rejoin General U.S. Grant at the ongoing siege of Vicksburg, Mississippi. Banks posted guards and declared martial law. Porter left behind the gunboat in Alexandria and posted the USS \"Pittsburg\" on the Black River to the northeast.\nIn 1864, Admiral Porter returned to the area and quarreled with General Banks over possession of cotton supplies. Porter seized three hundred bales of Confederate cotton from various warehouses in Alexandria and stamped it \"U.S.N. prize\", referring to the United States Navy. Porter sent his sailors into the country to search for unginned cotton. After the crop was located, it was brought to Alexandria to be ginned and baled. The sailors also seized molasses and wool. Winters writes that Porter \"took all cotton wherever he found it, cotton belonging to the Confederate government, cotton belonging to the 'rebels,' and cotton belonging to 'loyal' citizens.\"\nWinters continues: \"Banks was furious with Porter when he learned that the admiral was scouring the interior for cotton. Since he had no authority to stop Porter's speculative activities, Banks could only try to beat him to the remaining cotton. Army wagons were sent out in large numbers to collect the cotton. Thousands of bales were brought in by the troops and stored for future shipment. Jealous of the abundant transportation facilities of the army, unprincipled navy men stole army wagons and teams at night, repainted the wagons, and branded the mules with navy initials, and dove deep in the country in search of cotton.\"\nThe federal army made itself as comfortable as possible during its long stay in Alexandria. Winters writes that \"lumber and tools were foraged, and the men busied themselves by building wooden tent floors, benches, and furniture.\u00a0... Alexandria [was enclosed] with a zigzag line of fortifications.\" While Banks remained in Alexandria in the spring of 1864, Porter was temporarily trapped north of the city because of the low level of the Red River, four feet instead of the needed seven feet to accommodate gunboats.\nConfederate citizens as a whole were most fearful of the Union. According to Winters, \"most [Confederates] had never before seen a Yankee soldier [and] expected the worse from the invader.\u00a0... 'Some cried, some cursed, some whined; and some overcome with fear, hid themselves in the woods, leaving everything to the tender mercies of the army.' Negroes were responsible for much of the plunder and pillage. Negro camp followers and officers' servants roamed the plantations and small farms without hindrance, bringing in their booty to camps each afternoon.\"\nOn May 13, 1864, when the Union decided to abandon Alexandria, the city was set afire despite General Banks' order to the contrary. Winters reports that \"burning and plundering\" by two Union corps, who set fire to a store on Front Street. Then \"a strong wind spread the flames rapidly from one building to the next.\" Banks later claimed that the fire \"broke out in the attic of one of the buildings on the levee inhabited by either soldiers or refugees.\" Winters reports that \"pandemonium reigned; frightened cows bellowed and charged through the flaming streets; squawking chickens with scorched wings tried to fly out of danger. Hundreds of women, children, and old people ran through the streets, trying to carry a few of their belongings to safety. When the heat became unbearable, they dropped their loads and fled to the levee. Thieves ran from house to house and even along the levee taking whatever they wanted from the shocked people. By noon the most congested parts of town were destroyed. An attempt to blow up a church in the path of the fire only succeeded in helping to spread the flames.\"\nAlexandria faced the overwhelming task of rebuilding with a year of the war remaining. Prices became exorbitant; butter cost $10 a pound, bacon $5 a pound, flour $3 a pound, and a bushel of meal $10. Many of the helpless lived in the forest without food, shelter, or clothing, subsisting on blackberries. All clothing was homespun, and shoes were mostly made of cloth. While Admiral Porter expressed sympathy for the suffering Alexandria residents, he declared the \"burning of Alexandria a fit termination of the unfortunate Red River expedition.\"\nGeography and climate.\nAlexandria is located at and has an elevation of .\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which 26.4 square miles (68.4\u00a0km2) is land and 0.6 square mile (1.5\u00a0km2) (2.15%) is water.\nAlexandria is on a level plain in the center of the Louisiana Longleaf Pine forests, in which pine is interspersed with various hardwoods. A number of small bayous, such as Bayou Rapides, Bayou Robert, and Hynson Bayou, meander throughout the city. In the immediate vicinity of the city, cotton, sugar, alfalfa, and garden vegetables are cultivated.\nThe climate is humid subtropical with some continental influence in the winter. Summers are consistently hot and humid, whereas winters are mild, with occasional cold snaps. On average, the first freeze occurs in early to mid November and the last freeze occurs in early to mid March. The area receives plentiful rainfall year-round, with thunderstorms possible throughout the year. Some storms can be severe, especially during the spring months. According to 'Cities Ranked and Rated' (Bert Sperling and Peter Sander), Alexandria reports an average of 69 days per year with thunder reported, which is nearly double the national average. Snowfall is rare, with measurable snow having occurred 27 times since 1895. The heaviest snowfall event took place February 12\u201313, 1960, when 9.1\" of snow fell.\nTropical storms and hurricanes affect Alexandria from time to time, but rarely cause severe damage, unlike areas closer to the coast. In September 2005, Hurricane Rita moved inland and affected Alexandria and surrounding areas, causing widespread power outages and damaging the roofs of some structures. The most recent hurricane, Gustav in 2008, caused widespread flooding, knocked over trees and power lines leading to power outages, and damaged structures. Some low-lying Alexandria neighborhoods had substantial flooding from Gustav, leaving several feet of water in houses.\nDemographics.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 47,723 people, 17,816 households, and 11,722 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,754.6/sq\u00a0mi (677.5/km2). There were 19,806 housing units at an average density of 749.9 per square mile (289.6/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 38.32% White, 57.25% Black, 1.25% Native American, 1.85% Asian, 0.14% Pacific Islander, 1.03% from other races, and 1.09% from two or more races. 6.98% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 17,816 households, out of which 31.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.5% were married couples living together, 23.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.2% were non-families. 30.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.13.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 28.1% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 26.2% from 25 to 44, 21.4% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 83.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 77.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $26,097, and the median income for a family was $31,978. Males had a median income of $29,456 versus $20,154 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,242. About 23.2% of families and 27.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.7% of those under age 18 and 18.5% of those age 65 or over.\nReligion.\nLike many other southern cities, the largest single church denomination in the Alexandria area is Southern Baptist. Large congregations include Emmanuel Baptist Church downtown on Jackson Street and Calvary Baptist off Jackson Street Extension. Alexandria is also headquarters of the Louisiana Baptist Convention. A significant Roman Catholic population is also present, a result of the large Catholic Acadian French population which resides in and around Alexandria, many from neighboring Avoyelles Parish. Alexandria is the headquarters for the Diocese of Alexandria, Louisiana, which is headed by Bishop David Talley.\nAlexandria also has a significant number of Methodists, Presbyterians, and Episcopalians. There is a large number of Pentecostals too. Alexandria has a small, though active Jewish community which dates back to the mid-19th century. Jews have consistently been leaders in government, civic organizations, education, and medicine. The long-time Alexandria City Council member, Harry B. Silver, is Jewish. From 1973 to 1977, another Jew, Arnold Jack Rosenthal, was the last commissioner of finance and utilities under the previous commission form of municipal government. At one time, many large businesses in the downtown were Jewish-owned, with prominent stores including: Wellan's, Caplan's, Bialy's, Weiss &amp; Goldring and Schwartzberg's. The Jewish community in Alexandria maintains two synagogues, which are approximately two blocks apart: Congregation Gemiluth Chassodim (Reform) and B'nai Israel Traditional Synagogue (Conservative).\nAnnual cultural events and festivals.\nMardi Gras.\nAs Alexandria is at the cusp of Cajun culture's extension to the north, the city recognizes Mardi Gras as an official holiday. The annual Mardi Gras Krewes Parade \u2013 occurring on the Sunday before Mardi Gras \u2013 on Texas Avenue is a major cultural festivity in the area. It is featured as a family-oriented event, and parade goers can enjoy over 20 New Orleans style floats, high school and college marching bands, as well as appearances by local celebrities. In addition to the main Sunday parade, the College Cheerleaders &amp; Classic Cars Parade, which was established in 2008, takes place downtown on the Friday before Mardi Gras, the Children's Parade takes place downtown on the Saturday before Mardi Gras, and the Krewe of Provine Parade is held on Fat Tuesday, processing along Coliseum Boulevard. All the events are organized by the Alexandria Mardi Gras Association (AMGA). The Krewe Parade can attract from 120,000 to 150,000; the Children's parade, up to 40,000 to 50,000, and the College Cheerleaders &amp; Classic Cars, about 5,000 to 15,000 people.\nAlex River F\u00eate.\nAn annual three-day festival is held in downtown Alexandria around late April and early May. The festival, established in 2013, was created around a former successful stand-alone event, the Louisiana Dragon Boat Races. It features the race and other former stand-alone events such as Dinner on the Bricks and the ArtWalk (now Art F\u00eate) along with various booth venues, food, and live music, as well as the Kids F\u00eate and Classic Car F\u00eate.\nAlex Winter F\u00eate.\nAn annual three day festival held in downtown Alexandria around early December. Launched in 2015, the festival first year drew about double the anticipated crowd of 15,000. The festival, like the Alex River F\u00eate, feature booth venues, food, and live music but also features an ice rink. In January 2017, the Alex Winter F\u00eate was voted Festival of the Year by the Louisiana Travel Promotion Association.\nFormer events.\nCenlabration.\nBegun in the late 1980s, Cenlabration\nwas one of the largest festivals in Central Louisiana (Cenla). The name comes from Central Louisiana (\"LA\") Celebration, and reflects local culture and heritage, as well as serving as a means of celebrating Labor Day as the end of summer.\nAs many as three stages support a particular type of music, including Cajun and zydeco, blues and jazz, and Country music. In addition there are arts and crafts booths for local artists to sell their wares. In the Children's Village, children can participate in arts and crafts, listen to storytellers, play games with clowns, or watch a play. The festival has plenty of carnival rides available as well. Cenlabration ends with a large fireworks display.\nThe festival ran for 20 years until cancellation due to finances. The city ended its annual support of $40,000 because of budget constraints.\nRiverFest.\nIn 2002, representatives of local government, businesses, organizations, and community formed the nonprofit organization River Cities Cultural Alliance, Inc. to promote tourism and the arts through a celebration of Central Louisiana's diverse cultural heritage. The nonprofit served to organize and put on RiverFest: Heritage and Arts on the Red. More than ten thousand festival-goers attending the event.\nRiverFest was held in downtown Alexandria and on the Alexandria and Pineville levees. The festival features the work of visual artists from across the South, food booths exemplifying southern cuisine, a variety of children's activities, three outdoor stages with a wide range of music, dance, and theatrical performances, and a literary component with readings and panel discussions by Louisiana authors and scholars.\nRiverFest was canceled in 2007.\nQue'in on the Red.\nAn annual barbecue festival launched in 2006, the festival was held on the levee near downtown Alexandria and was well known for its big-name entertainment. The event was cancelled in 2012 due to its high cost and the city deciding against continued support of $100,000 annually.\nMuseums.\nThe Alexandria Museum of Art was founded in 1977 and occupies an historic Rapides Bank Building on the banks of the Red River. The building was built c. 1898 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The museum opened to the public in March 1998. In 1998, the Alexandria Museum of Art expanded and constructed its grand foyer and offices as an annex to the Rapides Bank Building. In 1999, the Alexandria Museum of Art was honored as an Outstanding Arts Organization in the Louisiana Governor's Arts Awards. In 2007, the Alexandria Museum of Art entered into a collaborative endeavor agreement with Louisiana State University of Alexandria (LSUA). The Alexandria Museum of Art now also serves as a downtown campus for LSUA classes, and is host to multidisciplinary community events, including concerts and recitals, lectures, yoga classes, Second Saturday Markets, and Museum Afterhours.\nThe Louisiana History Museum is located downtown on the bottom floor of the former library. A small facility, it showcases the history of all Louisiana, with emphasis on the central portion of the state, Rapides Parish, and Alexandria. Major exhibit areas concern Native Americans, Louisiana geography, politics, health care, farming, and the impact of war.\nThe T.R.E.E. House Children's Museum and Arna Bontemps African American Museum are located within the Cultural Arts District.\nThe Kent Plantation House in Alexandria, completed by 1800, was located on a Spanish land grant. It is the oldest standing structure in Central Louisiana, one of only two buildings in the city to survive the burning of 1864 by Union troops fleeing after having been defeated at the Battle of Mansfield in DeSoto Parish. The house has been moved from its original location but is still located on part of the first land grant. It is open for tours daily except Sundays at 9, 10, and 11 a.m. and 1, 2, and 3 p.m. The tour is led by costumed docents and includes the house furnished in period pieces, some belonging to the original family, and all nine outbuildings, including an 1840-50s sugar mill, blacksmith shop, barn, two slave cabins, open-hearth kitchen, and milk house.\nPerforming arts.\nThe performing arts are centered in the Alexandria Cultural Arts District in the downtown. Located within a few blocks of each other are three performance venues: Coughlin-Saunders Performing Arts Center, the Hearn Stage, and the Riverfront Amphitheater.\nThe Coughlin-Saunders Performing Arts Center is the home of the Rapides Symphony Orchestra, which has performed in Alexandria since 1968. The center hosts the Performing Arts Series of the Arts Council of Central Louisiana, the Red River Chorale (an auditioned community chorus), and presentations of numerous local theater groups. The land for the center was donated by \"The Alexandria Town Talk\" newspaper, owned by the Gannett Company of McLean, Virginia.\nBusinesswoman Jacqueline Seagall Caplan (1935\u20132016) was the president of the Arts Council of Central Louisiana and the chairman of the group's executive committee when the Coughlin-Saunders Performing Arts Center opened in 2004. She predicted that Coughlin-Saunders would in time \"provide a place people can point to and say it's theirs. ... [Until now], we've never had a performing arts center where every type of performing art can come.\"\nThe Hearn Stage is a black box theater for smaller productions. The Arts Council provides day-to-day management of both the Coughlin-Saunders Center and the Hearn Stage.\nThe Riverfront Amphitheater hosts each April a \"Jazz on the River\" music festival, sponsored by the Arna Bontemps African American Museum. The Rapides Symphony holds an annual fall Pops concert in the amphitheater. In recent years, the amphitheater has welcomed musical guests in conjunction with the springtime Dragonboat Races sponsored by the Alexandria Museum of Art.\nThe spring and fall seasons also feature Downtown Rocks, a free outdoor concert series in nearby Fulton Park.\nSports.\nAlexandria was home to the Alexandria Aces, a summer college league baseball team. The Aces were champions in various leagues in 1997, 1998, 2006, and 2007. They played their home games at Bringhurst Field. Unfortunately, due to lack of repairs on the stadium, combined with the aging of it caused interest in the team to unfortunately drop, with much of the wooden stands being barricaded. The remaining games of the 2013 season were canceled in mid-July because of low attendance, which averaged fewer than two hundred per game. The stadium's office and clubhouse were destroyed by a fire in 2014 and were subsequently torn down. In 2017, it was decided that the stadium would become a green space, open to the public and welcome news to those concerned about the building's future. The scoreboard and outfield walls have been removed, but most of the stadium is still in tact. In 1974, a Little League team from Alexandria won the Louisiana state championship.\nAlexandria had a minor league ice hockey team, the Alexandria Warthogs. They played their home games at the Rapides Parish Coliseum.\nA professional indoor football team, the Louisiana Rangers, played their home games at the Rapides Parish Coliseum. They played in the Central District of the Southern American Football League, and the Southern Conference of the National Indoor Football League (NIFL). The team was owned by a Lafayette business group before moving in 2003 to Beaumont, Texas.\nAlexandria is also home to the U-14 Crossroads Pride soccer team. They won the 2012 Louisiana Soccer Association State Cup. The Pool Boys FC soccer team, a member of the Gulf Coast Premier League, plays at Johnny Downs Sports Complex.\nNearby is Bringhurst Golf Course, popularly known as \"the nation's oldest par-three course.\" A full-scale renovation was completed in mid-2010. In addition to Bringhurst, named for the late industrialist R.W. Bringhurst, Alexandria is home to four other golf courses: Oak Wing, The Links on the Bayou, at LSUA, and Alexandria Golf and Country Club.\nAlexandria was also home to the Cenla Derby Dames, a roller derby team that operates under the Women's Flat Track Derby Association. The Dames played their home games at the Rapides Parish Coliseum.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nEstablished March 17, 1883, The Alexandria Town Talk is a daily newspaper for Alexandria-Pineville and the thirteen parishes which comprise central Louisiana. The newspaper was owned by the family of the late Jane Wilson Smith and Joe D. Smith, Jr., until March 1996, when it was sold to Central Newspapers. In August 2000, the Gannett Company acquired the Central Newspapers properties, including \"The Town Talk\". The name of the paper on its inaugural issue was the \"Alexandria Daily Town Talk\". Although it has since been shorted to the current \"The Town Talk\", it is still frequently referred to by long-time residents as the \"Daily Town Talk\".\nTelevision.\nAlexandria is served by local television stations KALB-TV (NBC / CBS), WNTZ (Fox), KLAX-TV (ABC), KLPA (PBS/LPB), and KBCA (The CW). KALB is the oldest television station in central Louisiana.\nAlexandria is the location of the pawn shop in the show Cajun Pawn Stars on the History Channel.\nRadio.\nLocal radio stations\nParks and outdoor attractions.\nAlexandria Zoological Park.\nThe Alexandria Zoological Park is a zoo first opened to the public in 1926. Owned by the City of Alexandria and operated by the Division of Public Works, it is home to about 500 animals and includes an award-winning Louisiana Habitat exhibit. Much of the credit for the quality of the zoo has been given to Robert Leslie Whitt (1951\u20132008), who served as director for 34 years prior to his death. Whitt was hired in 1974 by then Streets and Parks Commissioner Malcolm Hebert. The zoo is accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) and takes part in about 20 Species Survival Plans (SSP) as part of its conservation efforts.\nCotile Lake Recreation Area.\nCotile Lake is a man-made impoundment located in the uplands approximately west-northwest of Alexandria, Louisiana. The lake is approximately in size and was completed in October 1965. The Louisiana Wild Life and Fisheries Commission stocked this impoundment with the proper species and number of game fish in 1965\u201366 shortly after its completion date. The recreational facilities include a large area cleared and zoned for swimming with complete bath house facilities nearby. There is a water skiing area that is cleared and snagged for safety of the skiers. The picnic and camping areas are modern and complete. There is also space available for campers.\nIndian Creek Lake and Recreation Area.\nEncompasses a lake, of developed recreation facilities and a primitive camping area all within the Alexander State Forest. The lake, located in central Louisiana, was constructed as a joint venture of the Louisiana Forestry Commission, the Rapides Parish Police Jury, and the Lower West Red River Soil and Water Conservation District as a reservoir for agricultural irrigation in times of need and for recreation purposes.\nThe recreation area camping area contains 109 campsites with conventional full utility hookups, 3 beaches for swimming, bath houses, a boat launch, and 75 picnic sites. A covered pavilion within the developed area provides for groups up to 100 people. The recreation area is open year-round and operates on user fees.\nKisatchie National Forest.\nAlexandria sits in the middle of the Kisatchie National Forest. Ranger districts are north, northwest, west and southwest of the city. An abundance of large timberlands and forest nurseries, as well as lake and recreation areas, are within a short driving distance.\nMilitary.\nLouisiana National Guard.\nAlexandria is home to both Headquarters and Company B of the 199th Brigade Support Battalion (BSB). The 199th BSB is the logistical component of the 256th Infantry Brigade that served in Operation Iraqi Freedom from October 2004 until September 2005. The 199th BSB provides supply and transportation (Company A), medical (Company C) and maintenance (Company B) support and services that keep the 256th Brigade operational. The battalion also has units located in Jonesboro, Winnfield, Colfax, and St. Martinville, Louisiana.\nEngland Air Force Base.\nAlexandria served as the home of England Air Force Base from its origins as an emergency airstrip for Esler Regional Airport until its closure. England AFB was officially closed on December 15, 1992, pursuant to the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 101-510) and recommendations of the Defense Secretary's Commission on Base Realignment and Closure. The base now serves as Alexandria International Airport (see below).\nEconomy.\nAccording to Census ACS 1-year survey for 2016, the per capita income of Alexandria was $23,962. This is $1,702 lower than the Louisiana average for per capita income in the same period. That figure is at $31,128 nationally. The Alexandria workforce consists of about 55,000 residents. Union Tank Car Company has recently located a plant northwest of Alexandria near the airport creating hundreds of jobs. Expansions at the Procter &amp; Gamble plant and the construction of a PlastiPak plant in nearby Pineville have also created a number of new jobs for the area. Sundrop Fuels Inc., a Colorado-based biofuels start-up, plans to construct an over 1,200 acre plant just southwest of Alexandria in Rapides Station area. The facility will serve as the headquarters for the company because aside from the plant itself, Sundrop has also bought Cowboy Town, an abandon entertainment venue that sits inside the surrounding land that was purchased, to house their offices and their maintenance and fabrication operations.\nIn 2007, Inc. Magazine rated Alexandria as the 77th best place in which to conduct business out of the 393 U.S. cities ranked, a significant increase from its ranking as No. 276 in 2006. Among other Louisiana cities, Alexandria ranked second, following only Baton Rouge, which ranked 59th nationally.\nHealthcare.\nAlexandria is home to two major hospitals: Rapides Regional Medical Center, a former Baptist hospital is located downtown. Christus St. Frances Cabrini Hospital was opened in 1950 and is located at the corner of Masonic Drive and Texas Avenue. Both hospitals have undergone expansion.\nAdditionally, located just across the Red River in Pineville, the Veteran's Affairs Medical Center at Alexandria serves central Louisiana and surrounding areas.\nMeanwhile, in 2013, the state allocated $15 million to move the medical services long provided at no or minimal charge at the Huey P. Long Medical Center in Pineville to the former hospital at England Park at the site of the closed England Air Force Base.\nPort of Alexandria.\nIn the early 19th century, the Port of Alexandria brought goods to the area and shipped cotton and other local products to the rest of the country. A ferry connected the cities of Alexandria and Pineville until a bridge was built across the Red in 1900.\nToday, Port facilities include: a 40-ton crane for off-loading, a warehouse, 13,600-ton bulk fertilizer warehouse, a 3,400-ton bulk fertilizer dome structure and a 5,000-ton dome which was added in January 2005.\nThe petroleum off-loading facility includes two tanks, one tank capable of handling two barges and five truck off-loading simultaneously. There is also a general cargo dock with access to rail and a hopper barge unloading dock with conveyor system.\nToday's modern facilities and the Port's central location with its connection to the Mississippi River provide excellent opportunities for importers and exporters.\nAlexandria International Airport.\nAlexandria International Airport (AEX) is a regional airport, providing flights to Atlanta, Dallas/Ft. Worth, and Houston. In 2006 a new-state-of-the-art passenger terminal was dedicated. Alexandria is served by American, United, and Delta.\nCurrent military use.\nFormerly known as England AFB until 1992, Alexandria International Airport additionally has numerous international charter airlines using the airport in the transport of military personnel attached to the United States Army base at Fort Polk. A new military personnel terminal opened in 2007.\nNeighborhoods.\nDowntown.\nDowntown Alexandria, including the Alexandria Cultural Arts District, is currently in the process of revitalization. It is home to five museums, three performance venues, and several galleries. In recent years, several bars, cafes, and restaurants have opened.\nHotel Bentley.\nAcross the street from the venues is the Hotel Bentley. The Bentley was built in 1908 by lumberman and local eccentric Joseph A. Bentley. The Bentley's heyday was during the 1940s and 1950s, when senior military officials, including General Dwight D. Eisenhower, stayed for extended periods. The Bentley, which was closed on December 12, 2004, was once one of only two four-star hotels in Louisiana. The hotel was set to reopen in August 2007, in time for the 100th anniversary of its construction, but was prevented by funding issues. The current owner, Michael Jenkins, purchased the Bentley for $3.4 million. His plan is to keep the older portion of the building to remain a hotel and turn the 7-story tower portion into luxury condominiums, and also to reopen Bentley's restaurant and Mirror Room lounge. The hotel and all of its components were to have been opened by the summer of 2013, but the hotel remained unfinished as of November 2014.\nCentral Alexandria.\nCentral Alexandria is bounded by MacArthur Drive, Masonic Drive, Mason Street, the Alexandria-Pineville Expressway, and the Red River.\nNorthwestern Alexandria.\nNorthwestern Alexandria comprises the area north of Louisiana Highway 28 West and MacArthur Drive and south of the Red River.\nWestern Alexandria.\nWestern Alexandria is the area south of Highway 28 West, west of MacArthur Drive, and north of Versailles Boulevard and Metro Drive\nAlexandria real estate broker Robert Andrew Wolf, Jr. (1930\u20132016), designed The Centre and other local and regional developments, including the Walmart SuperCenter on Louisiana Highway 28 West, the Melrose Plantation in Natchitoches Parish with partner John Wasson, at which once lived the author Francois Mignon and the painter Clementine Hunter, and the site of what became the Union Tank Car Company near England Airpark, formerly part of England Air Force Base. In 1967, he and Wasson designed the Wedgewood subdivision in Alexandria; in 1970, they sold Melrose. Wolf was a past president of the Alexandria-Pineville Board of Realtors and in 1984 was named \"Realtor of the Year\".\nSouthwestern Alexandria.\nSouthwestern Alexandria comprises the area west of Masonic Drive and south of Versailles Boulevard and Metro Drive.\nSouthern Alexandria.\nSouthern Alexandria is located east of Masonic Drive and south of MacArthur Drive\nSoutheastern Alexandria.\nSoutheastern Alexandria contains the area northeast of MacArthur Drive, south of Masonic Drive, Mason Street, and Alexandria-Pineville Expressway, and bordered by the Red River.\nSurrounding cities and towns.\nRapides Parish\nGrant Parish\nGovernment and politics.\nLocal government.\nHistory.\nFollowing the Civil War, all public records in Alexandria had been destroyed. On September 29, 1868, the city was granted a new charter with a government consisting of a Mayor, Treasurer, and Justice of the Peace. Nine aldermen represented the four wards of the city \u2013 two from each ward and one elected at-large.\nIn 1912, the Lawrason Act established Alexandria municipal government in a strong mayor format, where the mayor was also the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety (Police, Fire, Sanitation). There were separate Commissioners of Streets and Parks and Finance and Utilities, elected citywide. The last to hold those positions, which ended in 1977, were Mayor John K. Snyder (1922\u20131993), Malcolm P. Hebert, Sr. (1926\u20132006), and Arnold Jack Rosenthal (1923\u20132010), respectively.\nToday.\nAlexandria has a mayoral-council system of government. The Mayor serves as the executive branch of the local government. The current Mayor \u2013 Jacques Roy \u2013 was elected to office in November 2006, succeeding long-time mayor Edward Gordon \"Ned\" Randolph, Jr. Randolph had succeeded John K. Snyder.\nThe City Council serves as the legislative branch. The five districts of the city are represented on the Council; in addition there are two council members elected to serve as at-large representatives of the city.\nThe Alexandria Court has a limited jurisdiction, consisting of the citizens of Wards 1, 2 and 8 in Rapides Parish. Within those boundaries the court has the power to hear and decide both criminal and civil cases, rule in civil cases and hand down judgment for punishment in criminal cases.\nArea politics.\nOverall, the people of the Alexandria area tend to be conservative. Even though the majority typically elects Republicans in national elections, they vote for Democrats in local elections, many of which are not contested by the GOP.\nUnited States Congressional district.\nFrom 1913 to 1993, Alexandria served as the seat of Louisiana's Eighth Congressional district. A Democratic seat, it was held by the Long family for nearly half of its existence, from 1953 to 1987, broken only by the two terms of Harold B. McSween and three terms of Republican Clyde Holloway of Forest Hill. The seat was removed after the 1990 census indicated Louisiana no longer had the population to support it. The district was split among the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Congressional districts. Alexandria is now in the Fifth district and was represented from 2003 to 2013 by Rodney Alexander, a Democrat-turned-Republican. From November 2013 to January 2015 the representative is Vance McAllister of Ouachita Parish.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nSituated south of the city, Louisiana State University at Alexandria (or LSUA) is a regional campus of the state's flagship university system, Louisiana State University. From its establishment in 1959, the campus offered only two-year degrees; students seeking baccalaureate degrees had to commute or move to the main campus in Baton Rouge in order to gain a four-year degree. After 1976, students could either commute or telecommute in order to attend upper-level courses, including graduate classes. In 2002, following approval by the Louisiana State University Board of Supervisors and the Louisiana Board of Regents the Louisiana Legislature passed legislation allowing LSUA to offer baccalaureate degrees.\nA four-year degree is also attainable through Southern Baptist-affiliated Louisiana College in Pineville, founded in 1906.\nAlexandria also has one of the Region 6 Louisiana Technical College campuses.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nRapides Parish School Board operates public schools.\nAlexandria has three public high schools: Bolton High School, Alexandria Senior High School, and Peabody Magnet High School. In addition, there are two private high schools: the Roman Catholic Holy Savior Menard Central High School, and Grace Christian.\nThe Renaissance Home for Youth west of Alexandria is a haven for youthful offenders who live in a group-home setting as an alternative to reform school or adult jail. Since the facility opened in 1973, nearly 12 thousand young people have lived at the home in search of rehabilitation.\nAlfred Booker Junior Academy proudly follows faith- centered education for all students Pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nAlexandria serves as the crossroads of Louisiana. To reach either Shreveport or Monroe from the southern portion of the state, the easiest method of travel takes the driver through Alexandria. Likewise, if a visitor is to head from the northern portion of the state to the Cajun portions of the state (Lake Charles and Lafayette), or the greater metropolitan areas of either Baton Rouge or New Orleans, the easiest method of travel involves driving down Interstate 49 through Alexandria.\nIn addition to I-49, travelers can follow Louisiana 1 up to Alexandria from Baton Rouge and points south. Also, Highway 167 could be taken from Opelousas north to Ruston, crossing through Alexandria at one of the few bridges over the Red River in central Louisiana. Highways 165 and 71 also link Alexandria and points south with the northern and southern portions of the state via the Curtis-Coleman bridge.\nThere are possible plans for a 50-mile, 4 lane beltway to encircle Alexandria and Pineville. As of now, it is only in the planning stages of development.\nBridges.\nThree road bridges cross the Red River in the Alexandria area. They are:\nFormer bridges include:\nThere are two railroad bridges over the Red River in Alexandria. One is located near the Buhlow area north of the OK Allen bridge. The other is south of the Purple Heart Memorial Bridge.\nMass transit.\nRegional mass transit is handled by ATRANS (Alexandria Transportation Authority).\nFor those leaving or arriving at the city by bus, Greyhound Lines has a terminal downtown.\nAirports.\nAlexandria is served by the Alexandria International Airport and the Esler Regional Airport in Pineville.\nRail.\nAlexandria does not have Amtrak service, nor a commuter rail system. The Kansas City Southern (\"Southern Belle\") and the Missouri Pacific (since absorbed by Union Pacific) (\"Louisiana Eagle\" and \"Louisiana Daylight\") operated train stations in the area in the early part of the 20th century but passenger services ended in the 1960s and the stations have closed."}
{"id": "3085", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3085", "title": "Alexandria Troas", "text": "Alexandria Troas (\"Alexandria of the Troad\"; ; ) is the site of an ancient Greek city situated on the Aegean Sea near the northern tip of Turkey's western coast, the area known historically as Troad. a little south of Tenedos (modern Bozcaada). It is located southeast of modern Dalyan, a village in the Ezine district of \u00c7anakkale Province. The site sprawls over an estimated ; among the few structures remaining today are a ruined bath, an odeon, a theatre, gymnasium complex and a recently uncovered stadion. The circuit of the old walls can still be traced.\nHistory.\nHellenistic.\nAccording to Strabo, this site was first called Sigeia (\u03a3\u03b9\u03b3\u03af\u03b1); around 306\u00a0BC Antigonus refounded the city as the much-expanded Antigonia Troas by settling the people of five other towns in Sigeia, including the once influential city of Neandreia. It did not receive its name until its name was changed by Lysimachus to Alexandria Troas, in 301 BC, in memory of Alexander III of Macedon (Pliny merely states, in his view, that the name changed from Antigonia to Alexandria). However, Pliny's view is not correct, because the city continued being called Alexandria Troas, and so is also stated in the 4th-5th c. AD Tabula Peutingeriana. As the chief port of north-west Asia Minor, the place prospered greatly in Roman times, becoming a \"free and autonomous city\" as early as 188\u00a0BC, and the existing remains sufficiently attest its former importance. In its heyday the city may have had a population of about 100,000. Strabo mentions that a Roman colony was created at the location in the reign of Augustus, named Colonia Alexandria Augusta Troas (called simply Troas during this period). Augustus, Hadrian and the rich grammarian Herodes Atticus contributed greatly to its embellishment; the aqueduct still preserved is due to the latter. Constantine considered making Troas the capital of the Roman Empire.\nRoman.\nIn Roman times, it was a significant port for travelling between Anatolia and Europe. According to the account in the Acts of the Apostles, Paul of Tarsus sailed for Europe for the first time from Alexandria Troas and returned there from Europe (it was there that the episode of the raising of Eutychus is said to have occurred). Ignatius of Antioch also paused at this city before continuing to his martyrdom at Rome.\nByzantine.\nSeveral of its later bishops are known: Marinus in 325; Niconius in 344; Sylvanus at the beginning of the 5th century; Pionius in 451; Leo in 787; Peter, friend of the Patriarch Ignatius, and adversary to Michael, in the ninth century. In the 10th century Troas is given as a suffragan of Cyzicus and distinct from the famous Troy (Heinrich Gelzer, \"Ungedruckte ... Texte der Notitiae episcopatuum\", 552; \"Georgii Cyprii descriptio orbis romani\", 64); it is not known when the city was destroyed and the diocese disappeared. The bishopric remains a titular see of the Catholic Church under the name Troas, vacant since 1971.\nTroas is also a titular see of the Orthodox Church under the Ecumenical Patriarchate. Bishop Savas (Zembillas) of Troas served as hierarch from 2002 to 2011, and then became Metropolitan Savas (Zembillas) of Pittsburgh in the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America.\nOttoman.\nKarasid Turkomans settled in the area of the Troad in the 14th century. Their \"beylik\" was conquered by the Ottomans in 1336. The ruins of Alexandria Troas came to be known among the Turks as \"Eski Stambul\", the \"Old City\". The site's stones were much plundered for building material (for example Mehmed IV took columns to adorn his Yeni Valide Mosque in Istanbul). As of the mid-18th century the site served as \"a lurking place for bandetti\".\nModern.\nBy 1911, the site had been overgrown with Vallonea oaks and much plundered, but the circuit of the old walls could still be traced, and in several places they were fairly well preserved. \nThey had a circumference of about ten kilometres, and were fortified with towers at regular intervals.\nRemains of an ancient bath and gymnasium complex can be found within this area; this building is locally known as \"Bal Saray\" (Honey Palace) and was originally endowed by Herodes Atticus in the year 135. Trajan built an aqueduct which can still be traced. \nThe harbour had two large basins, now almost choked with sand. \nIt is the subject of an early twenty-first century study by German archaeologists digging and surveying at the site. \nTheir excavation uncovered the remains of a large stadium dating to about 100\u00a0BC."}
{"id": "3086", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3086", "title": "Alexandretta", "text": ""}
{"id": "3087", "revid": "1005884289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3087", "title": "Alexandria, West Dunbartonshire", "text": "Alexandria (, ) is a town in West Dunbartonshire, Scotland. The town is on the River Leven, north of Dumbarton and north-west of Glasgow.\nDemographics.\nIn 2016, the estimated population of the town was 6,860. It is one of five towns in the Vale of Leven, the others being Balloch, Bonhill, Jamestown and Renton; their combined population is over 20,000.\nEconomy.\nThe town's traditional industries, most importantly cotton manufacturing, bleaching and printing, have been phased out. In the 1970s Alexandria was redeveloped, with a new town centre layout and traffic system. Local landmarks include Christie Park and the Category B listed Smollett Fountain in the town centre. Lomond Galleries on North Main Street is a former car factory with an impressive dome and an even more impressive marble entrance hall and staircase. It was originally built in 1906 as the Argyll Motor Works, for Argyll Motors Ltd. A carving above the entrance shows one of the company's cars. After the car production ceased in 1914, it was used by the Admiralty for the manufacture of torpedoes, which were test-fired in Loch Long, and in the early 1970s was the scene of the Plessey sit-in. The building now hosts a shopping mall but has retained many of its striking architectural features.\nMajor employers in the area were Westclox and Polaroid, both based in the Leven Industrial Estate; Aggreko based a major purpose-built factory in the estate from 2000 to 2010. The Ballantine's whisky distillery continues to operate in the estate.\nTransport.\nAlexandria sits on the former A82 main road between Glasgow and Loch Lomond. There are regular bus services on the route, and the town has a railway station on the rail line between Balloch and Glasgow Queen Street.\nAlexandria is reputed to be the only town in the UK with a railway station, carnival (periodically Codona\u2019s travelling fair sets up in the car park) and a pub in the middle of a roundabout. A. J. Cronin's uncle owned a pub in Bridge Street. Alexandria Library is located on Gilmour Street.\nSport.\nThe town is home to Vale of Leven football club, who play at Millburn Park. The club was a dominant force in early Scottish football history, winning the Scottish Cup in 1877, 1878 and 1879, and were founder members of the Scottish Football League.\nGordon Reid, born in Alexandria, has won the Wimbledon Tennis Men's Wheelchair Doubles, with his partner Alfie Hewett, three times."}
{"id": "3088", "revid": "7397785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3088", "title": "Alexandria, Romania", "text": "Alexandria () is the capital city of the Teleorman County, Muntenia, Romania. It is located south-west of Bucharest, towards the Bulgarian border. The city is situated on the Vedea River and has over 45,000 inhabitants.\nEarly history.\nAlexandria was named after its founder, Alexandru D. Ghica, Prince of Wallachia from April 1834 to 7 October 1842. Its population in 1900 was 1,675. Grain, which was Alexandria's main trade at the time, was dispatched both by rail to the Danubian port of Zimnicea and by river to Giurgiu.\nModern history.\nIn 1989, the city had over 63,000 inhabitants and more than six large factories.\nA 2020 estimate puts the population at 49,878."}
{"id": "3089", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3089", "title": "Angela Vincent", "text": "Angela Vincent (born 1942) is emeritus professor at the University of Oxford and a Fellow of Somerville College, Oxford.\nCareer and research.\nAngela was Head of the Department of Clinical Neurology (2005-2008) at the University of Oxford, President of the International Society of Neuroimmunology, and an Associate Editor of Brain (2004-2013). Her research group was located in the Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine at the John Radcliffe Hospital, working on a wide range of biological disciplines encompassing molecular biology, biochemistry, cellular immunology and intracellular neurophysiology. The group's research focused on autoimmune and genetic disorders of the neuromuscular junction, peripheral nerves and more recently the exciting field of central nervous system diseases. The principal autoimmune diseases studied were myasthenia gravis, the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, limbic encephalitis, other types of autoimmune encephalitis and acquired neuromyotonia. Since 2016 she has been Emeritus Professor at Oxford University and she continues to advise and support young researchers. Her group's work is continued under Associate Professor Sarosh Irani and Dr Patrick Waters.\nHer contributions have been mainly on the roles of antibodies directed against ion channels, proteins complexed to ion channels, such as LGI1, CASPR2 and Contactin-2, within neurons, glia and the nerve-muscle junction in the pathogenesis of above-mentioned diseases.\nShe has demonstrated that transfer of these antibodies across the placenta from the pregnant woman to the fetus in utero can cause developmental abnormalities.\nAwards and honours.\nIn 2009 she presented the Leslie Oliver Oration at Queen's Hospital. In 2009 she received the medal of the Association of British Neurologists and in 2017 the World Federation of Neurology Scientific Contributions to Neurology award. She was awarded the Klaus Joachim Z\u00fclch Prize with J Posner and J Dalmau in 2018. In 2003, she was elected a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences (FMedSci) and in 2011 Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS)."}
{"id": "3090", "revid": "35859266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3090", "title": "Arithmetic\u2013geometric mean", "text": "In mathematics, the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean (AGM) of two positive real numbers and is defined as follows:\nCall and and :\nThen define the two interdependent sequences and as\nThese two sequences converge to the same number, the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of and ; it is denoted by , or sometimes by .\nThe arithmetic\u2013geometric mean is used in fast algorithms for exponential and trigonometric functions, as well as some mathematical constants, in particular, computing.\nExample.\nTo find the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of and , iterate as follows:\nThe first five iterations give the following values:\nThe number of digits in which and agree (underlined) approximately doubles with each iteration. The arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of 24 and 6 is the common limit of these two sequences, which is approximately .\nHistory.\nThe first algorithm based on this sequence pair appeared in the works of Lagrange. Its properties were further analyzed by Gauss.\nProperties.\nThe geometric mean of two positive numbers is never bigger than the arithmetic mean (see inequality of arithmetic and geometric means). As a consequence, for , is an increasing sequence, is a decreasing sequence, and . These are strict inequalities if .\n is thus a number between the geometric and arithmetic mean of and ; it is also between and .\nIf , then .\nThere is an integral-form expression for :\nwhere is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind:\nIndeed, since the arithmetic\u2013geometric process converges so quickly, it provides an efficient way to compute elliptic integrals via this formula. In engineering, it is used for instance in elliptic filter design.\nRelated concepts.\nThe reciprocal of the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of 1 and the square root of 2 is called Gauss's constant, after Carl Friedrich Gauss.\nIn 1941, formula_7 (and hence formula_8) was proven transcendental by Theodor Schneider.\nThe geometric\u2013harmonic mean can be calculated by an analogous method, using sequences of geometric and harmonic means. One finds that GH(\"x,y\") = 1/M(1/\"x\", 1/\"y\") = \"xy\"/M(\"x,y\").\nThe arithmetic\u2013harmonic mean can be similarly defined, but takes the same value as the geometric mean (see section \"Calculation\" there).\nThe arithmetic\u2013geometric mean can be used to compute \u2013 among others \u2013 logarithms, complete and incomplete elliptic integrals of the first and second kind, and Jacobi elliptic functions.\nProof of existence.\nFrom the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means we can conclude that:\nand thus\nthat is, the sequence is nondecreasing.\nFurthermore, it is easy to see that it is also bounded above by the larger of and (which follows from the fact that both the arithmetic and geometric means of two numbers lie between them). Thus, by the monotone convergence theorem, the sequence is convergent, so there exists a such that:\nHowever, we can also see that:\nand so:\nQ.E.D.\nProof of the integral-form expression.\nThis proof is given by Gauss.\nLet\nChanging the variable of integration to formula_15, where\ngives\nThus, we have\nThe last equality comes from observing that formula_19.\nFinally, we obtain the desired result\nApplications.\nThe number \"\u03c0\".\nFor example, according to the Gauss\u2013Salamin formula:\nwhere\nwhich can be computed without loss of precision using\nComplete elliptic integral \"K\"(sin\"\u03b1\").\nTaking formula_24 and formula_25 yields the AGM\nwhere is a complete elliptic integral of the first kind:\nThat is to say that this quarter period may be efficiently computed through the AGM,\nOther applications.\nUsing this property of the AGM along with the ascending transformations of Landen, Richard Brent suggested the first AGM algorithms for the fast evaluation of elementary transcendental functions (\"e\"\"x\", cos\u00a0\"x\", sin\u00a0\"x\"). Subsequently, many authors went on to study the use of the AGM algorithms."}
{"id": "3092", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3092", "title": "Akira Toriyama", "text": " is a Japanese manga artist and character designer. He first achieved mainstream recognition for his highly successful manga series \"Dr. Slump\", before going on to create \"Dragon Ball\"\u2014his best-known work\u2014and acting as a character designer for several popular video games such as the \"Dragon Quest\" series, \"Chrono Trigger\" and \"Blue Dragon\". Toriyama is regarded as one of the artists that changed the history of manga, as his works are highly influential and popular, particularly \"Dragon Ball,\" which many manga artists cite as a source of inspiration.\nHe earned the 1981 Shogakukan Manga Award for best \"sh\u014dnen\" or \"sh\u014djo\" manga with \"Dr. Slump\", and it went on to sell over 35 million copies in Japan. It was adapted into a successful anime series, with a second anime created in 1997, 13 years after the manga ended. His next series, \"Dragon Ball\", would become one of the most popular and successful manga in the world. Having sold 250\u2013300 million copies worldwide, it is the second best-selling manga of all time and is considered to be one of the main reasons for the period when manga circulation was at its highest in the mid-1980s and mid-1990s. Overseas, \"Dragon Ball\"s anime adaptations have been more successful than the manga and are credited with boosting anime's popularity in the Western world. In 2019, Toriyama was decorated a \"Chevalier\" of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres for his contributions to the arts.\nEarly life.\nAkira Toriyama was born in Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. He has recalled that when he was in elementary school all of his classmates drew, imitating anime and manga, as a result of not having many forms of entertainment. He believes that he began to advance above everyone else when he started drawing pictures of his friends, and after winning a prize at the local art studio for a picture of \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\", began to think \"art was fun\".\nCareer.\nEarly work and success 1978\u20132000.\nBefore becoming a manga artist, he worked at an advertising agency in Nagoya designing posters for three years. After quitting his previous job, Toriyama entered the manga industry by submitting a work to an amateur contest in a \"Jump\" magazine in order to win the prize money. While it did not win, Kazuhiko Torishima, who would later become his editor, contacted him and gave him encouragement. His debut came later in 1978 with the story \"Wonder Island\", which was published in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\". However, he did not rise to popularity until the comedy series \"Dr. Slump\", which was serialized in \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" from 1980 to 1984. It follows the adventures of a perverted professor and his small but super-strong robot Arale. He began the series at age 25 while living at home with his parents, but when the series ended in 1984 he was a \"manga superstar\". In 1981, \"Dr. Slump\" earned him the Shogakukan Manga Award for best \"sh\u014dnen\" or \"sh\u014djo\" manga series of the year. A very successful anime adaptation aired on TV from 1981 to 1986, with a remake series airing from 1997 to 1999. By 2008, the manga had sold over 35 million copies in Japan.\nToriyama's official fan club was established in 1982. Its newsletters were called \"Bird Land Press\" and were sent to members until the club closed in 1987.\nIn 1984, \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" began serializing Toriyama's \"Dragon Ball\", which became an instant hit. As of 2014, it had sold 159.5million \"tank\u014dbon\" copies in Japan alone, making it Shueisha's second best-selling manga of all time. It began as an adventure/gag manga but later turned into a martial arts fighting series, considered by many to be the \"most influential \"sh\u014dnen\" manga.\" \"Dragon Ball\" was one of the main reasons for the magazine's circulation hitting a record high of 6.53 million copies (1995). The series' success encouraged Toriyama to continue working on it from 1984 to 1995. At the series' end, Toriyama said that he asked everyone involved to let him end the manga, so he could \"take some new steps in life.\" During that 11-year period, he produced 519 chapters that were collected into 42 volumes. Moreover, the success of the manga led to five anime adaptations, several animated movies, numerous video games, and mega-merchandising. The third anime adaptation, \"Dragon Ball GT\", was not based on his manga; however, Toriyama was still involved in coming up with the name and designing the main cast. Aside from its popularity in Japan, \"Dragon Ball\" was successful internationally as well, including Asia, Europe, and the Americas, with 250\u2013300million copies of the manga sold worldwide.\nWhile Toriyama was serializing \"Dragon Ball\" weekly, Torishima recruited him to work as character designer for the 1986 role-playing video game \"Dragon Quest\". The artist admitted he was pulled into it without even knowing what an RPG was and that it made his already busy schedule even more hectic, but he was happy to have been a part after enjoying the finished game. Toriyama has continued to work on every installment in the \"Dragon Quest\" series. He has also served as the character designer for the Super Famicom RPG \"Chrono Trigger\" and for the fighting games \"Tobal No. 1\" and \"Tobal 2\" for the PlayStation.\nToriyama's own studio is called Bird Studio, which is a play on his name; meaning \"bird\". Toriyama does nearly all of the work at Bird Studio himself, and even when he employed an assistant (until 1995, and only one at a time, which is itself rare for manga artists), the assistant did mostly backgrounds. The studio founded in 1983 has produced occasional one-shots, or stand-alone manga that are not serialized, and some other design work. All of Toriyama's manga after \"Dragon Ball\" tend to be short (100\u2013200-page) stories, including \"Cowa!\", \"Kajika\", and \"Sand Land\".\n2002\u20132013.\nOn December 6, 2002, Toriyama made his only promotional appearance in the United States at the launch of \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\"'s North American counterpart, \"Shonen Jump\", in New York City. Toriyama's \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Sand Land\" were published in the magazine in the first issue, which also included an in-depth interview with him.\nOn March 27, 2005, CQ Motors began selling an electric car designed by Toriyama. The one-person QVOLT is part of the company's Choro-Q series of small electric cars, with only 9 being produced. It costs 1,990,000 yen (about $19,000 US), has a top speed of and is available in 5 colors. Designed to look like an American street rod, the QVOLT has a top and a door that are both opened by pulling a cord. Toriyama stated that the car took over a year to design, \"but due to my genius mini-model construction skills, I finally arrived at the end of what was a very emotional journey.\"\nHe worked on a 2006 one-shot called \"Cross Epoch\", in cooperation with \"One Piece\" creator Eiichiro Oda. The story is a short crossover that presents characters from both \"Dragon Ball\" and \"One Piece\". Toriyama was the character designer and artist for the 2006 Mistwalker Xbox 360 exclusive RPG \"Blue Dragon\", working with Hironobu Sakaguchi and Nobuo Uematsu, both of whom he had previously worked with on \"Chrono Trigger\". He announced that his help with the making of the \"Blue Dragon\" anime might very well be his final work in anime. In his own words, he said:\nIn 2008, he collaborated with Masakazu Katsura, his good friend and creator of \"I\"s\" and \"Zetman\", for the \"Jump SQ\" one-shot \"Sachie-chan Good!!\". It was later published in North America in the free SJ Alpha Yearbook 2013, which was mailed out to annual subscribers of the digital manga magazine \"Shonen Jump Alpha\" in December 2012. The two worked together again in 2009, for the three-chapter one-shot \"Jiya\" in \"Weekly Young Jump\".\nAvex Trax commissioned Toriyama to draw a portrait of pop singer Ayumi Hamasaki; it was printed on the CD of her 2009 single \"Rule/Sparkle\", which was used as the theme song to the American live-action \"Dragonball Evolution\" film. Also in 2009, Toriyama drew a manga titled \"Delicious Island's Mr. U\" for Anj\u014d's Rural Society Project, a nonprofit environmental organization that teaches the importance of agriculture and nature to young children. They originally asked him to do the illustrations for a pamphlet, but Toriyama liked the project and decided to expand it into a story. It is included in a booklet about environmental awareness that is distributed by the Anj\u014d city government.\nAs part of \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\"s \"Top of the Super Legend\" project, a series of six one-shots by famed \"Jump\" artists, Toriyama created \"Kintoki\" for its November 15, 2010 issue. It was later released in North America's online manga anthology \"Weekly Shonen Jump\" on January 28, 2013.\nHe collaborated with \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" to create a video to raise awareness and support for those affected by the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami on March 11, 2011.\nReturn to \"Dragon Ball\": 2013\u2013present.\n', the series' first theatrical film in 17 years, opened on March 30, 2013 and marks the first time Toriyama has been deeply involved in an animation for the franchise, in this case as early as the screenwriting stages. A special \"dual ticket\" that can be used to see both \"Battle of Gods\" and ' was created with new art by both Toriyama and Eiichiro Oda.\nOn March 27, the \"Akira Toriyama: The World of \"Dragon Ball\"\" exhibit opened at the Takashimaya department store in Nihonbashi, garnering 72,000 visitors in its first nineteen days. The exhibit is separated into seven areas. The first provides a look at the series' history, the second shows the 400-plus characters from the series, the third displays Toriyama's manga manuscripts from memorable scenes, the fourth shows special color illustrations, the fifth displays rare \"Dragon Ball\"-related materials, the sixth includes design sketches and animation cels from the anime, and the seventh screens \"Dragon Ball\"-related videos. It was there until April 15, when it moved to Osaka from April 17 to 23, and ended in Toriyama's native Nagoya from July 27 to September 1.\nTo celebrate the 45th anniversary of \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\", Toriyama launched a new series in its July 13, 2013 issue titled \"Jaco the Galactic Patrolman\". Viz Media began serializing it in English in their digital \"Weekly Shonen Jump\" magazine, beginning just two days later. The final chapter reveals that the story is set before the events of \"Dragon Ball\" and features some of its characters.\nThe follow-up film to \"Battle of Gods\", ', released on April 18, 2015, features even more contributions from Toriyama, who personally wrote its original script. Toriyama provides the basic story outline and some character designs for \"Dragon Ball Super\", which began serialization in \"V Jump\" in June 2015 with an anime counterpart following in July. Although the anime ended in 2018, he continues to provide story ideas for the manga while Toyotarou illustrates it. ', released in theaters on December 14, 2018, continued Toriyama's deep involvement with the films.\nPersonal life.\nToriyama married his wife on May 2, 1982. She is a former manga artist from Nagoya under the pen name , and occasionally helped Toriyama and his assistant on \"Dr. Slump\" when they were short on time. They have two children: a son named born on March 23, 1987, and a daughter born in October 1990. Toriyama lives in his home studio in Kiyosu. He is a well-known recluse, who avoids appearing in public or media.\nToriyama has a love of cars and motorcycles, something he inherited from his father who used to race motorbikes and operated an auto repair business for a brief time, although he does not understand the mechanics himself. The author is an animal lover, having kept many different species of birds, dogs, cats, fish, lizards and bugs as pets since childhood. Some were used as models for characters he created such as Karin and Beerus. Toriyama has had a lifelong passion for plastic models, and has designed several for the Fine Molds brand. He also collected autographs of famous manga artists, having over 30 including Yudetamago and Hisashi Eguchi, a hobby he gave to Peasuke Soramame.\nStyle.\nToriyama admires Osamu Tezuka's \"Astro Boy\" and was impressed by Walt Disney's \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\", which he remembers for its high-quality animation. Jackie Chan's early movies also had a noticeable influence on his stories, particularly Chan's martial arts comedy film \"Drunken Master\". Toriyama stated he was influenced by animator Toyoo Ashida and the anime television series adaptation of his own \"Dragon Ball\"; from which he learned that separating colors instead of blending them makes the art cleaner and coloring illustrations easier. It was Toriyama's sound effects in \"Mysterious Rain Jack\" that caught the eye of Kazuhiko Torishima, who explained that usually they are written in \"katakana\", but Toriyama used the Roman alphabet which he found refreshing. In his opinion, Torishima stated that Toriyama excels in black and white, utilizing black areas, as a result of not having had the money to buy screentone when he started drawing manga. He also described Toriyama as a master of convenience and \"sloppy, but in a good way.\" For instance, in \"Dragon Ball\", destroying scenery in the environment and giving Super Saiyans blond hair were done in order to have less work in drawing and inking. Torishima claimed that Toriyama draws what he finds interesting and is not mindful of what his readers think.\n\"Dr. Slump\" is mainly a comedy series, filled with puns, toilet humor and sexual innuendos. But it also contained many science fiction elements; aliens, anthropomorphic characters, time travel, and parodies of works such as Godzilla, \"Star Wars\" and \"Star Trek\". Toriyama also included many real-life people in the series, such as his assistants, wife and colleagues (such as Masakazu Katsura), but most notably his editor Kazuhiko Torishima as the series' main antagonist, Dr. Mashirito. A running gag in \"Dr. Slump\" that utilizes feces has been reported as an inspiration for the Pile of Poo emoji.\nWhen \"Dragon Ball\" began, it was loosely based on the classic Chinese novel \"Journey to the West\", with Goku being Sun Wukong and Bulma as Tang Sanzang. It was also inspired by Hong Kong martial arts films, particularly those of Jackie Chan, and was set in a fictional world based on Asia, taking inspiration from several Asian cultures including Japanese, Chinese, South Asian, Central Asian, Arabic and Indonesian cultures. Toriyama continued to use his characteristic comedic style in the beginning, but over the course of time this slowly changed, with him turning the series into a \"nearly-pure fighting manga\" later on. He did not plan out in advance what would happen in the series, instead choosing to draw as he went. This, coupled with him simply forgetting things he had already drawn, caused him to find himself in situations that he had to write himself out of.\nToriyama was commissioned to illustrate the characters and monsters for the first \"Dragon Quest\" video game (1986) in order to separate it from other role-playing games of the time. He has since worked on every title in the series. For each game Yuji Horii first sends rough sketches of the characters with their background information to Toriyama, who then re-draws them. Lastly, Horii approves the finished work. Toriyama explained in 1995 that for video games, because the sprites are so small, as long as they have a distinguishing feature so people can tell which character it is, he can make complex designs without concern of having to reproduce it like he usually would in manga. Besides the character and monster designs, Toriyama also does the games' packaging art and, for \"Dragon Quest VIII\", the boats and ships. In 2016, Toriyama revealed that because of the series' established time period and setting, his artistic options are limited, which makes every iteration harder to design for than the last. The series' Slime character, which has become a sort of mascot for the franchise, is considered to be one of the most recognizable figures in gaming.\nManga critic Jason Thompson declared Toriyama's art influential, saying that his \"extremely personal and recognizable style\" was a reason for \"Dragon Ball\"'s popularity. He points out that the popular \"sh\u014dnen\" manga of the late 1980s and early 1990s had \"manly\" heroes, such as \"City Hunter\" and \"Fist of the North Star\", whereas \"Dragon Ball\" starred the cartoonish and small Goku, thus starting a trend that Thompson says continues to this day. Toriyama himself said he went against the normal convention that the strongest characters should be the largest in terms of physical size, designing many of the series' most powerful characters with small statures. Thompson concluded his analysis by saying that only Akira Toriyama drew like this at the time and that \"Dragon Ball\" is \"an action manga drawn by a gag manga artist.\" However, James S. Yadao, author of \"The Rough Guide to Manga\", points out that an art shift does occur in the series, as the characters gradually \"lose the rounded, innocent look that [Toriyama] established in \"Dr. Slump\" and gain sharper angles that leap off the page with their energy and intensity.\"\nLegacy and accolades.\nThompson stated in 2011 that \"\"Dragon Ball\" is by far the most influential shonen manga of the last 30 years, and today, almost every \"Sh\u014dnen Jump\" artist lists it as one of their favorites and lifts from it in various ways.\" David Brothers for ComicsAlliance wrote that: \"Like Osamu Tezuka and Jack Kirby before him, Toriyama created a story with his own two hands that seeped deep into the hearts of his readers, creating a love for both the cast and the medium at the same time.\" In a rare 2013 interview, commenting on \"Dragon Balls global success, Toriyama admitted, \"Frankly, I don't quite understand why it happened. While the manga was being serialized, the only thing I wanted as I kept drawing was to make Japanese boys happy.\" Many artists have named Toriyama and \"Dragon Ball\" as influences, including \"One Piece\" author Eiichiro Oda, \"Naruto\" creator Masashi Kishimoto, \"Fairy Tail\" and \"Rave\" author Hiro Mashima, ' illustrator Mikio Ikemoto, \"Venus Versus Virus\" author Atsushi Suzumi, \"Bleach\" creator Tite Kubo, \"Black Cat\" author Kentaro Yabuki, and \"Mr. Fullswing\" author Shinya Suzuki. German comic book artist Hans Steinbach was strongly influenced by Toriyama, and Thai cartoonist Wisut Ponnimit cited Toriyama as one of his favorite cartoonists. Ian Jones-Quartey, a producer of the American animated series \"Steven Universe\", is a fan of both \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Dr. Slump\", and uses Toriyama's vehicle designs as reference for his own. He also stated that \"We're all big Toriyama fans on [\"Steven Universe\"], which kind of shows a bit.\"\nIn 2008, Oricon conducted a poll of people's favorite manga artists, with Toriyama coming in second, behind only \"Nana\" author Ai Yazawa. However, he was number one among male respondents and among those over 30 years of age. They held a poll on the Mangaka that Changed the History of Manga in 2010, \"mangaka\" being the Japanese word for a manga artist. Toriyama came in second, after only Osamu Tezuka, due to his works being highly influential and popular worldwide. Toriyama won the Special 40th Anniversary Festival Award at the 2013 Angoul\u00eame International Comics Festival, honoring his years in cartooning. He actually received the most votes for the festival's Grand Prix de la ville d'Angoul\u00eame award that year; however, the selection committee chose Willem as the recipient. Toriyama was decorated a \"Chevalier\" or \"Knight\" of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French government on May 30, 2019 for his contributions to the arts. He was also a 2019 nominee for entry into the Will Eisner Hall of Fame. Due to his video game design work, IGN named Toriyama number 74 on their list of the Top 100 Game Creators of All Time."}
{"id": "3093", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3093", "title": "Epsilon Ursae Majoris", "text": "Epsilon Ursae Majoris (Latinised from \u03b5\u00a0Ursae Majoris, abbreviated Epsilon\u00a0UMa, \u03b5\u00a0UMa), officially named Alioth , is, despite being designated \"\u03b5\"\u00a0(epsilon), the brightest star in the constellation of Ursa Major, and at magnitude 1.77 is the thirty-second brightest star in the sky.\nIt is the star in the tail of the bear closest to its body, and thus the star in the handle of the Big Dipper (or Plough) closest to the bowl. It is also a member of the large and diffuse Ursa Major moving group. Historically, the star was frequently used in celestial navigation in the maritime trade, because it is listed as one of the 57 navigational stars.\nPhysical characteristics.\nAccording to \"Hipparcos\", Epsilon Ursae Majoris is from the Sun. Its spectral type is A1p; the \"p\" stands for \"peculiar\", as its spectrum is characteristic of an \u03b12 Canum Venaticorum variable. Epsilon Ursae Majoris, as a representative of this type, may harbor two interacting processes. First, the star's strong magnetic field separating different elements in the star's hydrogen 'fuel'. In addition, a rotation axis at an angle to the magnetic axis may be spinning different bands of magnetically sorted elements into the line of sight between Epsilon Ursae Majoris and the Earth. The intervening elements react differently at different frequencies of light as they whip in and out of view, causing Epsilon Ursae Majoris to have very strange spectral lines that fluctuate over a period of 5.1 days. The \"kB9\" suffix to the spectral type indicates that the calcium K line is present and representative of a B9 spectral type even though the rest of the spectrum indicates A1.\nEpsilon Ursae Majoris's rotational and magnetic poles are at almost 90 degrees to one another. Darker (denser) regions of chromium form a band at right angles to the equator.\nIt has long been suspected that Epsilon Ursae Majoris is a spectroscopic binary, possibly with more than one companion. A more recent study suggests Epsilon Ursae Majoris's 5.1-day variation may be due to a substellar object of about 14.7 Jupiter masses in an eccentric orbit (e=0.5) with an average separation of 0.055 astronomical units. It is now thought that the 5.1-day period is the rotation period of the star, and no companions have been detected using the most modern equipment.\nEpsilon Ursae Majoris has a relatively weak magnetic field, 15 times weaker than \u03b1 Canum Venaticorum, but it is still 100 times stronger than that of the Earth.\nName and etymology.\n\"\u03b5\u00a0Ursae Majoris\" (Latinised to \"Epsilon Ursae Majoris\") is the star's Bayer designation.\nThe traditional name \"Alioth\" comes from the Arabic \"alyat al-hamal\" (\"the sheep's fat tail\"). In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Alioth\" for this star.\nThis star was known to the Hindus as \"A\u00f1giras\", one of the Seven Rishis.\nIn Chinese, (), meaning \"Northern Dipper\", refers to an asterism equivalent to the Big Dipper. Consequently, the Chinese name for Epsilon Ursae Majoris itself is (, ) and (, ).\nNamesakes.\nUSS Allioth (AK-109) was a United States Navy Crater class cargo ship named after the star."}
{"id": "3095", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3095", "title": "Amiga 500", "text": "The Amiga 500, also known as the A500, is the first low-end version of the Amiga home computer. It contains the same Motorola 68000 as the Amiga 1000, as well as the same graphics and sound coprocessors, but is in a smaller case similar to that of the Commodore 128,\nCommodore announced the Amiga 500 at the January 1987 winter Consumer Electronics Showat the same time as the high-end Amiga 2000. It was initially available in the Netherlands in April 1987, then the rest of Europe in May. In North America and the UK it was released in October 1987 with a list price. It competed directly against models in the Atari ST line.\nThe Amiga 500 was sold in the same retail outlets as the Commodore 64, as opposed to the computer store-only Amiga 1000. It proved to be Commodore's best-selling model, particularly in Europe. Although popular with hobbyists, arguably its most widespread use was as a gaming machine, where its graphics and sound were of significant benefit.\nReleases.\nIn October 1989, the Amiga 500 dropped its price from \u00a3499 to \u00a3399 and was bundled with the \"Batman Pack\" in the United Kingdom (from October 1989 to September 1990) which included the games \"Batman\", \"F/A-18 Interceptor\", \"The New Zealand Story\" and the bitmap graphics editor Deluxe Paint 2. Also included was the Amiga video connector which allows the A500 to be used with a conventional CRT television.\nIn late 1991, the enhanced Amiga 500 Plus replaced the 500 in some markets. It was bundled with the \"Cartoon Classics\" pack in the United Kingdom at \u00a3399, although many stores still advertised it as an 'A500'.\nThe Amiga 500 series was discontinued in June 1992 and replaced by the similar Amiga 600. In late 1992, Commodore released the Amiga 1200, a machine closer in concept to the original Amiga 500, but with significant technical improvements. Despite this, neither the A1200 nor the A600 replicated the commercial success of its predecessor. By this time, the home market was strongly shifting to IBM PC compatibles with VGA graphics and the \"low-cost\" Macintosh Classic, LC, and IIsi models.\nDescription.\nOutwardly resembling the Commodore 128 and codenamed \"Rock Lobster\" during development, the Amiga 500 houses the keyboard and CPU in one shell, unlike the Amiga 1000. It uses a Motorola 68000 microprocessor running at (NTSC) or (PAL). The CPU implements a 32-bit model, has 32-bit registers and 32-bit internal data bus, but it has a 16-bit main ALU, uses a 16-bit external data bus and 24-bit address bus, providing a maximum of 16\u00a0MB of address space.\nThe earliest Amiga 500 models use nearly the same Original Amiga chipset as the Amiga 1000. So graphics can be displayed in multiple resolutions and color depths, even on the same screen. Resolutions vary from 320\u00d7200 (up to 32 colors) to 640\u00d7400 (up to 16 colors) for NTSC (704\u00d7484 overscan) and 320\u00d7256 to 640\u00d7512 for PAL (704\u00d7576 overscan.) The system uses planar graphics, with up to five bitplanes (four in high resolution) allowing 2-, 4-, 8-, 16-, and 32-color screens, from a palette of 4096 colors. Two special graphics modes are also available: Extra HalfBrite, which uses a 6th bitplane as a mask to cut the brightness of any pixel in half (resulting in 32 arbitrary colors plus 32 more colors set at half the value of the first 32), and which allows all 4096 colors to be used on screen simultaneously. Later revisions of the chipset are PAL/NTSC switchable in software.\nThe sound chip produces four hardware-mixed channels, two to the left and two to the right, of 8-bit PCM at a sampling frequency of up to . Each hardware channel has its own independent volume level and sampling rate, and can be designated to another channel where it can modulate both volume and frequency using its own output. With DMA disabled it's possible to output with a sampling frequency up to . There's a common trick to output sound with 14-bit precision that can be combined to output 14-bit sound.\nThe stock system comes with AmigaOS version 1.2 or 1.3 and of chip RAM (150 ns access time), one built-in double-density standard floppy disk drive that is completely programmable and can read IBM PC disks, standard Amiga disks, and up to using custom-formatting drivers.\nDespite the lack of Amiga 2000-compatible internal expansion slots, there are many ports and expansion options. There are two DE9M Atari joystick ports for joysticks or mice, stereo audio (RCA connectors 1\u00a0V p-p). There is a floppy drive port for daisy-chaining up to three extra floppy disk drives via a DB23F connector. The then-standard RS-232 serial port (DB25M) and Centronics parallel port (DB25F) are also included. The power supply is (, ). \nThe system displays video in analog RGB PAL or NTSC through a proprietary DB23M connector and in NTSC mode the line frequency is HSync for standard video modes, which is compatible with NTSC television and CVBS/RGB video, but out of range for most VGA-compatible monitors, while a multisync monitor is required for some of the higher resolutions. This connection can also be genlocked to an external video signal. The system was bundled with an RF adapter to provide output on televisions with a coaxial RF input, while monochrome composite video is available via an RCA connector (also coaxial). On the left side, behind a plastic cover, there is a Zorro (Zorro I) bus expansion external edge connector with 86 pins. Peripherals such as a hard disk drive can be added via the expansion slot and are configured automatically by the Amiga's AutoConfig standard, so that multiple devices do not conflict with each other. Up to of so-called \"fast RAM\" (memory that can be accessed by the CPU only) can be added using the side expansion slot. This connector is electronically identical with the Amiga 1000's, but swapped on the other side.\nThe Amiga 500 has a \"trap-door\" slot on the underside for a RAM upgrade (typically of ). This extra RAM is classified as \"fast\" RAM, but is sometimes referred to as \"slow\" RAM: due to the design of the expansion bus, it is actually on the chipset bus. Such upgrades usually include a battery-backed real-time clock. All versions of the A500 can have the additional RAM configured as chip RAM by a simple hardware modification, which involves fitting a later model (8372A) Agnus chip. Likewise, all versions of the A500 can be upgraded to chip RAM by fitting the chip and adding additional memory.\nThe Amiga 500 also sports an unusual feature for a budget machine, socketed chips, which allow easy replacement of defective chips. The CPU can be directly upgraded on the motherboard to a 68010; or to a 68020, 68030, or 68040 via the side expansion slot; or by removing the CPU and plugging a CPU expansion card into the CPU socket (though this will require opening the computer and voiding any remaining warranty). In fact, all the custom chips can be upgraded to the Amiga Enhanced Chip Set (ECS) versions.\nThe case is made from ABS plastics which may become brown with time. This may be reversed by using the public-domain chemical mix \"Retr0bright\", though without a clearcoat to block oxygen, the brown colouring will return.\nTechnical specifications.\nGraphics.\nMax 6 bpp. The Amiga can show multiple resolution modes at the same time, splitting the screen vertically. An additional mode called Hold-And-Modify (HAM) makes it possible to use over a wide span. This works by letting each pixel position use the previous RGB value and modify one of the red, green or blue values to a new 4-bit value. This will cause some negligible colour artifacts however.\nMemory.\nUsing various expansion techniques, the A500's total RAM can reach up to 138 MiB \u2013 2 MiB Chip RAM, 8 MiB 16-bit Fast RAM, and 128 MiB 32-bit Fast RAM.\nChip RAM.\nThe stock 512 KiB Chip RAM can be complemented by 512 KiB using a \"trapdoor\" expansion (Commodore A501 or compatible). While that expansion memory is connected the chip bus, hardware limitations of the stock Agnus chip prevent its use as Chip RAM, only the CPU can access it. Suffering from the same contention limitations as Chip RAM, that memory is known as \"Slow RAM\" or \"Pseudo-fast RAM\". Retrofitting a later ECS Agnus and changing the memory-layout jumper allows use of trapdoor RAM as real Chip RAM for a total 1 MiB.\nAdditionally, several third-party expansions exist with up to 1.8 MiB on the trapdoor board. Using a Gary adapter, that memory is mapped similar to the standard Slow RAM and only usable by the CPU, yet slowed by chipset access.\nFurthermore, using an A3000 Agnus on an adapter board, it is possible to expand the Chip RAM to 2 MiB.\nFast RAM.\n\"Fast\" RAM is located on the CPU-side bus. Its access is exclusive to the CPU and not slowed by any chipset access. The side expansion port allows for up to 8 MiB of Zorro-style expansion RAM. Alternatively, a CPU adapter allows for internal expansion.\nAccelerator RAM.\nInternal or external CPU accelerators often include their own expansion memory. 16-bit CPUs are limited by the 24-bit address space but they can repurpose otherwise unused memory space for their included RAM. 32-bit CPU accelerators aren't limited by 24-bit addressing and can include up to 128 MiB of Fast RAM (and potentially more).\nDiagnostics.\nWhen the computer is powered on a self-diagnostic test is run that will indicates failure with a specific colour:\nThe keyboard LED uses blink codes:\nTrap-door expansion 501.\nA popular expansion for the Amiga 500 was the Amiga 501 circuit board that can be installed underneath the computer behind a plastic cover. The expansion contains RAM configured by default as \"Slow RAM\" or \"trap-door RAM\" and a battery-backed real-time clock (RTC). The 512 KB trap-door RAM and 512 KB of original chip RAM will result in 1 MB of total memory. By default, the expansion memory is handled and reported by the system as fast memory. However, the RAM is physically connected to Agnus like chip RAM and it is impacted by chip-bus bandwidth contention. Being only accessible by the CPU but as slow as chip RAM, it is commonly being referred to as \"Slow RAM\". The motherboard can be modified to relocate the trap-door RAM to the chip memory pool, provided a compatible Agnus chip is fitted on the motherboard."}
{"id": "3099", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3099", "title": "Abiword", "text": ""}
{"id": "3100", "revid": "3115846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3100", "title": "Aga", "text": "Aga or AGA may refer to:"}
{"id": "3104", "revid": "734812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3104", "title": "Amiga 1000", "text": "The Commodore Amiga 1000, also known as the A1000 and originally marketed as the Amiga, is the first personal computer released by Commodore International in the Amiga line. It combines the 16/32-bit Motorola 68000 CPU which was powerful by 1985 standards with one of the most advanced graphics and sound systems in its class, and runs a preemptive multitasking operating system that fits into of read-only memory and shipped with 256\u00a0KB of RAM. The primary memory can be expanded internally with a manufacturer-supplied 256\u00a0KB module for a total of 512\u00a0KB of RAM. Using the external slot the primary memory can be expanded up to \nDesign.\nThe A1000 has a number of characteristics that distinguish it from later Amiga models: It is the only model to feature the short-lived Amiga check-mark logo on its case, the majority of the case is elevated slightly to give a storage area for the keyboard when not in use (a \"keyboard garage\"), and the inside of the case is engraved with the signatures of the Amiga designers (similar to the Macintosh); including Jay Miner and the paw print of his dog Mitchy. The A1000's case was designed by Howard Stolz. As Senior Industrial Designer at Commodore, Stolz was the mechanical lead and primary interface with Sanyo in Japan, the contract manufacturer for the A1000 casing.\nThe Amiga 1000 was manufactured in two variations: One uses the NTSC television standard and the other uses the PAL television standard. The NTSC variant was the initial model manufactured and sold in North America. The later PAL model was manufactured in Germany and sold in countries using the PAL television standard. The first NTSC systems lack the EHB video mode which is present in all later Amiga models.\nBecause AmigaOS was rather buggy at the time of the A1000's release, the OS was not placed in ROM then. Instead, the A1000 includes a daughterboard with 256\u00a0KB of RAM, dubbed the \"writable control store\" (WCS), into which the core of the operating system is loaded from floppy disk (this portion of the operating system is known as the \"Kickstart\"). The WCS is write-protected after loading, and system resets do not require a reload of the WCS. In Europe, the WCS was often referred to as WOM (Write Once Memory), a play on the more conventional term \"ROM\" (read-only memory).\nTechnical information.\nThe preproduction Amiga (which was codenamed \"Velvet\") released to developers in early 1985 contained of RAM with an option to expand it to Commodore later increased the system memory to due to objections by the Amiga development team. The names of the custom chips were different; Denise and Paula were called Daphne and Portia respectively. The casing of the preproduction Amiga was almost identical to the production version: the main difference being an embossed Commodore logo in the top left corner. It did not have the developer signatures.\nThe Amiga 1000 has a Motorola 68000 CPU running at 7.15909\u00a0MHz (on NTSC systems) or 7.09379\u00a0MHz (PAL systems), precisely double the video color carrier frequency for NTSC or 1.6 times the color carrier frequency for PAL. The system clock timings are derived from the video frequency, which simplifies glue logic and allows the Amiga\u00a01000 to make do with a single crystal. In keeping with its video game heritage, the chipset was designed to synchronize CPU memory access and chipset DMA so the hardware runs in real time without wait-state delays.\nThough most units were sold with an analog RGB monitor, the A1000 also has a built-in composite video output which allows the computer to be connected directly to some monitors other than their standard RGB monitor. The A1000 also has a \"TV MOD\" output, into which an RF Modulator can be plugged, allowing connection to a TV that was old enough not to even have a composite video input.\nThe original 68000 CPU can be directly replaced with a Motorola 68010, which can execute instructions slightly faster than the 68000 but also introduces a small degree of software incompatibility. Third-party CPU upgrades, which mostly fit in the CPU socket, use faster successors 68020/68881 or 68030/68882 microprocessors and integrated memory. Such upgrades often have the option to revert to 68000 mode for full compatibility. Some boards have a socket to seat the original 68000, whereas the 68030 cards typically come with an on-board 68000.\nThe original Amiga\u00a01000 is the only model to have 256\u00a0KB of Amiga Chip RAM, which can be expanded to 512\u00a0KB with the addition of a daughterboard under a cover in the center front of the machine. RAM may also be upgraded via official and third-party upgrades, with a practical upper limit of about 9\u00a0MB of \"fast RAM\" due to the 68000's 24-bit address bus. This memory is accessible only by the CPU permitting faster code execution as DMA cycles are not shared with the chipset.\nThe Amiga 1000 features an 86-pin expansion port (electrically identical to the later Amiga 500 expansion port, though the A500's connector is inverted). This port is used by third-party expansions such as memory upgrades and SCSI adapters. These resources are handled by the Amiga Autoconfig standard. Other expansion options are available including a bus expander which provides two Zorro-II slots.\nRetail.\nIntroduced on July 23, 1985, during a star-studded gala featuring Andy Warhol and Debbie Harry held at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center in New York City, machines began shipping in September with a base configuration of 256\u00a0KB of RAM at the retail price of . A analog RGB monitor was available for around , bringing the price of a complete Amiga system to US$1,595 (). Before the release of the Amiga 500 and Amiga 2000 models in 1987, the A1000 was marketed as simply the \"Amiga\", although the model number was there from the beginning, as the original box indicates.\nIn the US, the A1000 was marketed as \"The Amiga from Commodore\", with the Commodore logo omitted from the case. The Commodore branding was retained for the international versions. \nAdditionally, the Amiga 1000 was sold exclusively in computer stores in the US rather than the various non computer-dedicated department and toy stores through which the VIC-20 and Commodore 64 were retailed. These measures were an effort to avoid Commodore's \"toy-store\" computer image created during the Tramiel era. \nAlong with the operating system, the machine came bundled with a version of AmigaBASIC developed by Microsoft and a speech synthesis library developed by Softvoice, Inc.\nAftermarket upgrades.\nMany A1000 owners remained attached to their machines long after newer models rendered the units technically obsolete, and it attracted numerous aftermarket upgrades. Many CPU upgrades that plugged into the Motorola 68000 socket functioned in the A1000. Additionally, a line of products called the \"Rejuvenator\" series allowed the use of newer chipsets in the A1000, and an Australian-designed replacement A1000 motherboard called \"The Phoenix\" utilized the same chipset as the A3000 and added an A2000-compatible video slot and on-board SCSI controller.\nImpact.\nIn 1994, as Commodore filed for bankruptcy, \"Byte\" magazine called the Amiga 1000 \"the first multimedia computer... so far ahead of its time that almost nobody\u2014including Commodore's marketing department\u2014could fully articulate what it was all about\".\nIn 2006, \"PC World\" rated the Amiga 1000 as the 7th greatest PC of all time. In 2007, it was rated by the same magazine as the 37th best tech product of all time.\nJoe Pillow.\n\"Joe Pillow\" was the name given on the ticket for the extra airline seat purchased to hold the first Amiga prototype while on the way to the January 1984 Consumer Electronics Show. The airlines required a name for the airline ticket and Joe Pillow was born. The engineers (RJ Mical and Dale Luck) who flew with the Amiga prototype (codenamed \"Lorraine\") drew a happy face on the front of the pillowcase and even added a tie.\nJoe Pillow extended his fifteen minutes of fame when the Amiga went to production. All fifty-three Amiga team members who worked on the project signed the Amiga case. This included Joe Pillow and Jay Miner's dog Michy who each got to \"sign\" the case in their own unique way."}
{"id": "3106", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3106", "title": "Apple Airport", "text": ""}
{"id": "3107", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3107", "title": "Asymptote", "text": "In analytic geometry, an asymptote () of a curve is a line such that the distance between the curve and the line approaches zero as one or both of the \"x\" or \"y\" coordinates tends to infinity. In projective geometry and related contexts, an asymptote of a curve is a line which is tangent to the curve at a point at infinity.\nThe word asymptote is derived from the Greek \u1f00\u03c3\u03cd\u03bc\u03c0\u03c4\u03c9\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 (\"asumpt\u014dtos\") which means \"not falling together\", from \u1f00 priv. + \u03c3\u03cd\u03bd \"together\" + \u03c0\u03c4\u03c9\u03c4-\u03cc\u03c2 \"fallen\". The term was introduced by Apollonius of Perga in his work on conic sections, but in contrast to its modern meaning, he used it to mean any line that does not intersect the given curve.\nThere are three kinds of asymptotes: \"horizontal\", \"vertical\" and \"oblique\". For curves given by the graph of a function , horizontal asymptotes are horizontal lines that the graph of the function approaches as \"x\" tends to Vertical asymptotes are vertical lines near which the function grows without bound. An oblique asymptote has a slope that is non-zero but finite, such that the graph of the function approaches it as \"x\" tends to \nMore generally, one curve is a \"curvilinear asymptote\" of another (as opposed to a \"linear asymptote\") if the distance between the two curves tends to zero as they tend to infinity, although the term \"asymptote\" by itself is usually reserved for linear asymptotes.\nAsymptotes convey information about the behavior of curves \"in the large\", and determining the asymptotes of a function is an important step in sketching its graph. The study of asymptotes of functions, construed in a broad sense, forms a part of the subject of asymptotic analysis.\nIntroduction.\nThe idea that a curve may come arbitrarily close to a line without actually becoming the same may seem to counter everyday experience. The representations of a line and a curve as marks on a piece of paper or as pixels on a computer screen have a positive width. So if they were to be extended far enough they would seem to merge, at least as far as the eye could discern. But these are physical representations of the corresponding mathematical entities; the line and the curve are idealized concepts whose width is 0 (see Line). Therefore, the understanding of the idea of an asymptote requires an effort of reason rather than experience.\nConsider the graph of the function formula_1 shown in this section. The coordinates of the points on the curve are of the form formula_2 where x is a number other than 0. For example, the graph contains the points (1, 1), (2, 0.5), (5, 0.2), (10, 0.1), ... As the values of formula_3 become larger and larger, say 100, 1,000, 10,000 ..., putting them far to the right of the illustration, the corresponding values of formula_4, .01, .001, .0001, ..., become infinitesimal relative to the scale shown. But no matter how large formula_3 becomes, its reciprocal formula_6 is never 0, so the curve never actually touches the \"x\"-axis. Similarly, as the values of formula_3 become smaller and smaller, say .01, .001, .0001, ..., making them infinitesimal relative to the scale shown, the corresponding values of formula_4, 100, 1,000, 10,000 ..., become larger and larger. So the curve extends farther and farther upward as it comes closer and closer to the \"y\"-axis. Thus, both the \"x\" and \"y\"-axis are asymptotes of the curve. These ideas are part of the basis of concept of a limit in mathematics, and this connection is explained more fully below.\nAsymptotes of functions.\nThe asymptotes most commonly encountered in the study of calculus are of curves of the form . These can be computed using limits and classified into \"horizontal\", \"vertical\" and \"oblique\" asymptotes depending on their orientation. Horizontal asymptotes are horizontal lines that the graph of the function approaches as \"x\" tends to +\u221e or \u2212\u221e. As the name indicates they are parallel to the \"x\"-axis. Vertical asymptotes are vertical lines (perpendicular to the \"x\"-axis) near which the function grows without bound. Oblique asymptotes are diagonal lines such that the difference between the curve and the line approaches 0 as \"x\" tends to +\u221e or \u2212\u221e.\nVertical asymptotes.\nThe line \"x\" = \"a\" is a \"vertical asymptote\" of the graph of the function if at least one of the following statements is true:\nwhere formula_11 is the limit as \"x\" approaches the value \"a\" from the left (from lesser values), and formula_12 is the limit as \"x\" approaches \"a\" from the right.\nFor example, if \u0192(\"x\") = \"x\"/(\"x\"\u20131), the numerator approaches 1 and the denominator approaches 0 as \"x\" approaches 1. So\nand the curve has a vertical asymptote \"x\"=1.\nThe function \"\u0192\"(\"x\") may or may not be defined at \"a\", and its precise value at the point \"x\" = \"a\" does not affect the asymptote. For example, for the function\nhas a limit of +\u221e as , \"\u0192\"(\"x\") has the vertical asymptote , even though \"\u0192\"(0)\u00a0=\u00a05. The graph of this function does intersect the vertical asymptote once, at (0,5). It is impossible for the graph of a function to intersect a vertical asymptote (or a vertical line in general) in more than one point. Moreover, if a function is continuous at each point where it is defined, it is impossible that its graph does intersect any vertical asymptote.\nA common example of a vertical asymptote is the case of a rational function at a point x such that the denominator is zero and the numerator is non-zero.\nIf a function has a vertical asymptote, then it isn't necessarily true that the derivative of the function has a vertical asymptote at the same place. An example is\nThis function has a vertical asymptote at formula_18 because \nand\nThe derivative of formula_21 is the function\nFor the sequence of points\nthat approaches formula_25 both from the left and from the right, the values formula_26 are constantly formula_27. Therefore, both one-sided limits of formula_28 at formula_27 can be neither formula_30 nor formula_31. Hence formula_32 doesn't have a vertical asymptote at formula_25.\nHorizontal asymptotes.\n\"Horizontal asymptotes\" are horizontal lines that the graph of the function approaches as . The horizontal line \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"c\" is a horizontal asymptote of the function \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"\u0192\"(\"x\") if\nIn the first case, \"\u0192\"(\"x\") has \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"c\" as asymptote when \"x\" tends to , and in the second \"\u0192\"(\"x\") has \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"c\" as an asymptote as \"x\" tends to .\nFor example, the arctangent function satisfies\nSo the line is a horizontal asymptote for the arctangent when \"x\" tends to , and is a horizontal asymptote for the arctangent when \"x\" tends to .\nFunctions may lack horizontal asymptotes on either or both sides, or may have one horizontal asymptote that is the same in both directions. For example, the function has a horizontal asymptote at \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a00 when \"x\" tends both to and because, respectively,\nOther common functions that have one or two horisontal asymptotes include (that has an hyperbola as it graph), the Gaussian function formula_39 the error function, and the logistic function.\nOblique asymptotes.\nWhen a linear asymptote is not parallel to the \"x\"- or \"y\"-axis, it is called an \"oblique asymptote\" or \"slant asymptote\". A function \"f\"(\"x\") is asymptotic to the straight line (\"m\"\u00a0\u2260\u00a00) if\nIn the first case the line is an oblique asymptote of \"\u0192\"(\"x\") when \"x\" tends to +\u221e, and in the second case the line is an oblique asymptote of \"\u0192(x)\" when \"x\" tends to \u2212\u221e.\nAn example is \u0192(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"x\" + 1/\"x\", which has the oblique asymptote \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"x\" (that is \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a01, \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a00) as seen in the limits\nElementary methods for identifying asymptotes.\nThe asymptotes of many elementary functions can be found without the explicit use of limits (although the derivations of such methods typically use limits).\nGeneral computation of oblique asymptotes for functions.\nThe oblique asymptote, for the function \"f\"(\"x\"), will be given by the equation \"y\"=\"mx\"+\"n\". The value for \"m\" is computed first and is given by\nwhere \"a\" is either formula_31 or formula_30 depending on the case being studied. It is good practice to treat the two cases separately. If this limit doesn't exist then there is no oblique asymptote in that direction.\nHaving \"m\" then the value for \"n\" can be computed by\nwhere \"a\" should be the same value used before. If this limit fails to exist then there is no oblique asymptote in that direction, even should the limit defining \"m\" exist. Otherwise is the oblique asymptote of \"\u0192\"(\"x\") as \"x\" tends to \"a\".\nFor example, the function has\nso that is the asymptote of \"\u0192\"(\"x\") when \"x\" tends to +\u221e.\nThe function has\nSo does not have an asymptote when \"x\" tends to +\u221e.\nAsymptotes for rational functions.\nA rational function has at most one horizontal asymptote or oblique (slant) asymptote, and possibly many vertical asymptotes.\nThe degree of the numerator and degree of the denominator determine whether or not there are any horizontal or oblique asymptotes. The cases are tabulated below, where deg(numerator) is the degree of the numerator, and deg(denominator) is the degree of the denominator.\nThe vertical asymptotes occur only when the denominator is zero (If both the numerator and denominator are zero, the multiplicities of the zero are compared). For example, the following function has vertical asymptotes at \"x\" = 0, and \"x\" = 1, but not at \"x\" = 2.\nOblique asymptotes of rational functions.\nWhen the numerator of a rational function has degree exactly one greater than the denominator, the function has an oblique (slant) asymptote. The asymptote is the polynomial term after dividing the numerator and denominator. This phenomenon occurs because when dividing the fraction, there will be a linear term, and a remainder. For example, consider the function\nshown to the right. As the value of \"x\" increases, \"f\" approaches the asymptote \"y\" = \"x\". This is because the other term, 1/(\"x\"+1), approaches 0.\nIf the degree of the numerator is more than 1 larger than the degree of the denominator, and the denominator does not divide the numerator, there will be a nonzero remainder that goes to zero as \"x\" increases, but the quotient will not be linear, and the function does not have an oblique asymptote.\nTransformations of known functions.\nIf a known function has an asymptote (such as \"y\"=0 for \"f\"(x)=\"e\"\"x\"), then the translations of it also have an asymptote.\nIf a known function has an asymptote, then the scaling of the function also have an asymptote.\nFor example, \"f\"(\"x\")=\"e\"\"x\"-1+2 has horizontal asymptote \"y\"=0+2=2, and no vertical or oblique asymptotes.\nGeneral definition.\nLet be a parametric plane curve, in coordinates \"A\"(\"t\")\u00a0=\u00a0(\"x\"(\"t\"),\"y\"(\"t\")). Suppose that the curve tends to infinity, that is:\nA line \u2113 is an asymptote of \"A\" if the distance from the point \"A\"(\"t\") to \u2113 tends to zero as \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"b\". From the definition, only open curves that have some infinite branch can have an asymptote. No closed curve can have an asymptote.\nFor example, the upper right branch of the curve \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a01/\"x\" can be defined parametrically as \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"t\", \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a01/\"t\" (where \"t\" &gt; 0). First, \"x\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u221e as \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u221e and the distance from the curve to the \"x\"-axis is 1/\"t\" which approaches 0 as \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u221e. Therefore, the \"x\"-axis is an asymptote of the curve. Also, \"y\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u221e as \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a00 from the right, and the distance between the curve and the \"y\"-axis is \"t\" which approaches 0 as \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a00. So the \"y\"-axis is also an asymptote. A similar argument shows that the lower left branch of the curve also has the same two lines as asymptotes.\nAlthough the definition here uses a parameterization of the curve, the notion of asymptote does not depend on the parameterization. In fact, if the equation of the line is formula_55 then the distance from the point \"A\"(\"t\")\u00a0=\u00a0(\"x\"(\"t\"),\"y\"(\"t\")) to the line is given by\nif \u03b3(\"t\") is a change of parameterization then the distance becomes\nwhich tends to zero simultaneously as the previous expression.\nAn important case is when the curve is the graph of a real function (a function of one real variable and returning real values). The graph of the function \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"\u0192\"(\"x\") is the set of points of the plane with coordinates (\"x\",\"\u0192\"(\"x\")). For this, a parameterization is\nThis parameterization is to be considered over the open intervals (\"a\",\"b\"), where \"a\" can be \u2212\u221e and \"b\" can be +\u221e.\nAn asymptote can be either vertical or non-vertical (oblique or horizontal). In the first case its equation is \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"c\", for some real number \"c\". The non-vertical case has equation , where \"m\" and formula_59 are real numbers. All three types of asymptotes can be present at the same time in specific examples. Unlike asymptotes for curves that are graphs of functions, a general curve may have more than two non-vertical asymptotes, and may cross its vertical asymptotes more than once.\nCurvilinear asymptotes.\nLet be a parametric plane curve, in coordinates \"A\"(\"t\")\u00a0=\u00a0(\"x\"(\"t\"),\"y\"(\"t\")), and \"B\" be another (unparameterized) curve. Suppose, as before, that the curve \"A\" tends to infinity. The curve \"B\" is a curvilinear asymptote of \"A\" if the shortest distance from the point \"A\"(\"t\") to a point on \"B\" tends to zero as \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"b\". Sometimes \"B\" is simply referred to as an asymptote of \"A\", when there is no risk of confusion with linear asymptotes.\nFor example, the function\nhas a curvilinear asymptote , which is known as a \"parabolic asymptote\" because it is a parabola rather than a straight line.\nAsymptotes and curve sketching.\nAsymptotes are used in procedures of curve sketching. An asymptote serves as a guide line to show the behavior of the curve towards infinity. In order to get better approximations of the curve, curvilinear asymptotes have also been used although the term asymptotic curve seems to be preferred.\nAlgebraic curves.\nThe asymptotes of an algebraic curve in the affine plane are the lines that are tangent to the projectivized curve through a point at infinity. For example, one may identify the asymptotes to the unit hyperbola in this manner. Asymptotes are often considered only for real curves, although they also make sense when defined in this way for curves over an arbitrary field.\nA plane curve of degree \"n\" intersects its asymptote at most at \"n\"\u22122 other points, by B\u00e9zout's theorem, as the intersection at infinity is of multiplicity at least two. For a conic, there are a pair of lines that do not intersect the conic at any complex point: these are the two asymptotes of the conic.\nA plane algebraic curve is defined by an equation of the form \"P\"(\"x\",\"y\")\u00a0=\u00a00 where \"P\" is a polynomial of degree \"n\"\nwhere \"P\"\"k\" is homogeneous of degree \"k\". Vanishing of the linear factors of the highest degree term \"P\"\"n\" defines the asymptotes of the curve: setting , if , then the line\nis an asymptote if formula_63 and formula_64 are not both zero. If formula_65 and formula_66, there is no asymptote, but the curve has a branch that looks like a branch of parabola. Such a branch is called a , even when it does not have any parabola that is a curvilinear asymptote. If formula_67 the curve has a singular point at infinity which may have several asymptotes or parabolic branches.\nOver the complex numbers, \"P\"\"n\" splits into linear factors, each of which defines an asymptote (or several for multiple factors). 0ver the reals, \"P\"\"n\" splits in factors that are linear or quadratic factors. Only the linear factors correspond to infinite (real) branches of the curve, but if a linear factor has multiplicity greater than one, the curve may have several asymptotes or parabolic branches. It may also occur that such a multiple linear factor corresponds to two complex conjugate branches, and does not corresponds to any infinite branch of the real curve. For example, the curve has no real points outside the square formula_68, but its highest order term gives the linear factor \"x\" with multiplicity 4, leading to the unique asymptote \"x\"=0.\nAsymptotic cone.\nThe hyperbola\nhas the two asymptotes\nThe equation for the union of these two lines is\nSimilarly, the hyperboloid\nis said to have the asymptotic cone\nThe distance between the hyperboloid and cone approaches 0 as the distance from the origin approaches infinity.\nMore generally, consider a surface that has an implicit equation\nformula_74\nwhere the formula_75 are homogeneous polynomials of degree formula_76 and formula_77. Then the equation formula_78 defines a cone which is centered at the origin. It is called an asymptotic cone, because the distance to the cone of a point of the surface tends to zero when the point on the surface tends to infinity."}
{"id": "3110", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3110", "title": "Andrew S. Tanenbaum", "text": "Andrew Stuart Tanenbaum (born March 16, 1944), sometimes referred to by the handle ast, is an American-Dutch computer scientist and professor emeritus of computer science at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam in the Netherlands.\nHe is best known as the author of MINIX, a free Unix-like operating system for teaching purposes, and for his computer science textbooks, regarded as standard texts in the field. He regards his teaching job as his most important work. Since 2004 he has operated Electoral-vote.com, a website dedicated to analysis of polling data in federal elections in the United States.\nBiography.\nTanenbaum was born in New York City and grew up in suburban White Plains, New York. He is Jewish. His paternal grandfather was born in Khorostkiv in the Austro-Hungarian empire.\nHe received his bachelor of Science degree in Physics from MIT in 1965 and his Ph.D. degree in astrophysics from the University of California, Berkeley in 1971. Tanenbaum also served as a lobbyist for the Sierra Club.\nHe moved to the Netherlands to live with his wife, who is Dutch, but he retains his United States citizenship. He teaches courses about Computer Organization and Operating Systems and supervises the work of Ph.D. candidates at the VU University Amsterdam. On , he announced his retirement.\nTeaching.\nBooks.\nTanenbaum is well recognized for his textbooks on computer science. They include:\nHis book, \"Operating Systems: Design and Implementation\" and MINIX were Linus Torvalds' inspiration for the Linux kernel. In his autobiography \"Just for Fun\", Torvalds describes it as \"the book that launched me to new heights\".\nHis books have been translated into many languages including Arabic, Basque, Bulgarian, Chinese, Dutch, French, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Macedonian, Mexican Spanish, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, and Spanish. They have appeared in over 175 editions and are used at universities around the world.\nDoctoral students.\nTanenbaum has had a number of Ph.D. students who themselves have gone on to become widely known computer science researchers.\nThese include:\nDean of the Advanced School for Computing and Imaging.\nIn the early 1990s, the Dutch government began setting up a number of thematically oriented research schools that spanned multiple universities. These schools were intended to bring professors and Ph.D. students from different Dutch (and later, foreign) universities together to help them cooperate and enhance their research.\nTanenbaum was one of the cofounders and first Dean of the Advanced School for Computing and Imaging (ASCI). This school initially consisted of nearly 200 faculty members and Ph.D. students from the Vrije Universiteit, University of Amsterdam, Delft University of Technology, and Leiden University. They were especially working on problems in advanced computer systems such as parallel computing and image analysis and processing.\nTanenbaum remained dean for 12 years, until 2005, when he was awarded an Academy Professorship by the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, at which time he became a full-time research professor. ASCI has since grown to include researchers from nearly a dozen universities in The Netherlands, Belgium, and France. ASCI offers Ph.D. level courses, has an annual conference, and runs various workshops every year.\nProjects.\nAmsterdam Compiler Kit.\nThe Amsterdam Compiler Kit is a toolkit for producing portable compilers. It was started sometime before 1981 and Andrew Tanenbaum was the architect from the start until version 5.5.\nMINIX.\nIn 1987, Tanenbaum wrote a clone of UNIX, called MINIX (MINi-unIX), for the IBM PC. It was targeted at students and others who wanted to learn how an operating system worked. Consequently, he wrote a book that listed the source code in an appendix and described it in detail in the text. The source code itself was available on a set of floppy disks. Within three months, a Usenet newsgroup, comp.os.minix, had sprung up with over 40,000 subscribers discussing and improving the system. One of these subscribers was a Finnish student named Linus Torvalds, who began adding new features to MINIX and tailoring it to his own needs. On October 5, 1991, Torvalds announced his own (POSIX-like) kernel, called Linux, which originally used the MINIX file system but is not based on MINIX code.\nAlthough MINIX and Linux have diverged, MINIX continues to be developed, now as a production system as well as an educational one. The focus is on building a highly modular, reliable, and secure operating system. The system is based on a microkernel, with only 5000 lines of code running in kernel mode. The rest of the operating system runs as a number of independent processes in user mode, including processes for the file system, process manager, and each device driver. The system continuously monitors each of these processes, and when a failure is detected is often capable of automatically replacing the failed process without a reboot, without disturbing running programs, and without the user even noticing. MINIX 3, as the current version is called, is available under the BSD license for free.\nResearch projects.\nTanenbaum has also been involved in numerous other research projects in the areas of operating systems, distributed systems, and ubiquitous computing, often as supervisor of Ph.D. students or a postdoctoral researcher. These projects include:\nElectoral-vote.com.\nIn 2004, Tanenbaum created Electoral-vote.com, a web site analyzing opinion polls for the 2004 U.S. Presidential Election, using them to project the outcome in the Electoral College. He stated that he created the site as an American who \"knows first hand what the world thinks of America and it is not a pretty picture at the moment. I want people to think of America as the land of freedom and democracy, not the land of arrogance and blind revenge. I want to be proud of America again.\" The site provided a color-coded map, updated each day with projections for each state's electoral votes. Through most of the campaign period Tanenbaum kept his identity secret, referring to himself as \"the Votemaster\" and acknowledging only that he personally preferred John Kerry. Mentioning that he supported the Democrats, he revealed his identity on November 1, 2004, the day before the election, and also stating his reasons and qualifications for running the website.\nThrough the site he also covered the 2006 midterm elections, correctly predicting the winner of all 33 Senate races that year.\nFor the 2008 elections, he got every state right except for Indiana, which he said McCain would win by 2% (Obama won by 1%) and Missouri, which he said was too close to call (McCain won by 0.1%). He correctly predicted all the winners in the Senate except for Minnesota, where he predicted a 1% win by Norm Coleman over Al Franken. After 7 months of legal battling and recounts, Franken won by 312 votes (0.01%).\nIn 2010, he correctly projected 35 out of 37 Senate races in the Midterm elections on the website. The exceptions were Colorado and Nevada.\nElectoral-vote.com incorrectly predicted Hillary Clinton would win the 2016 United States presidential election. The website incorrectly predicted Clinton would win Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and Florida. Electoral-vote.com did not predict a winner for Nevada, which Clinton would win. The website predicted the winners of the remaining 44 states and the District of Columbia correctly.\nTanenbaum\u2013Torvalds debate.\nThe Tanenbaum\u2013Torvalds debate was a famous debate between Tanenbaum and Linus Torvalds regarding kernel design on Usenet in 1992.\nKeynote talks.\nTanenbaum has been keynote speaker at numerous conferences, most recently"}
{"id": "3111", "revid": "16680171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3111", "title": "Ariane 5", "text": "Ariane 5 is a European heavy-lift space launch vehicle developed and operated by Arianespace for the European Space Agency (ESA). It is launched from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guiana. It has been used to deliver payloads into geostationary transfer orbit (GTO) or low Earth orbit (LEO).\nThe rocket had a streak of 85 consecutive successful launches between 9 April 2003 and 12 December 2017.\nA direct successor system, Ariane 6, is in development.\nThe system was originally designed as an expendable launch system by the \"Centre national d'\u00e9tudes spatiales\" (CNES), the French government's space agency, in close cooperation with Germany and other European partners. Despite not being a direct derivative of its predecessor rocket program, it is classified as part of the Ariane rocket family. Airbus Defence and Space is the prime contractor for the vehicles, leading a multi-country consortium of other European contractors. ESA originally designed Ariane 5 to launch the Hermes spaceplane, and thus it is rated for human space launches.\nSince its first launch, Ariane 5 has been refined in successive versions: \"G\", \"G+\", \"GS\", \"ECA\", and most recently, \"ES\". The system has a commonly used dual-launch capability, where up to two large geostationary belt communication satellites can be mounted using a SYLDA (\"Syst\u00e8me de Lancement Double Ariane\", \"Ariane Double-Launch System\") carrier system. Up to three, somewhat smaller, main satellites are possible depending on size using SPELTRA (\"Structure Porteuse Externe Lancement Triple Ariane\", \"Ariane Triple-Launch External Carrier Structure\"). Up to eight secondary payloads, usually small experiment packages or minisatellites, can be carried with an ASAP (Ariane Structure for Auxiliary Payloads) platform.\nAfter the launch of 15 August 2020, Arianespace has already signed the contracts for the last eight Ariane 5 launches, left to launch before the transition to the new Ariane 6 launcher, according to Daniel Neuenschwander, director of space transportation at the ESA.\nVehicle description.\nCryogenic main stage.\nAriane 5's cryogenic H173 main stage (H158 for Ariane 5 G, G+, and GS) is called the EPC (\"\u00c9tage Principal Cryotechnique\" \u2014 Cryotechnic Main Stage). It consists of a large tank 30.5 metres high with two compartments, one for liquid oxygen and one for liquid hydrogen, and a Vulcain 2 engine at the base with a vacuum thrust of . The H173 EPC weighs about 189 tonnes, including 175 tonnes of propellant. After the main cryogenic stage runs out of fuel, it re-enters the atmosphere for an ocean splashdown.\nSolid boosters.\nAttached to the sides are two P241 (P238 for Ariane 5 G and G+) solid rocket boosters (SRBs or EAPs from the French \"\u00c9tages d'Acc\u00e9l\u00e9ration \u00e0 Poudre\"), each weighing about 277 tonnes full and delivering a thrust of about . They are fueled by a mix of ammonium perchlorate (68%) and aluminium fuel (18%) and HTPB (14%). They each burn for 130 seconds before being dropped into the ocean. The SRBs are usually allowed to sink to the bottom of the ocean, but, like the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters, they can be recovered with parachutes, and this has occasionally been done for post-flight analysis. Unlike Space Shuttle SRBs, Ariane 5 boosters are not reused. The most recent attempt was for the first Ariane 5 ECA mission in 2009. One of the two boosters was successfully recovered and returned to the Guiana Space Center for analysis. Prior to that mission, the last such recovery and testing was done in 2003.\nThe French M51 SLBM shares a substantial amount of technology with these boosters.\nIn February 2000, the suspected nose cone of an Ariane 5 booster washed ashore on the South Texas coast, and was recovered by beachcombers before the government could get to it.\nSecond stage.\nThe second stage is on top of the main stage and below the payload. The original Ariane \u2014 Ariane 5 G \u2014 used the EPS (\"\u00c9tage \u00e0 Propergols Stockables\" \u2014 Storable Propellant Stage), which was fueled by monomethylhydrazine (MMH) and nitrogen tetroxide, containing of storable propellant. The EPS was subsequently improved for use on the Ariane 5 G+, GS, and ES. Ariane 5 ECA uses the ESC (\"\u00c9tage Sup\u00e9rieur Cryotechnique\" \u2014 Cryogenic Upper Stage), which is fueled by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen.\nThe EPS upper stage is capable of multiple ignitions, first demonstrated during flight V26 which was launched on 5 October 2007. This was purely to test the engine, and occurred after the payloads had been deployed. The first operational use of restart capability as part of a mission came on 9 March 2008, when two burns were made to deploy the first Automated Transfer Vehicle into a circular parking orbit, followed by a third burn after ATV deployment to de-orbit the stage. This procedure was repeated for all subsequent ATV flights.\nFairing.\nThe payload and all upper stages are covered at launch by a fairing for aerodynamic stability and protection from heating during supersonic flight and acoustic loads. It is jettisoned once sufficient altitude has been reached (typically above 100 km). It is made by Ruag Space and since flight VA-238 it is composed of 4 panels.\nVariants.\nLaunch system status: \nLaunch pricing and market competition.\n, the Ariane 5 commercial launch price for launching a \"midsize satellite in the lower position\" was approximately \u20ac50 million, competing for commercial launches in an increasingly competitive market.\nThe heavier satellite is launched in the upper position on a typical dual-satellite Ariane 5 launch is priced higher than the lower satellite, on the order of \u20ac90 million .\nTotal launch price of an Ariane 5 \u2013 which can transport up to two satellites to space, one in the \"upper\" and one in the \"lower\" positions \u2013 is around 150 million Euro as of January 2015.\nFuture developments.\nAriane 5 ME.\nThe Ariane 5 ME (Mid-life Evolution) was in development into early 2015, and was seen as a stopgap between Ariane 5 ECA/Ariane 5 ES and the new Ariane 6. With first flight planned for 2018, it would have become ESA's principal launcher until the arrival of the new Ariane 6 version. ESA halted funding for the development of Ariane 5 ME in late 2014 to prioritize development of Ariane 6.\nThe Ariane 5 ME was to use a new upper stage, with increased propellant volume, powered by the new Vinci engine. Unlike the HM-7B engine, it was to be able restart several times, allowing for complex orbital maneuvers such as insertion of two satellites into different orbits, direct insertion into geosynchronous orbit, planetary exploration missions, and guaranteed upper stage deorbiting or insertion into graveyard orbit. The launcher was also to include a lengthened fairing up to 20 m and a new dual launch system to accommodate larger satellites. Compared to an Ariane 5 ECA model, the payload to GTO was to increase by 15% to 11.5 tonnes and the cost-per-kilogram of each launch is projected to decline by 20%.\nDevelopment.\nOriginally known as the Ariane 5 ECB, Ariane 5 ME was to have its first flight in 2006. However, the failure of the first ECA flight in 2002, combined with a deteriorating satellite industry, caused ESA to cancel development in 2003. Development of the Vinci engine continued, though at a lower pace. The ESA Council of Ministers agreed to fund development of the new upper stage in November 2008.\nIn 2009, EADS Astrium was awarded a \u20ac200 million contract, and on 10 April 2012 received another \u20ac112 million contract to continue development of the Ariane 5 ME with total development effort expected to cost \u20ac1 billion.\nOn 21 November 2012, ESA agreed to continue with the Ariane 5 ME to meet the challenge of lower priced competitors. It was agreed the Vinci upper stage would also be used as the second stage of a new Ariane 6, and further commonality would be sought. Ariane 5 ME qualification flight was scheduled for mid-2018, followed by gradual introduction into service.\nOn 2 December 2014, ESA decided to stop funding the development of Ariane 5 ME and instead focus on Ariane 6, which was expected to have a lower cost per launch and allow more flexibility in the payloads (using two or four P120C solid boosters depending on total payload mass).\nSolid propellant stage.\nWork on the Ariane 5 EAP motors has been continued in the Vega programme. The Vega 1st stage engine \u2013 the P80 engine \u2013 is a shorter derivation of the EAP. The P80 booster casing is made of filament wound graphite epoxy, much lighter than the current stainless steel casing. A new composite steerable nozzle has been developed while new thermal insulation material and a narrower throat improve the expansion ratio and subsequently the overall performance. Additionally, the nozzle now has electromechanical actuators which have replaced the heavier hydraulic ones used for thrust vector control.\nThese developments will probably later make their way back into the Ariane programme. The incorporation of the ESC-B with the improvements to the solid motor casing and an uprated Vulcain engine would deliver to LEO. This would be developed for any lunar missions but the performance of such a design may not be possible if the higher Max-Q for the launch of this rocket poses a constraint on the mass delivered to orbit.\nAriane 6.\nThe design brief of the next generation rocket called for a lower-cost and smaller rocket capable of launching a single satellite of up to 6.5 tonnes to GTO. However, after several permutations the finalized design was nearly identical in performance to the Ariane 5, focusing instead on lowering fabrication costs and launch prices.\nDevelopment is projected to cost \u20ac4 billion. In 2020, its first test launch was set to not earlier than 2021. , Ariane 6 was projected to be launched for about \u20ac70 million per flight or about half of the Ariane 5 current price.\nNotable launches.\nAriane 5's first test flight (Ariane 5 Flight 501) on 4 June 1996 failed, with the rocket self-destructing 37 seconds after launch because of a malfunction in the control software. A data conversion from 64-bit floating point value to 16-bit signed integer value to be stored in a variable representing horizontal bias caused a processor trap (operand error) because the floating point value was too large to be represented by a 16-bit signed integer. The software was originally written for the Ariane 4 where efficiency considerations (the computer running the software had an 80% maximum workload requirement) led to four variables being protected with a handler while three others, including the horizontal bias variable, were left unprotected because it was thought that they were \"physically limited or that there was a large margin of safety\". The software, written in Ada, was included in the Ariane 5 through the reuse of an entire Ariane 4 subsystem despite the fact that the particular software containing the bug, which was just a part of the subsystem, was not required by the Ariane 5 because it has a different preparation sequence than the Ariane 4.\nThe second test flight (L502, on 30 October 1997) was a partial failure. The Vulcain nozzle caused a roll problem, leading to premature shutdown of the core stage. The upper stage operated successfully, but it could not reach the intended orbit. A subsequent test flight (L503, on 21 October 1998) proved successful and the first commercial launch (L504) occurred on 10 December 1999 with the launch of the XMM-Newton X-ray observatory satellite.\nAnother partial failure occurred on 12 July 2001, with the delivery of two satellites into an incorrect orbit, at only half the height of the intended GTO. The ESA Artemis telecommunications satellite was able to reach its intended orbit on 31 January 2003, through the use of its experimental ion propulsion system.\nThe next launch did not occur until 1 March 2002, when the Envisat environmental satellite successfully reached an orbit of 800 km above the Earth in the 11th launch. At 8111 kg, it was the heaviest single payload until the launch of the first ATV on 9 March 2008 (19,360 kg).\nThe first launch of the ECA variant on 11 December 2002 ended in failure when a main booster problem caused the rocket to veer off-course, forcing its self-destruction three minutes into the flight. Its payload of two communications satellites (Stentor and Hot Bird 7), valued at about \u20ac630 million, was lost in the Atlantic Ocean. The fault was determined to have been caused by a leak in coolant pipes allowing the nozzle to overheat. After this failure, Arianespace SA delayed the expected January 2003 launch for the Rosetta mission to 26 February 2004, but this was again delayed to early March 2004 due to a minor fault in the foam that protects the cryogenic tanks on the Ariane 5. As of June 2017, the failure of the first ECA launch was the last failure of an Ariane 5; since then, 82 consecutive launches have been successful, from April 2003 with the launch of INSAT-3A and Galaxy 12 satellites, to flight 240 in December 2017.\nOn 27 September 2003, the last Ariane 5 G boosted three satellites (including the first European lunar probe, SMART-1), in Flight 162. On 18 July 2004, an Ariane 5 G+ boosted what was at the time the heaviest telecommunication satellite ever, Anik F2, weighing almost 6000 kg.\nThe first successful launch of the Ariane 5 ECA took place on 12 February 2005. The payload consisted of the XTAR-EUR military communications satellite, a 'SLOSHSAT' small scientific satellite and a MaqSat B2 payload simulator. The launch had been originally scheduled for October 2004, but additional testing and the military requiring a launch at that time (of a Helios 2A observation satellite) delayed the attempt.\nOn 11 August 2005, the first Ariane 5 GS (featuring the Ariane 5 ECA's improved solid motors) boosted Tha\u00efcom-4/iPStar-1, the heaviest telecommunications satellite to date at 6505 kg, into orbit.\nOn 16 November 2005, the third Ariane 5 ECA launch (the second successful ECA launch) took place. It carried a dual payload consisting of Spaceway F2 for DirecTV and Telkom-2 for PT Telekomunikasi of Indonesia. This was the rocket's heaviest dual payload to date, at more than 8000 kg.\nOn 27 May 2006, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket set a new commercial payload lifting record of 8.2 tonnes. The dual-payload consisted of the Thaicom 5 and Satmex 6 satellites.\nOn 4 May 2007, the Ariane 5 ECA set another new commercial record, lifting into transfer orbit the Astra 1L and Galaxy 17 communication satellites with a combined weight of 8.6 tonnes, and a total payload weight of 9.4 tonnes. This record was again broken by another Ariane 5 ECA, launching the Skynet 5B and Star One C1 satellites, on 11 November 2007. The total payload weight for this launch was of 9535 kg.\nOn 9 March 2008, the first Ariane 5 ES-ATV was launched to deliver the first ATV called \"Jules Verne\" to the International Space Station. The ATV was the heaviest payload ever launched by a European rocket, providing supplies to the space station with necessary propellant, water, air and dry cargo. This was the first operational Ariane mission which involved an engine restart in the upper stage. The ES-ATV Aestus EPS upper stage was restartable while the ECA HM7-B engine was not.\nOn 1 July 2009, an Ariane 5 ECA launched TerreStar-1 (now EchoStar T1), which was then, at , the largest and most massive commercial telecommunication satellite ever built at that time until being overtaken by Telstar 19 Vantage, at , launched aboard Falcon 9 (although the satellite was launched into a lower-energy orbit than a usual GTO, with its initial apogee at roughly 17,900 km).\nOn 28 October 2010, an Ariane 5 ECA launched Eutelsat's W3B (part of its W Series of satellites) and Broadcasting Satellite System Corporation (B-SAT)'s BSAT-3b satellites into orbit. But the W3B satellite failed to operate shortly after the successful launch and was written off as a total loss due to an oxidizer leak in the satellite's main propulsion system. The BSAT-3b satellite, however, is operating normally.\nThe VA253 launch on 15 August 2020 introduced two small changes that increased lift capacity by about ; a lighter avionics and guidance equipment bay and modified pressure vents on the payload fairing which will be required for the future James Webb Space Telescope launch. It also debuted a location system using Galileo navigation satellites.\nGTO payload weight records.\nOn 22 April 2011, the Ariane 5 ECA flight VA-201 broke a commercial record, lifting Yahsat 1A and Intelsat New Dawn with a total payload weight of 10,064 kg to transfer orbit. This record was later broken again during the launch of Ariane 5 ECA flight VA-208 on 2 August 2012, lifting a total of 10,182 kg into the planned geosynchronous transfer orbit, which was broken again 6 months later on flight VA-212 with 10,317 kg sent towards geosynchronous transfer orbit. In June 2016, the GTO record was raised to 10,730 kg, on the first rocket in history that carried a satellite dedicated to financial institutions. The payload record was pushed a further 5 kg to on 24 August 2016 with the launch of Intelsat 33e and Intelsat 36. On 1 June 2017, the payload record was broken again to carrying ViaSat-2 and Eutelsat 172B.\nVA241 anomaly.\nOn 25 January 2018, an Ariane 5 ECA launched SES-14 and Al Yah 3 satellites. About 9 minutes and 28 seconds after launch, a telemetry loss occurred between the rocket and the ground controllers. It was later confirmed, about 1 hour and 20 minutes after launch, that both satellites were successfully separated from the upper stage and were in contact with their respective ground controllers, but that their orbital inclinations were incorrect as the guidance systems might have been compromised. Therefore, both satellites conducted orbital procedures, extending commissioning time. SES-14 needed about 8 weeks longer than planned commissioning time, meaning that entry into service was reported early September instead of July. Nevertheless, SES-14 is still expected to be able to meet the designed lifetime. This satellite was originally to be launched with more propellant reserve on a Falcon 9 rocket since the Falcon 9, in this specific case, was intended to deploy this satellite into a high inclination orbit that would require more work from the satellite to reach its final geostationary orbit. The Al Yah 3 was also confirmed healthy after more than 12 hours without further statement, and like SES-14, Al Yah 3's maneuvering plan was also revised to still fulfill the original mission. As of 16 February 2018, Al Yah 3 was approaching the intended geostationary orbit, after series of recovery maneuvers had been performed. The investigation showed that invalid inertial units' azimuth value had sent the vehicle 17\u00b0 off course but to the intended altitude, they had been programmed for the standard geostationary transfer orbit of 90\u00b0 when the payloads were intended to be 70\u00b0 for this supersynchronous transfer orbit mission, 20\u00b0 off norme. This mission anomaly marked the end of 82nd consecutive success streak since 2003.\nLaunch history.\nLaunch statistics.\nAriane 5 rockets have accumulated 109 launches since 1996, 104 of which were successful, yielding a success rate. Between April 2003 and December 2017, Ariane 5 flew 82 consecutive missions without failure, but the rocket suffered a partial failure in January 2018.\nList of launches.\nAll launches are from Centre Spatial Guyanais, Kourou, ELA-3.\nFuture payloads and scheduled flights.\n&lt;section begin=Scheduled_flights/&gt;\n&lt;section end=Scheduled_flights/&gt;"}
{"id": "3112", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3112", "title": "Arianespace", "text": "Arianespace SA is a European company founded in 1980 as the world's first commercial launch service provider. It undertakes the operation and marketing of the Ariane programme. The company offers a number of different launch vehicles: the heavy-lift Ariane 5 for dual launches to geostationary transfer orbit, the Soyuz-2 as a medium-lift alternative, and the solid-fueled Vega for lighter payloads.\n, Arianespace had launched more than 550 satellites in 254 launches over years (236 Ariane missions minus the first 8 flights handled by CNES, 17 Soyuz-2 missions and 9 Vega missions). The first commercial flight managed by the new entity was Spacenet F1 launched on 23 May 1984. Arianespace uses the Guiana Space Center in French Guiana as its main launch site. Through shareholding in Starsem, it can also offer commercial Soyuz launches from the Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. It has its headquarters in \u00c9vry-Courcouronnes, Essonne, France.\nHistory.\nThe formation of Arianespace SA is closely associated with the desire of several European nations to pursue joint collaboration in the field of space exploration and the formation of a pan-national organisation, the European Space Agency (ESA), to oversee such undertaking during 1973. Prior to the ESA's formation, France had been lobbying for the development of a new European expendable launch system to serve as a replacement for the Europa rocket. Accordingly, one of the first programmes launched by the ESA was the Ariane heavy launcher. The express purpose of this launcher was to facilitate the delivery of commercial satellites into geosynchronous orbit.\nFrance was the largest stakeholder in the Ariane development programme. French aerospace manufacturer A\u00e9rospatiale served as the prime contractor and held responsibility for performing the integration of all sections of the vehicle, while French engine manufacturer Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Europ\u00e9enne de Propulsion (SEP) provided both the first and second stage engines (the third stage engines were produced by Air Liquide and German aerospace manufacturer MBB). Other major companies involved included the French electronics firm Matra, Swedish manufacturer Volvo, and German aircraft producer Dornier Flugzeugwerke. Development of the third stage was a major focus point for the project - prior to Ariane, only the United States had ever flown a launcher that utilised hydrogen-powered upper stages.\nImmediately following the successful first test launch of an Ariane 1 on 24 December 1979, the French space agency Centre national d'\u00e9tudes spatiales (CNES) and the ESA created a new company, \"Arianespace\", for the purpose of promoting, marketing, and managing Ariane operations. According to Arianespace, at the time of its establishment, it was the world's first launch services company. Following a further three test launches, the first commercial launch took place on 10 September 1982, which ended in failure as a result of a turbopump having failed in the third stage. The six remaining flights of the Ariane 1 were successful, with the final flight occurring during February 1986. As a result of these repeated successes, orders for the Ariane launcher quickly mounted up; by early 1984, a total of 27 satellites had been booked to use Ariane, which was estimated to be half of the world's market at that time. As a result of the commercial success, after the tenth Ariane mission was flown, the ESA formally transferred responsibility for Ariane over to Arianespace.\nBy early 1986, the Ariane 1, along with its Ariane 2 and Ariane 3 derivates, were the dominant launcher on the world market. The Ariane 2 and Ariane 3 were short-lived platforms while the more extensive Ariane 4 was being developed; it was a considerably larger and more flexible launcher that the earlier members of its family, having been intended from the onset to compete with the upper end of launchers worldwide. In comparison, while the Ariane 1 had a typical weight of 207 tonnes and could launch payloads of up to 1.7 tonnes into orbit; the larger Ariane 4 had a typical weight of 470 tonnes and could orbit payloads of up to 4.2 tonnes. Despite this, the Ariane 4 was actually 15 per cent smaller than the Ariane 3.\nOn 15 June 1988, the first successful launch of the Ariane 4 was conducted. This maiden flight was considered a success, having placed multiple satellites into orbit. For the V50 launch onwards, an improved third stage, known as the \"H10+\", was adopted for the Ariane 4, which raised the rocket's overall payload capacity by 110\u00a0kg and increased its burn time by 20 seconds.\nEven prior to the first flight of the Ariane 4 in 1988, development of a successor, designated as the Ariane 5, had already commenced. In January 1985, the Ariane 5 was officially adopted as an ESA programme, and began an eleven-year development and test program to the first launch in 1996. It lacked the high levels of commonality that the Ariane 4 had with its predecessors, and had been designed not only for launching heavier payloads of up to 5.2 tonnes and at a 20 per cent cost reduction over the Ariane 4, but for a higher margin of safety due to the fact that the Ariane 5 was designed to conduct crewed space launches as well, being intended to transport astronauts using the proposed Hermes space vehicle. Development of the Ariane 5 was not without controversy as some ESA members considered the mature Ariane 4 platform to be more suited for meeting established needs for such launchers; it was reportedly for this reason that Britain chose not to participate in the Ariane 5 programme. For several years, Ariane 4 and Ariane 5 launchers were operated interchangeably; however, it was eventually decided to terminate all Ariane 4 operations in favour of concentrating on the newer Ariane 5.\nDuring the mid-1990s, French firms A\u00e9rospatiale and SEP, along with Italian firm Bombrini-Parodi-Delfino (BPD), held discussions on the development of a proposed Ariane Complementary Launcher (ACL). Simultaneously, Italy championed the concept of a new solid-propellant satellite launcher, referred to as Vega. During March 2003, contracts for Vega's development were signed by the ESA and CNES; Italy provided 65 per cent of funding while six additional nations contributed the remainder. In May 2004, it was reported that a contract was signed between commercial operator Arianespace and prime contractor ELV to perform vehicle integration at Kourou, French Guiana. On 13 February 2012, the first launch of the Vega took place; it was reported as being an \"apparently perfect flight\". Since entering commercial service, Arianespace markets Vega as a launch system tailored for missions to polar and sun-synchronous orbits.\nDuring 2002, the ESA announced the Arianespace Soyuz programme in cooperation with Russia; a launch site for Soyuz was constructed as the Guiana Space Centre, while the Soyuz launch vehicle was modified for use at the site. On 4 February 2005, both funding and final approval for the initiative were granted. Arianespace had offered launch services on the modified Soyuz ST-B to its clients. On 21 October 2011, Arianespace launched the first Soyuz rocket ever from outside former Soviet territory. The payload consisted of two Galileo navigation satellites. Since 2011, Arianespace has ordered a total of 23 Soyuz rockets, enough to cover its needs until 2019 at a pace of three to four launches per year.\nOn 21 January 2019, ArianeGroup and Arianespace announced that it had signed a one-year contract with the ESA to study and prepare for a mission to the Moon to mine regolith.\nIn 2020, Arianespace suspended operations for nearly two months due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Operations were suspended on 18 March and are, as of 29 April, expected to resume on 11 May. The return to operations will observe a number of new health and safety guidelines including social distancing in the workplace.\nCompany and infrastructure.\nArianespace \"is the marketing and sales organization for the European space industry and various component suppliers.\"\nThe primary shareholders of Arianespace are its suppliers, in various European nations.\nArianespace had 24 shareholders in 2008, 21 in 2014,\nand just 17 .\nIn 2015, Arianespace shareholding was restructured due to the creation of Airbus Safran Launchers (later renamed ArianeGroup), which is tasked with developing and manufacturing the Ariane 6 carrier rocket. Industrial groups Airbus and Safran pooled their shares along with the French government's CNES stake to form a partnership company holding just under 74% of Arianespace shares, while the remaining 26% is spread across suppliers in nine countries including further Airbus subsidiaries.\nCorporate management.\n, the Arianespace management team was:\nCompetition and pricing.\nBy 2004, Arianespace reportedly held more than 50% of the world market for boosting satellites to geostationary transfer orbit (GTO).\nDuring the 2010s, the disruptive force represented by the new sector entrant SpaceX forced Arianespace to cut back on its workforce and focus on cost-cutting to decrease costs to remain competitive against the new low-cost entrant in the launch sector. In the midst of pricing pressure from such companies, during November 2013, Arianespace announced that it was enacting pricing flexibility for the \"lighter satellites\" that it carries to Geostationary orbits aboard its Ariane 5. According to Arianespace's managing director: \"It's quite clear there's a very significant challenge coming from SpaceX (...) therefore things have to change (...) and the whole European industry is being restructured, consolidated, rationalised and streamlined.\"\nDuring early 2014, Arianespace was considering requesting additional subsidies from European governments to face competition from SpaceX and unfavorable changes in the Euro-Dollar exchange rate. The company had halved subsidy support by \u20ac100m per year since 2002 but the fall in the value of the US Dollar meant Arianespace was losing \u20ac60m per year due to currency fluctuations on launch contracts. SpaceX had reportedly begun to take market share from Arianespace, Eutelsat CEO Michel de Rosen, a major customer of Arianespace, stated that: \"Each year that passes will see SpaceX advance, gain market share and further reduce its costs through economies of scale.\"\nBy September 2014, Arianespace had reportedly to sign four additional contracts for lower slots on an Ariane 5 SYLDA dispenser for satellites that otherwise could be flown on a SpaceX launch vehicle; this was claimed to have been allowed via cost reductions; it had signed a total of 11 contracts by that point, while two additional ones that were under advanced negotiations. At the time, Arianespace has a backlog of launches worth billion with 38 satellites to be launched on Ariane 5, 7 on Soyuz and 9 on Vega, claiming 60% of the global satellite launch market.\nLaunch vehicles.\nCurrently Arianespace operates 3 launch vehicles, including two versions of Ariane 5:\nAdditionally Arianespace offers optional back-up launch service on H-IIA through Launch Services Alliance.\nAriane launch vehicles.\nSince the first launch in 1979, there have been several versions of the Ariane launch vehicle:\nThe new Ariane 6 vehicle is in development. It would have a similar payload capacity to the Ariane 5 but have considerably lower costs. Tentatively, its first flight is planned for 2021."}
{"id": "3114", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3114", "title": "Amiga 500 Plus", "text": "The Commodore Amiga 500 Plus (often A500 Plus or simply A500+) is an enhanced version of the original Amiga 500 computer. It was notable for introducing new versions of Kickstart and Workbench, and for some minor improvements in the custom chips, known as the Enhanced Chip Set (or ECS).\nIntroduction.\nThe A500+ was released in several markets (including many European countries), but was never sold officially in the U.S.\nAlthough officially introduced in 1992, some Amiga 500 Plus units had already been sold (masquerading as Amiga 500 models, and with no prior announcement) during late 1991. It has been speculated that Commodore had already sold out the remaining stocks of Amiga 500s, before the run-up to the profitable Christmas sales period. In order to make enough A500s before Christmas, Commodore used stocks of the new 8A revision motherboards destined for the A500+. Many users were unaware that they were purchasing anything other than a standard Amiga 500. Although the Amiga 500+ was an improvement to the Amiga 500, it was minor. It was discontinued and replaced by the Amiga 600 in summer 1992, making it the shortest-lived Amiga model.\nReason for design.\nCommodore created the A500+ for a couple of reasons. The first was cost reduction; minor changes were made to the motherboard to make it cheaper to produce. It was also so that Commodore could introduce the new version of the Amiga Operating system, 2.04.\nCompatibility problems.\nDue to the new Kickstart, quite a few popular games (such as Treasure Island Dizzy, SWIV, and Lotus Esprit Turbo Challenge) failed to work on the Amiga 500+, and some people took them back to dealers demanding an original Kickstart 1.3 Amiga 500. This problem was solved by third parties who produced Kickstart ROM switching boards, that could allow the Amiga 500+ to be downgraded to Kickstart 1.2 or 1.3. It also encouraged game developers to use better programming habits, which was important since Commodore already had plans for the introduction of the next-generation Amiga 1200 computer. A program, Relokick, was also released (and included with an issue of CU Amiga) which loaded a Kickstart 1.3 ROM image into memory and booted the machine into Kickstart 1.3, allowing incompatible software to run. In some cases, updated compatible versions of games were later released, such as budget versions of Lotus 1 and SWIV."}
{"id": "3116", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3116", "title": "Accumulator (computing)", "text": "In a computer's central processing unit (CPU), the accumulator is a register in which intermediate arithmetic and logic results are stored. \nWithout a register like an accumulator, it would be necessary to write the result of each calculation (addition, multiplication, shift, etc.) to main memory, perhaps only to be read right back again for use in the next operation. \nAccess to main memory is slower than access to a register like an accumulator because the technology used for the large main memory is slower (but cheaper) than that used for a register. Early electronic computer systems were often split into two groups, those with accumulators and those without.\nModern computer systems often have multiple general-purpose registers that can operate as accumulators, and the term is no longer as common as it once was. However, to simplify their design, a number of special-purpose processors still use a single accumulator.\nBasic concept.\nMathematical operations often take place in a stepwise fashion, using the results from one operation as the input to the next. For instance, a manual calculation of a worker's weekly payroll might look something like:\nA computer program carrying out the same task would follow the same basic sequence of operations, although the values being looked up would all be stored in computer memory. In early computers, the number of hours would likely be held on a punch card and the pay rate in some other form of memory, perhaps a magnetic drum. Once the multiplication is complete, the result needs to be placed somewhere. On a \"drum machine\" this would likely be back to the drum, an operation that takes considerable time. And then the very next operation has to read that value back in, which introduces another considerable delay.\nAccumulators dramatically improve performance in systems like these by providing a scratchpad area where the results of one operation can be fed to the next one for little or no performance penalty. In the example above, the basic weekly pay would be calculated and placed in the accumulator, which could then immediately be used by the income tax calculation. This removes one save and one read operation from the sequence, operations that generally took tens to hundreds of times as long as the multiplication itself.\nAccumulator machines.\nAn accumulator machine, also called a 1-operand machine, or a CPU with \"accumulator-based architecture\", is a kind of CPU where, although it may have several registers, the CPU mostly stores the results of calculations in one special register, typically called \"the accumulator\". Almost all early computers were accumulator machines with only the high-performance \"supercomputers\" having multiple registers. Then as mainframe systems gave way to microcomputers, accumulator architectures were again popular with the MOS 6502 being a notable example. Many 8-bit microcontrollers that are still popular as of 2014, such as the PICmicro and 8051, are accumulator-based machines.\nModern CPUs are typically 2-operand or 3-operand machines. The additional operands specify which one of many general purpose registers (also called \"general purpose accumulators\") are used as the source and destination for calculations. These CPUs are not considered \"accumulator machines\".\nThe characteristic which distinguishes one register as being the accumulator of a computer architecture is that the accumulator (if the architecture were to have one) would be used as an \"implicit\" operand for arithmetic instructions. For instance, a CPU might have an instruction like: codice_1 that adds the value read from memory location \"memaddress\" to the value in the accumulator, placing the result back in the accumulator. The accumulator is not identified in the instruction by a register number; it is implicit in the instruction and no other register can be specified in the instruction. Some architectures use a particular register as an accumulator in some instructions, but other instructions use register numbers for explicit operand specification.\nHistory of the computer accumulator.\nAny system that uses a single \"memory\" to store the result of multiple operations can be considered an accumulator. J. Presper Eckert refers to even the earliest adding machines of Gottfried Leibniz and Blaise Pascal as accumulator-based systems. Percy Ludgate was the first to conceive a multiplier-accumulator (MAC) in his Analytical Machine of 1909.\nHistorical convention dedicates a register to \"the accumulator\", an \"arithmetic organ\" that literally accumulates its number during a sequence of arithmetic operations:\nJust a few of the instructions are, for example (with some modern interpretation):\nNo convention exists regarding the names for operations from registers to accumulator and from accumulator to registers. Tradition (e.g. Donald Knuth's (1973) hypothetical MIX computer), for example, uses two instructions called \"load accumulator\" from register/memory (e.g. \"LDA r\") and \"store accumulator\" to register/memory (e.g. \"STA r\"). Knuth's model has many other instructions as well.\nNotable accumulator-based computers.\nThe 1945 configuration of ENIAC had 20 accumulators, which could operate in parallel. Each one could store an eight decimal digit number and add to it (or subtract from it) a number it received. Most of IBM's early binary \"scientific\" computers, beginning with the vacuum tube IBM 701 in 1952, used a single 36-bit accumulator, along with a separate multiplier/quotient register to handle operations with longer results. The IBM 650, a decimal machine, had one 10 digit distributor and two ten-digit accumulators; the IBM 7070, a later, transistorized decimal machine had three accumulators. The IBM System/360, and Digital Equipment Corporation's PDP-6, had 16 general purpose registers, although the PDP-6 and its successor, the PDP-10, call them accumulators.\nThe 12-bit PDP-8 was one of the first minicomputers to use accumulators, and inspired many later machines. The PDP-8 had but one accumulator. The HP 2100 and Data General Nova had 2 and 4 accumulators. The Nova was created when this follow-on to the PDP-8 was rejected in favor of what would become the PDP-11. The Nova provided four accumulators, AC0-AC3, although AC2 and AC3 could also be used to provide offset addresses, tending towards more generality of usage for the registers. The PDP-11 had 8 general purpose registers, along the lines of the System/360 and PDP-10; most later CISC and RISC machines provided multiple general purpose registers.\nEarly 4-bit and 8-bit microprocessors such as the 4004, 8008 and numerous others, typically had single accumulators. The 8051 microcontroller has two, a primary accumulator and a secondary accumulator, where the second is used by instructions only when multiplying (MUL AB) or dividing (DIV AB); the former splits the 16-bit result between the two 8-bit accumulators, whereas the latter stores the quotient on the primary accumulator A and the remainder in the secondary accumulator B. As a direct descendant of the 8008, the 8080, and the 8086, the modern ubiquitous Intel x86 processors still uses the primary accumulator EAX and the secondary accumulator EDX for multiplication and division of large numbers. For instance, MUL ECX will multiply the 32-bit registers ECX and EAX and split the 64-bit result between EAX and EDX. However, MUL and DIV are special cases; other arithmetic-logical instructions (ADD, SUB, CMP, AND, OR, XOR, TEST) may specify any of the eight registers EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI as the accumulator (i.e. left operand and destination). This is also supported for multiply if the upper half of the result is not required. x86 is thus a fairly general register architecture, despite being based on an accumulator model. The 64-bit extension of x86, x86-64, has been further generalized to 16 instead of 8 general registers."}
{"id": "3117", "revid": "39203244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3117", "title": "Abu Zubaydah", "text": "Abu Zubaydah ( ; , \"Ab\u016b Zubaydah\"; born March 12, 1971, as Zayn al-Abidin Muhammad Husayn) is a Palestinian national currently held by the U.S. in the Guantanamo Bay detention camp in Cuba. He is held under the authority of Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists (AUMF).\nZubaydah was captured in Pakistan in March 2002 and has been in United States custody ever since, including four-and-a-half years in the secret prison network of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). He was transferred among prisons in various countries including a year in Poland, as part of a United States' extraordinary rendition program. During his time in CIA custody, Zubaydah was extensively interrogated; he was water-boarded 83 times and subjected to numerous other torture techniques including forced nudity, sleep deprivation, confinement in small dark boxes, deprivation of solid food, stress positions, and physical assaults. Videotapes of some of Zubaydah's interrogations are amongst those destroyed by the CIA in 2005.\nZubaydah and ten other \"high-value detainees\" were transferred to Guantanamo in September 2006. He and other former CIA detainees are held in Camp 7, where conditions are the most isolating. At his Combatant Status Review Tribunal in 2007, Zubaydah said he was told that the CIA realized he was not significant.\nOn July 24, 2014, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ordered the Polish government to pay Zubaydah \u20ac100,000 in damages. It also awarded him \u20ac30,000 to cover his costs. Poland cooperated with the US, allowing the CIA to hold and torture Zubaydah on its territory in 2002\u20132003. Zubaydah said through his US lawyer that he would be donating the full \u20ac100,000 in damages to victims of torture. Joseph Margulies was a lawyer for Zubaydah.\nBiography and early activities.\nAccording to his younger brother Hesham, they had eight siblings. Hesham remembers his older brother \"as a happy-go-lucky guy, and something of a womanizer.\" Born in Saudi Arabia, Zubaydah moved to the West Bank as a teenager, where he joined in Palestinian demonstrations against the Israelis. Zubaydah is reported to have studied computer science in Mysore, India prior to his travel to Afghanistan/Pakistan at the age of 20 in 1991. He joined the mujahideen in the Afghan civil war, perhaps serving under Mohamad Kamal Elzahabi. In 1992, Zubaydah was injured in a mortar shell blast, which left shrapnel in his head and caused severe memory loss, as well as the loss of the ability to speak for over one year.\nZubaydah eventually became involved in the jihad training site known as the Khalden training camp, where he oversaw the flow of recruits and obtained passports and paperwork for men transferring out of Khalden. He may also have worked as an instructor there. Although originally described as an al-Qaeda training camp, this alleged connection, which has been used as justification for holding Zubaydah and others as enemy combatants, has come under scrutiny from multiple sources,&lt;ref name=\"9/11CommissionReport\"&gt;\"9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States\" , July 22, 2006&lt;/ref&gt; and the camp may have shut its doors in 2001 in response to an ideological division with al-Qaeda.\nBy 1999, the United States government was attempting to surveil Zubaydah. By March 2000, United States officials were reporting that Zubaydah was a \"senior bin Laden official\", the \"former head of Egypt-based Islamic Jihad\", a \"trusted aide\" to bin Laden with \"growing power\", who had \"played a key role in the East Africa embassy attacks\". Zubaydah was convicted \"in absentia\" in Jordan and sentenced to death by a Jordanian court for his role in plots to bomb U.S. and Israeli targets there. A senior Middle East security official said Zubaydah had directed the Jordanian cell and was part of \"bin Laden's inner circle\".\nIn August 2001, the classified FBI report, \"Bin Ladin Determined To Strike in US\", said that the foiled millennium bomber, Ahmed Ressam, had confessed that Zubaydah had encouraged him to blow up the Los Angeles airport and facilitated his mission. The report said that Zubaydah was also planning his own attack on the U.S. However, when Ressam was tried in December 2001, federal prosecutors did not try to connect him to Zubaydah or refer to any of this supposed evidence in its case. After the trial, Ressam recanted his confession, saying he had been coerced into giving it.\nAccording to a psychological evaluation conducted upon his capture, Zubaydah allegedly served as Osama bin Laden's senior lieutenant and counter-intelligence officer (i.e. third or fourth highest-ranking member of al Qaeda), managed a network of training camps, was involved in every major terrorist operation carried out by al Qaeda (including the planning of 9/11), and was engaged in planning future terrorist attacks against U.S. interests. These statements were widely echoed by members of the Bush administration and other US officials. Zubaydah's perceived \"value\" as a detainee would later be used by President George W. Bush to justify the use of \"enhanced interrogation techniques\" and Zubaydah's detention in secret CIA prisons around the world. However, Zubaydah's connection to al Qaeda is now often said to have been\u2014according to Rebecca Gordon writing about \"The al Qaeda Leader Who Wasn't\"\u2014a fictitious charge. Others have said instead that it is merely overstated, and in response to his habeas corpus petition, the U.S. Government stated in 2009 that it did not contend Zubaydah had any involvement with the 9/11 attacks, or that he had even been a member of al Qaeda, simply because they did not have to: \"In simple terms, the issue in this habeas corpus action is Petitioner's conduct\", rather than membership or inclination: \"Petitioner's personal philosophy is not relevant except to the extent that it is reflected in his actions\".\nCapture.\nOn March 28, 2002, CIA and FBI agents, in conjunction with Pakistani intelligence agency, raided several safe houses in Pakistan searching for Zubaydah. Zubaydah was apprehended from one of the targeted safe houses in Faisalabad, Pakistan. The Pakistani intelligence service had paid a small amount for a tip on his whereabouts. The United States paid far more to Pakistan for its assistance; a CIA source later said: \"We paid $10\u00a0million for Zubaydah.\"\nDuring the raid, Zubaydah was shot in the thigh, the testicle, and the stomach with rounds from an AK-47 assault rifle. Not recognized at first, he was piled into a pickup truck along with other prisoners by the Pakistani forces, until a senior CIA officer identified him. He was taken by the Pakistanis to a Pakistani hospital nearby and treated for his wounds. The attending doctor told the CIA lead officer of the group which apprehended Zubaydah, that he had never before seen a patient survive such severe wounds. The CIA flew in a doctor from Johns Hopkins University to ensure Zubaydah would survive during transit out of Pakistan.\nHis pocket litter supposedly contained two bank cards which showed that he had access to Saudi and Kuwaiti bank accounts; most al-Qaeda members used the preferred, untraceable hawala banking. According to James Risen: \"It is not clear whether an investigation of the cards simply fell through the cracks, or whether they were ignored because no one wanted to know the answers about connections between al Qaeda and important figures in the Middle East \u2013 particularly in Saudi Arabia.\" One of Risen's sources chalks up the failure to investigate the cards to incompetence rather than foul play: \"The cards were sent back to Washington and were never fully exploited. I think nobody ever looked at them because of incompetence.\"\nWhen Americans investigated the cards, Risen wrote that they worked with \"a Muslim financier with a questionable past, and with connections to the Afghan Taliban, al Qaeda, and Saudi intelligence. ... Saudi intelligence officials had seized all of the records related to the card from the Saudi financial institution in question; the records then disappeared. There was no longer any way to trace the money that had gone into the account.\"\nA search of the safehouse turned up Zubaydah's personal 10,000-page diaries, in which he recorded his thoughts as a young boy, old man, and at his current age. What appears to be split personalities is how Zubaydah was piecing his memories together after his 1992 shrapnel head wound. As part of his therapy to regain his memories, he began recording the diary that detailed his life, emotions, and what people were telling him. He split information into categories, such as what he knew about himself and what people told him, and listed them under different names to distinguish one set from the other. This was later incorrectly interpreted by some analysts reviewing the diary as symptoms of split personality disorder.\nZubaydah was handed to the CIA. Reports later alleged that he was transferred to secret CIA-operated prisons, known as black sites, in Pakistan, Thailand, Afghanistan, Poland, Northern Africa, and Diego Garcia. Historically, renditions of prisoners to countries which commit torture have been illegal. A memo written by John Yoo and signed by Jay Bybee of the Office of the Legal Counsel, DOJ, days before Zubaydah's capture, provided a legal opinion providing for CIA renditions of detainees to places such as Thailand. In March 2009, the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee launched a year-long study on how the CIA operated the secret prisons, or black sites, around the world.\nTop U.S. officials approved torture techniques.\nIn the spring of 2002, immediately following the capture of Zubaydah, top Bush administration officials, Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of State Colin Powell, CIA Director George Tenet, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and US Attorney General John Ashcroft discussed at length whether or not the CIA could legally use harsh techniques against him. Condoleezza Rice specifically mentioned the SERE program during the meeting, saying, \"I recall being told that U.S. military personnel were subjected to training to certain physical and psychological interrogation techniques...\"\nIn addition, in 2002 and 2003, the administration briefed several Democratic Congressional leaders on the proposed \"enhanced interrogation techniques.\" These congressional leaders included Nancy Pelosi, the future Speaker of the House, and Representative Jane Harman. Congressional officials have stated that the attitude in the briefings ranged from \"quiet acquiescence, if not downright support.\" The documents show that top U.S. Officials were intimately involved in the discussion and approval of the harsher interrogation techniques used on Zubaydah. Condoleezza Rice ultimately told the CIA the harsher interrogation tactics were acceptable, and Dick Cheney stated, \"I signed off on it; so did others.\" During the discussions, US Attorney General John Ashcroft is reported as saying, \"Why are we talking about this in the White House? History will not judge this kindly.\"\nTorture drawings.\nIn December 2019, the New York Times published an article in partnership with the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting which was based upon drawings made by Zubaydah, showing how he was tortured in \"vivid and disturbing ways.\" The article includes some of the drawings as well as a link to a 61 page report titled \"How America Tortures,\" and asserts that Zubaydah was never a member of Al Qaeda. In the article Zubaydah gives gruesome details of numerous types of torture including being locked up inside a small box called \u201cthe dog box\u201d for \u201ccountless hours,\u201d which caused muscle contractions. \u201cThe very strong pain,\u201d he said, \u201cmade me scream unconsciously.\u201d\nInterrogation of Zubaydah.\nZubaydah was interrogated by two separate interrogation teams: the first from the FBI and one from the CIA. Ali Soufan, one of the FBI interrogators, later testified in 2009 on these issues to the Senate Committee that was investigating detainee treatment. Soufan, who witnessed part of the CIA interrogation of Zubaydah, described his treatment under the CIA as torture. The International Committee of the Red Cross and others later reached the same conclusion. While in CIA custody, Zubaydah lost his left eye.\nBecause of the urgency felt about the interrogation of Zubaydah, the CIA had consulted with the president about how to proceed. The General Counsel of the CIA asked for a legal opinion from the Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice about what was permissible during interrogation.\nAugust 2002 memo.\nIn early July 2002, the Associate General Council CTC/Legal Group started drafting a memo to the Attorney General requesting the approval of \"aggressive\" interrogation methods, which otherwise would be prohibited under the provisions of Section 2340-2340B, Title 18, United States Code, on Abu Zubaydah. This memo, drafted by Office of Legal Counsel, Jay Bybee and his assistant John Yoo, is also referred to as the first Torture Memo. Addressed to CIA acting General Counsel John A. Rizzo at his request, the purpose of the memo was to describe and authorize specific enhanced interrogation techniques to be used on Zubaydah. On July 26, 2002, Deputy Assistant Attorney General John Yoo informed the CIA that Attorney General John Ashcroft had approved waterboarding of Abu Zubaydah.\nJournalists including Jane Mayer, Joby Warrick and Peter Finn, and Alex Koppelman have reported the CIA was already using these harsh tactics before the memo authorizing their use was written, and that it was used to provide after-the-fact legal support for harsh interrogation techniques. A Department of Justice 2009 report regarding prisoner abuses reportedly stated the memos were prepared one month after Zubaydah had already been subjected to the specific techniques authorized in an August 1, 2002, memo. John Kiriakou stated in July 2009 that Zubaydah was waterboarded in the early summer of 2002, months before the August 1, 2002, memo was written.\nThe memo described ten techniques which the interrogators wanted to use: \"(1) attention grasp, (2) walling, (3) facial hold, (4) facial slap (insult slap), (5) cramped confinement, (6) wall standing, (7) stress positions, (8) sleep deprivation, (9) insects placed in a confinement box, and (10) the waterboard.\" Many of the techniques were, until then, generally considered illegal. Many other techniques developed by the CIA were held to constitute inhumane and degrading treatment and torture under the United Nations Convention against Torture and Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\nAs reported later, many of these interrogation techniques were previously considered illegal under U.S. and international law and treaties at the time of Zubaydah's capture. For instance, the United States had prosecuted Japanese military officials after World War II and American soldiers after the Vietnam War for waterboarding. Since 1930, the United States had defined sleep deprivation as an illegal form of torture. Many other techniques developed by the CIA constitute inhuman and degrading treatment and torture under the United Nations Convention against Torture, and Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\nEnsuing interrogation.\nAt a CIA black site in Thailand, Zubaydah was subjected to various forms of increasingly harsh interrogation techniques, including temperature extremes, music played at debilitating volumes, and sexual humiliation. Zubaydah was also subjected to beatings, isolation, waterboarding, long-time standing, continuous cramped confinement, and sleep deprivation.\nFormer CIA analyst and case officer John Kiriakou asserted that while Zubaydah was in CIA custody, a box of cockroaches were poured on him inside of a coffin he was confined to for two weeks, because of an irrational fear Zubaydah has of cockroaches.\nDuring Zubaydah's interrogation, President Bush learned he was on painkillers for his wounds and was proving resistant. He said to the CIA director George Tenet, \"Who authorized putting him on pain medication?\" It was later reported that Zubaydah was denied painkillers during his interrogation.\nWaterboarding.\nZubaydah was one of three or more high-value detainees to be waterboarded. The Bush administration in 2007 said that Zubaydah had been waterboarded once. John Kiriakou, a CIA officer who had seen the cables regarding Zubaydah's interrogation, publicly said in 2009 that Zubaydah was waterboarded once for 35 seconds before he started talking.\nIntelligence sources claimed as early as 2008 that Zubaydah had been waterboarded no less than ten times in the span of one week. Zubaydah was waterboarded 83 times within the month of August 2002, the month the CIA was authorized to use this enhanced interrogation techniques for him. In January 2010, Kiriakou, in a memoir, said, \"Now we know that Zubaydah was waterboarded eighty-three times in a single month, raising questions about how much useful information he actually supplied.\"\n2003 transfer to Guantanamo.\nIn August 2010, the Associated Press reported that the CIA, having concluded its agents had gotten most of the information from Zubaydah, in September 2003 transferred him and three other high-value detainees to Guantanamo. They were held at what was informally known as \"Strawberry Fields,\" a secret camp within the complex built especially for former CIA detainees. Concerned that a pending Supreme Court decision, \"Rasul v. Bush\" (2004), might go against the Bush administration and require providing the prisoners with counsel and having to reveal data about them, on March 27, 2004, the CIA took the four men back into custody and transported them out of Guantanamo to one of their secret sites. At the time, the moves were all kept secret.\nInternational Committee of the Red Cross report.\nIn February 2007, the International Committee of the Red Cross concluded a report on the treatment of \"14 high-value detainees,\" who had been held by the CIA and, after September 2006, by the military at Guantanamo. The ICRC described the twelve enhanced interrogation techniques covered in the OLC memos to the CIA: suffocation by water (which is described as \"torture\" by numerous US officials), prolonged stress standing position, beatings by use of a collar, beating and kicking, confinement in a box, prolonged nudity, sleep deprivation, exposure to cold temperature, prolonged shackling, threats of ill-treatment, forced shaving, and deprivation/restricted provision of solid food. Zubaydah was the only detainee of the 14 interviewed who had been subjected to all 12 of these interrogation techniques. He was also the only one of the 14 detainees to be put into close confinement.\nMay 30, 2005, memo.\nThe final memo mentioned Zubaydah several times. It claimed that due to the enhanced interrogation techniques, Zubaydah \"provided significant information on two operatives, [including] Jos\u00e9 Padilla[,] who planned to build and detonate a 'dirty bomb' in the Washington DC area.\" This claim is strongly disputed by Ali Soufan, the FBI interrogator who first interrogated Zubaydah following his capture, by traditional means. He said the most valuable information was gained before torture was used. Other intelligence officers have also disputed that claim. Soufan, when asked in 2009 by Senator Sheldon Whitehouse during a Congressional hearing if the memo was incorrect, testified that it was. The memo noted that not all of the waterboarding sessions were necessary for Zubaydah, since the on-scene interrogation team determined he had stopped producing actionable intelligence. The memo reads:\nThis is not to say that the interrogation program has worked perfectly. According to the IG Report, the CIA, at least initially, could not always distinguish detainees who had information but were successfully resisting interrogation from those who did not actually have the information. See IG Report at 83\u201385. On at least one occasion, this may have resulted in what might be deemed in retrospect to have been the unnecessary use of enhanced techniques. On that occasion, although the on-scene interrogation team judged Zubaydah to be compliant, elements within CIA Headquarters still believed he was withholding information. See id at 84. At the direction of CIA Headquarters, interrogators therefore used the waterboard one more time on Zubaydah.\nJohn McLaughlin, former acting CIA director, stated in 2006, \"I totally disagree with the view that the capture of Zubaydah was unimportant. Zubaydah was woven through all of the intelligence prior to 9/11 that signaled a major attack was coming, and his capture yielded a great deal of important information.\"\nIn his 2007 memoir, former CIA Director George Tenet writes:\nA published report in 2006 contended that Zubaydah was mentally unstable and that the administration had overstated his importance. Baloney. Zubaydah had been at the crossroads of many al-Qa'ida operations and was in position to \u2013 and did \u2013 share critical information with his interrogators. Apparently, the source of the rumor that Zubaydah was unbalanced was his personal diary, in which he adopted various personas. From that shaky perch, some junior Freudians leapt to the conclusion that Zubaydah had multiple personalities. In fact, Agency psychiatrists eventually determined that in his diary he was using a sophisticated literary device to express himself.\nIntelligence obtained from Zubaydah and its aftereffects.\nZubaydah's capture was touted as the biggest of the War on Terror until that of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.&lt;ref name=\"9/11MastermindNabbed\"&gt;\"Alleged 9-11 Mastermind Nabbed\" CBS News, March 1, 2003&lt;/ref&gt; The director of the FBI stated Zubaydah's capture would help deter future attacks.\nIn a speech in 2006, President Bush claimed that Zubaydah revealed useful intelligence when enhanced interrogation was used, including identification of two important suspects and information that allegedly helped foil a terrorist attack on American soil. These claims directly conflict with the reports of the FBI agents who first interrogated Zubaydah. He gave them the names before torture was used, and the third piece of information came from other sources who had been receiving crucial pieces of information from him without the use of harsher techniques, as well as other government officials.\nIraq War (2003).\nThe Bush administration relied on some of Zubaydah's claims in justifying the invasion of Iraq. U.S. officials stated that the allegations that Iraq and al-Qaeda were linked in the training of people on chemical weapons came from Zubaydah. The officials noted there was no independent verification of his claims.\nThe U.S. government included statements made by Zubaydah in regards to al Qaeda's ability to obtain a dirty bomb to show a link between Iraq and al Qaeda. According to a Senate Intelligence Committee report of 2004, Zubaydah said that \"he had heard that an important al Qaeda associate, Abu Musab al Zarqawi, and others had good relationships with Iraqi intelligence.\" However, the year before, in June 2003, Zubaydah and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed were reported as saying there was no link between Saddam Hussein and al Qaeda.\nIn the Senate Armed Services Committee 2008 report on the abuses of detainees, the Bush administration was described as having applied pressure to interrogators to find a link between Iraq and al Qaeda prior to the Iraq War. Major Paul Burney, a psychiatrist with the United States Army, said to the committee, \"while we were [at Guantanamo] a large part of the time we were focused on trying to establish a link between al Qaeda and Iraq and we were not being successful.\" He said that higher-ups were \"frustrated\" and applied \"more and more pressure to resort to measures that might produce more immediate results.\"\nColonel Lawrence B. Wilkerson, the former chief of staff for former Secretary of State Colin Powell said:\nLikewise, what I have learned is that as the administration authorized harsh interrogation in April and May 2002\u2014well before the Justice Department had rendered any legal opinion\u2014its principal priority for intelligence was not aimed at pre-empting another terrorist attack on the U.S. but discovering a smoking gun linking Iraq and al-Qa'ida.\nSo furious was this effort that on one particular detainee, even when the interrogation team had reported to Cheney's office that their detainee \"was compliant\" (meaning the team recommended no more torture), the VP's office ordered them to continue the enhanced methods. The detainee had not revealed any al-Qa'ida-Baghdad contacts yet. This ceased only after Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi, under waterboarding in Egypt, \"revealed\" such contacts. Of course, later we learned that al-Libi revealed these contacts only to get the torture to stop.\nConcerns.\nIn 2004, media coverage of Abu Zubaydah began listing him as a \"disappeared\" prisoner, claiming he had no access to the International Red Cross. In February 2005, the CIA was reported as uncomfortable keeping Zubaydah in indefinite custody. Less than 18 months later, Zubaydah and the thirteen other high-value detainees who had been in secret CIA custody were transferred to the Guantanamo Bay detention camp.\nAfter his transfer, the CIA denied access to Zubaydah. In 2008, the Office of the Inspector General, Department of Justice, complained that it had been prevented from seeing him, although it was conducting a study of the US treatment of its detainees.\nZubaydah's mental health.\nSome people are concerned about Zubaydah's mental stability and how that has affected information he has given to interrogators. Ron Suskind noted in his book, \"The One Percent Doctrine: Deep Inside America's Pursuit of Its Enemies Since 9/11\" (2006), that Zubaydah was mentally ill or disabled due to a severe head injury. He described Zubaydah as keeping a diary \"in the voice of three people: Hani 1, Hani 2, and Hani 3\"\u2014a boy, a young man and a middle-aged alter ego. Zubaydah's diaries spanned ten years and recorded in numbing detail \"what he ate, or wore, or trifling things [people] said.\" Dan Coleman, then the FBI's top al-Qaeda analyst, told a senior bureau official, \"This guy is insane, certifiable, split personality.\" According to Suskind, this judgment was \"echoed at the top of CIA and was briefed to the President and Vice President.\" Coleman stated Zubaydah was a \"safehouse keeper\" with mental problems, who \"claimed to know more about al-Qaeda and its inner workings than he really did.\"\nJoseph Margulies, Zubaydah's co-counsel, wrote in an op-ed in the \"Los Angeles Times\":\nPartly as a result of injuries he suffered while he was fighting the communists in Afghanistan, partly as a result of how those injuries were exacerbated by the CIA and partly as a result of his extended isolation, Zubaydah's mental grasp is slipping away. Today, he suffers blinding headaches and has permanent brain damage. He has an excruciating sensitivity to sounds, hearing what others do not. The slightest noise drives him nearly insane. In the last two years alone, he has experienced about 200 seizures. Already, he cannot picture his mother's face or recall his father's name. Gradually, his past, like his future, eludes him.\nLegal status.\nPresident Bush referred to Zubaydah in a speech to Congress September 2006 requesting a bill to authorize military commissions, following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Hamdan v. Rumsfeld\" (2006) that held the tribunals as formulated by the executive branch were unconstitutional. Congress rapidly passed legislation that was signed by the president.\nLess than one month after Zubaydah's capture, Justice Department officials said Zubaydah was \"a near-ideal candidate for a tribunal trial.\" Several months later in 2002, US officials said there was \"no rush\" to try Zubaydah via military commission.\nAt his Combatant Status Review Tribunal in 2007, Zubaydah said he was told that the CIA realized he was not significant.\n\"They told me, 'Sorry, we discover that you are not Number 3, not a partner, not even a fighter,' \" said Zubaydah, speaking in broken English, according to the new transcript of a Combatant Status Review Tribunal held at the U.S. military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.\nAbu Zubaydah's lawyers, including Joseph Margulies and George Brent Mickum IV, filed a lawsuit in July 2008 challenging his detention at Guantanamo Bay detention camps after the \"Boumediene v. Bush\" ruling. As of 2015, the judge overseeing the case, Richard W. Roberts, has failed to rule on any motions related to the case, even the preliminary ones. This has led Zubaydah's lawyers to file motion asking Judge Roberts to recuse himself for nonfeasance in January 2015. On March 16, 2016, Roberts retired early from the federal bench, citing unspecified health issues.\nThe U.S. Government has not officially charged Zubaydah with any crimes. The Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture reported that Zubaydah's CIA interrogators wanted him to \"remain in isolation and incommunicado for the remainder of his life.\"\nJoint Review Task Force.\nWhen he assumed office in January 2009, President Barack Obama made a number of promises about the future of Guantanamo.\nHe promised the use of torture would cease at the camp. He promised to institute a new review system. That new review system was composed of officials from six departments, where the OARDEC reviews were conducted entirely by the Department of Defense. When it reported back, a year later, the Joint Review Task Force classified some individuals as too dangerous to be transferred from Guantanamo, even though there was no evidence to justify laying charges against them. On April 9, 2013, that document was made public after a Freedom of Information Act request.\nZayn al-lbidin Muhammed Husayn was one of the 71 individuals deemed too innocent to charge but too dangerous to release. Although Obama promised that those deemed too innocent to charge but too dangerous to release would start to receive reviews from a Periodic Review Board, less than a quarter of men have received a review.\nEuropean Court of Human Rights decision.\nOn 24 July 2014, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled that Poland had violated the European Convention on Human Rights when it cooperated with US allowing the CIA to hold and torture Zubaydah and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri on its territory in 2002\u20132003. The court ordered the Polish government to pay each of the men \u20ac100,000 in damages. It also awarded Zubaydah \u20ac30,000 to cover his costs.\nOn 31 May 2018, the ECHR ruled that Romania and Lithuania also violated the rights of Abu Zubaydah and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri in 2003\u20132005 and in 2005\u20132006 respectively, and Lithuania and Romania were ordered to pay 100,000 euros in damages each to Abu Zubaydah and Abd al-Nashiri."}
{"id": "3118", "revid": "1012751136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3118", "title": "Arithmetic", "text": "Arithmetic (from the Greek \u1f00\u03c1\u03b9\u03b8\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2 \"arithmos\", 'number' and \u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae [\u03c4\u03ad\u03c7\u03bd\u03b7], \"tik\u00e9 [t\u00e9chne]\", 'art' or 'craft') is a branch of mathematics that consists of the study of numbers, especially the properties of the traditional operations on them\u2014addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation and extraction of roots. Arithmetic is an elementary part of number theory, and number theory is considered to be one of the top-level divisions of modern mathematics, along with algebra, geometry, and analysis. The terms \"arithmetic\" and \"higher arithmetic\" were used until the beginning of the 20th\u00a0century as synonyms for \"number theory\", and are sometimes still used to refer to a wider part of number theory.\nHistory.\nThe prehistory of arithmetic is limited to a small number of artifacts, which may indicate the conception of addition and subtraction, the best-known being the Ishango bone from central Africa, dating from somewhere between 20,000 and 18,000\u00a0BC, although its interpretation is disputed.\nThe earliest written records indicate the Egyptians and Babylonians used all the elementary arithmetic operations as early as 2000\u00a0BC. These artifacts do not always reveal the specific process used for solving problems, but the characteristics of the particular numeral system strongly influence the complexity of the methods. The hieroglyphic system for Egyptian numerals, like the later Roman numerals, descended from tally marks used for counting. In both cases, this origin resulted in values that used a decimal base, but did not include positional notation. Complex calculations with Roman numerals required the assistance of a counting board (or the Roman abacus) to obtain the results.\nEarly number systems that included positional notation were not decimal, including the sexagesimal (base\u00a060) system for Babylonian numerals, and the vigesimal (base\u00a020) system that defined Maya numerals. Because of this place-value concept, the ability to reuse the same digits for different values contributed to simpler and more efficient methods of calculation.\nThe continuous historical development of modern arithmetic starts with the Hellenistic civilization of ancient Greece, although it originated much later than the Babylonian and Egyptian examples. Prior to the works of Euclid around 300\u00a0BC, Greek studies in mathematics overlapped with philosophical and mystical beliefs. For example, Nicomachus summarized the viewpoint of the earlier Pythagorean approach to numbers, and their relationships to each other, in his \"Introduction to Arithmetic\".\nGreek numerals were used by Archimedes, Diophantus and others in a positional notation not very different from the modern notation. The ancient Greeks lacked a symbol for zero until the Hellenistic period, and they used three separate sets of symbols as digits: one set for the units place, one for the tens place, and one for the hundreds. For the thousands place, they would reuse the symbols for the units place, and so on. Their addition algorithm was identical to the modern method, and their multiplication algorithm was only slightly different. Their long division algorithm was the same, and the digit-by-digit square root algorithm, popularly used as recently as the 20th century, was known to Archimedes (who may have invented it). He preferred it to Hero's method of successive approximation because, once computed, a digit does not change, and the square roots of perfect squares, such as 7485696, terminate immediately as 2736. For numbers with a fractional part, such as 546.934, they used negative powers of 60\u2014instead of negative powers of 10 for the fractional part 0.934.\nThe ancient Chinese had advanced arithmetic studies dating from the Shang Dynasty and continuing through the Tang Dynasty, from basic numbers to advanced algebra. The ancient Chinese used a positional notation similar to that of the Greeks. Since they also lacked a symbol for zero, they had one set of symbols for the units place, and a second set for the tens place. For the hundreds place, they then reused the symbols for the units place, and so on. Their symbols were based on the ancient counting rods. The exact time where the Chinese started calculating with positional representation is unknown, though it is known that the adoption started before 400\u00a0BC. The ancient Chinese were the first to meaningfully discover, understand, and apply negative numbers. This is explained in the \"Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\" (\"Jiuzhang Suanshu\"), which was written by Liu Hui dated back to 2nd century BC.\nThe gradual development of the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system independently devised the place-value concept and positional notation, which combined the simpler methods for computations with a decimal base, and the use of a digit representing 0. This allowed the system to consistently represent both large and small integers\u2014an approach which eventually replaced all other systems. In the early the Indian mathematician Aryabhata incorporated an existing version of this system in his work, and experimented with different notations. In the 7th\u00a0century, Brahmagupta established the use of\u00a00 as a separate number, and determined the results for multiplication, division, addition and subtraction of zero and all other numbers\u2014except for the result of division by zero. His contemporary, the Syriac bishop Severus Sebokht (650\u00a0AD) said, \"Indians possess a method of calculation that no word can praise enough. Their rational system of mathematics, or of their method of calculation. I mean the system using nine symbols.\" The Arabs also learned this new method and called it \"hesab\".\nAlthough the Codex Vigilanus described an early form of Arabic numerals (omitting\u00a00) by 976\u00a0AD, Leonardo of Pisa (Fibonacci) was primarily responsible for spreading their use throughout Europe after the publication of his book \"Liber Abaci\" in 1202. He wrote, \"The method of the Indians (Latin \"Modus Indorum\") surpasses any known method to compute. It's a marvelous method. They do their computations using nine figures and symbol zero\".\nIn the Middle Ages, arithmetic was one of the seven liberal arts taught in universities.\nThe flourishing of algebra in the medieval Islamic world, and also in Renaissance Europe, was an outgrowth of the enormous simplification of computation through decimal notation.\nVarious types of tools have been invented and widely used to assist in numeric calculations. Before Renaissance, they were various types of abaci. More recent examples include slide rules, nomograms and mechanical calculators, such as Pascal's calculator. At present, they have been supplanted by electronic calculators and computers.\nArithmetic operations.\nThe basic arithmetic operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, although arithmetic also includes more advanced operations, such as manipulations of percentages, square roots, exponentiation, logarithmic functions, and even trigonometric functions, in the same vein as logarithms (prosthaphaeresis). Arithmetic expressions must be evaluated according to the intended sequence of operations. There are several methods to specify this, either\u2014most common, together with infix notation\u2014explicitly using parentheses and relying on precedence rules, or using a prefix or postfix notation, which uniquely fix the order of execution by themselves. Any set of objects upon which all four arithmetic operations (except division by zero) can be performed, and where these four operations obey the usual laws (including distributivity), is called a field.\nAddition.\nAddition, denoted by the symbol formula_1, is the most basic operation of arithmetic. In its simple form, addition combines two numbers, the \"addends\" or \"terms\", into a single number, the \"sum\" of the numbers (such as or ).\nAdding finitely many numbers can be viewed as repeated simple addition; this procedure is known as summation, a term also used to denote the definition for \"adding infinitely many numbers\" in an infinite series. Repeated addition of the number\u00a01 is the most basic form of counting; the result of adding is usually called the successor of the original number.\nAddition is commutative and associative, so the order in which finitely many terms are added does not matter. \nThe number has the property that, when added to any number, it yields that same number; so, it is the identity element of addition, or the additive identity.\nFor every number , there is a number denoted , called the \"opposite\" of , such that and . So, the opposite of is the inverse of with respect to addition, or the additive inverse of . For example, the opposite of is , since .\nAddition can also be interpreted geometrically, as in the following example.\nIf we have two sticks of lengths \"2\" and \"5\", then, if the sticks are aligned one after the other, the length of the combined stick becomes \"7\", since .\nSubtraction.\nSubtraction, denoted by the symbol formula_2, is the inverse operation to addition. Subtraction finds the \"difference\" between two numbers, the \"minuend\" minus the \"subtrahend\": Resorting to the previously established addition, this is to say that the difference is the number that, when added to the subtrahend, results in the minuend: \nFor positive arguments and holds:\nIn any case, if minuend and subtrahend are equal, the difference \nSubtraction is neither commutative nor associative. For that reason, the construction of this inverse operation in modern algebra is often discarded in favor of introducing the concept of inverse elements (as sketched under ), where subtraction is regarded as adding the additive inverse of the subtrahend to the minuend, that is, . The immediate price of discarding the binary operation of subtraction is the introduction of the (trivial) unary operation, delivering the additive inverse for any given number, and losing the immediate access to the notion of difference, which is potentially misleading when negative arguments are involved.\nFor any representation of numbers, there are methods for calculating results, some of which are particularly advantageous in exploiting procedures, existing for one operation, by small alterations also for others. For example, digital computers can reuse existing adding-circuitry and save additional circuits for implementing a subtraction, by employing the method of two's complement for representing the additive inverses, which is extremely easy to implement in hardware (negation). The trade-off is the halving of the number range for a fixed word length.\nA formerly wide spread method to achieve a correct change amount, knowing the due and given amounts, is the \"counting up method\", which does not explicitly generate the value of the difference. Suppose an amount \"P\" is given in order to pay the required amount \"Q\", with \"P\" greater than \"Q\". Rather than explicitly performing the subtraction \"P\" \u2212 \"Q\" = \"C\" and counting out that amount \"C\" in change, money is counted out starting with the successor of \"Q\", and continuing in the steps of the currency, until \"P\" is reached. Although the amount counted out must equal the result of the subtraction \"P\" \u2212 \"Q\", the subtraction was never really done and the value of \"P\" \u2212 \"Q\" is not supplied by this method.\nMultiplication.\nMultiplication, denoted by the symbols formula_3 or formula_4, is the second basic operation of arithmetic. Multiplication also combines two numbers into a single number, the \"product\". The two original numbers are called the \"multiplier\" and the \"multiplicand\", mostly both are simply called \"factors\".\nMultiplication may be viewed as a scaling operation. If the numbers are imagined as lying in a line, multiplication by a number greater than\u00a01, say \"x\", is the same as stretching everything away from\u00a00 uniformly, in such a way that the number\u00a01 itself is stretched to where \"x\" was. Similarly, multiplying by a number less than\u00a01 can be imagined as squeezing towards\u00a00, in such a way that\u00a01 goes to the multiplicand.\nAnother view on multiplication of integer numbers (extendable to rationals but not very accessible for real numbers) is by considering it as repeated addition. For example. corresponds to either adding times a , or times a , giving the same result. There are different opinions on the advantageousness of these paradigmata in math education.\nMultiplication is commutative and associative; further, it is distributive over addition and subtraction. The multiplicative identity is\u00a01, since multiplying any number by\u00a01 yields that same number. The multiplicative inverse for any number except\u00a0 is the reciprocal of this number, because multiplying the reciprocal of any number by the number itself yields the multiplicative identity . \u00a0is the only number without a multiplicative inverse, and the result of multiplying any number and is again One says that is not contained in the multiplicative group of the numbers.\nThe product of \"a\" and \"b\" is written as or . When \"a\" or \"b\" are expressions not written simply with digits, it is also written by simple juxtaposition:\u00a0\"ab\". In computer programming languages and software packages (in which one can only use characters normally found on a keyboard), it is often written with an asterisk:\u00a0codice_1.\nAlgorithms implementing the operation of multiplication for various representations of numbers are by far more costly and laborious than those for addition. Those accessible for manual computation either rely on breaking down the factors to single place values and applying repeated addition, or on employing tables or slide rules, thereby mapping multiplication to addition and vice versa. These methods are outdated and are gradually replaced by mobile devices. Computers utilize diverse sophisticated and highly optimized algorithms, to implement multiplication and division for the various number formats supported in their system.\nDivision.\nDivision, denoted by the symbols formula_5 or formula_6, is essentially the inverse operation to multiplication. Division finds the \"quotient\" of two numbers, the \"dividend\" divided by the \"divisor\". Any dividend divided by zero is undefined. For distinct positive numbers, if the dividend is larger than the divisor, the quotient is greater than\u00a01, otherwise it is less than or equal to\u00a01 (a similar rule applies for negative numbers). The quotient multiplied by the divisor always yields the dividend.\nDivision is neither commutative nor associative. So as explained in , the construction of the division in modern algebra is discarded in favor of constructing the inverse elements with respect to multiplication, as introduced in . Hence division is the multiplication of the dividend with the reciprocal of the divisor as factors, that is, \nWithin the natural numbers, there is also a different but related notion called Euclidean division, which outputs two numbers after \"dividing\" a natural (numerator) by a natural (denominator): first a natural (quotient), and second a natural (remainder) such that and \nIn some contexts, including computer programming and advanced arithmetic, division is extended with another output for the remainder. This is often treated as a separate operation, the Modulo operation, denoted by the symbol formula_7 or the word formula_8, though sometimes a second output for one \"divmod\" operation. In either case, Modular arithmetic has a variety of use cases. Different implementations of division (floored, truncated, Euclidean, etc) correspond with different implementations of modulus.\nFundamental theorem of arithmetic.\nThe fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that any integer greater than 1 has a unique prime factorization (a representation of a number as the product of prime factors), excluding the order of the factors. For example, 252 only has one prime factorization:\nEuclid's Elements first introduced this theorem, and gave a partial proof (which is called Euclid's lemma). The fundamental theorem of arithmetic was first proven by Carl Friedrich Gauss.\nThe fundamental theorem of arithmetic is one of the reasons why 1 is not considered a prime number. Other reasons include the sieve of Eratosthenes, and the definition of a prime number itself (a natural number greater than 1 that cannot be formed by multiplying two smaller natural numbers.).\nDecimal arithmetic.\nDecimal representation refers exclusively, in common use, to the written numeral system employing arabic numerals as the digits for a radix 10\u00a0(\"decimal\") positional notation; however, any numeral system based on powers of\u00a010, e.g., Greek, Cyrillic, Roman, or Chinese numerals may conceptually be described as \"decimal notation\" or \"decimal representation\".\nModern methods for four fundamental operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) were first devised by Brahmagupta of India. This was known during medieval Europe as \"Modus Indoram\" or Method of the Indians. Positional notation (also known as \"place-value notation\") refers to the representation or encoding of numbers using the same symbol for the different orders of magnitude (e.g., the \"ones place\", \"tens place\", \"hundreds place\") and, with a radix point, using those same symbols to represent fractions (e.g., the \"tenths place\", \"hundredths place\"). For example, 507.36 denotes 5\u00a0hundreds (102), plus 0\u00a0tens (101), plus 7\u00a0units (100), plus 3\u00a0tenths (10\u22121) plus 6\u00a0hundredths (10\u22122).\nThe concept of 0 as a number comparable to the other basic digits is essential to this notation, as is the concept of\u00a00's use as a placeholder, and as is the definition of multiplication and addition with\u00a00. The use of\u00a00 as a placeholder and, therefore, the use of a positional notation is first attested to in the Jain text from India entitled the \"Lokavibh\u00e2ga\", dated 458\u00a0AD and it was only in the early 13th\u00a0century that these concepts, transmitted via the scholarship of the Arabic world, were introduced into Europe by Fibonacci using the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system.\nAlgorism comprises all of the rules for performing arithmetic computations using this type of written numeral. For example, addition produces the sum of two arbitrary numbers. The result is calculated by the repeated addition of single digits from each number that occupies the same position, proceeding from right to left. An addition table with ten rows and ten columns displays all possible values for each sum. If an individual sum exceeds the value\u00a09, the result is represented with two digits. The rightmost digit is the value for the current position, and the result for the subsequent addition of the digits to the left increases by the value of the second (leftmost) digit, which is always one (if not zero). This adjustment is termed a \"carry\" of the value\u00a01.\nThe process for multiplying two arbitrary numbers is similar to the process for addition. A multiplication table with ten rows and ten columns lists the results for each pair of digits. If an individual product of a pair of digits exceeds\u00a09, the \"carry\" adjustment increases the result of any subsequent multiplication from digits to the left by a value equal to the second (leftmost) digit, which is any value from (). Additional steps define the final result.\nSimilar techniques exist for subtraction and division.\nThe creation of a correct process for multiplication relies on the relationship between values of adjacent digits. The value for any single digit in a numeral depends on its position. Also, each position to the left represents a value ten times larger than the position to the right. In mathematical terms, the exponent for the radix (base) of\u00a010 increases by\u00a01 (to the left) or decreases by\u00a01 (to the right). Therefore, the value for any arbitrary digit is multiplied by a value of the form\u00a010\"n\" with integer\u00a0\"n\". The list of values corresponding to all possible positions for a single digit is written \nRepeated multiplication of any value in this list by\u00a010 produces another value in the list. In mathematical terminology, this characteristic is defined as closure, and the previous list is described as closed under multiplication. It is the basis for correctly finding the results of multiplication using the previous technique. This outcome is one example of the uses of number theory.\nCompound unit arithmetic.\nCompound unit arithmetic is the application of arithmetic operations to mixed radix quantities such as feet and inches; gallons and pints; pounds, shillings and pence; and so on. Before decimal-based systems of money and units of measure, compound unit arithmetic was widely used in commerce and industry.\nBasic arithmetic operations.\nThe techniques used in compound unit arithmetic were developed over many centuries and are well documented in many textbooks in many different languages. In addition to the basic arithmetic functions encountered in decimal arithmetic, compound unit arithmetic employs three more functions:\nKnowledge of the relationship between the various units of measure, their multiples and their submultiples forms an essential part of compound unit arithmetic.\nPrinciples of compound unit arithmetic.\nThere are two basic approaches to compound unit arithmetic:\nThe addition operation is carried out from right to left; in this case, pence are processed first, then shillings followed by pounds. The numbers below the \"answer line\" are intermediate results.\nThe total in the pence column is 25. Since there are 12 pennies in a shilling, 25 is divided by\u00a012 to give\u00a02 with a remainder of\u00a01. The value\u00a0\"1\" is then written to the answer row and the value\u00a0\"2\" carried forward to the shillings column. This operation is repeated using the values in the shillings column, with the additional step of adding the value that was carried forward from the pennies column. The intermediate total is divided by\u00a020 as there are 20\u00a0shillings in a pound. The pound column is then processed, but as pounds are the largest unit that is being considered, no values are carried forward from the pounds column.\nFor the sake of simplicity, the example chosen did not have farthings.\nOperations in practice.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries various aids were developed to aid the manipulation of compound units, particularly in commercial applications. The most common aids were mechanical tills which were adapted in countries such as the United Kingdom to accommodate pounds, shillings, pennies and farthings, and ready reckoners, which are books aimed at traders that catalogued the results of various routine calculations such as the percentages or multiples of various sums of money. One typical booklet that ran to 150\u00a0pages tabulated multiples \"from one to ten thousand at the various prices from one farthing to one pound\".\nThe cumbersome nature of compound unit arithmetic has been recognized for many years\u2014in 1586, the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin published a small pamphlet called \"De Thiende\" (\"the tenth\") in which he declared the universal introduction of decimal coinage, measures, and weights to be merely a question of time. In the modern era, many conversion programs, such as that included in the Microsoft Windows\u00a07 operating system calculator, display compound units in a reduced decimal format rather than using an expanded format (e.g. \"2.5\u00a0ft\" is displayed rather than ).\nNumber theory.\nUntil the 19th century, \"number theory\" was a synonym of \"arithmetic\". The addressed problems were directly related to the basic operations and concerned primality, divisibility, and the solution of equations in integers, such as Fermat's last theorem. It appeared that most of these problems, although very elementary to state, are very difficult and may not be solved without very deep mathematics involving concepts and methods from many other branches of mathematics. This led to new branches of number theory such as analytic number theory, algebraic number theory, Diophantine geometry and arithmetic algebraic geometry. Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is a typical example of the necessity of sophisticated methods, which go far beyond the classical methods of arithmetic, for solving problems that can be stated in elementary arithmetic.\nArithmetic in education.\nPrimary education in mathematics often places a strong focus on algorithms for the arithmetic of natural numbers, integers, fractions, and decimals (using the decimal place-value system). This study is sometimes known as algorism.\nThe difficulty and unmotivated appearance of these algorithms has long led educators to question this curriculum, advocating the early teaching of more central and intuitive mathematical ideas. One notable movement in this direction was the New Math of the 1960s and 1970s, which attempted to teach arithmetic in the spirit of axiomatic development from set theory, an echo of the prevailing trend in higher mathematics.\nAlso, arithmetic was used by Islamic Scholars in order to teach application of the rulings related to Zakat and Irth. This was done in a book entitled \"The Best of Arithmetic\" by Abd-al-Fattah-al-Dumyati.\nThe book begins with the foundations of mathematics and proceeds to its application in the later chapters."}
{"id": "3120", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3120", "title": "Andersonville, Georgia", "text": "Andersonville is a city in Sumter County, Georgia, United States. As of the 2010 census, the city had a population of 255. It is located in the southwest part of the state, approximately southwest of Macon on the Central of Georgia railroad. During the American Civil War, it was the site of a prisoner-of-war camp, which is now Andersonville National Historic Site.\nAndersonville is part of the Americus Micropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe hamlet of Anderson was named for John Anderson, a director of the South Western Railroad in 1853 when it was extended from Oglethorpe to Americus. It was known as Anderson Station until the US post office was established in November 1855. The government changed the name of the station from \u201cAnderson\u201d to \u201cAndersonville\u201d in order to avoid confusion with the post office in Anderson, South Carolina.\nDuring the Civil War, the Confederate army established Camp Sumter at Andersonville to house incoming Union prisoners of war. The overcrowded Andersonville Prison was notorious for its bad conditions, and nearly 13,000 prisoners died there. After the war, Henry Wirz was convicted for war crimes related to the command of the camp. His trial was later regarded as unfair by several groups, and a monument in his honor has been erected in Andersonville by the United Daughters of the Confederacy. \nThe town also served as a supply depot during the war period. It included a post office, a depot, a blacksmith shop and stable, a couple of general stores, two saloons, a school, a Methodist church, and about a dozen houses. (Ben Dykes, who owned the land on which the prison was built, was both depot agent and postmaster.)\nUntil the establishment of the prison, the area was entirely dependent on agriculture, supported by dark reddish brown sandy loams later mapped as Greenville and Red Bay soil series. After the close of the prison and end of the war, the town continued economically dependent on agriculture, primarily the cultivation of cotton as a commodity crop.\nIt was not until 1968, when the large-scale mining of kaolin, bauxitic kaolin, and bauxite was begun by Mulcoa, Mullite Company of America, that the town was dramatically altered. This operation exploited of scrub oak wilderness into a massive mining and refining operation. The company now ships more than 2000 tons of refined ore from Andersonville each week.\nIn 1974, long-time mayor Lewis Easterlin and a group of concerned citizens decided to promote tourism in the town, redeveloping Main Street to look much as it did during the American Civil War. The city of Andersonville and the Andersonville National Historic Site, location of the prison camp, are now tourist attractions.\nDemographics.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 331 people, 124 households, and 86 families residing in the city. The population density was 254.1 people per square mile (98.3/km2). There were 142 housing units at an average density of 109.0 per square mile (42.2/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 65.26% White and 34.74% African American. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.21% of the population.\nThere were 124 households, out of which 34.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.0% were married couples living together, 17.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.6% were non-families. 26.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.21.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 27.8% under the age of 18, 9.4% from 18 to 24, 31.4% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 105.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $29,107, and the median income for a family was $30,972. Males had a median income of $26,591 versus $20,000 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,168. About 19.8% of families and 23.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.3% of those under age 18 and 13.5% of those age 65 or over."}
{"id": "3121", "revid": "27234849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3121", "title": "Andersonville", "text": "Andersonville may refer to:"}
{"id": "3122", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3122", "title": "Agra Canal", "text": "The Agra Canal is an important Indian irrigation work which starts from Okhla in Delhi. The Agra canal originates from Okhla barrage, downstream of Nizamuddin bridge. \nThe Canal receives its water from the Yamuna River at Okhla, about 10\u00a0km to the south of New Delhi. The weir across the Yamuna was constructed of locally quarried stone. It was about 800-yard long, and rises seven-feet above the summer level of the river.\nFrom Okhla the canal follows a route south then southeast for in the high land between the Khari-Nadi and the Yamuna and finally joins the Utanga River about below Agra. Navigable branches connect the canal with Mathura and Agra.\nThe canal irrigates about 1.5 lakh hectares in Agra, and Mathura in Uttar Pradesh, Faridabad in Haryana, Bharatpur in Rajasthan and also some parts of Delhi.\nHistory.\nThe canal opened in 1874. In the beginning, it was available for navigation, in Delhi, erstwhile Gurgaon, Mathura and Agra Districts, and Bharatpur State. Later, navigation was stopped in 1904 and the canal has since then, been exclusively used for irrigation purposes only. At present the canal does not flow in district Gurgaon, but only in Faridabad, which was earlier a part of Gurgaon.\nIn recent times, Agra canal is an important landmark which separates Greater Faridabad from Faridabad.\nReferences.\nThe Agra Canal also has many places to visit along its coast."}
{"id": "3123", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3123", "title": "Amakusa", "text": ", which means \"Heaven's Grass,\" is a series of islands off the west coast of Kyushu, the southernmost of the four main islands of Japan.\nGeography.\nThe largest island of the Amakusa group is Shimoshima, which is 26.5 miles long and 13.5 miles at its widest (). It is situated at 32\u00b020'N, 130\u00b0E, separated from the rest of Kumamoto Prefecture by the Yatsushiro Sea.\nWhile lacking high mountains with only four peaks surpassing , the island terrain is ruggedly hilly. To cope with the lack of flat arable land, farming is carried out on a terrace system of cultivation.\nHistory.\nAmakusa, along with the neighboring Shimabara Peninsula, became the site of the Shimabara rebellion in the 17th century, led by Christians. Following the rebellion, Kakure Kirishitan, the Christians who had survived, continued to practice their faith in secret, despite severe persecution.\nEconomy.\nAmakusa produces a little coal and pottery stone, both being used by the potters of Hirado ware and Satsuma ware. Many kilns remain on the islands today, and pottery and pottery stone are still exported.\nAmakusa pottery has been recognised by the government. The retail company Muji brought out its own line of \"Hakuji\" home ware, which is produced out of ground translucent Amakusa stones kneaded into clay, using traditional techniques.\nPeople.\nHidenoshin Koyama, who built Thomas Blake Glover's House in Glover Garden, came from this island.\nKenta and Ko-shin, two of the three members of Wanima come from the island of Amakusa. \nGovernment.\nAt present, the islands are organized as Amakusa District, Amakusa City, and Kami-amakusa City, all of which are under the administration of Kumamoto Prefecture.\nTransport.\nThe islands are served by Amakusa Airfield, located on the north end of Shimoshima. The islands are connected to the mainland by the Five Bridges of Amakusa and by ferry from Hondo and Matsushima.\nThere are also ferries between the islands and the neighboring prefectures of Kagoshima Prefecture and Nagasaki Prefecture. The ferry from Oniike on the north Shimoshima to Kuchinotsu, at the southern tip of the Shimabara Peninsula, is run by the Shimabara Railway and operates hourly each day. The ferry boat from Tomioka Port in Reihoku, sailing north to Mogi in Nagasaki Prefecture, is operated by Yasuda Sangyo Kisen Co. Ltd.\nTwo ferries from Shinwa and Ushibuka, in the south of Shimoshima, connect Amakusa to Nagashima in Kagoshima Prefecture."}
{"id": "3124", "revid": "23129483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3124", "title": "Afterglow", "text": "An afterglow is a broad arch of whitish or pinkish sunlight in the sky that is scattered by fine particulates, like dust, suspended in the atmosphere. An afterglow may appear above the highest clouds in the hour of fading twilight or be reflected off high snowfields in mountain regions long after sunset. The particles produce a scattering effect upon the component parts of white light. The opposite of an afterglow is a foreglow, which occurs before sunrise.\nTrue alpenglow, which occurs long after sunset or long before sunrise, is caused by the backscattering of red sunlight by aerosols and fine dust particles low in the atmosphere. After sunset, alpenglow is an afterglow caused by the illumination of atmospheric particles by sunlight as it gets refracted and scattered through the Earth's atmosphere.\nThe high-energy and high-frequency light is scattered out the most, while the remaining low-energy and -frequency light reaches the observer on the horizon at twilight. The backscattering of this light further turns it pinkish to reddish. This period of time is referred to as the blue hour and is widely treasured by photographers and painters.\nThe afterglow persists until the Earth's shadow (terminator line) overtakes the sky above the observer as night falls and the stars appear, with Venus (the second-brightest celestial object after the Moon in the night sky) visible above the horizon opposite of the Belt of Venus around the antisolar point.\nAfter the 1883 eruption of the volcano Krakatoa, a remarkable series of red sunsets appeared worldwide. An enormous amount of exceedingly fine dust were blown to a great height by the volcano's explosion, and then globally diffused by the high atmospheric winds. Edvard Munch's painting \"The Scream\" possibly depicts an afterglow during this period."}
{"id": "3125", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3125", "title": "Ammonius Grammaticus", "text": "Ammonius Grammaticus (; ) was a 4th-century Egyptian priest who, after the destruction of the pagan temple at Alexandria (389), fled to Constantinople, where he became the tutor of the ecclesiastical historian Socrates.\nLife.\nAmmonius was formerly identified as the author of a treatise titled \"Peri homo\u00ed\u014dn kai diaph\u00f3r\u014dn l\u00e9xe\u014dn\" (\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u1f41\u03bc\u03bf\u03af\u03c9\u03bd \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03c6\u03cc\u03c1\u03c9\u03bd \u03bb\u03ad\u03be\u03b5\u03c9\u03bd, \"On the Differences of Synonymous Expressions\"). But it seems more probable that the real author was Herennius Philo of Byblus, who was born during the reign of Nero and lived till the reign of Hadrian, and that the treatise in its present form is a revision prepared by a later Byzantine editor, whose name may have been Ammonius.\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "3126", "revid": "2952402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3126", "title": "Angra Mainyu", "text": ""}
{"id": "3129", "revid": "983202026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3129", "title": "Algebraic closure", "text": "In mathematics, particularly abstract algebra, an algebraic closure of a field \"K\" is an algebraic extension of \"K\" that is algebraically closed. It is one of many closures in mathematics.\nUsing Zorn's lemma or the weaker ultrafilter lemma, it can be shown that every field has an algebraic closure, and that the algebraic closure of a field \"K\" is unique up to an isomorphism that fixes every member of \"K\". Because of this essential uniqueness, we often speak of \"the\" algebraic closure of \"K\", rather than \"an\" algebraic closure of \"K\".\nThe algebraic closure of a field \"K\" can be thought of as the largest algebraic extension of \"K\".\nTo see this, note that if \"L\" is any algebraic extension of \"K\", then the algebraic closure of \"L\" is also an algebraic closure of \"K\", and so \"L\" is contained within the algebraic closure of \"K\".\nThe algebraic closure of \"K\" is also the smallest algebraically closed field containing \"K\",\nbecause if \"M\" is any algebraically closed field containing \"K\", then the elements of \"M\" that are algebraic over \"K\" form an algebraic closure of \"K\".\nThe algebraic closure of a field \"K\" has the same cardinality as \"K\" if \"K\" is infinite, and is countably infinite if \"K\" is finite.\nExistence of an algebraic closure and splitting fields.\nLet formula_1 be the set of all monic irreducible polynomials in \"K\"[\"x\"].\nFor each formula_2, introduce new variables formula_3 where formula_4.\nLet \"R\" be the polynomial ring over \"K\" generated by formula_5 for all formula_6 and all formula_7. Write\nwith formula_9.\nLet \"I\" be the ideal in \"R\" generated by the formula_10. Since \"I\" is strictly smaller than \"R\",\nZorn's lemma implies that there exists a maximal ideal \"M\" in \"R\" that contains \"I\".\nThe field \"K\"1=\"R\"/\"M\" has the property that every polynomial formula_11 with coefficients in \"K\" splits as the product of formula_12 and hence has all roots in \"K\"1. In the same way, an extension \"K\"2 of \"K\"1 can be constructed, etc. The union of all these extensions is the algebraic closure of \"K\", because any polynomial with coefficients in this new field has its coefficients in some \"K\"n with sufficiently large \"n\", and then its roots are in \"K\"n+1, and hence in the union itself. \nIt can be shown along the same lines that for any subset \"S\" of \"K\"[\"x\"], there exists a splitting field of \"S\" over \"K\".\nSeparable closure.\nAn algebraic closure \"Kalg\" of \"K\" contains a unique separable extension \"Ksep\" of \"K\" containing all (algebraic) separable extensions of \"K\" within \"Kalg\". This subextension is called a separable closure of \"K\". Since a separable extension of a separable extension is again separable, there are no finite separable extensions of \"Ksep\", of degree &gt; 1. Saying this another way, \"K\" is contained in a \"separably-closed\" algebraic extension field. It is unique (up to isomorphism).\nThe separable closure is the full algebraic closure if and only if \"K\" is a perfect field. For example, if \"K\" is a field of characteristic \"p\" and if \"X\" is transcendental over \"K\", formula_13 is a non-separable algebraic field extension.\nIn general, the absolute Galois group of \"K\" is the Galois group of \"Ksep\" over \"K\"."}
{"id": "3130", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3130", "title": "Advanced Power Management", "text": "Advanced power management (APM) is an API developed by Intel and Microsoft and released in 1992 which enables an operating system running an IBM-compatible personal computer to work with the BIOS (part of the computer's firmware) to achieve power management.\nRevision 1.2 was the last version of the APM specification, released in 1996. ACPI is the successor to APM. Microsoft dropped support for APM in Windows Vista. The Linux kernel still mostly supports APM, though support for APM CPU idle was dropped in version 3.0.\nOverview.\nAPM uses a layered approach to manage devices. APM-aware applications (which include device drivers) talk to an OS-specific APM driver. This driver communicates to the APM-aware BIOS, which controls the hardware. There is the ability to opt out of APM control on a device-by-device basis, which can be used if a driver wants to communicate directly with a hardware device.\nCommunication occurs both ways; power management events are sent from the BIOS to the APM driver, and the APM driver sends information and requests to the BIOS via function calls. In this way the APM driver is an intermediary between the BIOS and the operating system.\nPower management happens in two ways; through the above-mentioned function calls from the APM driver to the BIOS requesting power state changes, and automatically based on device activity.\nPower management events.\nThere are 12 power events (such as standby, suspend and resume requests, and low battery notifications), plus OEM-defined events, that can be sent from the APM BIOS to the operating system. The APM driver regularly polls for event change notifications.\nPower Management Events:\nPower management functions:\nAPM functions.\nThere are 21 APM function calls defined that the APM driver can use to query power management statuses, or request power state transitions. Example function calls include letting the BIOS know about current CPU usage (the BIOS may respond to such a call by placing the CPU in a low-power state, or returning it to its full-power state), retrieving the current power state of a device, or requesting a power state change.\nPower states.\nThe APM specification defines system power states and device power states.\nSystem power states.\nAPM defines five power states for the computer system:\nDevice power states.\nAPM also defines power states that APM-aware hardware can implement. There is no requirement that an APM-aware device implement all states.\nThe four states are:\nCPU.\nThe CPU core (defined in APM as the CPU clock, cache, system bus and system timers) is treated specially in APM, as it is the last device to be powered down, and the first device to be powered back up. The CPU core is always controlled through the APM BIOS (there is no option to control it through a driver). Drivers can use APM function calls to notify the BIOS about CPU usage, but it is up to the BIOS to act on this information; a driver cannot directly tell the CPU to go into a power saving state.\nIn ATA drives.\nThe ATA specification defines APM provisions for hard drives via the subcommand , which specifies a trade-off between spin-down frequency and always-on performance. Unlike the BIOS-side APM, the ATA APM has never been deprecated."}
{"id": "3132", "revid": "12923157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3132", "title": "Adolphe Sax", "text": "Antoine-Joseph \"Adolphe\" Sax (; 6 November 1814 \u2013 7 February 1894) was a Belgian inventor and musician who created the saxophone in the early 1840s, patenting it in 1846. He also invented the saxotromba, saxhorn and saxtuba. He played the flute and clarinet.\nEarly life.\nAntoine-Joseph Sax was born on 6 November 1814, in Dinant, in what is now Belgium, to Charles-Joseph Sax and his wife Marie-Joseph (Masson). While his given name was Antoine-Joseph, he was referred to as Adolphe from childhood. His father and mother were instrument designers themselves, who made several changes to the design of the French horn. Adolphe began to make his own instruments at an early age, entering two of his flutes and a clarinet into a competition at the age of 15. He subsequently studied performance on those two instruments as well as voice at the Royal Conservatory of Brussels. He was Jewish.\nSax faced many brushes with death. Over the course of his childhood, he:\nHis mother once said that \"he's a child condemned to misfortune; he won't live.\" His neighbors called him \"little Sax, the ghost\".\nCareer and later life.\nAfter leaving the Royal Conservatory of Brussels, Sax began to experiment with new instrument designs, while his parents continued their business of making conventional instruments. Sax's first important invention was an improvement in bass clarinet design which he patented at the age of 24. He relocated permanently to Paris in 1842 and began working on a new set of valved bugles. While he did not invent this instrument, his examples were much more successful than those of his rivals and became known as saxhorns. Hector Berlioz was so enamoured of these that he arranged in February 1844 for one of his pieces to be played entirely on saxhorns. They were made in seven different sizes and paved the way for the creation of the flugelhorn. Today, saxhorns are sometimes used in concert bands, marching bands, and orchestras. The saxhorn also laid the groundwork for the modern euphonium.\nSax also developed the \"saxotromba\" family, valved brass instruments with narrower bore than the saxhorns, in 1845, though they survived only briefly.\nThe use of saxhorns spread rapidly. The saxhorn valves were accepted as state-of-the-art in their time and remain largely unchanged today. The advances made by Adolphe Sax were soon followed by the British brass band movement which exclusively adopted the saxhorn family of instruments. The Jedforest Instrumental Band formed in 1854 and The Hawick Saxhorn Band formed in 1855, within the Scottish Borders, a decade after saxhorn models became available.\nThe period around 1840 saw Sax inventing the \"clarinette-bourdon\", an early unsuccessful design of contrabass clarinet. On 28 June 1846 he patented the saxophone, intended for use in orchestras and military bands. By 1846 Sax had designed saxophones ranging from sopranino to subcontrabass although not all were built. Composer Hector Berlioz wrote approvingly of the new instrument in 1842 but despite his support saxophones did not become a standard part of the orchestra. Their ability to play technical passages easily like woodwinds yet project loudly like brass instruments led to their inclusion in military bands in France and elsewhere. His reputation helped secure him a job teaching at the Paris Conservatory in 1857.\nSax continued to make instruments later in life and presided over the new saxophone program at the Paris Conservatory. Rival instrument makers both attacked the legitimacy of his patents and were sued by Sax for patent infringement. These legal troubles continued for over 20 years. He was driven into bankruptcy three times: in 1852, 1873, and 1877.\nSax suffered from lip cancer between 1853 and 1858 but made a full recovery. In 1894 he died in poverty in Paris and was interred in section 5 (Avenue de Montebello) at the Cimeti\u00e8re de Montmartre in Paris.\nHonors and awards.\nIn his birthplace Dinant in Belgium the Mr Sax's House is dedicated to his life and saxophones."}
{"id": "3134", "revid": "5908908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3134", "title": "Aspirated consonant", "text": "In phonetics, aspiration is the strong burst of breath that accompanies either the release or, in the case of preaspiration, the closure of some obstruents. In English, aspirated consonants are allophones in complementary distribution with their unaspirated counterparts, but in some other languages, notably most Indian and East Asian languages, the difference is contrastive.\nIn dialects with aspiration, to feel or see the difference between aspirated and unaspirated sounds, one can put a hand or a lit candle in front of one's mouth, and say \"spin\" and then \"pin\" . One should either feel a puff of air or see a flicker of the candle flame with \"pin\" that one does not get with \"spin\".\nTranscription.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), aspirated consonants are written using the symbols for voiceless consonants followed by the aspiration modifier letter , a superscript form of the symbol for the voiceless glottal fricative . For instance, represents the voiceless bilabial stop, and represents the aspirated bilabial stop.\nVoiced consonants are seldom actually aspirated. Symbols for voiced consonants followed by , such as , typically represent consonants with murmured voiced release (see below). In the grammatical tradition of Sanskrit, aspirated consonants are called voiceless aspirated, and breathy-voiced consonants are called voiced aspirated.\nThere are no dedicated IPA symbols for degrees of aspiration and typically only two degrees are marked: unaspirated and aspirated . An old symbol for light aspiration was , but this is now obsolete. The aspiration modifier letter may be doubled to indicate especially strong or long aspiration. Hence, the two degrees of aspiration in Korean stops are sometimes transcribed or and , but they are usually transcribed and , with the details of voice onset time given numerically.\nPreaspirated consonants are marked by placing the aspiration modifier letter before the consonant symbol: represents the preaspirated bilabial stop.\nUnaspirated or tenuis consonants are occasionally marked with the modifier letter for unaspiration , a superscript equals sign: . Usually, however, unaspirated consonants are left unmarked: .\nPhonetics.\nVoiceless consonants are produced with the vocal folds open (spread) and not vibrating, and voiced consonants are produced when the vocal folds are fractionally closed and vibrating (modal voice). Voiceless aspiration occurs when the vocal folds remain open after a consonant is released. An easy way to measure this is by noting the consonant's voice onset time, as the voicing of a following vowel cannot begin until the vocal folds close.\nIn some languages, such as Navajo, aspiration of stops tends to be phonetically realised as voiceless velar airflow; aspiration of affricates is realised as an extended length of the frication.\nAspirated consonants are not always followed by vowels or other voiced sounds. For example, in Eastern Armenian, aspiration is contrastive even word-finally, and aspirated consonants occur in consonant clusters. In Wahgi, consonants are aspirated only when they are in final position.\nDegree.\nThe degree of aspiration varies: the voice onset time of aspirated stops is longer or shorter depending on the language or the place of articulation.\nArmenian and Cantonese have aspiration that lasts about as long as English aspirated stops, in addition to unaspirated stops. Korean has lightly-aspirated stops that fall between the Armenian and Cantonese unaspirated and aspirated stops as well as strongly-aspirated stops whose aspiration lasts longer than that of Armenian or Cantonese. (See voice onset time.)\nAspiration varies with place of articulation. The Spanish voiceless stops have voice onset times (VOTs) of about 5, 10, and 30 milliseconds, and English aspirated have VOTs of about 60, 70, and 80 ms. Voice onset time in Korean has been measured at 20, 25, and 50 ms for and 90, 95, and 125 for .\nDoubling.\nWhen aspirated consonants are doubled or geminated, the stop is held longer and then has an aspirated release. An aspirated affricate consists of a stop, fricative, and aspirated release. A doubled aspirated affricate has a longer hold in the stop portion and then has a release consisting of the fricative and aspiration.\nPreaspiration.\nIcelandic and Faroese have consonants with preaspiration , and some scholars interpret them as consonant clusters as well. In Icelandic, preaspirated stops contrast with double stops and single stops:\nPreaspiration is also a feature of Scottish Gaelic:\nPreaspirated stops also occur in most Sami languages. For example, in Northern Sami, the unvoiced stop and affricate phonemes , , , , are pronounced preaspirated (, , , ) in medial or final position.\nFricatives and sonorants.\nAlthough most aspirated obstruents in the world's languages are stops and affricates, aspirated fricatives such as , or have been documented in Korean, though these are allophones of other phonemes. Similarly, aspirated fricatives and even aspirated nasals, approximants, and trills occur in a few Tibeto-Burman languages, in some Oto-Manguean languages, in the Hmongic language Hmu, and in the Siouan language Ofo. Some languages, such as Choni Tibetan, have as many as four contrastive aspirated fricatives , and .\nVoiced consonants with voiceless aspiration.\nTrue aspirated voiced consonants, as opposed to murmured (breathy-voice) consonants such as the that are common among the languages of India, are extremely rare. They have been documented in Kelabit.\nPhonology.\nAspiration has varying significance in different languages. It is either allophonic or phonemic, and may be analyzed as an underlying consonant cluster.\nAllophonic.\nIn some languages, such as English, aspiration is allophonic. Stops are distinguished primarily by voicing, and voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated, while voiced stops are usually unaspirated.\nEnglish voiceless stops are aspirated for most native speakers when they are word-initial or begin a stressed syllable.\nFor instance, \"distend\" has unaspirated since it is not analyzed as two morphemes, but \"distaste\" has an aspirated middle because it is analyzed as \"dis-\" + \"taste\" and the word \"taste\" has an aspirated initial \"t\".\nWord-final voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated.\nVoiceless stops in Pashto are slightly aspirated prevocalically in a stressed syllable.\nPhonemic.\nIn many languages, such as Armenian, Korean, Lakota, Thai, Indo-Aryan languages, Dravidian languages, Icelandic, Faroese, Ancient Greek, and the varieties of Chinese, tenuis and aspirated consonants are phonemic. Unaspirated consonants like and aspirated consonants like are separate phonemes, and words are distinguished by whether they have one or the other.\nConsonant cluster.\nAlemannic German dialects have unaspirated as well as aspirated ; the latter series are usually viewed as consonant clusters.\nTenseness.\nIn Danish and most southern varieties of German, the lenis consonants transcribed for historical reasons as are distinguished from their fortis counterparts , mainly in their lack of aspiration.\nAbsence.\nFrench, Standard Dutch, Afrikaans, Tamil, Finnish, Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, Russian, Polish, Latvian and Modern Greek are languages that do not have phonemic aspirated consonants.\nExamples.\nChinese.\nStandard Chinese (Mandarin) has stops and affricates distinguished by aspiration: for instance, , . In pinyin, tenuis stops are written with letters that represent voiced consonants in English, and aspirated stops with letters that represent voiceless consonants. Thus \"d\" represents , and \"t\" represents .\nWu Chinese and Southern Min has a three-way distinction in stops and affricates: . In addition to aspirated and unaspirated consonants, there is a series of \"muddy consonants\", like . These are pronounced with slack or breathy voice: that is, they are weakly voiced. Muddy consonants as initial cause a syllable to be pronounced with low pitch or \"light\" (\u967d \"y\u00e1ng\") tone.\nIndian languages.\nMany Indo-Aryan languages have aspirated stops. Sanskrit, Hindustani, Bengali, Marathi, and Gujarati have a four-way distinction in stops: voiceless, aspirated, voiced, and breathy-voiced or voiced aspirated, such as . Punjabi has lost breathy-voiced consonants, which resulted in a tone system, and therefore has a distinction between voiceless, aspirated, and voiced: .\nSome of the Dravidian languages, such as Telugu, Malayalam, and Kannada, have a distinction between voiced and voiceless, aspirated and unaspirated only in loanwords from Indo-Aryan languages. In native Dravidian words, there is no distinction between these categories and stops are underspecified for voicing and aspiration.\nArmenian.\nMost dialects of Armenian have aspirated stops, and some have breathy-voiced stops.\nClassical and Eastern Armenian have a three-way distinction between voiceless, aspirated, and voiced, such as .\nWestern Armenian has a two-way distinction between aspirated and voiced: . Western Armenian aspirated corresponds to Eastern Armenian aspirated and voiced , and Western voiced corresponds to Eastern voiceless .\nGreek.\nSome forms of Greek before the Koine Greek period are reconstructed as having aspirated stops. The Classical Attic dialect of Ancient Greek had a three-way distinction in stops like Eastern Armenian: . These series were called , , (\"psil\u00e1, das\u00e9a, m\u00e9sa\") \"smooth, rough, intermediate\", respectively, by Koine Greek grammarians.\nThere were aspirated stops at three places of articulation: labial, coronal, and velar . Earlier Greek, represented by Mycenaean Greek, likely had a labialized velar aspirated stop , which later became labial, coronal, or velar depending on dialect and phonetic environment.\nThe other Ancient Greek dialects, Ionic, Doric, Aeolic, and Arcadocypriot, likely had the same three-way distinction at one point, but Doric seems to have had a fricative in place of in the Classical period, and the Ionic and Aeolic dialects sometimes lost aspiration (psilosis).\nLater, during the Koine Greek period, the aspirated and voiced stops of Attic Greek lenited to voiceless and voiced fricatives, yielding in Medieval and Modern Greek. Cypriot Greek is notable for aspirating its inherited (and developed across word-boundaries) voiceless geminate stops, yielding the series /p\u02b0\u02d0 t\u02b0\u02d0 c\u02b0\u02d0 k\u02b0\u02d0/.\nOther uses.\nDebuccalization.\nThe term \"aspiration\" sometimes refers to the sound change of debuccalization, in which a consonant is lenited (weakened) to become a glottal stop or fricative .\nBreathy-voiced release.\nSo-called voiced aspirated consonants are nearly always pronounced instead with breathy voice, a type of phonation or vibration of the vocal folds. The modifier letter after a voiced consonant actually represents a breathy-voiced or murmured dental stop, as with the \"voiced aspirated\" bilabial stop in the Indo-Aryan languages. This consonant is therefore more accurately transcribed as , with the diacritic for breathy voice, or with the modifier letter , a superscript form of the symbol for the voiced glottal fricative .\nSome linguists restrict the double-dot subscript to murmured sonorants, such as vowels and nasals, which are murmured throughout their duration, and use the superscript hook-aitch for the breathy-voiced release of obstruents."}
{"id": "3135", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3135", "title": "Arteriovenous malformation", "text": "Arteriovenous malformation is an abnormal connection between arteries and veins, bypassing the capillary system. This vascular anomaly is widely known because of its occurrence in the central nervous system (usually cerebral AVM), but can appear in any location. Although many AVMs are asymptomatic, they can cause intense pain or bleeding or lead to other serious medical problems.\nAVMs are usually congenital and belong to the RASopathies.\nThe genetic transmission patterns of AVMs are incomplete, but there are known genetic mutations (for instance in the epithelial line, tumor suppressor PTEN gene) which can lead to an increased occurrence throughout the body.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms of AVM vary according to the location of the malformation. Roughly 88% of people with an AVM are asymptomatic; often the malformation is discovered as part of an autopsy or during treatment of an unrelated disorder (called in medicine an \"incidental finding\"); in rare cases, its expansion or a micro-bleed from an AVM in the brain can cause epilepsy, neurological deficit, or pain.\nThe most general symptoms of a cerebral AVM include headaches and epileptic seizures, with more specific symptoms occurring that normally depend on the location of the malformation and the individual. Such possible symptoms include:\nCerebral AVMs may present themselves in a number of different ways:\nPulmonary arteriovenous malformations.\nPulmonary arteriovenous malformations are abnormal communications between the veins and arteries of the pulmonary circulation, leading to a right-to-left blood shunt.\nThey have no symptoms in up to 29% of all cases, however they can give rise to serious complications including hemorrhage, and infection. They are most commonly associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.\nGenetics.\nCan occur due to autosomal dominant diseases, such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.\nPathophysiology.\nArteries and veins are part of the vascular system. Arteries carry blood away from the heart to the lungs or the rest of the body, where the blood passes through capillaries, and veins return the blood to the heart. An AVM interferes with this process by forming a direct connection of the arteries and veins. AVMs can cause intense pain and lead to serious medical problems. Although AVMs are often associated with the brain and spinal cord, they can develop in any part of the body.\nNormally, the arteries in the vascular system carry oxygen-rich blood, except in the case of the pulmonary artery. Structurally, arteries divide and sub-divide repeatedly, eventually forming a sponge-like capillary bed. Blood moves through the capillaries, giving up oxygen and taking up waste products, including , from the surrounding cells. Capillaries in turn successively join together to form veins that carry blood away. The heart acts to pump blood through arteries and uptake the venous blood.\nAs an AVM lacks the dampening effect of capillaries on the blood flow, the AVM can get progressively larger over time as the amount of blood flowing through it increases, forcing the heart to work harder to keep up with the extra blood flow. It also causes the surrounding area to be deprived of the functions of the capillaries\u2014removal of and delivery of nutrients to the cells. The resulting tangle of blood vessels, often called a \"nidus\" (Latin for \"nest\"), has no capillaries. It can be extremely fragile and prone to bleeding because of the abnormally direct connections between high-pressure arteries and low-pressure veins. The resultant sign, audible via stethoscope, is a rhythmic, whooshing sound caused by excessively rapid blood flow through the arteries and veins. It has been given the term \"bruit\", French for noise. On some occasions, a patient with a brain AVM may become aware of the noise, which can compromise hearing and interfere with sleep in addition to causing psychological distress.\nDiagnosis.\nAVMs are diagnosed primarily by the following imaging methods:\nAVMs can occur in various parts of the body:\nAVMs may occur in isolation or as a part of another disease (for example, Von Hippel-Lindau disease or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia).\nAVMs have been shown to be associated with aortic stenosis.\nBleeding from an AVM can be relatively mild or devastating. It can cause severe and less often fatal strokes. If a cerebral AVM is detected before a stroke occurs, usually the arteries feeding blood into the nidus can be closed off to avert the danger. However, interventional therapy may also be relatively risky. \nTreatment.\nTreatment for brain AVMs can be symptomatic, and patients should be followed by a neurologist for any seizures, headaches, or focal neurologic deficits. AVM-specific treatment may also involve endovascular embolization, neurosurgery or radiosurgery.\nEmbolization, that is, cutting off the blood supply to the AVM with coils, particles, acrylates, or polymers introduced by a radiographically guided catheter, may be used in addition to neurosurgery or radiosurgery, but is rarely successful in isolation except in smaller AVMs. Gamma knife may also be used.\nTreatment of lung AVMs is typically performed with endovascular embolization alone, which is considered the standard of care. \nEpidemiology.\nThe estimated detection rate of AVM in the US general population is 1.4/100,000 per year. This is approximately one fifth to one seventh the incidence of intracranial aneurysms. An estimated 300,000 Americans have AVMs, of whom 12% (approximately 36,000) will exhibit symptoms of greatly varying severity.\nHistory.\nLuschka (1820\u20131875) and Virchow (1821\u20131902) first described arteriovenous malformations in the mid-1800s. Olivecrona (1891\u20131980) performed the first surgical excision of an intracranial AVM in 1932.\nResearch.\nDespite many years of research, the central question of whether to treat AVMs has not been answered. All treatments, whether involving surgery, radiation, or drugs, have risks and side-effects. Therefore, it might be better in some cases to avoid treatment altogether and simply accept a small risk of coming to harm from the AVM itself. This question is currently being addressed in clinical trials."}
{"id": "3136", "revid": "3570909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3136", "title": "Abstract concept", "text": ""}
{"id": "3138", "revid": "21811437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3138", "title": "Atlanta", "text": "Atlanta () is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Georgia. With an estimated 2019 population of 506,811, it is also the 37th most populous city in the United States. The city serves as the cultural and economic center of the Atlanta metropolitan area, home to more than 6\u00a0million people and the ninth-largest metropolitan area in the nation. Atlanta is the seat of Fulton County, the most populous county in Georgia. Portions of the city extend eastward into neighboring DeKalb County. The city is situated among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains and has the highest elevation among major cities east of the Mississippi River.\nAtlanta was originally founded as the terminus of a major state-sponsored railroad. With rapid expansion, however, it soon became the convergence point among multiple railroads, spurring its rapid growth. The city's name derives from that of the Western and Atlantic Railroad's local depot, signifying the town's growing reputation as a transportation hub. During the American Civil War, the city was almost entirely burned to the ground in General William T. Sherman's March to the Sea. However, the city rose from its ashes and quickly became a national center of commerce and the unofficial capital of the \"New South\". During the 1950s and 1960s, Atlanta became a major organizing center of the civil rights movement, with Martin Luther King Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, and many other locals playing major roles in the movement's leadership. During the modern era, Atlanta has attained international prominence as a major air transportation hub, with Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport being the world's busiest airport by passenger traffic since 1998.\nIt ranks in the top twenty among world cities and 10th in the nation with a gross domestic product (GDP) of $385\u00a0billion. Atlanta's economy is considered diverse, with dominant sectors that include aerospace, transportation, logistics, professional and business services, media operations, medical services, and information technology. Atlanta has topographic features that include rolling hills and dense tree coverage, earning it the nickname of \"the city in a forest\". Gentrification of Atlanta's neighborhoods, initially spurred by the 1996 Summer Olympics, has intensified in the 21st century with the growth of the Atlanta Beltline, altering the city's demographics, politics, aesthetics, and culture.\nHistory.\nNative American settlements.\nFor thousands of years prior to the arrival of European settlers in north Georgia, the indigenous Creek people and their ancestors inhabited the area. Standing Peachtree, a Creek village where Peachtree Creek flows into the Chattahoochee River, was the closest Native American settlement to what is now Atlanta. Through the early 19th century, European Americans systematically encroached on the Creek of northern Georgia, forcing them out of the area from 1802 to 1825. The Creek were forced to leave the area in 1821, under Indian Removal by the federal government, and European American settlers arrived the following year.\nWestern and Atlantic Railroad.\nIn 1836, the Georgia General Assembly voted to build the Western and Atlantic Railroad in order to provide a link between the port of Savannah and the Midwest. The initial route was to run southward from Chattanooga to a terminus east of the Chattahoochee River, which would be linked to Savannah. After engineers surveyed various possible locations for the terminus, the \"zero milepost\" was driven into the ground in what is now Five Points. A year later, the area around the milepost had developed into a settlement, first known as \"Terminus\", and later \"Thrasherville\", after a local merchant who built homes and a general store in the area. By 1842, the town had six buildings and 30 residents and was renamed \"Marthasville\" to honor Governor Wilson Lumpkin's daughter Martha. Later, John Edgar Thomson, Chief Engineer of the Georgia Railroad, suggested the town be renamed \"Atlanta\". The residents approved, and the town was incorporated as Atlanta on December 29, 1847.\nCivil War.\nBy 1860, Atlanta's population had grown to 9,554. During the American Civil War, the nexus of multiple railroads in Atlanta made the city a strategic hub for the distribution of military supplies.\nIn 1864, the Union Army moved southward following the capture of Chattanooga and began its invasion of north Georgia. The region surrounding Atlanta was the location of several major army battles, culminating with the Battle of Atlanta and a four-month-long siege of the city by the Union Army under the command of General William Tecumseh Sherman. On September 1, 1864, Confederate General John Bell Hood decided to retreat from Atlanta, and he ordered the destruction of all public buildings and possible assets that could be of use to the Union Army. On the next day, Mayor James Calhoun surrendered Atlanta to the Union Army, and on September 7, Sherman ordered the city's civilian population to evacuate. On November 11, 1864, Sherman prepared for the Union Army's March to the Sea by ordering the destruction of Atlanta's remaining military assets.\nRebuilding the city.\nAfter the Civil War ended in 1865, Atlanta was gradually rebuilt. The work attracted many new residents. Due to the city's superior rail transportation network, the state capital was moved from Milledgeville to Atlanta in 1868. In the 1880 Census, Atlanta had surpassed Savannah as Georgia's largest city.\nBeginning in the 1880s, Henry W. Grady, the editor of the \"Atlanta Constitution\" newspaper, promoted Atlanta to potential investors as a city of the \"New South\" that would be based upon a modern economy and less reliant on agriculture. By 1885, the founding of the Georgia School of Technology (now Georgia Tech) and the Atlanta University Center, a consortium of historically black colleges made up of units for men and women, had established Atlanta as a center for higher education. In 1895, Atlanta hosted the Cotton States and International Exposition, which attracted nearly 800,000 attendees and successfully promoted the New South's development to the world.\n20th century.\nDuring the first decades of the 20th century, Atlanta enjoyed a period of unprecedented growth. In three decades' time, Atlanta's population tripled as the city limits expanded to include nearby streetcar suburbs. The city's skyline grew taller with the construction of the Equitable, Flatiron, Empire, and Candler buildings. Sweet Auburn emerged as a center of black commerce. The period was also marked by strife and tragedy. Increased racial tensions led to the Atlanta Race Riot of 1906, when whites attacked blacks, leaving at least 27 people dead and over 70 injured, with extensive damage in black neighborhoods. In 1913, Leo Frank, a Jewish-American factory superintendent, was convicted of the murder of a 13-year-old girl in a highly publicized trial. He was sentenced to death but the governor commuted his sentence to life. An enraged and organized lynch mob took him from jail in 1915 and hanged him in Marietta. The Jewish community in Atlanta and across the country were horrified. On May 21, 1917, the Great Atlanta Fire destroyed 1,938 buildings in what is now the Old Fourth Ward, resulting in one fatality and the displacement of 10,000 people.\nOn December 15, 1939, Atlanta hosted the premiere of \"Gone with the Wind\", the epic film based on the best-selling novel by Atlanta's Margaret Mitchell. The gala event at Loew's Grand Theatre was attended by the film's legendary producer, David O. Selznick, and the film's stars Clark Gable, Vivien Leigh, and Olivia de Havilland, but Oscar winner Hattie McDaniel, an African-American actress, was barred from the event due to racial segregation laws.\nMetropolitan area's growth.\nAtlanta played a vital role in the Allied effort during World War II due to the city's war-related manufacturing companies, railroad network and military bases. The defense industries attracted thousands of new residents and generated revenues, resulting in rapid population and economic growth. In the 1950s, the city's newly constructed highway system, supported by federal subsidies, allowed middle class Atlantans the ability to relocate to the suburbs. As a result, the city began to make up an ever-smaller proportion of the metropolitan area's population. Georgia Tech's president Blake R Van Leer played an important role with a goal of making Atlanta the \"MIT of the South.\". In 1946 Georgia Tech secured about $240,000 annually in sponsored research and purchased an electron microscope for $13,000 (), the first such instrument in the Southeastern United States and one of few in the United States at the time. The Research Building was expanded, and a $300,000 () Westinghouse A-C network calculator was given to Georgia Tech by Georgia Power in 1947. In 1953, Van Leer assisted with helping Lockheed establish a research and development and production line in Marietta. Later in 1955 he helped set up a committee to assist with establishing a nuclear research facility, which would later become the Neely Nuclear Research Center. Van Leer also co-founded Southern Polytechnic State University now known as Kennesaw State University to help meet the need for technicians after the war. Van Leer was instrumental in making the school and Atlanta the first major research center in the American South. The building that houses Tech's school of Electrical and Computer Engineering bears his name.\nCivil Rights Movement.\nAfrican-American veterans returned from World War II seeking full rights in their country and began heightened activism. In exchange for support by that portion of the black community that could vote, in 1948 the mayor ordered the hiring of the first eight African-American police officers in the city. Much controversy preceded the 1956 Sugar Bowl, when the Pitt Panthers, with African-American fullback Bobby Grier on the roster, met the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets. There had been controversy over whether Grier should be allowed to play due to his race, and whether Georgia Tech should even play at all due to Georgia's Governor Marvin Griffin's opposition to racial integration. After Griffin publicly sent a telegram to the state's Board Of Regents requesting Georgia Tech not to engage in racially integrated events, Georgia Tech's president Blake R Van Leer rejected the request and threatened to resign. The game went on as planned.\nIn the 1960s, Atlanta became a major organizing center of the civil rights movement, with Martin Luther King Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, and students from Atlanta's historically black colleges and universities playing major roles in the movement's leadership. While Atlanta in the postwar years had relatively minimal racial strife compared to other cities, blacks were limited by discrimination, segregation, and continued disenfranchisement of most voters. In 1961, the city attempted to thwart blockbusting by realtors by erecting road barriers in Cascade Heights, countering the efforts of civic and business leaders to foster Atlanta as the \"city too busy to hate\".\nDesegregation of the public sphere came in stages, with public transportation desegregated by 1959, the restaurant at Rich's department store by 1961, movie theaters by 1963, and public schools by 1973 (nearly 20 years after the US Supreme Court ruled that segregated public schools were unconstitutional).\nIn 1960, whites comprised 61.7% of the city's population. During the 1950s\u201370s, suburbanization and white flight from urban areas led to a significant demographic shift. By 1970, African Americans were the majority of the city's population and exercised their recently enforced voting rights and political influence by electing Atlanta's first black mayor, Maynard Jackson, in 1973. Under Mayor Jackson's tenure, Atlanta's airport was modernized, strengthening the city's role as a transportation center. The opening of the Georgia World Congress Center in 1976 heralded Atlanta's rise as a convention city. Construction of the city's subway system began in 1975, with rail service commencing in 1979. Despite these improvements, Atlanta lost more than 100,000 residents between 1970 and 1990, over 20% of its population. At the same time, it developed new office space after attracting numerous corporations, with an increasing portion of workers from northern areas.\n1996 Summer Olympic Games.\nAtlanta was selected as the site for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games. Following the announcement, the city government undertook several major construction projects to improve Atlanta's parks, sporting venues, and transportation infrastructure; however, for the first time, none of the $1.7\u00a0billion cost of the games was governmentally funded. While the games experienced transportation and accommodation problems and, despite extra security precautions, there was the Centennial Olympic Park bombing, the spectacle was a watershed event in Atlanta's history. For the first time in Olympic history, every one of the record 197 national Olympic committees invited to compete sent athletes, sending more than 10,000 contestants participating in a record 271 events. The related projects such as Atlanta's Olympic Legacy Program and civic effort initiated a fundamental transformation of the city in the following decade.\n2000 to present.\nDuring the 2000s, Atlanta underwent a profound physical, cultural, and demographic transformation. As some of the black middle and upper classes also began to move to the suburbs, a booming economy drew numerous new migrants from other areas of the country, who contributed to changes in the city's demographics. African Americans made up a decreasing portion of the population, from a high of 67% in 1990 to 54% in 2010. From 2000 to 2010, Atlanta gained 22,763 white residents, 5,142 Asian residents, and 3,095 Hispanic residents, while the city's black population decreased by 31,678. Much of the city's demographic change during the decade was driven by young, college-educated professionals: from 2000 to 2009, the three-mile radius surrounding Downtown Atlanta gained 9,722 residents aged 25 to 34 and holding at least a four-year degree, an increase of 61%. This was similar to the tendency in other cities for young, college educated, single or married couples to live in downtown areas.\nBetween the mid-1990s and 2010, stimulated by funding from the HOPE VI program and under leadership of CEO Renee Lewis Glover (1994\u20132013), the Atlanta Housing Authority demolished nearly all of its public housing, a total of 17,000 units and about 10% of all housing units in the city. After reserving 2,000 units mostly for elderly, the AHA allowed redevelopment of the sites for mixed-use and mixed-income, higher density developments, with 40% of the units to be reserved for affordable housing. Two-fifths of previous public housing residents attained new housing in such units; the remainder received vouchers to be used at other units, including in suburbs. At the same time, in an effort to change the culture of those receiving subsidized housing, the AHA imposed a requirement for such residents to work (or be enrolled in a genuine, limited-time training program). It is virtually the only housing authority to have created this requirement. To prevent problems, the AHA also gave authority to management of the mixed-income or voucher units to evict tenants who did not comply with the work requirement or who caused behavior problems.\nIn 2005, the city approved the $2.8\u00a0billion BeltLine project. It was intended to convert a disused 22-mile freight railroad loop that surrounds the central city into an art-filled multi-use trail and light rail transit line, which would increase the city's park space by 40%. The project stimulated retail and residential development along the loop, but has been criticised for its adverse effects on some Black communities.\nAtlanta's cultural offerings expanded during the 2000s: the High Museum of Art doubled in size; the Alliance Theatre won a Tony Award; and art galleries were established on the once-industrial Westside. The city of Atlanta was the subject of a massive cyberattack which began in March 2018.\nGeography.\nAtlanta encompasses , of which is land and is water. The city is situated among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. At above mean sea level, Atlanta has the highest elevation among major cities east of the Mississippi River. Atlanta straddles the Eastern Continental Divide. Rainwater that falls on the south and east side of the divide flows into the Atlantic Ocean, while rainwater on the north and west side of the divide flows into the Gulf of Mexico. Atlanta developed on a ridge south of the Chattahoochee River, which is part of the ACF River Basin. The river borders the far northwestern edge of the city, and much of its natural habitat has been preserved, in part by the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area.\nAtlanta is sometimes called \"City of Trees\" or \"city in a forest\", despite having lost approximately of trees between 1973 and 1999.\nCityscape.\nMost of Atlanta was burned during the Civil War, depleting the city of a large stock of its historic architecture. Yet architecturally, the city had never been traditionally \"southern\" because Atlanta originated as a railroad town, rather than a southern seaport dominated by the planter class, such as Savannah or Charleston. Because of its later development, many of the city's landmarks share architectural characteristics with buildings in the Northeast or Midwest, as they were designed at a time of shared national architectural styles.\nDuring the late twentieth century, Atlanta embraced the global trend of modern architecture, especially for commercial and institutional structures. Examples include the State of Georgia Building built in 1966, and the Georgia-Pacific Tower in 1982. Many of the most notable examples from this period were designed by world renowned Atlanta architect John Portman. Most of the buildings that define the downtown skyline were designed by Portman during this period, including the Westin Peachtree Plaza and the Atlanta Marriott Marquis. In the latter half of the 1980s, Atlanta became one of the early homes of postmodern buildings that reintroduced classical elements to their designs. Many of Atlanta's tallest skyscrapers were built in this period and style, displaying tapering spires or otherwise ornamented crowns, such as One Atlantic Center (1987), 191 Peachtree Tower (1991), and the Four Seasons Hotel Atlanta (1992). Also completed during the era is the Portman-designed Bank of America Plaza built in 1992. At , it is the tallest building in the city and the 14th-tallest in the United States.\nThe city's embrace of modern architecture has often translated into an ambivalent approach toward historic preservation, leading to the destruction of many notable architectural landmarks. These include the Equitable Building (1892\u20131971), Terminal Station (1905\u20131972), and the Carnegie Library (1902\u20131977). In the mid-1970s, the Fox Theatre, now a cultural icon of the city, would have met the same fate if not for a grassroots effort to save it. More recently, preservationists may have made some inroads. For example, in 2016 activists convinced the Atlanta City Council not to demolish the Atlanta-Fulton Central Library, the last building designed by noted architect Marcel Breuer.\nAtlanta is divided into 242 officially defined neighborhoods. The city contains three major high-rise districts, which form a north\u2013south axis along Peachtree: Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead. Surrounding these high-density districts are leafy, low-density neighborhoods, most of which are dominated by single-family homes.\nDowntown Atlanta contains the most office space in the metro area, much of it occupied by government entities. Downtown is home to the city's sporting venues and many of its tourist attractions. Midtown Atlanta is the city's second-largest business district, containing the offices of many of the region's law firms. Midtown is known for its art institutions, cultural attractions, institutions of higher education, and dense form. Buckhead, the city's uptown district, is north of Downtown and the city's third-largest business district. The district is marked by an urbanized core along Peachtree Road, surrounded by suburban single-family neighborhoods situated among woods and rolling hills.\nSurrounding Atlanta's three high-rise districts are the city's low- and medium-density neighborhoods, where the craftsman bungalow single-family home is dominant. The eastside is marked by historic streetcar suburbs, built from the 1890s\u20131930s as havens for the upper middle class. These neighborhoods, many of which contain their own villages encircled by shaded, architecturally distinct residential streets, include the Victorian Inman Park, Bohemian East Atlanta, and eclectic Old Fourth Ward. On the westside and along the BeltLine on the eastside, former warehouses and factories have been converted into housing, retail space, and art galleries, transforming the once-industrial areas such as West Midtown into model neighborhoods for smart growth, historic rehabilitation, and infill construction.\nIn southwest Atlanta, neighborhoods closer to downtown originated as streetcar suburbs, including the historic West End, while those farther from downtown retain a postwar suburban layout. These include Collier Heights and Cascade Heights, home to much of the city's affluent African-American population. Northwest Atlanta contains the areas of the city to west of Marietta Boulevard and to the north of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, including those neighborhoods remote to downtown, such as Riverside, Bolton and Whittier Mill. The latter is one of Atlanta's designated Landmark Historical Neighborhoods. Vine City, though technically Northwest, adjoins the city's Downtown area and has recently been the target of community outreach programs and economic development initiatives.\nGentrification of the city's neighborhoods is one of the more controversial and transformative forces shaping contemporary Atlanta. The gentrification of Atlanta has its origins in the 1970s, after many of Atlanta's neighborhoods had declined and suffered the urban decay that affected other major American cities in the mid-20th century. When neighborhood opposition successfully prevented two freeways from being built through the city's east side in 1975, the area became the starting point for Atlanta's gentrification. After Atlanta was awarded the Olympic games in 1990, gentrification expanded into other parts of the city, stimulated by infrastructure improvements undertaken in preparation for the games. New development post-2000 has been aided by the Atlanta Housing Authority's eradication of the city's public housing. As noted above, it allowed development of these sites for mixed-income housing, requiring developers to reserve a considerable portion for affordable housing units. It has also provided for other former residents to be given vouchers to gain housing in other areas. Construction of the Beltline has stimulated new and related development along its path.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen classification, Atlanta has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") with four distinct seasons and generous precipitation year-round, typical for the Upland South; the city is situated in USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 8a, with the northern and western suburbs transitioning to 7b. Summers are hot and humid, with temperatures somewhat moderated by the city's elevation. Winters are cool but variable, occasionally susceptible to snowstorms even if in small quantities on several occasions, unlike the central and southern portions of the state. Warm air from the Gulf of Mexico can bring spring-like highs while strong Arctic air masses can push lows into the teens\u00a0\u00b0F (\u22127 to \u221212\u00a0\u00b0C).\nJuly averages , with high temperatures reaching on an average of 44 days per year, though readings are not seen most years. January averages , with temperatures in the suburbs slightly cooler due largely to the urban heat island effect. Lows at or below freezing can be expected 40 nights annually, but the last occurrence of temperatures below is January 6, 2014. Extremes range from on February 13, 1899 to on June 30, 2012. Average dewpoints in the summer range from in June to in July.\nTypical of the southeastern U.S., Atlanta receives abundant rainfall that is evenly distributed throughout the year, though spring and early fall are markedly drier. The average annual rainfall is , while snowfall is typically light with a normal of per winter. The heaviest single snowfall occurred on January 23, 1940, with around of snow. However, ice storms usually cause more problems than snowfall does, the most severe occurring on January 7, 1973. Tornadoes are rare in the city itself, but the March 14, 2008 EF2 tornado damaged prominent structures in downtown Atlanta.\nDemographics.\nThe 2010 United States Census reported that Atlanta had a population of 420,003. The population density was 3,154 per square mile (1232/km2). The racial makeup and population of Atlanta was 54.0% Black or African American, 38.4% White, 3.1% Asian and 0.2% Native American. Those from some other race made up 2.2% of the city's population, while those from two or more races made up 2.0%. Hispanics of any race made up 5.2% of the city's population. The median income for a household in the city was $45,171. The per capita income for the city was $35,453. 22.6% percent of the population was living below the poverty line.\nIn the 1920s, the black population began to grow in Southern metropolitan cities like Atlanta, Birmingham, Houston, and Memphis. In the 2010 Census, Atlanta was recorded as the nation's fourth-largest majority-black city. The New Great Migration brought an insurgence of African Americans from California and the North to the Atlanta area. It has long been known as a center of African-American political power, education, economic prosperity, and culture, often called a black mecca. Some middle and upper class African-American residents of Atlanta followed an influx of whites to newer housing and public schools in the suburbs in the early 21st century. From 2000 to 2010, the city's black population decreased by 31,678 people, shrinking from 61.4% of the city's population in 2000 to 54.0% in 2010, as the overall population expanded and migrants increased from other areas.\nAt the same time, the white population of Atlanta has increased. Between 2000 and 2010, the proportion of whites in the city had notable growth. In that decade, Atlanta's white population grew from 31% to 38% of the city's population, an absolute increase of 22,753 people, more than triple the increase that occurred between 1990 and 2000.\nEarly immigrants in the Atlanta area were mostly Jews and Greeks. Since 1970, the Hispanic immigrant population, especially Mexicans, has experienced the most rapid growth, particularly in Gwinnett, Cobb, and DeKalb counties. Since 2010, the Atlanta area has seen very notable growth with immigrants from India, China, South Korea, and Jamaica. Other notable countries immigrants come from are Vietnam, Eritrea, Nigeria, the Arabian gulf, Ukraine and Poland. Within a few decades, and in keeping with national trends, immigrants from England, Ireland, and German-speaking central Europe were no longer the majority of Atlanta's foreign-born population. The city's Italians included immigrants from northern Italy, many of whom had been in Atlanta since the 1890s; more recent arrivals from southern Italy; and Sephardic Jews from the Isle of Rhodes, which Italy had seized from Turkey in 1912.\nOf the total population five years and older, 83.3% spoke only English at home, while 8.8% spoke Spanish, 3.9% another Indo-European language, and 2.8% an Asian language. 7.3% of Atlantans were born abroad (86th in the US). Atlanta's dialect has traditionally been a variation of Southern American English. The Chattahoochee River long formed a border between the Coastal Southern and Southern Appalachian dialects. Because of the development of corporate headquarters in the region, attracting migrants from other areas of the country, by 2003, \"Atlanta\" magazine concluded that Atlanta had become significantly \"de-Southernized\". A Southern accent was considered a handicap in some circumstances. In general, Southern accents are less prevalent among residents of the city and inner suburbs and among younger people; they are more common in the outer suburbs and among older people. At the same time, some residents of the city speak in Southern variations of African-American English.\nReligion in Atlanta, while historically centered on Protestant Christianity, now encompasses many faiths, as a result of the city and metro area's increasingly international population. Some 63% of residents identify as some type of Protestant, but in recent decades the Catholic Church has increased in numbers and influence because of new migrants to the region. Metro Atlanta also has numerous ethnic or national Christian congregations, including Korean and Indian churches. The larger non-Christian faiths are Judaism, Islam, and Hinduism. Overall, there are over 1,000 places of worship within Atlanta.\nSexual orientation and gender identity.\nAtlanta has a thriving and diverse lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community. According to a 2006 survey by the Williams Institute, Atlanta ranked third among major American cities, behind San Francisco and slightly behind Seattle, with 12.8% of the city's total population identifying as LGBT. The Midtown and Cheshire Bridge areas have historically been the epicenters of LGBT culture in Atlanta. Atlanta formed a reputation for being a progressive place of tolerance after former mayor Ivan Allen Jr. dubbed it \"the city too busy to hate\" in the 1960s.\nEconomy.\nWith a GDP of $385\u00a0billion, the Atlanta metropolitan area's economy is the tenth-largest in the country and among the top 20-largest in the world. Corporate operations play a major role in Atlanta's economy, as the city claims the nation's third-largest concentration of Fortune 500 companies. It also hosts the global headquarters of corporations like The Coca-Cola Company, The Home Depot, Delta Air Lines, AT&amp;T Mobility, Chick-fil-A, and UPS. Over 75% of Fortune 1000 companies conduct business operations in the city's metro area, and the region hosts offices of over 1,250 multinational corporations. Many corporations are drawn to the city by its educated workforce; , 45% of adults aged 25 or older residing in the city have at least 4-year college degrees, compared to the national average of 28%.\nAtlanta started as a railroad town, and logistics has been a major component of the city's economy to this day. Atlanta serves as an important rail junction and contains major classification yards for Norfolk Southern and CSX. Since its construction in the 1950s, Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport has served as a key engine of the city's economic growth. Delta Air Lines, the city's largest employer and the metro area's third-largest, operates the world's largest airline hub at Hartsfield-Jackson, and it has helped make it the world's busiest airport, in terms of both passenger traffic and aircraft operations. Partly due to the airport, Atlanta has been also a hub for diplomatic missions; , the city contains 26 consulates general, the seventh-highest concentration of diplomatic missions in the US.\nBroadcasting is also an important aspect of Atlanta's economy. In the 1980s, media mogul Ted Turner founded the Cable News Network (CNN) and the Turner Broadcasting System (TBS) in the city. Around the same time, Cox Enterprises, now the nation's third-largest cable television service and the publisher of over a dozen American newspapers, moved its headquarters to the city. The Weather Channel is also based just outside of the city in suburban Cobb County.\nInformation technology (IT) has become an increasingly important part of Atlanta's economic output, earning the city the nickname the \"Silicon peach\". , Atlanta contains the fourth-largest concentration of IT jobs in the US, numbering 85,000+. The city is also ranked as the sixth fastest-growing for IT jobs, with an employment growth of 4.8% in 2012 and a three-year growth near 9%, or 16,000 jobs. Companies are drawn to Atlanta's lower costs and educated workforce.\nRecently, Atlanta has been the center for film and television production, largely because of the Georgia Entertainment Industry Investment Act, which awards qualified productions a transferable income tax credit of 20% of all in-state costs for film and television investments of $500,000 or more. Some film and television production facilities based in Atlanta include Turner Studios, Pinewood Studios (Pinewood Atlanta), Tyler Perry Studios, Williams Street Productions, and the EUE/Screen Gems soundstages. Film and television production injected $9.5\u00a0billion into Georgia's economy in 2017, with Atlanta garnering most of the projects. Atlanta has emerged as the all-time most popular destination for film production in the United States and one of the ten most popular destinations globally.\nCompared to other American cities, Atlanta's economy in the past had been disproportionately affected by the 2008 financial crisis and the subsequent recession, with the city's economy earning a ranking of 68 among 100 American cities in a September 2014 report due to an elevated unemployment rate, declining real income levels, and a depressed housing market. From 2010 to 2011, Atlanta saw a 0.9% contraction in employment and plateauing income growth at 0.4%. Although unemployment had decreased to 7% by late 2014, this was still higher than the national unemployment rate of 5.8% Atlanta's housing market has also struggled, with home prices dropping by 2.1% in January 2012, reaching levels not seen since 1996. Compared with a year earlier, the average home price in Atlanta plummeted to 17.3% in February 2012, thus becoming the largest annual drop in the history of the index for any American or global city. The decline in home prices prompted some economists to deem Atlanta the worst housing market in the nation at the height of the depression. Nevertheless, the city's real estate market has resurged since 2012, so much median home value and rent growth significantly outpaced the national average by 2018, thanks to a rapidly-growing regional economy.\nCulture.\nAtlanta is noted for its lack of Southern culture. This is due to a large population of migrants from other parts of the U.S., in addition to many recent immigrants to the U.S. who have made the metropolitan area their home, establishing Atlanta as the cultural and economic hub of an increasingly multi-cultural metropolitan area. Thus, although traditional Southern culture is part of Atlanta's cultural fabric, it is mostly a footnote to one of the nation's most cosmopolitan cities. This unique cultural combination reveals itself in the arts district of Midtown, the quirky neighborhoods on the city's eastside, and the multi-ethnic enclaves found along Buford Highway.\nArts and theater.\nAtlanta is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, and resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Atlanta Opera), ballet (Atlanta Ballet), orchestral music (Atlanta Symphony Orchestra), and theater (the Alliance Theatre). Atlanta attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions catering to a variety of interests. Atlanta's performing arts district is concentrated in Midtown Atlanta at the Woodruff Arts Center, which is home to the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra and the Alliance Theatre. The city frequently hosts touring Broadway acts, especially at The Fox Theatre, a historic landmark among the highest-grossing theaters of its size.\nAs a national center for the arts, Atlanta is home to significant art museums and institutions. The renowned High Museum of Art is arguably the South's leading art museum. The Museum of Design Atlanta (MODA) and the SCAD FASH Museum of Fashion + Film are the only such museums in the Southeast. Contemporary art museums include the Atlanta Contemporary Art Center and the Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia. Institutions of higher education contribute to Atlanta's art scene, with the Savannah College of Art and Design's Atlanta campus providing the city's arts community with a steady stream of curators, and Emory University's Michael C. Carlos Museum containing the largest collection of ancient art in the Southeast. In nearby Athens is the Georgia Museum of Art that is associated with the University of Georgia and is both an academic museum and the official art museum of the state of Georgia.\nAtlanta has become one of the USA's best cities for street art in recent years. It is home to Living Walls, an annual street art conference and the Outerspace Project, an annual event series that merges public art, live music, design, action sports, and culture. Examples of street art in Atlanta can be found on the Atlanta Street Art Map.\nMusic.\nAtlanta has played a major or contributing role in the development of various genres of American music at different points in the city's history. Beginning as early as the 1920s, Atlanta emerged as a center for country music, which was brought to the city by migrants from Appalachia. During the countercultural 1960s, Atlanta hosted the Atlanta International Pop Festival, with the 1969 festival taking place more than a month before Woodstock and featuring many of the same bands. The city was also a center for Southern rock during its 1970s heyday: the Allman Brothers Band's hit instrumental \"Hot 'Lanta\" is an ode to the city, while Lynyrd Skynyrd's famous live rendition of \"Free Bird\" was recorded at the Fox Theatre in 1976, with lead singer Ronnie Van Zant directing the band to \"play it pretty for Atlanta\". During the 1980s, Atlanta had an active punk rock scene centered on two of the city's music venues, 688 Club and the Metroplex, and Atlanta famously played host to the Sex Pistols' first U.S. show, which was performed at the Great Southeastern Music Hall. The 1990s saw the city produce major mainstream acts across many different musical genres. Country music artist Travis Tritt, and R&amp;B sensations Xscape, TLC, Usher and Toni Braxton, were just some of the musicians who call Atlanta home. The city also gave birth to Atlanta hip hop, a subgenre that gained relevance and success with the introduction of the home-grown Atlantans known as Outkast, along with other Dungeon Family artists such as Organized Noize and Goodie Mob; however, it was not until the 2000s that Atlanta moved \"from the margins to becoming hip-hop's center of gravity with another sub-genre called Crunk, part of a larger shift in hip-hop innovation to the South and East\". Also in the 2000s, Atlanta was recognized by the Brooklyn-based \"Vice\" magazine for its indie rock scene, which revolves around the various live music venues found on the city's alternative eastside. To facilitate further local development, the state government provides qualified businesses and productions a 15% transferable income tax credit for in-state costs of music investments. Trap music became popular in Atlanta, and has since become a hub for popular trap artists and producers due to the success of T.I., Young Jeezy, 21 Savage, Gucci Mane, Future, Migos, Lil Yachty, 2 Chainz, Playboi Carti and Young Thug.\nFilm and television.\nAs the national leader for motion picture and television production, and a top ten global leader, Atlanta plays a significant role in the entertainment industry. Atlanta is considered a hub for filmmakers of color and houses Tyler Perry Studios (first African-American owned major studio) and Areu Bros. Studios (first Latino-American owned major studio). Atlanta doubles for other parts of the world and fictional settlements in blockbuster productions, among them the newer titles from \"The Fast and the Furious\" franchise and Marvel features such as \"Ant-Man\" (2015), ' (2016), \"Black Panther\" and ' (both 2018). On the other hand, \"Gone With the Wind\" (1939), \"Smokey and the Bandit\" (1977), \"Sharkey's Machine\" (1981), \"The Slugger's Wife\" (1985), \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1989), \"ATL\" (2006), and \"Baby Driver\" (2017) are among several notable examples of films actually set in Atlanta. The city also provides the backdrop for shows such as \"Ozark\", \"Watchmen\", \"The Walking Dead\", \"Stranger Things\", \"Love is Blind\", \"Star\", \"Dolly Parton's Heartstrings\", \"The Outsider\", \"The Vampire Diaries\" and \"Atlanta\", in addition to a myriad of animated and reality television programming.\nFestivals.\nAtlanta has more festivals than any city in the southeastern United States.\nSome notable festivals in Atlanta include Shaky Knees Music Festival, Dragon Con, the Peachtree Road Race, Music Midtown, the Atlanta Film Festival, National Black Arts Festival, Honda Battle of the Bands, Festival Peachtree Latino, Atlanta Pride, the neighborhood festivals in Inman Park, Atkins Park, Virginia-Highland (Summerfest), and the Little Five Points Halloween festival.\nTourism.\n, Atlanta is the seventh-most visited city in the United States, with over 35\u00a0million visitors per year. Although the most popular attraction among visitors to Atlanta is the Georgia Aquarium, the world's largest indoor aquarium, Atlanta's tourism industry is mostly driven by the city's history museums and outdoor attractions. Atlanta contains a notable number of historical museums and sites, including the Martin Luther King Jr. National Historical Park, which includes the preserved childhood home of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., as well as his final resting place; the Atlanta Cyclorama &amp; Civil War Museum, which houses a massive painting and diorama in-the-round, with a rotating central audience platform, depicting the Battle of Atlanta in the Civil War; the World of Coca-Cola, featuring the history of the world-famous soft drink brand and its well-known advertising; the College Football Hall of Fame, which honors college football and its athletes; the National Center for Civil and Human Rights, which explores the civil rights movement and its connection to contemporary human rights movements throughout the world; the Carter Center and Presidential Library, housing U.S. President Jimmy Carter's papers and other material relating to the Carter administration and the Carter family's life; and the Margaret Mitchell House and Museum, where Mitchell wrote the best-selling novel \"Gone with the Wind\".\nAtlanta contains several outdoor attractions. The Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, is home to the Kendeda Canopy Walk, a skywalk that allows visitors to tour one of the city's last remaining urban forests from above the ground. The Canopy Walk is considered the only canopy-level pathway of its kind in the United States. Zoo Atlanta, in Grant Park, accommodates over 1,300 animals representing more than 220 species. Home to the nation's largest collections of gorillas and orangutans, the zoo is one of only four zoos in the U.S. to house giant pandas. Festivals showcasing arts and crafts, film, and music, including the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, the Atlanta Film Festival, and Music Midtown, respectively, are also popular with tourists.\nTourists are drawn to the city's culinary scene, which comprises a mix of urban establishments garnering national attention, ethnic restaurants serving cuisine from every corner of the world, and traditional eateries specializing in Southern dining. Since the turn of the 21st century, Atlanta has emerged as a sophisticated restaurant town. Many restaurants opened in the city's gentrifying neighborhoods have received praise at the national level, including Bocado, Bacchanalia, and Miller Union in West Midtown, Empire State South in Midtown, and Two Urban Licks and Rathbun's on the east side. In 2011, \"The New York Times\" characterized Empire State South and Miller Union as reflecting \"a new kind of sophisticated Southern sensibility centered on the farm but experienced in the city\". Visitors seeking to sample international Atlanta are directed to Buford Highway, the city's international corridor, and suburban Gwinnett County. There, the nearly-million immigrants that make Atlanta home have established various authentic ethnic restaurants representing virtually every nationality on the globe. For traditional Southern fare, one of the city's most famous establishments is The Varsity, a long-lived fast food chain and the world's largest drive-in restaurant. Mary Mac's Tea Room and Paschal's are more formal destinations for Southern food.\nSports.\nSports are an important part of the culture of Atlanta. The city is home to professional franchises for four major team sports: the Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball, the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association, the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League, and Atlanta United FC of Major League Soccer. In addition, many of the city's universities participate in collegiate sports. The city also regularly hosts international, professional, and collegiate sporting events.\nThe Braves moved to Atlanta in 1966. Originally established as the Boston Red Stockings in 1871, they are the oldest continually operating professional sports franchise in the United States. The Braves won the World Series in 1995, during an unprecedented run of 14 straight divisional championships from 1991 to 2005. The team plays at Truist Park, having moved from Turner Field for the 2017 season. The new stadium is outside the city limits, located northwest of downtown in the Cumberland/Galleria area of Cobb county.\nThe Atlanta Falcons have played in Atlanta since their inception in 1966. The team play their home games at Mercedes Benz Stadium, having moved from the Georgia Dome in 2017. The Falcons have won the division title six times (1980, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2012, 2016) and the NFC championship twice in 1998 and 2016. However, they have been unsuccessful in both of their Super Bowl trips, losing to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999 and to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI in 2017. In 2019, Atlanta also briefly hosted an Alliance of American Football team, the Atlanta Legends, but the league was suspended during its first season and the team folded.\nThe Atlanta Hawks were founded in 1946 as the Tri-Cities Blackhawks, playing in Moline, Illinois. they moved to Atlanta in 1968 and play their games in State Farm Arena. The city is also home to a Women's National Basketball Association franchise, the Atlanta Dream, who share the stadium with the Hawks.\nProfessional soccer has been played in some form in Atlanta since 1967. Atlanta's first professional soccer team was the Atlanta Chiefs of the original North American Soccer League which won the 1968 NASL Championship and defeated English first division club Manchester City F.C. twice in international friendlies. In 1998 the Atlanta Silverbacks were formed, playing the new North American Soccer League. They now play as an amateur club in the National Premier Soccer League. In 2017, Atlanta United FC began play as Atlanta's first premier-division professional soccer club since the Chiefs. They won MLS Cup 2018, defeating the Portland Timbers 2\u20130. Fan reception has been very positive; the team has broken several single-game and season attendance records for both MLS and the U.S. Open Cup. The club is estimated by Forbes to be the most valuable club in Major League Soccer.\nIn ice hockey, Atlanta has had two National Hockey League franchises, both of which relocated after playing in Atlanta for fewer than 15 years. The Atlanta Flames began play in 1972 before moving to Calgary in 1980, and the Atlanta Thrashers began play in 1999 before moving to Winnipeg in 2011. The Atlanta Gladiators of the ECHL Play in Duluth, a suburb northeast of the city.\nThe Atlantic Sun Conference moved its headquarters to Atlanta in 2019. \nSeveral other, less popular sports also have professional franchises in Atlanta. The Georgia Swarm compete in the National Lacrosse League. On September 21, 2018, Major League Rugby announced that Atlanta was one of the expansion teams joining the league for the 2020 season named Rugby ATL. On August 2, 2018, it was announced that Atlanta would have its own Overwatch League team, Atlanta Reign.\nAtlanta has long been known as the \"capital\" of college football in America. Also, Atlanta is within a few hours driving distance of many of the universities that make up the Southeastern Conference, college football's most profitable and popular conference, and annually hosts the SEC Championship Game. Other annual college football events include the Chick-fil-A Kickoff Game, the Celebration Bowl, the MEAC/SWAC Challenge, and the Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl which is one of College Football's major New Year's Six Bowl games and a college football playoff bowl. Atlanta additionally hosted the 2018 College Football Playoff National Championship.\nAtlanta regularly hosts a variety of sporting events. Most famous was the Centennial 1996 Summer Olympics. The city has hosted the super bowl three times: Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994, Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000, and Super Bowl LIII in 2019. In professional golf, The Tour Championship, the final PGA Tour event of the season, is played annually at East Lake Golf Club. In 2001 and 2011, Atlanta hosted the PGA Championship, one of the four major championships in men's professional golf, at the Atlanta Athletic Club. In 2011, Atlanta hosted professional wrestling's annual WrestleMania. In soccer, Atlanta has hosted numerous international friendlies and CONCACAF Gold Cup matches. The city has hosted the NCAA Final Four Men's Basketball Championship five times, most recently in 2020.\nRunning is a popular local sport, and the city declares itself to be \"Running City USA\". The city hosts the Peachtree Road Race, the world's largest race, annually on Independence Day. Atlanta also hosts the nation's largest Thanksgiving day half marathon, which starts and ends at Georgia State Stadium. The Atlanta Marathon, which starts and ends at Centennial Olympic Park, routes through many of the city's historic landmarks, and its 2020 running will coincide with the U.S. Olympic marathon trials for the 2020 Summer Olympics.\nParks and recreation.\nAtlanta's 343 parks, nature preserves, and gardens cover , which amounts to only 5.6% of the city's total acreage, compared to the national average of just over 10%. However, 64% of Atlantans live within a 10-minute walk of a park, a percentage equal to the national average. In its 2013 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that among the park systems of the 50 most populous U.S. cities, Atlanta's park system received a ranking of 31. Piedmont Park, in Midtown, is Atlanta's most iconic green space. The park, which underwent a major renovation and expansion in recent years, attracts visitors from across the region and hosts cultural events throughout the year. Other notable city parks include Centennial Olympic Park, a legacy of the 1996 Summer Olympics that forms the centerpiece of the city's tourist district; Woodruff Park, which anchors the campus of Georgia State University; Grant Park, home to Zoo Atlanta; Chastain Park, which houses an amphitheater used for live music concerts; and the under construction Westside Park at Bellwood Quarry, the 280-acre green space and reservoir project slated to become the city's largest park when fully complete in the 2020s. The Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area, in the northwestern corner of the city, preserves a stretch of the river for public recreation opportunities.\nThe Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, contains formal gardens, including a Japanese garden and a rose garden, woodland areas, and a conservatory that includes indoor exhibits of plants from tropical rainforests and deserts. The BeltLine, a former rail corridor that forms a loop around Atlanta's core, has been transformed into a series of parks, connected by a multi-use trail, increasing Atlanta's park space by 40%.\nAtlanta offers resources and opportunities for amateur and participatory sports and recreation. Golf and tennis are popular in Atlanta, and the city contains six public golf courses and 182 tennis courts. Facilities along the Chattahoochee River cater to watersports enthusiasts, providing the opportunity for kayaking, canoeing, fishing, boating, or tubing. The city's only skate park, a facility that offers bowls, curbs, and smooth-rolling concrete mounds, is at Historic Fourth Ward Park.\nGovernment.\nAtlanta is governed by a mayor and the Atlanta City Council. The city council consists of 15 representatives\u2014one from each of the city's 12 districts and three at-large positions. The mayor may veto a bill passed by the council, but the council can override the veto with a two-thirds majority. The mayor of Atlanta is Keisha Lance Bottoms, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot whose first term in office began on January 2, 2018. Every mayor elected since 1973 has been black. In 2001, Shirley Franklin became the first woman to be elected mayor of Atlanta, and the first African-American woman to serve as mayor of a major Southern city. Atlanta city politics suffered from a notorious reputation for corruption during the 1990s administration of Mayor Bill Campbell, who was convicted by a federal jury in 2006 on three counts of tax evasion in connection with gambling winnings during trips he took with city contractors.\nAs the state capital, Atlanta is the site of most of Georgia's state government. The Georgia State Capitol building, located downtown, houses the offices of the governor, lieutenant governor and secretary of state, as well as the General Assembly. The Governor's Mansion is in a residential section of Buckhead. Atlanta serves as the regional hub for many arms of the federal bureaucracy, including the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The City of Atlanta annexed the CDC into its territory effective January 1, 2018. Atlanta also plays an important role in the federal judiciary system, containing the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit and the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia.\nHistorically, Atlanta has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party. Although municipal elections are officially nonpartisan, nearly all of the city's elected officials are registered Democrats. The city is split among 14 state house districts and four state senate districts, all held by Democrats. At the federal level, Atlanta is split between two congressional districts. Most of the city is in the 5th district, represented by Democrat Nikema Williams. A small portion in the north is in the 11th district, represented by Republican Barry Loudermilk.\nLaw enforcement, fire, and EMS services.\nThe city is served by the Atlanta Police Department, which numbers 2,000 officers and oversaw a 40% decrease in the city's crime rate between 2001 and 2009. Specifically, homicide decreased by 57%, rape by 72%, and violent crime overall by 55%. Crime is down across the country, but Atlanta's improvement has occurred at more than twice the national rate. Nevertheless, Forbes ranked Atlanta as the sixth most dangerous city in the United States in 2012. Aggravated assaults, burglaries and robberies were down from 2014. Mexican drug cartels thrive in Atlanta. 145 gangs operate in Atlanta.\nThe Atlanta Fire Rescue Department provides fire protection and first responder emergency medical services to the city from its 35 fire stations. In 2017, AFRD responded to over 100,000 calls for service over a coverage area of . The department also protects Hartsfield\u2013Jackson with 5 fire stations on the property; serving over 1\u00a0million passengers from over 100 different countries. The department protects over 3000 highrise buildings, of the rapid rail system, and of interstate highway.\nEmergency ambulance services are provided to city residents by hospital based Grady EMS (Fulton County), and American Medical Response (DeKalb County).\nAtlanta in January 2017 declared the city was a \"welcoming city\" and \"will remain open and welcoming to all\". Nonetheless, Atlanta does not consider itself to be a \"sanctuary city\". Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said: \"Our city does not support ICE. We don't have a relationship with the U.S. Marshal[s] Service. We closed our detention center to ICE detainees, and we would not pick up people on an immigration violation.\"\nEducation.\nTertiary education.\nDue to more than 15 colleges and universities in Atlanta, it is considered one of the nation's largest hubs for higher education.\nThe Georgia Institute of Technology is a prominent public research university in Midtown. It offers highly ranked degree programs in engineering, design, industrial management, the sciences, and architecture.\nThe University of Georgia, chartered in 1785, is one of the top public research universities in the nation with \"Highest Research Activity\" and based about an hour away in Athens; however, the Atlanta Center of its Terry College of Business is in the Buckhead area of Atlanta and the university has a metropolitan Atlanta Gwinnett Campus that occupies 60,000 square feet of the Intellicenter.\nGeorgia State University is a major public research university in Downtown Atlanta; it is the largest in student population of the 29 public colleges and universities in the University System of Georgia and is a significant contributor to the revitalization of the city's central business district.\nAtlanta is home to nationally renowned private colleges and universities, most notably Emory University, a leading liberal arts and research institution that operates Emory Healthcare, the largest health care system in Georgia. The City of Atlanta annexed Emory into its territory effective January 1, 2018.\nThe Atlanta University Center is also in the city; it is the oldest and largest contiguous consortium of historically black colleges in the nation, comprising Spelman College, Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College, and Morehouse School of Medicine. Atlanta contains a campus of the Savannah College of Art and Design, a private art and design university that has proven to be a major factor in the recent growth of Atlanta's visual art community. Atlanta and nearby Athens also boast American Bar Association accredited law schools: Atlanta's John Marshall Law School, Emory University School of Law, Georgia State University College of Law and University of Georgia School of Law.\nThe Atlanta Regional Council of Higher Education (ARCHE) is dedicated to strengthening synergy among 19 public and private colleges and universities in the Atlanta region. Participating Atlanta region colleges and universities partner on joint-degree programs, cross-registration, library services, and cultural events.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nFifty-five thousand students are enrolled in 106 schools in Atlanta Public Schools (APS), some of which are operated as charter schools. Atlanta is served by many private schools including, without limitation, Atlanta Jewish Academy, Atlanta International School, The Westminster Schools, Pace Academy, The Lovett School, The Paideia School, Holy Innocents' Episcopal School and Roman Catholic parochial schools operated by the Archdiocese of Atlanta.\nIn 2018 the City of Atlanta annexed a portion of DeKalb County containing the Centers for Disease Control and Emory University; this portion will be zoned to the DeKalb County School District until 2024, when it will transition into APS. In 2017 the number of children living in the annexed territory who attended public schools was nine.\nMedia.\nThe primary network-affiliated television stations in Atlanta are WXIA-TV 11 (NBC), WGCL-TV 46 (CBS), WSB-TV 2 (ABC), and WAGA-TV 5 (Fox). Other major commercial stations include WPXA-TV 14 (Ion), WPCH-TV 17 (Ind.), WUVG-TV 34 (Univision), WUPA 69 (CW), and WATL 36 (MyNetworkTV). WPXA-TV, WUVG-TV, WAGA-TV and WUPA are network O&amp;O's. The Atlanta metropolitan area is served by two public television stations (both PBS member stations), and two public radio stations. WGTV 8 is the flagship station of the statewide Georgia Public Television network, while WPBA is owned by Atlanta Public Schools. Georgia Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, WABE, a classical music station operated by Atlanta Public Schools. The second public radio, listerner-funded NPR member station is WCLK, a jazz music station owned and operated by Clark Atlanta University.\nAtlanta is served by \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution. The \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" is the result of a 1950 merger between \"The Atlanta Journal\" and \"The Atlanta Constitution\", with staff consolidation occurring in 1982 and separate publication of the morning \"Constitution\" and afternoon \"Journal\" ceasing in 2001. Alternative weekly newspapers include \"Creative Loafing\", which has a weekly print circulation of 80,000. \"Atlanta\" magazine is an award-winning, monthly general-interest magazine based in and covering Atlanta.\nTransportation.\nAtlanta's transportation infrastructure comprises a complex network that includes a heavy rail rapid transit system, a light rail streetcar loop, a multi-county bus system, Amtrak service via the Crescent, multiple freight train lines, an Interstate Highway System, several airports, including the world's busiest, and over of bike paths.\nAtlanta has a network of freeways that radiate out from the city, and automobiles are the dominant means of transportation in the region. Three major interstate highways converge in Atlanta: I-20 (east-west), I-75 (northwest-southeast), and I-85 (northeast-southwest). The latter two combine in the middle of the city to form the Downtown Connector (I-75/85), which carries more than 340,000 vehicles per day and is one of the most congested segments of interstate highway in the United States. Atlanta is mostly encircled by Interstate 285, a beltway locally known as \"the Perimeter\" that has come to mark the boundary between \"Inside the Perimeter\" (ITP), the city and close-in suburbs, and \"Outside the Perimeter\" (OTP), the outer suburbs and exurbs. The heavy reliance on automobiles for transportation in Atlanta has resulted in traffic, commute, and air pollution rates that rank among the worst in the country. The City of Atlanta has a higher than average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 15.2 percent of Atlanta households lacked a car, and increased slightly to 16.4 percent in 2016. The national average is 8.7 percent in 2016. Atlanta averaged 1.31 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nThe Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) provides public transportation in the form of buses, heavy rail, and a downtown light rail loop. Notwithstanding heavy automotive usage in Atlanta, the city's subway system is the eighth busiest in the country. MARTA rail lines connect key destinations, such as the airport, Downtown, Midtown, Buckhead, and Perimeter Center. However, significant destinations, such as Emory University and Cumberland, remain unserved. As a result, a 2011 Brookings Institution study placed Atlanta 91st of 100 metro areas for transit accessibility. Emory University operates its Cliff shuttle buses with 200,000 boardings per month, while private minibuses supply Buford Highway. Amtrak, the national rail passenger system, provides service to Atlanta via the \"Crescent train\" (New\u00a0York\u2013New\u00a0Orleans), which stops at Peachtree Station. In 2014, the Atlanta Streetcar opened to the public. The streetcar's line, which is also known as the Downtown Loop, runs around the downtown tourist areas of Peachtree Center, Centennial Olympic Park, the Martin Luther King Jr. National Historical Park, and Sweet Auburn. The Atlanta Streetcar line is also being expanded on in the coming years to include a wider range of Atlanta's neighborhoods and important places of interest, with a total of over of track in the plan.\nHartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport is the world's busiest airport as measured by passenger traffic and aircraft traffic. The facility offers air service to over 150 U.S. destinations and more than 75 international destinations in 50 countries, with over 2,500 arrivals and departures daily. Delta Air Lines maintains its largest hub at the airport. Situated () south of downtown, the airport covers most of the land inside a wedge formed by Interstate 75, Interstate 85, and Interstate 285.\nCycling is a growing mode of transportation in Atlanta, more than doubling since 2009, when it comprised 1.1% of all commutes (up from 0.3% in 2000). Although Atlanta's lack of bike lanes and hilly topography may deter many residents from cycling, the city's transportation plan calls for the construction of of bike lanes by 2020, with the BeltLine helping to achieve this goal. In 2012, Atlanta's first \"bike track\" was constructed on 10th Street in Midtown. The two lane bike track runs from Monroe Drive west to Charles Allen Drive, with connections to the Beltline and Piedmont Park. Starting in June 2016, Atlanta received a bike sharing program, known as Relay Bike Share, with 100 bikes in Downtown and Midtown, which expanded to 500 bikes at 65 stations as of April 2017.\nAccording to the 2016 American Community Survey (five-year average), 68.6% of working city of Atlanta residents commuted by driving alone, 7% carpooled, 10% used public transportation, and 4.6% walked. About 2.1% used all other forms of transportation, including taxi, bicycle, and motorcycle. About 7.6% worked at home.\nThe city has also become one of a handful of \"scooter capitals\", where companies like Lime and Bird have gained a major foothold by placing electric scooters on street corners and byways.\nTree canopy.\nAtlanta has a reputation as a \"city in a forest\" due to an abundance of trees that is rare among major cities. The city's main street is named after a tree, and beyond the Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead business districts, the skyline gives way to a dense canopy of woods that spreads into the suburbs. The city is home to the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, an annual arts and crafts festival held one weekend during early April, when the native dogwoods are in bloom. The nickname is factually accurate, as vegetation covers 47.9% of the city as of 2017, the highest among all major American cities, and well above the national average of 27%. Atlanta's tree coverage does not go unnoticed\u2014it was the main reason cited by \"National Geographic\" in naming Atlanta a \"Place of a Lifetime\".\nThe city's lush tree canopy, which filters out pollutants and cools sidewalks and buildings, has increasingly been under assault from man and nature due to heavy rains, drought, aged forests, new pests, and urban construction. A 2001 study found Atlanta's heavy tree cover declined from 48% in 1974 to 38% in 1996. Community organizations and the city government are addressing the problem. Trees Atlanta, a non-profit organization founded in 1985, has planted and distributed over 113,000 shade trees in the city, and Atlanta's government has awarded $130,000 in grants to neighborhood groups to plant trees. Fees are additionally imposed on developers that remove trees on their property per a citywide ordinance, active since 1993.\nSister cities.\nAtlanta's sister cities are:"}
{"id": "3139", "revid": "13825260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3139", "title": "Apostle (Christian)", "text": ""}
{"id": "3143", "revid": "40347300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3143", "title": "Axiology", "text": "Axiology (from Greek , \"axia\": \"value, worth\"; and , \"-logia\": \"study of\") is the philosophical study of value. It includes questions about the nature and classification of values and about what kinds of things have value. It is intimately connected with various other philosophical fields that crucially depend on the notion of value, like ethics, aesthetics or philosophy of religion. It is also closely related to value theory and meta-ethics. The term was first used by Paul Lapie, in 1902, and Eduard von Hartmann, in 1908.\nThe distinction between \"intrinsic\" and \"extrinsic\" value is central to axiology: something is \"intrinsically valuable\" if it is \"good in itself\" or \"good for its own sake\". It is usually held that intrinsic value \"depends\" on certain features of the valuable entity. For example, an experience may be said to be intrinsically valuable \"in virtue of\" being pleasurable. \"Extrinsic value\", by contrast, is ascribed to things that are valuable only as a \"means\" to something else. \"Substantive theories\" of value try to determine which entities have intrinsic value. \"Monist theories\" hold that there is only one type of intrinsic value. The paradigm example of monist theories is hedonism, the thesis that only pleasure has intrinsic value. \"Pluralist theories\", on the other hand, contend that there are various different types of intrinsic value, for example, virtue, knowledge, friendship, etc. Value pluralists face the problem of explaining whether or how the different types of value can be compared when making rational decisions. Some philosophers state that values \"do not exist\" on the most fundamental level of reality. One such view holds that a value statement about something just expresses the speaker's approval or disapproval of this thing. This position is opposed by \"realists about value\".\nHistory.\nBetween the 5th and 6th centuries BC, it was important in Greece to be knowledgeable if you were to be successful. Philosophers began to recognize that differences existed between the laws and morality of society. Socrates believed that knowledge had a vital connection to virtue, making morality and democracy closely intertwined. Socrates' student, Plato furthered the belief by establishing virtues which should be followed by all.\nE. J. Dijksterhuis found that axiological antithesis characterized the philosophy of ancient Greece:\nWith the fall of the government, values became individual, causing skeptic schools of thought to flourish, ultimately shaping a pagan philosophy that is thought to have influenced and shaped Christianity. During the medieval period, Thomas Aquinas made the distinction between natural and supernatural (theological) virtues. This concept led philosophers to distinguish between judgments based on fact and judgments based on values, creating division between science and philosophy.\nIntrinsic value.\nTraditionally, philosophers held that an entity has intrinsic value if it is \"good in itself\" or \"good for its own sake\". \"Intrinsic value\" is contrasted with \"extrinsic or instrumental value\", which is ascribed to things that are valuable only as a \"means\" to something else. For example, tools like cars or microwaves are said to be extrinsically valuable in virtue of the function they perform, while the well-being they cause is intrinsically valuable, according to hedonism. The same entity can be valuable in different ways: some entities have both intrinsic and extrinsic values at the same time. Extrinsic values can form chains, in which one entity is extrinsically valuable because it is a means to another entity that is itself extrinsically valuable. It is commonly held that these chains must terminate somewhere and that the endpoint can only be intrinsically valuable. The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic values is important for understanding various disagreements within axiology. Different substantive theories of value often agree on whether something, for example knowledge, is valuable while disagreeing on whether the value in question is intrinsic or extrinsic.\nThe traditional conception of intrinsic value presented above has been criticized in contemporary philosophy on the grounds that it combines various distinct notions that are better discussed separately. One such contrast is between \"intrinsic\" and \"final\" values. On a more narrow conception, an \"intrinsic\" value is a value an entity has in virtue of its intrinsic properties. For example, assuming that the phenomenal aspect of a pleasant experience is an intrinsic property, we might say that the experience is intrinsically valuable because of this intrinsic property. An entity with \"final\" value, by contrast, is valuable for its own sake. It is usually accepted that there is a conceptual difference between intrinsic and final values. For example, the pleasure experience may be said to be intrinsically valuable on the one hand, and finally valuable on the other hand. But it has been disputed whether there are actual things where these value types can come apart. Proposed candidates for bearers of final non-intrinsic value include unique or rare items (e.g. a stamp) or historically significant items (e.g. the pen that Abraham Lincoln used to sign the Emancipation Proclamation). \"Being-rare\" and \"having-been-used-by-someone\" are \"extrinsic\" properties that may be responsible for their bearers having \"final\" value, i.e. being valuable for their own sake.\nSome philosophers have questioned whether extrinsic values should be regarded as values at all rather than as mere indications of values. One reason for considering this idea is that adding or removing extrinsically valuable things does not affect the value of the whole if all intrinsically valuable things are kept constant. For example, the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake had a negative extrinsic value because of all the damage it caused. But arguably, the world would not have been a better place if exactly the same damage had been caused without the earthquake.\nOntological status of values.\nIn axiology, it is often important to distinguish between the entity that is valuable and the features in virtue of which it is valuable. For example, an experience may be said to be valuable in virtue of being pleasurable. This distinction is particularly relevant for intrinsic values since it is commonly held that the intrinsic value of an entity supervenes on its intrinsic features. This means that the entity could not have a different intrinsic value unless it had different intrinsic features.\nSubstantive theories of value focus on the features in virtue of which something has intrinsic value. Popular candidates for these features include pleasure, virtue and knowledge. Another question concerns the nature of the entities that are the bearers of value. The main approaches to this question can be divided into the Kantian tradition, which considers concrete things like persons to be the bearers of value, and the Moorean tradition, which holds that only states of affairs bear value. This difference is important when determining whether a value is extrinsic or intrinsic to an entity. Some philosophers hold that objects like Napoleon's hat are valuable because of their relation to extraordinary persons. From a Kantian perspective, this value must be extrinsic since it is based on the extrinsic property of having been worn by an extraordinary person. But from a Moorean perspective, it can be intrinsic since it is born not by the hat but by a state of affairs involving both the hat and Napoleon.\nThe preceding discussion about the ontological categories of values and value-bearers assumes some form of realism: that there actually are valuable things. But the difficulties in reaching expert consensus in value-related fields like ethics, aesthetics or politics and considerations from naturalism have led various philosophers to doubt this assumption. The ensuing dispute between cognitivists and non-cognitivists is usually held on the level of value-statements or value-attitudes, either concerning all values or specifically concerning ethical values. Cognitivists assert that value-statements are \"truth-apt\", i.e. are either true or false, which is denied by non-cognitivists. Most cognitivists are realists about values: they believe that values are part of reality. Error theory, as originally articulated by J. L. Mackie, is an exception. Error theorists hold that all value-statements are false, and thereby truth-apt, because the world lacks value-features that would be needed to make them true. Non-cognitivists, on the other hand, go one step further by denying that value-statements are truth-apt. This position involves the difficulty of explaining how value-statements can be meaningful despite lacking a truth value. This challenge can be met in different ways. Emotivists, following A. J. Ayer, state that value-statements only express the emotions of the speaker and are intended to influence the actions of the listener. Prescriptivism, as developed by R. M. Hare, interprets value-statements as imperatives or commands. Simon Blackburn's quasi-realism states that value statements project emotional attitudes as though they were real properties.\nMonism and pluralism.\nSubstantive theories of value try to determine which entities have \"intrinsic value\". A traditional dispute in this field is between monist and pluralist theories. Monist theories hold that there is only one type of intrinsic value. The paradigm example of monist theories is hedonism, the thesis that only pleasure has intrinsic value. Pluralist theories, on the other hand, contend that there are various different types of intrinsic value. W. D. Ross, for example, holds that pleasure is only one type of intrinsic value besides other types, like knowledge. It is important to keep in mind that this disagreement only concerns \"intrinsic\" value, not value \"at large\". So hedonists may be happy to concede that knowledge is valuable, but only extrinsically so, given that knowledge can be helpful in causing pleasure and avoiding pain.\nVarious arguments have been suggested in the monism-pluralism-dispute. Common-sense seems to favor value pluralism: values are ascribed to a wide range of different things like happiness, liberty, friendship, etc. without any obvious common feature underlying these values. One way to defend value monism is to cast doubt on the reliability of common-sense for technical matters like the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic value. This strategy is pursued by J. J. C. Smart, who holds that there is a psychological bias to mistake stable extrinsic values for intrinsic values. Value pluralists have often attempted to provide exhaustive lists of all value types, but different theorists have suggested very different lists. These lists seem to constitute arbitrary selections unless a clear criterion could be provided why all and only these items are included. But if a criterion was to be found then such a theory would no longer be pluralistic. This dilemma suggests that pluralism is explanatory inadequate.\nOne issue closely related to the monism-pluralism-debate is the problem of incommensurability: the question of whether there are incommensurable values. Two values are \"incommensurable\" if there is no fact as to whether one is better than or as good as the other: there is \"no common value scale\" according to which they could be compared. According to Joseph Raz, career choices between very different paths, for example, whether to become a lawyer or a clarinetist, are cases where incommensurable values are involved. Value pluralists often assert that values belonging to different types are incommensurable with each other. Value monists, by contrast, usually deny that there are incommensurable values. This question is particularly relevant for ethics. If different options available to the agent embody incommensurable values then there seems to be no rational way to determine what ought to be done since there is no matter of fact as to which option is better. Widespread incommensurability would threaten to undermine the practical relevance of ethics and rational choice.\nOther concepts and distinctions.\nMany evaluative terms are found in natural language, often with various different meanings. It is important for philosophers to distinguish these different meanings in order to avoid misunderstandings. One such distinction is between a \"predicative\" and a \"attributive\" sense of good and bad. In the \"attributive\" sense, an entity is good in relation to a certain kind. For example, a person with a clear voice may be a good singer or a knife with a blunt edge may be a bad knife. But this still leaves it open whether the entity in question is good or bad in an \"unqualified\" or \"predicative\" sense. For example, a person may be a bad assassin but being bad as an assassin is not bad in a predicative sense. Axiology is usually interested in the predicative sense of goodness. But some philosophers deny that such a sense exists and therefore hold that all value is relative to a kind.\nA second important distinction is that between \"being good for a person\" and \"being good for the world\". \"Being good for a person\" or \"prudential value\" has to do with this person's welfare or well-being. But what is good for one person may be bad for another person. For example, having a dry summer may be good for the hiker in virtue of the pleasant hiking conditions, but bad for the farmer, whose crop is dying because of a lack of water. In such cases, the question arises as to what is \"good for the world\" or \"good simpliciter\". Utilitarians can solve this problem by defining the \"good for the world\" as the sum of the \"good for each persons\".\nPhilosophers often distinguish between \"evaluative concepts\" (like \"good\" or \"bad\") and \"deontic concepts\" (like \"right\", \"fitting\" or \"ought\"). The former belong to axiology proper and express what has worth or value while the latter belong to ethics (and related fields) and express what one ought to do. Philosophers have tried to provide a unified account of these two fields since they seem to be intimately related. Consequentialists see evaluative concepts as fundamental and define deontic concepts in terms of evaluative concepts. \"Fitting-attitude theories\", on the other hand, try to reduce evaluative concepts to deontic concepts. \"Consequentialism\" is an ethical theory that holds that, given a certain set of possible actions, we ought to perform the action that has the best overall consequences. So what we ought to do is defined in evaluative terms: whatever leads to the consequences with the highest value. \"Fitting-attitude theories\" are axiological theories that define the value of something in terms of the attitude that would be \"fitting\" to have towards this thing, for example, that it would be good to find a cure for cancer because this would be a fitting object of desire. These accounts build on the deontic notion that some of our attitudes towards the world are \"fitting\" or \"right\" to define what is \"good\"."}
{"id": "3144", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3144", "title": "A Doll's House", "text": "A Doll's House (Danish and ; also translated as \"A Doll House\") is a three-act play written by Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen. It premiered at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 21 December 1879, having been published earlier that month. The play is set in a Norwegian town circa 1879.\nThe play is significant for the way it deals with the fate of a married woman, who at the time in Norway lacked reasonable opportunities for self-fulfillment in a male-dominated world, despite the fact that Ibsen denies it was his intent to write a feminist play. It aroused a great sensation at the time, and caused a \"storm of outraged controversy\" that went beyond the theatre to the world newspapers and society.\nIn 2006, the centennial of Ibsen's death, \"A Doll's House\" held the distinction of being the world's most performed play that year. UNESCO has inscribed Ibsen's autographed manuscripts of \"A Doll's House\" on the Memory of the World Register in 2001, in recognition of their historical value.\nThe title of the play is most commonly translated as \"A Doll's House\", though some scholars use \"A Doll House\". John Simon says that \"A Doll's House\" is \"the British term for what [Americans] call a 'dollhouse'\". Egil T\u00f6rnqvist says of the alternative title: \"Rather than being superior to the traditional rendering, it simply sounds more idiomatic to Americans.\"\nSynopsis.\nAct One.\nThe play opens at Christmas time as Nora Helmer enters her home carrying many packages. Nora's husband Torvald is working in his study when she arrives. He playfully rebukes her for spending so much money on Christmas gifts, calling her his \"little squirrel.\" He teases her about how the previous year she had spent weeks making gifts and ornaments by hand because money was scarce. This year Torvald is due a promotion at the bank where he works, so Nora feels that they can let themselves go a little. The maid announces two visitors: Mrs. Kristine Linde, an old friend of Nora's, who has come seeking employment; and Dr. Rank, a close friend of the family, who is let into the study. Kristine has had a difficult few years, ever since her husband died leaving her with no money or children. Nora says that things have not been easy for them either: Torvald became sick, and they had to travel to Italy so he could recover. Kristine explains that when her mother was ill she had to take care of her brothers, but now that they are grown she feels her life is \"unspeakably empty.\" Nora promises to talk to Torvald about finding her a job. Kristine gently tells Nora that she is like a child. Nora is offended, so she teases the idea that she got money from \"some admirer,\" so they could travel to Italy to improve Torvald's health. She told Torvald that her father gave her the money, but in fact she managed to illegally borrow it without his knowledge because women couldn't do anything economical like signing checks without their husband. Over the years, she has been secretly working and saving up to pay it off.\nKrogstad, a lower-level employee at Torvald's bank, arrives and goes into the study. Nora is clearly uneasy when she sees him. Dr. Rank leaves the study and mentions that he feels wretched, though like everyone he wants to go on living. In contrast to his physical illness, he says that the man in the study, Krogstad, is \"morally diseased.\"\nAfter the meeting with Krogstad, Torvald comes out of the study. Nora asks him if he can give Kristine a position at the bank and Torvald is very positive, saying that this is a fortunate moment, as a position has just become available. Torvald, Kristine, and Dr. Rank leave the house, leaving Nora alone. The nanny returns with the children and Nora plays with them for a while until Krogstad creeps through the ajar door, into the living room, and surprises her. Krogstad tells Nora that Torvald intends to fire him at the bank and asks her to intercede with Torvald to allow him to keep his job. She refuses, and Krogstad threatens to blackmail her about the loan she took out for the trip to Italy; he knows that she obtained this loan by forging her father's signature after his death. Krogstad leaves and when Torvald returns, Nora tries to convince him not to fire Krogstad. Torvald refuses to hear her pleas, explaining that Krogstad is a liar and a hypocrite and that years before he had committed a crime: he forged other people\u2019s signatures. Torvald feels physically ill in the presence of a man \"poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation.\"\nAct Two.\nKristine arrives to help Nora repair a dress for a costume function that she and Torvald plan to attend the next day. Torvald returns from the bank, and Nora pleads with him to reinstate Krogstad, claiming she is worried Krogstad will publish libelous articles about Torvald and ruin his career. Torvald dismisses her fears and explains that, although Krogstad is a good worker and seems to have turned his life around, he must be fired because he is too familial around Torvald in front of other bank personnel. Torvald then retires to his study to work.\nDr. Rank, the family friend, arrives. Nora asks him for a favor, but Rank responds by revealing that he has entered the terminal stage of his disease and that he has always been secretly in love with her. Nora tries to deny the first revelation and make light of it but is more disturbed by his declaration of love. She then clumsily attempts to tell him that she is not in love with him, but loves him dearly as a friend.\nHaving been fired by Torvald, Krogstad arrives at the house. Nora convinces Dr. Rank to go into Torvald's study so he will not see Krogstad. When Krogstad confronts Nora, he declares that he no longer cares about the remaining balance of Nora's loan, but that he will instead preserve the associated bond to blackmail Torvald into not only keeping him employed but also promoting him. Nora explains that she has done her best to persuade her husband, but he refuses to change his mind. Krogstad informs Nora that he has written a letter detailing her crime (forging her father's signature of surety on the bond) and put it in Torvald's mailbox, which is locked.\nNora tells Kristine of her difficult situation. She gives her Krogstad's card with his address, and asks her to try to convince him to relent.\nTorvald enters and tries to retrieve his mail, but Nora distracts him by begging him to help her with the dance she has been rehearsing for the costume party, feigning anxiety about performing. She dances so badly and acts so childishly that Torvald agrees to spend the whole evening coaching her. When the others go to dinner, Nora stays behind for a few minutes and contemplates killing herself.\nAct Three.\nKristine tells Krogstad that she only married her husband because she had no other means to support her sick mother and young siblings and that she has returned to offer him her love again. She believes that he would not have stooped to unethical behavior if he had not been devastated by her abandonment and been in dire financial straits. Krogstad changes his mind and offers to take back his letter from Torvald. However, Kristine decides that Torvald should know the truth for the sake of his and Nora's marriage.\nAfter Torvald literally drags Nora home from the party, \nRank follows them. They chat for a while, with Dr. Rank conveying obliquely to Nora that this is a final goodbye, as he has determined that his death is near. Dr. Rank leaves, and Torvald retrieves his letters. As he reads them, Nora prepares to run away for good, but Torvald confronts her with Krogstad's letter. Enraged, he declares that he is now completely in Krogstad's power; he must yield to Krogstad's demands and keep quiet about the whole affair. He berates Nora, calling her a dishonest and immoral woman and telling her that she is unfit to raise their children. He says that from now on their marriage will be only a matter of appearances.\nA maid enters, delivering a letter to Nora. The letter is from Krogstad, yet Torvald demands to read the letter and takes it from Nora. Torvald exults that he is saved, as Krogstad has returned the incriminating bond, which Torvald immediately burns along with Krogstad's letters. He takes back his harsh words to his wife and tells her that he forgives her. Nora realizes that her husband is not the strong and gallant man she thought he was, and that he truly loves himself more than he does Nora.\nTorvald explains that when a man has forgiven his wife, it makes him love her all the more since it reminds him that she is totally dependent on him, like a child. He preserves his peace of mind by thinking of the incident as a mere mistake that she made owing to her foolishness, one of her most endearing feminine traits.\nNora tells Torvald that she is leaving him, and in a confrontational scene expresses her sense of betrayal and disillusionment. She says he has never loved her, they have become strangers to each other. She feels betrayed by his response to the scandal involving Krogstad, and she says she must get away to understand herself. She says that she has been treated like a doll to play with for her whole life, first by her father and then by him. Torvald insists that she fulfill her duty as a wife and mother, but Nora says that she has duties to herself that are just as important, and that she cannot be a good mother or wife without learning to be more than a plaything. She reveals that she had expected that he would want to sacrifice his reputation for hers and that she had planned to kill herself to prevent him from doing so. She now realizes that Torvald is not at all the kind of person she had believed him to be and that their marriage has been based on mutual fantasies and misunderstandings.\nNora leaves her keys and wedding ring; Torvald breaks down and begins to cry, baffled by what has happened. After Nora leaves the room, Torvald, for one second, still has a sense of hope, and exclaims to himself \"The most wonderful thing of all--?\", just before the door downstairs is heard closing.\nAlternative ending.\nIbsen's German agent felt that the original ending would not play well in German theatres. In addition, copyright laws of the time would not preserve Ibsen's original work. Therefore, for it to be considered acceptable, and prevent the translator from altering his work, Ibsen was forced to write an alternative ending for the German premiere. In this ending, Nora is led to her children after having argued with Torvald. Seeing them, she collapses, and as the curtain is brought down, it is implied that she stays. Ibsen later called the ending a disgrace to the original play and referred to it as a \"barbaric outrage\". Virtually all productions today use the original ending, as do nearly all of the film versions of the play.\nComposition and publication.\nReal-life inspiration.\n\"A Doll's House\" was based on the life of Laura Kieler (maiden name Laura Smith Petersen), a good friend of Ibsen. Much that happened between Nora and Torvald happened to Laura and her husband, Victor. Similar to the events in the play, Laura signed an illegal loan to save her husband. She wanted the money to find a cure for her husband's tuberculosis. She wrote to Ibsen, asking for his recommendation of her work to his publisher, thinking that the sales of her book would repay her debt. At his refusal, she forged a check for the money. At this point she was found out. In real life, when Victor discovered about Laura's secret loan, he divorced her and had her committed to an asylum. Two years later, she returned to her husband and children at his urging, and she went on to become a well-known Danish author, living to the age of 83.\nIbsen wrote \"A Doll's House\" at the point when Laura Kieler had been committed to the asylum, and the fate of this friend of the family shook him deeply, perhaps also because Laura had asked him to intervene at a crucial point in the scandal, which he did not feel able or willing to do. Instead, he turned this life situation into an aesthetically shaped, successful drama. In the play, Nora leaves Torvald with head held high, though facing an uncertain future given the limitations single women faced in the society of the time.\nKieler eventually rebounded from the shame of the scandal and had her own successful writing career while remaining discontented with sole recognition as \"Ibsen's Nora\" years afterwards.\nComposition.\nIbsen started thinking about the play around May 1878, although he did not begin its first draft until a year later, having reflected on the themes and characters in the intervening period (he visualised its protagonist, Nora, for instance, as having approached him one day wearing \"a blue woolen dress\"). He outlined his conception of the play as a \"modern tragedy\" in a note written in Rome on 19 October 1878. \"A woman cannot be herself in modern society,\" he argues, since it is \"an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine standpoint!\"\nPublication.\nIbsen sent a fair copy of the completed play to his publisher on 15 September 1879. It was first published in Copenhagen on 4 December 1879, in an edition of 8,000 copies that sold out within a month; a second edition of 3,000 copies followed on 4 January 1880, and a third edition of 2,500 was issued on 8 March.\nProduction history.\n\"A Doll's House\" received its world premiere on 21 December 1879 at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen, with Betty Hennings as Nora, Emil Poulsen as Torvald, and Peter Jerndorff as Dr. Rank. Writing for the Norwegian newspaper \"Folkets Avis\", the critic Erik B\u00f8gh admired Ibsen's originality and technical mastery: \"Not a single declamatory phrase, no high dramatics, no drop of blood, not even a tear.\" Every performance of its run was sold out. Another production opened at the Royal Theatre in Stockholm, on 8 January 1880, while productions in Christiania (with Johanne Juell as Nora and Arnoldus Reimers as Torvald) and Bergen followed shortly after.\nIn Germany, the actress Hedwig Niemann-Raabe refused to perform the play as written, declaring, \"\"I\" would never leave \"my\" children!\" Since the playwright's wishes were not protected by copyright, Ibsen decided to avoid the danger of being rewritten by a lesser dramatist by committing what he called a \"barbaric outrage\" on his play himself and giving it an alternative ending in which Nora did not leave. A production of this version opened in Flensburg in February 1880. This version was also played in Hamburg, Dresden, Hanover, and Berlin, although, in the wake of protests and a lack of success, Niemann-Raabe eventually restored the original ending. Another production of the original version, some rehearsals of which Ibsen attended, opened on 3 March 1880 at the Residenz Theatre in Munich.\nIn Great Britain, the only way in which the play was initially allowed to be given in London was in an adaptation by Henry Arthur Jones and Henry Herman called \"Breaking a Butterfly\". This adaptation was produced at the Princess Theatre, 3 March 1884. Writing in 1896 in his book \"The Foundations of a National Drama\", Jones says: \"A rough translation from the German version of A Doll's House was put into my hands, and I was told that if it could be turned into a sympathetic play, a ready opening would be found for it on the London boards. I knew nothing of Ibsen, but I knew a great deal of Robertson and H. J. Byron. From these circumstances came the adaptation called \"Breaking a Butterfly\".\" H. L. Mencken writes that it was \"A Doll's House\" \"denaturized and dephlogisticated. \u2026 Toward the middle of the action Ibsen was thrown to the fishes, and Nora was saved from suicide, rebellion, flight and immortality by making a faithful old clerk steal her fateful promissory note from Krogstad's desk. \u2026 The curtain fell upon a happy home.\"\nBefore 1899 there were two private productions of the play in London (in its original form as Ibsen wrote it) \u2014 one featured George Bernard Shaw in the role of Krogstad. The first public British production of the play in its regular form opened on 7 June 1889 at the Novelty Theatre, starring Janet Achurch as Nora and Charles Charrington as Torvald. Achurch played Nora again for a 7-day run in 1897. Soon after its London premiere, Achurch brought the play to Australia in 1889.\nThe play was first seen in America in 1883 in Louisville, Kentucky; Helena Modjeska acted Nora. The play made its Broadway premiere at the Palmer's Theatre on 21 December 1889, starring Beatrice Cameron as Nora Helmer. It was first performed in France in 1894.\nOther productions in the United States include one in 1902 starring Minnie Maddern Fiske, a 1937 adaptation with acting script by Thornton Wilder and starring Ruth Gordon, and a 1971 production starring Claire Bloom.\nA new translation by Zinnie Harris at the Donmar Warehouse, starring Gillian Anderson, Toby Stephens, Anton Lesser, Tara FitzGerald and Christopher Eccleston opened in May 2009.\nThe play was performed by in March 2011, one of their early performances following their December 2010 lower Manhattan launch.\nIn August 2013, Young Vic, London, Great Britain, produced a new adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" directed by Carrie Cracknell based on the English language version by Simon Stephens.\nIn September 2014, in partnership with Brisbane Festival, La Boite located in Brisbane, Australia, hosted an adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" written by Lally Katz and directed by Stephen Mitchell Wright.\nIn June 2015, Space Arts Centre in London staged an adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" featuring the discarded alternate ending.\n'Manaveli' Toronto staged a Tamil version of \"A Doll's House\" (\u0b92\u0bb0\u0bc1 \u0baa\u0bca\u0bae\u0bcd\u0bae\u0bc8\u0baf\u0bbf\u0ba9\u0bcd \u0bb5\u0bc0\u0b9f\u0bc1)on 30 June 2018,Translated and Directed by Mr P Wikneswaran. The drama was very well received by the Tamil Community in Toronto and was staged again in few months later. The same stage play was filmed at the beginning of 2019 and screened in Toronto on 4 May 2019. The film was received with very good reviews and the artists were hailed for their performance. Now, arrangements are being made to screen the film, \u0b92\u0bb0\u0bc1 \u0baa\u0bca\u0bae\u0bcd\u0bae\u0bc8\u0baf\u0bbf\u0ba9\u0bcd \u0bb5\u0bc0\u0b9f\u0bc1, in London, at Safari Cinema Harrow, on 7 July 2019;\nFrom September 2019 to October 2019 the Lyric Hammersmith in London hosted a new adaptation of the play by Tanika Gupta who moved the setting of the play to colonial India. Though the plot largely remained unchanged, the protagonists were renamed Tom and Niru Helmer and a conversation was added regarding the British oppression of the Indian public. One significant shift was the lack of a slamming door at the end of the play. They also published a pack of teaching materials which includes extracts from the adapted play script.\nA production of \"A Doll's House\" by The Jamie Lloyd Company starring Jessica Chastain was initially scheduled to play at the Playhouse Theatre in London in the summer of 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the play is now postponed to a later date.\nAnalysis and criticism.\n\"A Doll's House\" questions the traditional roles of men and women in 19th-century marriage. To many 19th-century Europeans, this was scandalous. The covenant of marriage was considered holy, and to portray it as Ibsen did was controversial. However, the Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw found Ibsen's willingness to examine society without prejudice exhilarating.\nThe Swedish playwright August Strindberg criticised the play in his volume of essays and short stories \"Getting Married\" (1884). Strindberg questioned Nora's walking out and leaving her children behind with a man that she herself disapproved of so much that she would not remain with him. Strindberg also considers that Nora's involvement with an illegal financial fraud that involved Nora forging a signature, all done behind her husband's back, and then Nora's lying to her husband regarding Krogstad's blackmail, are serious crimes that should raise questions at the end of the play, when Nora is moralistically judging her husband. And Strindberg points out that Nora's complaint that she and Torvald \"have never exchanged one serious word about serious things,\" is contradicted by the discussions that occur in act one and two.\nThe reasons Nora leaves her husband are complex, and various details are hinted at throughout the play. In the last scene, she tells her husband she has been \"greatly wronged\" by his disparaging and condescending treatment of her, and his attitude towards her in their marriage \u2013 as though she were his \"doll wife\" \u2014 and the children in turn have become her \"dolls,\" leading her to doubt her own qualifications to raise her children. She is troubled by her husband's behavior in regard to the scandal of the loaned money. She does not love her husband, she feels they are strangers, she feels completely confused, and suggests that her issues are shared by many women. George Bernard Shaw suggests that she left to begin \"a journey in search of self-respect and apprenticeship to life,\" and that her revolt is \"the end of a chapter of human history.\"\nIbsen was inspired by the belief that \"a woman cannot be herself in modern society,\" since it is \"an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine standpoint.\" Its ideas can also be seen as having a wider application: Michael Meyer argued that the play's theme is not women's rights, but rather \"the need of every individual to find out the kind of person he or she really is and to strive to become that person.\" In a speech given to the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights in 1898, Ibsen insisted that he \"must disclaim the honor of having consciously worked for the women's rights movement,\" since he wrote \"without any conscious thought of making propaganda,\" his task having been \"the \"description of humanity\".\" However, the play is associated with feminism, as Miriam Schneir includes it in her anthology \"\", labelling it as one of the essential feminist works.\nBecause of the departure from traditional behavior and theatrical convention involved in Nora's leaving home, her act of slamming the door as she leaves has come to represent the play itself. In \"Iconoclasts\" (1905), James Huneker noted \"That slammed door reverberated across the roof of the world.\"\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\n\"A Doll's House\" has been adapted for the cinema on many occasions, including:"}
{"id": "3146", "revid": "4287607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3146", "title": "AIM-7 Sparrow", "text": "The AIM-7 Sparrow is an American, medium-range semi-active radar homing air-to-air missile operated by the United States Air Force, United States Navy, and United States Marine Corps, as well as other various air forces and navies. Sparrow and its derivatives were the West's principal beyond visual range (BVR) air-to-air missile from the late 1950s until the 1990s. It remains in service, although it is being phased out in aviation applications in favor of the more advanced AIM-120 AMRAAM.\nThe early Sparrow was intended primarily for use against larger targets and especially bombers, and had numerous operational limitations in other uses. Against smaller targets, the need to receive a strong reflected radar signal made achieving lock-on at the missile's effective range difficult. As the launching aircraft's own radar needed to be pointed at the target throughout the engagement, this meant that in fighter-vs-fighter combat the enemy fighter would often approach within the range of shorter-range infrared homing missiles while the launching aircraft had to continue flying towards its target. Additionally, early models were only effective against targets at roughly the same or higher altitudes, below which reflections from the ground became a problem.\nA number of upgraded Sparrow designs were developed to address these issues. In the early 1970s, the RAF developed a version with an inverse monopulse seeker and improved motor known as Skyflash, while the Italian Air Force introduced the similar Aspide. Both had the ability to be fired at targets below the launching fighter (\"look-down, shoot down\"), were more resistant to countermeasures, and much more accurate in the terminal phases. This basic concept was then made part of the US Sparrows in the M model (for monopulse) and some of these were later updated as the P model, the last to be produced in the US. Aspides sold to China resulted in the locally produced PL10. The Japan Self-Defense Forces also employ the Sparrow missile, though it is being phased out and replaced by the Mitsubishi AAM-4.\nThe Sparrow was also used as the basis for a surface-to-air missile, the RIM-7 Sea Sparrow, which is used by a number of navies for air defense of their ships. Fired at low altitude and flying directly at its target through the lower atmosphere, the range of the missile in this role is greatly reduced. With the retirement of the Sparrow in the air-to-air role, a new version of the Sea Sparrow was produced to address this concern, producing the much larger and more capable RIM-162 ESSM.\nDevelopment.\nSparrow I.\nSparrow emerged from a late-1940s United States Navy program to develop a guided rocket weapon for air-to-air use. In 1947 the Navy contracted Sperry to build a beam riding version of a standard HVAR, the standard unguided aerial rocket, under Project Hotshot. The weapon was initially dubbed KAS-1, then AAM-2, and, from 1948 on, AAM-N-2. The airframe was developed by Douglas Aircraft Company. The diameter of the HVAR proved to be inadequate for the electronics, leading Douglas to expand the missile's airframe to diameter. The prototype weapon began unpowered flight-tests in 1947, and made its first aerial interception in 1952.\nAfter a protracted development cycle the initial AAM-N-2 Sparrow entered limited operational service in 1954 with specially modified Douglas F3D Skyknight all-weather carrier night fighters. In 1956, they were joined by the McDonnell F3H-2M Demon and Vought F7U Cutlass fighter aircraft. Compared to the modern versions, the Sparrow I was more streamlined and featured a bullet-shaped airframe with a long pointed nose.\nSparrow I was a limited and rather primitive weapon. The limitations of beam-riding guidance (which was slaved to an optical sight on single seater fighters and a radar with night fighters) restricted the missile to attacks against targets flying a straight course and made it essentially useless against a maneuvering target. Only about 2,000 rounds were produced to this standard.\nSparrow II.\nAs early as 1950 Douglas examined equipping the Sparrow with an active radar seeker, initially known as XAAM-N-2a \"Sparrow II, the original retroactively becoming Sparrow I\". In 1952 it was given the new code AAM-N-3. The active radar made the Sparrow II a \"fire and forget\" weapon, allowing several to be fired at separate targets at the same time.\nBy 1955 Douglas proposed going ahead with development, intending it to be the primary weapon for the F5D Skylancer interceptor. It was later selected, with some controversy, to be the primary weapon for the Canadian Avro Arrow supersonic interceptor, along with the new Astra fire-control system. For Canadian use and as a second source for US missiles, Canadair was selected to build the missiles in Quebec.\nThe small size of the missile forebody and the K-band AN/APQ-64-radar limited performance, and it was never able to work in testing. After considerable development and test firings in the U.S. and Canada, Douglas abandoned development in 1956. Canadair continued development until the Arrow was cancelled in 1959.\nSparrow X.\nA subvariant of the Sparrow I armed with the same nuclear warhead as the MB-1 Genie was proposed in 1958, but was cancelled shortly thereafter.\nSparrow III.\nConcurrently with the development of the Sparrow I, in 1951, Raytheon began work on the semi-active radar homing version of Sparrow family of missiles, the AAM-N-6 \"Sparrow III\". The first of these weapons entered United States Navy service in 1958.\nThe AAM-N-6a was similar to the -6, but used a new Thiokol liquid-fuel rocket engine for improved performance. It also included changes to the guidance electronics to make it effective at higher closing speeds. The -6a was also selected to arm the Air Force's \"F-110A Spectre\" (F-4 Phantom) fighters in 1962, known to them as the AIM-101. It entered production in 1959, with 7500 being built.\nAnother upgrade reverted to a Rocketdyne solid-fuel motor for the AAM-N-6b, which started production in 1963. The new motor significantly increased maximum range to for head-on attacks.\nDuring this year the Air Force and Navy agreed on standardized naming conventions for their missiles. The Sparrows became the AIM-7 series. The original Sparrow I and aborted Sparrow II became the AIM-7A and AIM-7B, despite both being out of service. The -6, -6a, and -6B became the AIM-7C, AIM-7D, and AIM-7E respectively.\n25,000 AIM-7Es were produced, and saw extensive use during the Vietnam War, where its performance was generally considered disappointing. The mixed results were a combination of reliability problems (exacerbated by the tropical climate), limited pilot training in fighter-to-fighter combat, and restrictive rules of engagement that generally prohibited BVR (beyond visual range) engagements. The Pk (kill probability) of the AIM-7E was less than 10%; US fighter pilots shot down 59 aircraft out of the 612 Sparrows fired. Of the 612 AIM-7D/E/E-2 missiles fired, 97 (or 15.8%) hit their targets, resulting in 56 (or 9.2%) kills. Two kills were obtained beyond visual range.\nIn 1969 an improved version, the E-2, was introduced with clipped wings and various changes to the fuzing. Considered a \"dogfight Sparrow\", the AIM-7E-2 was intended to be used at shorter ranges where the missile was still travelling at high speeds, and in the head-on aspect, making it much more useful in the visual limitations imposed on the engagements. Even so, its kill rate was only 13% in combat, leading to a practice of ripple-firing all four at once in hopes of increasing kill probability. Its worst tendency was that of detonating prematurely, approximately a thousand feet in front of the launching aircraft, but it also had many motor failures, erratic flights, and fuzing problems. An E-3 version included additional changes to the fuzing, and an E-4 featured a modified seeker for use with the F-14 Tomcat.\nVietnam War (1965\u20131973) records.\nImproved versions of the AIM-7 were developed in the 1970s in an attempt to address the weapon's limitations. The AIM-7F, which entered service in 1976, had a dual-stage rocket motor for longer range, solid-state electronics for greatly improved reliability, and a larger warhead. Even this version had room for improvement, leading British Aerospace and the Italian firm Alenia to develop advanced versions of Sparrow with better performance and improved electronics as the BAe Skyflash and Alenia Aspide, respectively.\nThe most common version of the Sparrow today, the AIM-7M, entered service in 1982 and featured a new inverse monopulse seeker (matching the capabilities of Skyflash), active radar proximity fuse, digital controls, improved ECM resistance, and better low-altitude performance. It was used to good advantage in the 1991 Gulf War, where it scored many USAF air-to-air kills. Of 44 missiles fired, 30 (68.2%) hit their intended targets resulting in 24/26 (54.5%/59.1%) kills. 19 kills were obtained beyond visual range.\nThe AIM-7P is similar in most ways to the M versions, and was primarily an upgrade program for existing M-series missiles. The main changes were to the software, improving low-level performance. A follow-on Block II upgrade added a new rear receiver allowing the missile to receive mid-course correction from the launching aircraft. Plans initially called for all M versions to be upgraded, but currently P's are being issued as required to replace M's lost or removed from the inventory.\nThe final version of the missile was to have been the AIM-7R, which added an infrared homing seeker to an otherwise unchanged AIM-7P Block II. A general wind-down of the budget led to it being cancelled in 1997.\nSparrow is now being phased out with the availability of the active-radar AIM-120 AMRAAM, but is likely to remain in service for several years.\nForeign versions.\nCanada.\nAs part of the Avro Canada CF-105 Arrow program, Canadair (now Bombardier) partnered with Douglas Aircraft Company in the development of the Sparrow II (AAM-N-3/AIM-7B). After Douglas dropped out of this program, Canadair continued on with it until the termination of the Arrow project.\nThe AAM-N-3 Sparrow II was unique in that it had a fully active radar guidance system. This combined both a radar transmitter and receiver in the missile, making it unnecessary for the pilot to keep the aircraft aimed at the target after firing the missile, unlike Semi-active radar homing (SARH) missiles which require continuous radar-assisted guidance throughout flight. This allowed the aircraft that fired the AAM-N-3 to turn away, prosecute other targets, and/or escape from potential retaliatory missiles fired by the enemy aircraft during the time it takes for the Sparrow to reach its target. Despite the significant advantages of this design over SARH guidance, all subsequent models of the Sparrow use semi-active radar homing.\nTo accommodate the active radar guidance system, the AAM-N-3 Sparrow II had a much greater volume than its predecessor. Its size would subsequently set the precedent for all future Sparrow variants.\nIn 1959, Canadair had completed five missiles based on airframes from Douglas, and built two models from scratch, when the program was cancelled with the cancellation of the Arrow.\nItaly.\nThe Italian company Finmeccanica (now Leonardo S.p.A.), Alenia Difesa licensed the AIM-7E Sparrow technology from the US, and produced its own version.\nLater in the 1980s, Alenia started to produce an improved version of the AIM-7 called the Aspide, compared to the AIM-7E, it received a newer and improved monopulse guiding system that allowed for a better hit ratio and easier targeting of enemies at low altitude confused in the ground clutter.\nIt also received a new and more powerful engine and new control surfaces, these control surfaces were all independent one of the others, this gave the missile a much better manuverability compared to the AIM-7E and the English Skyflash that still used dependent control surfaces.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nThe LY-60/FD-60/PL-10 is a family of PRC missiles developed by the Shanghai Academy of Science and Technology, largely based on the Italian Aspide missile \u2013 a version of the Sparrow. There are four versions of the basic design, three of which are surface-to-air and one air-to-air.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union acquired an AIM-7 in 1968 and a Vympel team started copying it as the K-25. The missile did not enter production as the R-23 was thought to have better versatility, range, signal processing logic, and immunity from interference. K-25 work ended in 1971, but analysis of the Sparrow was later used to inform the design of the Vympel R-27, particularly the servomechanisms and movable wings.\nUK.\nBritish Aerospace (BAe) licensed the AIM-7E2 technology in the 1970s, producing the Skyflash missile. Skyflash used a Marconi XJ521 monopulse Semi-Active seeker together with improvements to the electronics. It was powered by the Aerojet Mk52 mod 2 rocket engine (later by the Rocketdyne Mk38 mod 4). Skyflash entered service with the Royal Air Force (RAF) on their Phantom FG.1/FGR.2 in 1978, and later on the Tornado F3. Skyflash was also exported to Sweden for use on their Viggen fighters.\nAn upgraded version with active radar seeker, called Active Sky Flash was proposed by BAe and Thomson-CSF, but did not receive funding because the RAF opted for other missiles.\nDesign.\nThe Sparrow has four major sections: guidance section, warhead, control, and rocket motor (currently the Hercules MK-58 solid-propellant rocket motor). It has a cylindrical body with four wings at mid-body and four tail fins. Although the external dimensions of the Sparrow remained relatively unchanged from model to model, the internal components of newer missiles represent major improvements, with vastly increased capabilities. The warhead is of the continuous-rod type.\nAs with other semi-active radar guided missiles, the missile does not generate radar signals, but instead homes in on reflected continuous-wave signals from the launch platform's radar. The receiver also senses the guidance radar to enable comparisons that enhance the missile's resistance to passive jamming.\nPrinciple of guidance.\nThe launching aircraft will illuminate the target with its radar. In radars of the 1950s these were single target tracking devices using a nutating horn as part of the antenna. This caused the beam to be swept in a small cone. Signal processing would be applied to determine the direction of maximum illumination and so develop a signal to steer the antenna toward the target. The missile detects the reflected signal from the target with a high gain antenna in a similar fashion and steers the entire missile toward closure with the target. The missile guidance also samples a portion of the illuminating signal via rearward pointing waveguides. The comparison of these two signals enabled logic circuits to determine the true target reflection signal, even if the target were to eject radar-reflecting chaff."}
{"id": "3147", "revid": "1011763565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3147", "title": "AIM-120 AMRAAM", "text": "The AIM-120 Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile, or AMRAAM (pronounced ), is an American beyond-visual-range air-to-air missile (BVRAAM) capable of all-weather day-and-night operations. Designed with a 7-inch (180mm) diameter form-and-fit factor, and employing active transmit-receive radar guidance instead of semi-active receive-only radar guidance, it has the advantage of being a fire-and-forget weapon when compared to the previous generation Sparrow missiles. When an AMRAAM missile is launched, NATO pilots use the brevity code Fox Three.\nThe AMRAAM is the world's most popular beyond-visual-range missile; more than 14,000 have been produced for the United States Air Force, the United States Navy, and 33 international customers. The AMRAAM has been used in several engagements and is credited with sixteen air-to-air kills in conflicts over Iraq, Bosnia, Kosovo, Kashmir, and Syria. Now over 30 years old in design, the AMRAAM is due to be replaced by the new AIM-260 JATM, which will offer better long-range performance and ability to defeat electronic warfare jamming.\nOrigins.\nAIM-7 Sparrow MRM.\nThe AIM-7 Sparrow medium range missile (MRM) was purchased by the US Navy from original developer Hughes Aircraft in the 1950s as its first operational air-to-air missile with \"beyond visual range\" (BVR) capability. With an effective range of about , it was introduced as a radar beam-riding missile and then it was improved to a semi-active radar guided missile which would home in on reflections from a target illuminated by the radar of the launching aircraft. It was effective at visual to beyond visual range. The early beam riding versions of the Sparrow missiles were integrated onto the F3H Demon and F7U Cutlass, but the definitive AIM-7 Sparrow was the primary weapon for the all-weather F-4 Phantom II fighter/interceptor, which lacked an internal gun in its U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine Corps, and early U.S. Air Force versions. The F-4 carried up to four AIM-7s in built-in recesses under its belly.\nAlthough designed for use against non-maneuvering targets such as bombers, because of poor performance against fighters over North Vietnam, these missiles were progressively improved until they proved highly effective in dogfights. Together with the short-range, infrared-guided AIM-9 Sidewinder, they replaced the AIM-4 Falcon IR and radar guided series for use in air combat by the USAF as well. A disadvantage to semi-active homing was that only one target could be illuminated by the launching fighter plane at a time. Also, the launching aircraft had to remain pointed in the direction of the target (within the azimuth and elevation of its own radar set) which could be difficult or dangerous in air-to-air combat.\nAn active-radar variant called the Sparrow II was developed to address these drawbacks, but the U.S. Navy pulled out of the project in 1956. The Royal Canadian Air Force, which took over development in the hopes of using the missile to arm their prospective CF-105 Arrow interceptor, soon followed in 1958. The electronics of the time simply could not be miniaturized enough to make Sparrow II a viable working weapon. It would take decades, and a new generation of digital electronics, to produce an effective active-radar air-to-air missile as compact as the Sparrow.\nAIM-54 Phoenix LRM.\nThe US Navy later developed the AIM-54 Phoenix long-range missile (LRM) for the fleet air defense mission. It was a large , Mach 5 missile designed to counter cruise missiles and the bombers that launched them. Originally intended for the straight-wing Douglas F6D Missileer and then the navalized version of the F-111B, it finally saw service with the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, the only fighter capable of carrying such a heavy missile. Phoenix was the first US fire-and-forget, multiple-launch, radar-guided missile: one which used its own active guidance system to guide itself without help from the launch aircraft when it closed on its target. This, in theory, gave a Tomcat with a six-Phoenix load the unprecedented capability of tracking and destroying up to six targets beyond visual range, as far as away\u2014the only US fighter with such capability.\nA full load of six Phoenix missiles and its dedicated launcher exceeded a typical Vietnam-era bomb load. Its service in the US Navy was primarily as a deterrent, as its use was hampered by restrictive rules of engagement in conflicts such as Operations Desert Storm, Southern Watch, and Iraqi Freedom. The US Navy retired the Phoenix in 2004 in light of availability of the AIM-120 AMRAAM on the F/A-18 Hornet and the pending retirement of the F-14 Tomcat from active service in late 2006.\nACEVAL/AIMVAL.\nThe Department of Defense conducted an extensive evaluation of air combat tactics and missile technology from 1974 to 1978 at Nellis AFB using the F-14 Tomcat and F-15 Eagle equipped with Sparrow and Sidewinder missiles as the blue force and aggressor F-5E aircraft equipped with AIM-9L all-aspect Sidewinders as the red force. This joint test and evaluation (JT&amp;E) was designated Air Combat Evaluation/Air Intercept Missile Evaluation (ACEVAL/AIMVAL). A principal finding was that the necessity to produce illumination for the Sparrow until impact resulted in the red force's being able to launch their all-aspect Sidewinders before impact, resulting in mutual kills. What was needed was Phoenix-type multiple-launch and terminal active capability in a Sparrow-size airframe. This led to a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with European allies (principally the UK and Germany for development) for the US to develop an advanced, medium-range, air-to-air missile with the USAF as lead service. The MOA also assigned responsibility for development of an advanced, short-range, air-to-air missile to the European team; this would become the British ASRAAM.\nRequirements.\nBy the 1990s, the reliability of the Sparrow had improved so much from the dismal days of Vietnam that it accounted for the largest number of aerial targets destroyed in Desert Storm. But while the USAF had passed on the Phoenix and their own similar AIM-47/YF-12 to optimize dogfight performance, they still needed a multiple-launch fire-and-forget capability for the F-15 and F-16. AMRAAM would need to be fitted on fighters as small as the F-16, and fit in the same spaces that were designed to fit the Sparrow on the F-4 Phantom. The European partners needed AMRAAM to be integrated on aircraft as small as the Sea Harrier. The US Navy needed AMRAAM to be carried on the F/A-18 Hornet and wanted capability for two to be carried on a launcher that normally carried one Sparrow to allow for more air-to-ground weapons.\nThe AMRAAM became one of the primary air-to-air weapons of the new F-22 Raptor fighter, which needed to place all of its weapons into internal weapons bays in order to help achieve an extremely low radar cross-section.\nDevelopment.\nAMRAAM was developed as the result of an agreement (the Family of Weapons MOA, no longer in effect by 1990), among the United States and several other NATO nations to develop air-to-air missiles and to share production technology. Under this agreement the U.S. was to develop the next generation medium range missile (AMRAAM) and Europe would develop the next generation short range missile (ASRAAM). Although Europe initially adopted the AMRAAM, an effort to develop the Meteor, a competitor to AMRAAM, was begun in Great Britain. Eventually the ASRAAM was developed solely by the British, but using another source for its infrared seeker. After protracted development, the deployment of AMRAAM (AIM-120A) began in September 1991 in US Air Force F-15 Eagle fighter squadrons. The US Navy soon followed (in 1993) in its F/A-18 Hornet squadrons.\nThe Russian Air Force counterpart of AMRAAM is the somewhat similar R-77 (NATO codename AA-12 Adder), sometimes referred to in the West as the \"AMRAAMski\" Likewise, France began its own air-to-air missile development with the MICA concept that used a common airframe for separate radar-guided and infrared-guided versions.\nOperational features summary.\nAMRAAM has an all-weather, beyond-visual-range (BVR) capability. It improves the aerial combat capabilities of US and allied aircraft to meet the threat of enemy air-to-air weapons as they existed in 1991. AMRAAM serves as a follow-on to the AIM-7 Sparrow missile series. The new missile is faster, smaller, and lighter, and has improved capabilities against low-altitude targets. It also incorporates a datalink to guide the missile to a point where its active radar turns on and makes terminal intercept of the target. An inertial reference unit and micro-computer system makes the missile less dependent upon the fire-control system of the aircraft.\nOnce the missile closes in on the target, its active radar guides it to intercept. This feature, known as \"fire-and-forget\", frees the aircrew from the need to further provide guidance, enabling the aircrew to aim and fire several missiles simultaneously at multiple targets and break a radar lock after the missile seeker goes active and guide themselves to the targets.\nThe missile also features the ability to \"Home on Jamming,\" giving it the ability to switch over from active radar homing to passive homing \u2013 homing on jamming signals from the target aircraft. Software on board the missile allows it to detect if it is being jammed, and guide on its target using the proper guidance system.\nGuidance system overview.\nInterception course stage.\nAMRAAM uses two-stage guidance when fired at long range. The aircraft passes data to the missile just before launch, giving it information about the location of the target aircraft from the launch point and its direction and speed. The missile uses this information to fly on an interception course to the target using its built-in inertial navigation system (INS). This information is generally obtained using the launching aircraft's radar, although it could come from an infra-red search and track system, from a data link from another fighter aircraft, or from an AWACS aircraft.\nAfter launch, if the firing aircraft or surrogate continues to track the target, periodic updates\u2014such as changes in the target's direction and speed\u2014are sent from the launch aircraft to the missile, allowing the missile to adjust its course, via actuation of the rear fins, so that it is able to close to a self-homing distance where it will be close enough to \"catch\" the target aircraft in the \"basket\" (the missile's radar field of view in which it will be able to lock onto the target aircraft, unassisted by the launch aircraft).\nNot all armed services using the AMRAAM have elected to purchase the mid-course update option, which limits AMRAAM's effectiveness in some scenarios. The RAF initially opted not to use mid-course update for its Tornado F3 force, only to discover that without it, testing proved the AMRAAM was less effective in beyond visual range (BVR) engagements than the older semi-active radar homing BAE Skyflash weapon\u2014the AIM-120's own radar is necessarily of limited range and power compared to that of the launch aircraft.\nTerminal stage and impact.\nOnce the missile closes to self-homing distance, it turns on its active radar seeker and searches for the target aircraft. If the target is in or near the expected location, the missile will find it and guide itself to the target from this point. If the missile is fired at short range, within visual range (WVR) or the near BVR, it can use its active seeker just after launch to guide it to intercept.\nBoresight Visual mode.\nApart from the radar-slaved mode, there is a free guidance mode, called \"Visual\". This mode is radar guidance-free\u2014the missile just fires and locks onto the first thing it sees. This mode can be used for defensive shots, i.e. when the enemy has numerical superiority. \nKill probability and tactics.\nGeneral considerations.\nThe kill probability (Pk) is determined by several factors, including aspect (head-on interception, side-on or tail-chase), altitude, the speed of the missile and the target, and how hard the target can turn. Typically, if the missile has sufficient energy during the terminal phase, which comes from being launched at close range to the target from an aircraft with an altitude and speed advantage, it will have a good chance of success. This chance drops as the missile is fired at longer ranges as it runs out of overtake speed at long ranges, and if the target can force the missile to turn it might bleed off enough speed that it can no longer chase the target. Operationally, the missile, which was designed for beyond visual range combat, has a Pk of 63.15% (19 missiles for 12 kills, including the Syrian Su-22 downed by a US Navy F/A-18E). The targets included six MiG-29s, a MiG-25, a MiG-23, two Su-22s, a Galeb and a US Army Blackhawk that was targeted by mistake.\nVariants and upgrades.\nAir-to-air missile versions.\nThere are currently four main variants of AMRAAM, all in service with the United States Air Force, United States Navy, and the United States Marine Corps. The AIM-120A is no longer in production and shares the enlarged wings and fins with the successor AIM-120B. The AIM-120C has smaller \"clipped\" aerosurfaces to enable internal carriage on the USAF F-22 Raptor. AIM-120B deliveries began in 1994.\nThe AIM-120C deliveries began in 1996. The C-variant has been steadily upgraded since it was introduced. The AIM-120C-6 contained an improved fuze (Target Detection Device) compared to its predecessor. The AIM-120C-7 development began in 1998 and included improvements in homing and greater range (actual amount of improvement unspecified). It was successfully tested in 2003 and is currently being produced for both domestic and foreign customers. It helped the U.S. Navy replace the F-14 Tomcats with F/A-18E/F Super Hornets\u00a0\u2013 the loss of the F-14's long-range AIM-54 Phoenix missiles (already retired) is offset with a longer-range AMRAAM-D. The lighter weight of the advanced AMRAAM enables an F/A-18E/F pilot greater bring-back weight upon carrier landings.\nThe AIM-120D is an upgraded version of the AMRAAM with improvements in almost all areas, including 50% greater range (than the already-extended range AIM-120C-7) and better guidance over its entire flight envelope yielding an improved kill probability (Pk). Raytheon began testing the D model on August 5, 2008, the company reported that an AIM-120D launched from an F/A-18F Super Hornet passed within lethal distance of a QF-4 target drone at the White Sands Missile Range. The range of the AIM-120D is classified, but is thought to extend to about .\nThe AIM-120D (P3I Phase 4, formerly known as AIM-120C-8) is a development of the AIM-120C with a two-way data link, more accurate navigation using a GPS-enhanced IMU, an expanded no-escape envelope, and improved HOBS (high off-boresight) capability. The AIM-120D max speed is Mach 4 and AIM-120D is a joint USAF/USN project, and is currently in the testing phase. The USN was scheduled to field it from 2014, and AIM-120D will be carried by all Pacific carrier groups by 2020, although the 2013 sequestration cuts could push back this later date to 2022. The Royal Australian Air Force requested 450 AIM-120D missiles, which would make it the first foreign operator of the missile. The procurement, approved by the US Government in April 2016, will cost $1.1 billion and will be integrated for use on the F/A-18F Super Hornet, EA-18G Growler and the F-35 Lightning II aircraft.\nThere were also plans for Raytheon to develop a ramjet-powered derivative of the AMRAAM, the Future Medium Range Air-Air Missile (FMRAAM). The FMRAAM was not produced since the target market, the British Ministry of Defence, chose the Meteor missile over the FMRAAM for a BVR missile for the Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft.\nRaytheon is also working with the Missile Defense Agency to develop the Network Centric Airborne Defense Element (NCADE), an anti-ballistic missile derived from the AIM-120. This weapon will be equipped with a ramjet engine and an infrared homing seeker derived from the Sidewinder missile. In place of a proximity-fuzed warhead, the NCADE will use a kinetic energy hit-to-kill vehicle based on the one used in the Navy's RIM-161 Standard Missile 3.\nThe -120A and -120B models are currently nearing the end of their service life while the -120D variant has just entered full production. AMRAAM was due to be replaced by the USAF, the U.S. Navy, and the U.S. Marine Corps after 2020 by the Joint Dual Role Air Dominance Missile (Next Generation Missile), but it was terminated in the 2013 budget plan. Exploratory work was started in 2017 on a replacement called Long-Range Engagement Weapon.\nIn 2017, work on the AIM-260 Joint Advanced Tactical Missile (JATM) began to create a longer-ranged replacement for the AMRAAM to contend with foreign weapons like the PL-15. Flight tests are planned to begin in 2021 and initial operational capability is slated for 2022, facilitating the end of AMRAAM production by 2026.\nGround-launched systems.\nRaytheon successfully tested launching AMRAAM missiles from a five-missile carrier on a M1097 Humvee. This system will be known as the SLAMRAAM (Surface Launched (SL) and AMRAAM). They receive their initial guidance information from a radar not mounted on the vehicle. Since the missile is launched without the benefit of an aircraft's speed or high altitude, its range is considerably shorter. Raytheon is currently marketing an SL-AMRAAM EX, purported to be an extended range AMRAAM and bearing a resemblance to the RIM-162 ESSM.\nThe Norwegian Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS), developed by Kongsberg Defence &amp; Aerospace, consists of a number of vehicle-pulled launch batteries (containing six AMRAAMs each) along with separate radar trucks and control station vehicles. A more recent version of the program is the \"High Mobility Launcher\", made in cooperation with Raytheon (Kongsberg Defence &amp; Aerospace was already a subcontractor on the SLAMRAAM system), where the launch-vehicle is a Humvee (M1152A1 HMMWV), containing four AMRAAMs each.\nWhile still under evaluation for replacement of current US Army assets, the SL-AMRAAM has been deployed in several nations' military forces. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has requested the purchasing of SL-AMRAAM as part of a larger $7 billion foreign military sales package. The sale would include 288 AMRAAM C-7 missiles.\nThe US Army has test fired the SL-AMRAAM from a HIMARS artillery rocket launcher as a common launcher, as part of a move to switch to a larger and more survivable launch platform.\nOn January 6, 2011, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced that the U.S. Army has decided to terminate acquisition of the SLAMRAAM as part of a budget-cutting effort.\nThe National Guard Association of the United States has sent a letter asking for the U.S. Senate to stop the Army's plan to drop the SLAMRAAM program because without it there would be no path to modernize the Guard's AN/TWQ-1 Avenger Battalions.\nOn 22 February 2015, Raytheon announced an Extended Range upgrade to NASAMS-launched AMRAAM, calling it AMRAAM-ER. This combines the AMRAAM seeker with the ESSM rocket motor.\nOperational history.\nThe AMRAAM was used for the first time on December 27, 1992, when a USAF F-16D shot down an Iraqi MiG-25 that violated the southern no-fly-zone. This missile had been returned from the flight line as defective a day earlier. AMRAAM gained a second victory in January 1993 when an Iraqi MiG-23 was shot down by a USAF F-16C.\nThe third combat use of the AMRAAM was in 1994, when a Republika Srpska Air Force J-21 Jastreb aircraft was shot down by a USAF F-16C that was patrolling the UN-imposed no-fly zone over Bosnia. In that engagement, at least three other Serbian aircraft were shot down by USAF F-16C fighters using AIM-9 missiles (see Banja Luka incident for more details). At that point, three launches in combat had resulted in three kills, resulting in the AMRAAM's being informally named \"slammer\" in the second half of the 1990s.\nIn 1998 and 1999 AMRAAMs were again fired by USAF F-15 fighters at Iraqi aircraft violating the No-Fly-Zone, but this time they failed to hit their targets. During spring 1999, AMRAAMs saw their main combat action during Operation Allied Force, the Kosovo bombing campaign. Six Serbian MiG-29 were shot down by NATO (four USAF F-15Cs, one USAF F-16C, and one Dutch F-16A MLU), all of them using AIM-120 missiles (the supposed kill by the F-16C may have actually been friendly fire, an SA-7 MANPADS fired by Serbian infantry).\nOn 24 November 2015 a Turkish Air Force F-16 shot down a Russian Su-24M strike aircraft with an AIM-120 missile over northern Syria after it allegedly crossed into Turkish airspace.\nOn 18 June 2017, a US F/A-18E Super Hornet engaged and shot down a Sukhoi Su-22 of the Syrian Air Force over northern Syria, using an AIM-120. The Su-22 had previously avoided an AIM-9X Sidewinder; it was initially thought this was done by using flares, although first-hand account by the F/A-18E pilot, Lt. Cmdr. Michael Tremel, was that the AIM-9X malfunctioned and failed to acquire the target, with no use of flares by the Su-22.\nAs of 2017, the AIM-120 AMRAAM has shot down eleven aircraft (six MiG-29s, one MiG-25, one MiG-23, one Su-22, one Soko J-21 Jastreb, and one UH-60 Black Hawk). The latter was a friendly fire incident in 1994 when two USAF F-15 fighters patrolling Iraq's Northern No-Fly Zone inadvertently shot down a pair of U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopters, one by an AIM-9 Sidewinder.\nOn 7 August 2018, a Spanish Air Force Eurofighter Typhoon accidentally launched a missile in Estonia. There were no human casualties, but a ten-day search operation for missile remains was unsuccessful.\nOn 27 February 2019, Pakistan Air Force (PAF) claimed to have shot down two IAF aircraft during Operation Swift Retort. Indian Air Force (IAF) officials confirmed the loss of one Mig-21 and displayed fragments of the alleged AIM-120C-5 missile.\nIndian officials also claimed that two IAF Sukhoi Su-30MKI managed to evade AMRAAM missiles fired at them by the PAF during the dogfight.\nOn 1 March 2020, Turkish Air Force downed two Su-24s belonging to the Syrian Air Force using two AIM-120C7s that launched by an F-16.\nOn 3 March 2020, a Syrian Air Force L-39 was shot down by Turkish Air Force F-16s flying inside the Turkish airspace with AIM-120C7 at a distance of about 45\u00a0km. As of 2020, this has been the longest AIM-120 kill.\nForeign sales.\nCanadair, now Bombardier, had largely helped with the development of the AIM-7 Sparrow and Sparrow II, and assisted to a lesser extent in the AIM-120 development. Canada had placed an order for 256 AIM-120's, but cancelled half of them after engine ignition problems due to cold weather conditions. The AIM-9X &amp; AIM-7 were ordered as replacements.\nIn early 1995 South Korea ordered 88 AIM-120A missiles for its KF-16 fleet. In 1997 South Korea ordered 737 additional AIM-120B missiles.\nIn 2006 Poland received AIM-120C-5 missiles to arm its new F-16C/D Block 52+ fighters.\nIn early 2006, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) ordered 500 AIM-120C-5 AMRAAM missiles as part of a $650 million F-16 ammunition deal to equip its F-16C/D Block 50/52+ and F-16A/B Block 15 MLU fighters. The PAF got the first three F-16C/D Block 50/52+ aircraft on July 3, 2010 and first batch of AMRAAMs on July 26, 2010.\nIn 2007, the United States government agreed to sell 218 AIM-120C-7 missiles to Taiwan as part of a large arms sales package that also included 235 AGM-65G-2 Maverick missiles. Total value of the package, including launchers, maintenance, spare parts, support and training rounds, was estimated at around US$421 million. This supplemented an earlier Taiwanese purchase of 120 AIM-120C-5 missiles a few years ago.\n2008 has brought announcements of new or additional sales to Singapore, Finland, Morocco and South Korea; in December 2010 the Swiss government requested 150 AIM-120C-7 missiles. Sales to Finland have stalled, because the manufacturer has not been able to fix a mysterious bug that causes the rocket motors of the missile to fail in cold tests. On May 5, 2015, the State Department has made a determination approving a possible Foreign Military Sale to Royal Malaysian Air Force for AIM-120C7 AMRAAM missiles and associated equipment, parts and logistical support for an estimated cost of $21 million.\nIn March 2016, the US government approved the sales of AIM-120C-7 missiles to the Indonesian Air Force to equip their fleet of F-16 C/D Block 52ID. The AIM-120C-7 is also equipped for the upgraded F-16 A/B Block 15 OCU through Falcon Star-eMLU upgrade project.\nIn March 2019, the US Department of State and Defense Security Cooperation Agency have formally signed off on a US$240.5 million foreign military sale to support Australia\u2019s introduction of the NASAMS and LAND 19 Phase 7B program. As part of the deal, the Australian government requested up to 108 Raytheon AIM-120C-7 AMRAAM, six AIM-120C-7 AMRAAM Air Vehicles Instrumented; and six spare AIM-120C-7 AMRAAM guidance sections."}
{"id": "3149", "revid": "16120261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3149", "title": "AGM-88 HARM", "text": "The AGM-88 HARM (High-speed Anti-Radiation Missile) is a tactical, air-to-surface anti-radiation missile designed to home in on electronic transmissions coming from surface-to-air radar systems. It was originally developed by Texas Instruments as a replacement for the AGM-45 Shrike and AGM-78 Standard ARM system. Production was later taken over by Raytheon Corporation when it purchased the defense production business of Texas Instruments.\nDescription.\nThe AGM-88 can detect, attack and destroy a radar antenna or transmitter with minimal aircrew input. The proportional guidance system that homes in on enemy radar emissions has a fixed antenna and seeker head in the missile's nose. A smokeless, solid-propellant, booster-sustainer rocket motor propels the missile at speeds over Mach 2.0. The HARM missile was a program led by the U.S. Navy, and it was first carried by the A-6E, A-7, and F/A-18A/B aircraft, and then it equipped the EA-6B aircraft. RDT&amp;E for use on the F-14 aircraft was begun, but not completed. The U.S. Air Force (USAF) put the HARM onto the F-4G Wild Weasel aircraft, and later on specialized F-16s equipped with the HARM Targeting System (HTS). The HTS pod, used by the USAF only, allows F-16s to detect and automatically target radar systems with HARMs instead of relying on the missile's sensors alone.\nHistory.\nDeployment.\nThe HARM missile was approved for full production in March 1983, obtained initial operating capability (IOC) on the A-7E Corsair II in late 1983 and then deployed in late 1985 with VA-46 aboard the aircraft carrier USS \"America\". In 1986, the first successful firing of the HARM from an EA-6B was performed by VAQ-131. It was soon used in combat\u2014in March 1986 against a Libyan SA-5 site in the Gulf of Sidra, and then during Operation Eldorado Canyon in April. HARM was used extensively by the Navy, Marine Corps, and the Air Force in Operation Desert Storm during the Persian Gulf War of 1991.\nDuring the Gulf War, the HARM was involved in a friendly fire incident when the pilot of an F-4G Wild Weasel escorting a B-52 bomber mistook the latter's tail gun radar for an Iraqi AAA site. (This was after the tail gunner of the B-52 had targeted the F-4G, mistaking it for an Iraqi MiG.) The F-4 pilot launched the missile and then saw that the target was the B-52, which was hit. It survived with shrapnel damage to the tail and no casualties. The B-52 was subsequently renamed \"In HARM's Way\".\n\"Magnum\" is spoken over the radio to announce the launch of an AGM-88. During the Gulf War, if an aircraft was illuminated by enemy radar a bogus \"Magnum\" call on the radio was often enough to convince the operators to power down.\nThis technique would also be employed in Serbia during air operations in 1999.\nIn 2013 President Obama offered the AGM-88 to Israel for the first time.\nAGM-88E AARGM.\nA newer upgrade, the \"AGM-88E Advanced Antiradiation Guided Missile (AARGM),\" features the latest software, enhanced capabilities intended to counter enemy radar shutdown, and passive radar using an additional active millimeter-wave seeker. It was released in November 2010, and it is a joint venture by the US Department of Defense and the Italian Ministry of Defense, produced by Orbital ATK.\nIn November 2005, the Italian Ministry of Defense and the U.S. Department of Defense signed a Memorandum of Agreement on the joint development of the AGM-88E AARGM missile. Italy was providing $20 million of developmental funding as well as several million dollars worth of material, equipment, and related services. The Italian Air Force was expected to buy up to 250 missiles for its Tornado ECR aircraft. A flight test program was set to integrate the AARGM onto Tornado ECR's weapon system.\nThe U.S. Navy demonstrated the AARGM's capability during Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&amp;E) in spring 2012 with live firing of 12 missiles. Aircrew and maintenance training with live missiles was completed in June.\nThe Navy authorized Full-Rate Production (FRP) of the AARGM in August 2012, with 72 missiles for the Navy and nine for the Italian Air Force to be delivered in 2013. A U.S. Marine Corps F/A-18 Hornet squadron will be the first forward-deployed unit with the AGM-88E.\nIn September 2013, ATK delivered the 100th AARGM to the U.S. Navy. The AGM-88E program is on schedule and on budget, with Full Operational Capability (FOC) planned for September 2014. The AGM-88E was designed to improve the effectiveness of legacy HARM variants against fixed and relocatable radar and communications sites, particularly those that would shut down to throw off anti-radiation missiles, by attaching a new seeker to the existing Mach 2-capable rocket motor and warhead section, adding a passive anti-radiation homing receiver, satellite and inertial navigation system, a millimeter-wave radar for terminal guidance, and the ability to beam up images of the target via a satellite link just seconds before impact.\nThis model of the HARM will be integrated onto the F/A-18C/D, F/A-18E/F, EA-18G, and Tornado ECR aircraft, and later on the F-35 (externally).\nIn September 2015, the AGM-88E successfully hit a mobile ship target in a live-fire test, demonstrating the missile's ability to use antiradiation homing and millimeter-wave radar to detect, identify, locate, and engage moving targets.\nIn December 2019, the German Air Force ordered the AARGM. On August 4, 2020, Northrop Grumman's Alliant Techsystems Operations division, based in Northridge, California, was awarded a $12,190,753 IDIQ contract for AARGM depot sustainment support, guidance section and control section repair, and equipment box test and inspection. On August 31, 2020, the same Northrop Grumman division was allocated roughly $80.9 million to develop new technology for the AARGM. Neither contract was awarded in free, open competition.\nAGM-88F HCSM.\nAlthough the US Navy/Marine Corps chose the Orbital ATK-produced AGM-88E AARGM, Raytheon developed its own update of the HARM called the AGM-88F HCSM (HARM Control Section Modification), tested in conjunction with and ultimately for the US Air Force. It incorporates similar upgrade features as the AARGM, and although it is not yet listed for export, existing HARM users have shown interest.\nAGM-88G AARGM-ER.\nThe Navy's FY 2016 budget included funding for an extended range AARGM-ER that uses the existing guidance system and warhead of the AGM-88E with a solid integrated rocket-ramjet for double the range. In September 2016, Orbital ATK unveiled its extended-range AARGM-ER, which incorporates a redesigned control section and -diameter rocket motor for twice the range and internal carriage on the Lockheed Martin F-35A and F-35C Lightning II; internal carriage on the F-35B isn't possible due to internal space limitations. The new missile utilizes the AARGM's warhead and guidance systems in a new airframe that replaces the mid-body wings with aerodynamic strakes along the sides with control surfaces relocated to low-drag tail surfaces and a more powerful propulsion system for greater speed and range. It reportedly increases range over the AGM-88E by 20-50%, which would result in the AGM-88G's range being around . The U.S. Navy awarded Orbital ATK a contract for AARGM-ER development in January 2018. The USAF later joined the AARGM-ER program, involved in internal F-35A/F-35C integration work, and selected the AARGM-ER to serve as the basis for their land-attack Stand in Attack Weapon (SiAW)."}
{"id": "3151", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3151", "title": "AGM-65 Maverick", "text": "The AGM-65 Maverick is an air-to-ground missile (AGM) designed for close air support. It is the most widely produced precision-guided missile in the Western world, and is effective against a wide range of tactical targets, including armor, air defenses, ships, ground transportation and fuel storage facilities.\nDevelopment began in 1966 at Hughes as the first missile to use an electronic contrast seeker. It entered service with the United States Air Force in August 1972. Since then, it has been exported to more than 30 countries and is certified on 25 aircraft. The Maverick served during the Vietnam, Yom Kippur, Iran\u2013Iraq, and Persian Gulf Wars, along with other smaller conflicts, destroying enemy forces and installations with varying degrees of success.\nSince its introduction into service, numerous Maverick versions had been designed and produced using electro-optical, laser, and imaging infrared guidance systems. The AGM-65 has two types of warhead: one has a contact fuze in the nose, the other has a heavyweight warhead fitted with a delayed-action fuze, which penetrates the target with its kinetic energy before detonating. The missile is currently produced by Raytheon Missile Systems.\nThe Maverick shares the same configuration as Hughes's AIM-4 Falcon and AIM-54 Phoenix, and measures more than in length and in diameter.\nDevelopment.\nThe Maverick's development history began in 1965, when the United States Air Force (USAF) began a program to develop a replacement to the AGM-12 Bullpup. With a range of , the radio-guided Bullpup was introduced in 1959 and was considered a \"silver bullet\" by operators. However, the launch aircraft was required to fly straight towards the target during the missile's flight instead of performing evasive maneuvers, thus risking the crew. Even when it hit, the small warhead was only useful against small targets like bunkers, when used against larger targets like the Thanh H\u00f3a Bridge it did little other than char the structure. The USAF began a series of projects to replace Bullpup, both larger versions of Bullpup, models C and D, as well as a series of Bullpup adaptations offering fire-and-forget guidance. Among the latter were the AGM-83 Bulldog, AGM-79 Blue Eye and AGM-80 Viper.\nFrom 1966 to 1968, Hughes Missile Systems Division and Rockwell competed for the contract to build an entirely new fire-and-forget missile with far greater range performance than any of the Bullpup versions. Each were allocated $3\u00a0million for preliminary design and engineering work of the Maverick in 1966. In 1968, Hughes emerged with the $95\u00a0million contract for further development and testing of the missile; at the same time, contract options called for 17,000 missiles to be procured. Hughes conducted a smooth development of the AGM-65 Maverick, with the first unguided test launch from an F-4 on 18 September 1969, with the first guided test on 18 December successfully performing a direct hit on a M41 tank target at the Air Force Missile Development Center at Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico.\nIn July 1971, the USAF and Hughes signed a $69.9\u00a0million contract for 2,000 missiles, the first of which was delivered in 1972. Although early operational results were favorable, military planners predicted that the Maverick would fare less successfully in the hazy conditions of Central Europe, where it would have been used against Warsaw Pact forces. As such, development of the AGM-65B \"Scene Magnified\" version began in 1975 before it was delivered during the late 1970s. When production of the AGM-65A/B was ended in 1978, more than 35,000 missiles had been built.\nMore versions of the Maverick appeared, among which was the laser-guided AGM-65C/E. Development of the AGM-65C started in 1978 by Rockwell, who built a number of development missiles for the USAF. Due to high cost, the version was not procured by the USAF, and instead entered service with the United States Marine Corps (USMC) as the AGM-65E.\nAnother major development was the AGM-65D, which employed an imaging infrared (IIR) seeker. By imaging on radiated heat, the IIR is all-weather operable as well as showing improved performance in acquiring and tracking the hot engines, such as in tanks and trucks, that were to be one of its major missions. The seekerhead mechanically scanned the scene over a nitrogen-cooled 4-by-4 pixel array using a series of mirrored facets machined into the inner surface of the ring-shaped main gyroscope. The five-year development period of the AGM-65D started in 1977 and ended with the first delivery to the USAF in October 1983. The version received initial operating capability in February 1986.\nThe AGM-65F is a hybrid Maverick combining the AGM-65D's IIR seeker and warhead and propulsion components of the AGM-65E. Deployed by the United States Navy (USN), the AGM-65F is optimized for maritime strike roles. The first AGM-65F launch from the P-3C took place in 1989, and in 1994, the USN awarded Unisys a contract to integrate the version with the P-3C. Meanwhile, Hughes produced the AGM-65G, which essentially has the same guidance system as the D, with some software modifications that track larger targets.\nIn the mid-1990s to early 2000s, there were several ideas of enhancing the Maverick's potential. Among them was the stillborn plan to incorporate the Maverick millimeter wave active radar homing, which can determine the exact shape of a target. Another study called \"Longhorn Project\" was conducted by Hughes, and later Raytheon following the absorption of Hughes into Raytheon, looked a Maverick version equipped with turbojet engines instead of rocket motors. The \"Maverick ER\", as it was dubbed, would have a \"significant increase in range\" compared to the Maverick's current range of . The proposal was abandoned, but if the Maverick ER had entered production, it would have replaced the AGM-119B Penguin carried on the MH-60R.\nThe most modern versions of the Maverick are the AGM-65H/K, which were in production . The AGM-65H was developed by coupling the AGM-65B with a charge-coupled device (CCD) seeker optimized for desert operations and which has three times the range of the original TV-sensor; a parallel USN program aimed at rebuilding AGM-65Fs with newer CCD seekers resulted in the AGM-65J. The AGM-65K, meanwhile, was developed by replacing the AGM-65G's IR guidance system with an electro-optical television guidance system.\nDesign.\nThe Maverick has a modular design, allowing for different combinations of the guidance package and warhead to be attached to the rocket motor to produce a different weapon. It has long-chord delta wings and a cylindrical body, reminiscent of the AIM-4 Falcon and the AIM-54 Phoenix.\nDifferent models of the AGM-65 have used electro-optical, laser, and imaging infrared guidance systems. The AGM-65 has two types of warhead: one has a contact fuze in the nose, the other has a heavyweight warhead fitted with a delayed-action fuze, which penetrates the target with its kinetic energy before detonating. The latter is most effective against large, hard targets. The propulsion system for both types is a solid-fuel rocket motor behind the warhead.\nThe Maverick missile is unable to lock onto targets on its own; it has to be given input by the pilot or weapon systems officer (WSO) after which it follows the path to the target autonomously. In an A-10 Thunderbolt II, for example, the video feed from the seeker head is relayed to a screen in the cockpit, where the pilot can check the locked target of the missile before launch. A crosshair on the heads-up display is shifted by the pilot to set the approximate target, where the missile will then automatically recognize and lock on to the target. Once the missile is launched, it requires no further assistance from the launch vehicle and tracks its target automatically. This fire-and-forget property is not shared by the E version that uses semi-active laser homing.\nDeployment.\nThe Maverick was declared operational on 30 August 1972 with the F-4D/Es and A-7s initially cleared for the type; the missile made its combat debut four months later with the USAF in the Vietnam War. During the Yom Kippur War in October 1973, the Israelis used Mavericks to destroy and disable enemy vehicles. Deployment of early versions of the Mavericks in these two wars were successful due to the favorable atmospheric conditions that suited the electro-optical TV seeker. Ninety-nine missiles were fired during the two wars, eighty-four of which were successful..\nThe Maverick was used for trials with the BGM-34A unmanned aerial vehicle in 1972\u20131973. Targeting could be carried out with a TV camera in the nose of the UAV. or using the seeker of an AGM-45 Shrike anti-radar missile also carried by the UAV to locate the target for the Maverick's camera to lock on to.\nIn June 1975, during a border confrontation, a formation of Iranian F-4E Phantoms destroyed a group of Iraqi tanks by firing 12 Mavericks at them. Five years later, during Operation Morvarid as part of the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Iranian F-4s used Mavericks to sink three Osa II missile boats and four P-6 combat ships.\nDue to weapons embargoes, Iran had to equip its AH-1J SeaCobra helicopters with AGM-65 Maverick missiles and used them with some success in various operations such as Operation Fatholmobin wherein Iranian AH-1Js fired 11 Mavericks.\nIn August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait. In early 1991, the US-led Coalition executed Operation Desert Storm during which Mavericks played a crucial role in the ousting of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Employed by F-15E Strike Eagles, F/A-18 Hornets, AV-8B Harriers, F-16 Fighting Falcons and A-10 Thunderbolt IIs, but used mainly by the last two, more than 5,000 Mavericks were used to attack armored targets. The most-used variant by the USAF was the IIR-guided AGM-65D. The reported hit rate by USAF Mavericks was 80\u201390%, while for the USMC it was 60%. The Maverick was used again in Iraq during the 2003 Iraq War, during which 918 were fired.\nThe first time the Maverick were fired from a Lockheed P-3 Orion at a hostile vessel was when the USN and coalition units came to the aid of Libyan rebels to engage the Libyan Coast Guard vessel \"Vittoria\" in the port of Misrata, Libya, during the late evening of 28 March 2011. \"Vittoria\" was engaged and fired upon by a USN P-3C Maritime Patrol aircraft with AGM-65 Maverick missiles.\nLaunch platforms.\nUnited States.\nLAU-117 Maverick launchers have been used on US Army, USN, USAF, and USMC aircraft (some platforms may load LAU-88 triple-rail launchers when configured and authorized):\nExport.\nThe Maverick has been exported to at least 35 countries:\nAccording to the article on Kh-23 Grom the guidance system of the Serbian Grom-B is based on the Maverick system."}
{"id": "3152", "revid": "39828248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3152", "title": "AIM-54 Phoenix", "text": "The AIM-54 Phoenix is a radar-guided, long-range air-to-air missile (AAM), carried in clusters of up to six missiles on the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, its only operational launch platform. \nThe Phoenix was the United States' only long-range air-to-air missile. The combination of Phoenix missile and the AN/AWG-9 guidance radar was the first aerial weapons system that could simultaneously engage multiple targets. Due to its active radar tracking, the brevity code \"Fox Three\" was used when firing the AIM-54.\nBoth the missile and the aircraft were used by Iran and the United States Navy. In US service both are now retired, the AIM-54 Phoenix in 2004 and the F-14 in 2006. They were replaced by the shorter-range AIM-120 AMRAAM, employed on the F/A-18 Hornet and F/A-18E/F Super Hornet\u2014in its AIM-120D version, the latest version of the AMRAAM just matches the Phoenix's maximum range. \nThe AIM-54 is credited with 62 air-to-air kills, all scored by Iran during the eight-year Iran\u2013Iraq War. Following the retirement of the F-14 by the U.S. Navy, the weapon's only current operator is the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nSince 1951, the Navy faced the initial threat from the Tupolev Tu-4K 'Bull' carrying anti-ship missiles or nuclear bombs.\nEventually, during the height of the Cold War, the threat would have expanded into regimental-size raids of Tu-16 Badger and Tu-22M Backfire bombers equipped with low-flying, long-range, high-speed, nuclear-armed cruise missiles and considerable electronic countermeasures (ECM) of various types. This combination was considered capable of saturating fleet defenses and threatening carrier groups. \nThe Navy would require a long-range, long-endurance interceptor aircraft to defend carrier battle groups against this threat. The proposed F6D Missileer was intended to fulfill this mission and oppose the attack as far as possible from the fleet it was defending. The weapon needed for interceptor aircraft, the Bendix AAM-N-10 Eagle, was to be an air-to-air missile of unprecedented range when compared to contemporary AIM-7 Sparrow missiles. It would work together with Westinghouse AN/APQ-81 radar. The Missileer project was cancelled in December 1960.\nAIM-54.\nIn the early 1960s, the U.S. Navy made the next interceptor attempt with the F-111B, and they needed a new missile design. At the same time, the USAF canceled the projects for their land-based high-speed interceptor aircraft, the North American XF-108 Rapier and the Lockheed YF-12, and left the capable AIM-47 Falcon missile at a quite advanced stage of development, but with no effective launch platform.\nThe AIM-54 Phoenix, developed for the F-111B fleet air defense fighter, had an airframe with four cruciform fins that was a scaled-up version of the AIM-47. One characteristic of the Missileer ancestry was that the radar sent it mid-course corrections, which allowed the fire control system to \"loft\" the missile up over the target into thinner air where it had better range.\nThe F-111B was canceled in 1968. Its weapons system, the AIM-54 working with the AWG-9 radar, migrated to the new U.S. Navy fighter project, the VFX, which would later become the F-14 Tomcat.\nIn 1977, development of a significantly improved Phoenix version, the AIM-54C, was developed to better counter projected threats from tactical anti-naval aircraft and cruise missiles, and its final upgrade included a re-programmable memory capability to keep pace with emerging ECM.\nUsage in comparison to other weapon systems.\nThe AIM-54/AWG-9 combination had multiple track capability (up to 24 targets) and launch (up to six Phoenixes can be launched nearly simultaneously); the large missile is equipped with a conventional warhead.\nOn the F-14, four missiles can be carried under the fuselage tunnel attached to special aerodynamic pallets, plus two under glove stations. A full load of six Phoenix missiles and the unique launch rails weighs in at over , about twice the weight of Sparrows, putting it above the allowable bringback load (which also would include enough fuel for go-around attempts). As such, carrying six Phoenix missiles would necessitate the jettison of at least some of the Phoenix missiles if they were not used. The most common air superiority payload is a mix of two Phoenix, four Sparrow, and two Sidewinder missiles.\nMost other US aircraft relied on the smaller, semi-active medium-range AIM-7 Sparrow. Semi-active guidance meant the aircraft no longer had a search capability while supporting the launched Sparrow, reducing situational awareness.\nThe Tomcat's radar could track up to 24 targets in track-while-scan mode, with the AWG-9 selecting up to six potential targets for the missiles. The pilot or radar intercept officer (RIO) could then launch the Phoenix missiles once parameters were met. The large tactical information display (TID) in the RIO's cockpit gave information to the aircrew (the pilot had the ability to monitor the RIO's display) and the radar could continually search and track multiple targets after Phoenix missiles were launched, thereby maintaining situational awareness of the battlespace.\nThe Link 4 datalink allowed US Navy Tomcats to share information with the E-2C Hawkeye AEW aircraft. During Desert Shield in 1990, the Link 4A was introduced; this allowed the Tomcats to have a fighter-to-fighter datalink capability, further enhancing overall situational awareness. The F-14D entered service with the JTIDS that brought the even better Link 16 datalink \"picture\" to the cockpit.\nActive guidance.\nThe Phoenix has several guidance modes and achieves its longest range by using mid-course updates from the F-14A/B AWG-9 radar (APG-71 radar in the F-14D) as it climbs to cruise between and at close to Mach 5. The Phoenix uses this high altitude to maximize its range by reducing atmospheric drag. At around from the target, the missile activates its own radar to provide terminal guidance. Minimum engagement range for the Phoenix is around ; at this range active homing would initiate upon launch.\nService history.\nU.S. combat experience.\nThe AIM-54 Phoenix was retired from USN service on September 30, 2004. F-14 Tomcats were retired on September 22, 2006. They were replaced by shorter-range AIM-120 AMRAAMs, employed on the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet.\nDespite the much-vaunted capabilities, the Phoenix was rarely used in combat, with only two confirmed launches and no confirmed targets destroyed in US Navy service. The USAF F-15 Eagle had responsibility for overland combat air patrol duties in Operation Desert Storm in 1991, primarily because of the onboard F-15 IFF capabilities. The Tomcat did not have the requisite IFF capability mandated by the JFACC to satisfy the rules of engagement to utilize the Phoenix capability at beyond visual range. The AIM-54 was not adopted by any foreign nation besides Iran, or any other US armed service, and was not used on any aircraft other than the F-14.\nIranian combat experience.\nOn January 7, 1974 as part of Project \"Persian King\", the Imperial Iranian Air Force placed an order for 424 AIM-54As, later increasing it by 290 missiles that June. Of the initial order, 274 missiles and 10 training rounds were delivered for US$150 million, until the 1979 Revolution ended deliveries and left the remaining 150 missiles embargoed and the additional order of 290 cancelled.\nAccording to Tom Cooper and Farzad Bishop, during the Iran-Iraq War AIM-54s fired by IRIAF Tomcats achieved 78 victories against Iraqi MiG-21/23/25s, Tu-22s, Su-20/22s, Mirage F 1s, Super \u00c9tendards, and even two AM-39 Exocets and a C-601. This includes two occasions where one AIM-54 was responsible for the downing of two Iraqi aircraft, as well as an incident on January 7, 1981 where a Phoenix fired at a four-ship of MiG-23s downed three and damaged the fourth.\nThe US refused to supply spare parts and maintenance after the 1979 Revolution, except for a brief period during the Iran-Contra Affair. According to Cooper, the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force kept its F-14 fighters and AIM-54 missiles in regular use during the entire Iran\u2013Iraq War, though periodic lack of spares grounded large parts of the fleet at times. During late 1987, the stock of AIM-54 missiles was at its lowest, with fewer than 50 operational missiles available. The missiles needed fresh thermal batteries that could only be purchased from the US. Iran found a clandestine buyer that supplied it with batteries, which cost up to US$10,000 each. Iran received spares and parts for both the F-14s and AIM-54s from various sources during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, and has received more spares after the conflict. Iran started a program to build spares for the planes and missiles, and although there are claims that it no longer relies on outside sources to keep its F-14s and AIM-54s operational, there is evidence that Iran continues to procure parts clandestinely.\nBoth the F-14 Tomcat and AIM-54 Phoenix missile continue in the service of the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force. Iran claimed to be working on building an equivalent missile and in 2013 unveiled the Fakour-90, an upgraded and reverse-engineered version of the Phoenix.\nVariants.\nThere were also test, evaluation, ground training, and captive air training versions of the missile; designated ATM-54, AEM-54, DATM-54A, and CATM-54. The flight versions had A and C versions. The DATM-54 was not made in a C version as there was no change in the ground handling characteristics.\nCharacteristics.\nThe following is a list of AIM-54 Phoenix specifications:"}
{"id": "3154", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3154", "title": "A-10 Warthog", "text": ""}
{"id": "3155", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3155", "title": "Lockheed AC-130", "text": "The Lockheed AC-130 gunship is a heavily armed, long-endurance, ground-attack variant of the C-130 Hercules transport, fixed-wing aircraft. It carries a wide array of ground attack weapons that are integrated with sophisticated sensors, navigation, and fire-control systems. Unlike other modern military fixed-wing aircraft, the AC-130 relies on visual targeting. Because its large profile and low operating altitudes of approximately 7,000\u00a0feet (2,100 m) make it an easy target, its close air support missions are usually flown at night.\nThe airframe is manufactured by Lockheed Martin, while Boeing is responsible for the conversion into a gunship and for aircraft support. Developed during the Vietnam War as \"Project Gunship II\", the AC-130 replaced the Douglas AC-47 Spooky, or \"Gunship I\". The sole operator is the United States Air Force, which uses the AC-130U Spooky and AC-130W Stinger II variants for close air support, air interdiction, and force protection, with the upgraded AC-130J Ghostrider entering service. Close-air-support roles include supporting ground troops, escorting convoys, and urban operations. Air-interdiction missions are conducted against planned targets and targets of opportunity. Force-protection missions include defending air bases and other facilities. AC-130Us are based at Hurlburt Field, Florida, while AC-130Ws are based at Cannon AFB, New Mexico; gunships can be deployed worldwide. The squadrons are part of the Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC), a component of the United States Special Operations Command (SOCOM).\nThe AC-130 has an unpressurized cabin, with the weaponry mounted to fire from the port side of the fuselage. During an attack, the gunship performs a pylon turn, flying in a large circle around the target, therefore being able to fire at it for far longer than in a conventional strafing attack. The AC-130H Spectre was armed with two M61 Vulcan cannons, one L60 Bofors 40 mm cannon, and M137 cannon and M37 recoil mechanism from the M102 howitzer; after 1994, the cannons were removed. The upgraded AC-130U Spooky has a single GAU-12 Equalizer cannon in place of the Spectre's two cannons, an improved fire-control system, and increased ammunition capacity. The new AC-130J was based on the MC-130J Commando II special-operations tanker. The AC-130W Stinger II is a modified C-130H with upgrades including a precision strike package.\nDevelopment.\nOrigins.\nDuring the Vietnam War, the C-130 Hercules was selected to replace the Douglas AC-47 Spooky gunship (Project Gunship I) to improve mission endurance and increase capacity to carry munitions. Capable of flying faster than helicopters and at high altitudes with excellent loiter time, the use of the pylon turn allowed the AC-47 to deliver continuous, accurate fire to a single point on the ground.\nIn 1967, JC-130A 54-1626 was selected for conversion into the prototype AC-130A gunship (Project Gunship II). The modifications were done at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base by the Aeronautical Systems Division. A direct-view night-vision telescope was installed in the forward door, an early forward-looking infrared device was placed in the forward part of the left wheel well, with miniguns and rotary cannons fixed facing down and aft along the left side. The analog fire-control computer prototype was handcrafted by RAF Wing Commander Tom Pinkerton at the USAF Avionics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB. Flight testing of the prototype was performed primarily at Eglin Air Force Base, followed by further testing and modifications. By September 1967, the aircraft was certified ready for combat testing and was flown to Nha Trang Air Base, South Vietnam for a 90-day test program. The AC-130 was later supplemented by the AC-119 Shadow (Project Gunship III), which later proved to be underpowered.\nSeven more warplanes were converted to the \"Plain Jane\" configuration like the AC-130 prototype in 1968, and one aircraft received the \"Surprise Package\" refit in 1969. The Surprise Package upgrade included the latest 20\u00a0mm rotary autocannons and 40 mm Bofors cannon, but no 7.62\u00a0mm close-support armament. The Surprise Package configuration served as a test bed for the avionic systems and armament for the AC-130E. In 1970, 10 more AC-130As were acquired under the \"Pave Pronto\" project. In the summer of 1971, Surprise Package AC-130s were converted to the Pave Pronto configuration and assumed the new nickname of \"Thor\". Conversion of C-130Es into AC-130Es for the \"PAVE Spectre\" project followed. Regardless of their project names, the aircraft were more commonly referred to by the squadron's call sign, Spectre.\nRecent and planned upgrades.\nIn 2007, AFSOC initiated a program to upgrade the armament of AC-130s. The test program planned for the 25\u00a0mm GAU-12/U and 40\u00a0mm Bofors cannon on the AC-130U gunships to be replaced with two 30\u00a0mm Mk 44 Bushmaster II cannons. In 2007, the Air Force modified four AC-130U gunships as test platforms for the Bushmasters. These were referred to as AC-130U Plus 4 or AC-130U+4. AFSOC, however, canceled its plans to install the new cannons on its fleet of AC-130Us. It has since removed the guns and reinstalled the original 40\u00a0mm and 25\u00a0mm cannons and returned the planes to combat duty. Brigadier General Bradley A. Heithold, AFSOC's director of plans, programs, requirements, and assessments, said on 11 August 2008 that the effort was canceled because of problems with the Bushmaster's accuracy in tests \"at the altitude we were employing it\". Also, schedule considerations drove the decision, he said.\nPlans were made to possibly replace the 105\u00a0mm cannon with a breech-loading 120\u00a0mm M120 mortar, and to give the AC-130 a standoff capability using either the AGM-114 Hellfire missile, the Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System (based on the Hydra 70 rocket), or the Viper Strike glide bomb.\nIn 2010, the Air Force awarded L-3 Communications a $61\u00a0million contract to add precision strike packages to eight MC-130W Combat Spear special-mission aircraft to give them a gunship-like attack capability; such-equipped MC-130Ws are known as Dragon Spears. AFSOC is arming these aircraft to relieve the high operational demands on AC-130 gunships until new AC-130Js enter service. The MC-130W Dragon Spear was renamed AC-130W Stinger II in 2011. The precision strike packages consist of a 30\u00a0mm gun and several precision guided munitions. Rails are mounted on the outboard pylon of the wing for four Hellfire missiles, SDBs, or SDB IIs under each. Ten Common Launch Tubes (CLTs) are mounted on the rear ramp to fire Griffin A missiles; additional missiles are stored in the aircraft that can be reloaded in flight. CLTs are able to fire other small munitions able to fit inside the -diameter, -long tubes.\nThe Air Force launched an initiative in 2011 to acquire 16 new gunships based on newly built MC-130J Combat Shadow II special-operations tankers outfitted with a \"precision strike package\" to give them an attack capability, requesting $1.6\u00a0billion from fiscal years 2011 through 2015. This would increase the size of the gunship fleet to 33 aircraft, a net increase of eight after the planned retirement of eight aging AC-130Hs. The first aircraft would be bought in fiscal 2012, followed by two in fiscal 2013, five in fiscal 2014, and the final eight in fiscal 2015. The decision to retain the C-130 came after funding for 16 C-27Js was removed from the fiscal 2010 budget.\nThe AC-130J will follow the path of the Dragon Spear program. On 9 January 2013, the Air Force began converting the first MC-130J Combat Shadow II into an AC-130J Ghostrider. The first AC-130J Ghostrider was delivered to AFSOC on 29 July 2015. The first AC-130J gunships achieved initial operational capability (IOC) on 30 September 2017. The AC-130J has two planned increments: the Block 10 configuration includes an internal 30\u00a0mm gun, small diameter bombs, and laser-guided missiles launched from the rear cargo door; and Block 20 configuration adds a 105\u00a0mm cannon, large aircraft infrared countermeasures, wing-mounted Hellfire missiles, and radio-frequency countermeasures.\nThe Air Force decided to add a 105\u00a0mm cannon to the AC-130J in addition to the 30\u00a0mm cannon and smart bombs, the shells being more accurate and cheaper than dropping SDBs. AFSOC is actively pursuing a directed-energy weapon onboard the AC-130J in place of the 30mm gun by 2022, similar to the previous Advanced Tactical Laser program. It is to produce a beam of up to 120\u00a0kW, or potentially even 180\u2013200\u00a0kW, weigh about , defensively destroy antiaircraft missiles, and offensively engage communications towers, boats, cars, and aircraft. However, laser armament may only be installed on a few aircraft rather than the entire AC-130J fleet; the laser will be mounted on the side in place of the 30\u00a0mm cannon. Other potential additions include an active denial system to perform airborne crowd control, and small unmanned aerial vehicles from the common launch tubes to provide remote video feed and coordinates to weapons operators through cloud cover. Called the Tactical Off-board Sensor (TOBS), the drones would be expendable and fly along a programmed orbit to verify targets the aircraft cannot see itself because of bad weather or standing off from air defenses. AFSOC will initially use the Raytheon Coyote small UAV for the TOBS mission, as it is an off-the-shelf design with a one-hour endurance, but plans to fulfill the role with a new drone capable of a four-hour endurance by 2019.\nThe Air Force was also interested in acquiring a glide bomb that can be launched from the common launch tubes capable of hitting ground vehicles traveling as fast as 120\u00a0km/h (70\u00a0mph) while above . In June 2016, Dynetics was awarded a contract by SOCOM to integrate its tactical munition onto the AC-130. Designated the GBU-69/B Small Glide Munition, the weapon weighs and is armed with a blast-fragmentation warhead that can detonate by direct impact or at a selected height; despite being smaller, being unpowered allows for its warhead to be heavier than those on the Hellfire and Griffin A missiles, and , respectively. Guidance is provided by a GPS receiver with antispoofing software and four Distributed Aperture Semiactive Laser Seeker apertures adapted from the WGU-59/B APKWS for terminal guidance. Approval for fielding occurred in early 2017. Dynetics was awarded a contract to deliver an initial batch of 70 SGMs in June 2017, with plans to buy up to 1,000. The SGM can travel .\nFuture.\n, AC-130 gunships have been providing close air support for special operators for 50 years. Although the aircraft have been kept relevant through constant upgrades to their weaponry, sensor packages, and countermeasures, they are not expected to be survivable in future nonpermissive environments due to their high signatures and low airspeeds. Military analysts, such as the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, have suggested that AFSOC invest in more advanced technologies to fill the role to operate in future contested combat zones, including a mix of low-cost disposable unmanned and stealthy strike aircraft.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe AC-130 is a heavily armed, long-endurance aircraft carrying an array of antiground-oriented weapons that are integrated with sophisticated sensors, navigation, and fire-control systems. It is capable of delivering precision firepower or area-saturation fire over a target area over a long period of time, at night, or in adverse weather. The sensor suite consists of a television sensor, infrared sensor, and radar. These sensors allow the gunship to visually or electronically identify friendly ground forces and targets in most weather conditions.\nThe AC-130U is equipped with the AN/APQ-180, a synthetic aperture radar, for long-range target detection and identification. The gunship's navigational devices include inertial navigation systems and a global positioning system. The AC-130U employs technologies developed in the 1990s, which allow it to attack two targets simultaneously. It has twice the munitions capacity of the AC-130H. Although the AC-130U conducts some operations in daylight, most of its combat missions are conducted at night. The AC-130H's unit cost is US$132.4\u00a0million, and the AC-130U's cost is $190\u00a0million (fiscal 2001 dollars).\nUpgrades.\nDuring the Vietnam War era, the various AC-130 versions following the Pave Pronto modifications were equipped with a magnetic anomaly detector system called Black Crow (designated AN/ASD-5), a highly sensitive passive device with a phased-array antenna located in the left-front nose radome that could pick up localized deviations in the Earth's magnetic field normally used to detect submerged submarines. The Black Crow system was slaved into the targeting computers of the AC-130A/E/H, enabling the detection of the unshielded ignition coils of North Vietnamese trucks hidden under dense jungle foliage along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. It could also detect hand-held transmitter signals of air controllers on the ground to identify and locate targets.\nThe PGM-38/U enhanced 25\u00a0mm high-explosive incendiary round was created to expand the AC-130U gunships' mission in standoff range and survivability for its 25\u00a0mm GAU-12/U gun. This round is a combination of the existing PGU-25 HEI and a M758 fuze designated as FMU-151/B to meet the MIL-STD-1316. The FMU-151 has an improved arming delay with multisensitive range.\nOperational history.\nVietnam War.\nThe AC-130 gunship first arrived in South Vietnam on 21 September 1967 under the Gunship II program and began combat operations over Laos and South Vietnam that year. In June 1968, AC-130s were deployed to Tan Son Nhut AB near Saigon for support against the Tet Offensive. By 30 October 1968, enough AC-130 Gunship IIs arrived to form a squadron, the 16th Special Operations Squadron of the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing, at Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base, Thailand. At this time, the C-130A gunship was designated the AC-130A.\nOn 18 August 1968, an AC-130 gunship flying an armed reconnaissance mission in Vietnam's III Corps was diverted to support the Katum Special Forces Camp. The ground commander quickly assessed the accurate fire and capabilities of this weapons system and called for fire on his own perimeter when the Viet Cong attempted to bridge the wire on the west side of his position.\nBy December 1968, most AC-130s flew under F-4 Phantom II escort (to protect the gunship against heavy and concentrated antiaircraft fire) from the 497th Tactical Fighter Squadron, normally three Phantoms per gunship. On 24 May 1969, the first Spectre gunship was lost to enemy fire.\nIn late 1969, under code name \"Surprise Package\", 56-0490 arrived with solid-state, laser-illuminated, low light-level TV with a companion YAG laser designator, an improved forward-looking infrared (FLIR) sensor, video recording for TV and FLIR, an inertial navigation system, and a prototype digital fire-control computer. The remaining AC-130s were refitted with upgraded similar equipment in the summer of 1970, and then redeployed to Ubon RTAFB. On 25 October 1971, the first \"Cadillac\" gunship, the AC-130E, arrived in Vietnam. On 17 February 1972, the first 105\u00a0mm cannon arrived for service with Spectre and was installed on Gunship 570. It was used from mid-February until the aircraft received battle damage to its right flap. The cannon was switched to Gunship 571 and was used until 30 March when the aircraft was shot down.\nOn 28 January 1973, the Vietnam peace accord went into effect, marking the end of Spectre operations in Vietnam. Spectre was still needed and active in the region, supporting operations in Laos and Cambodia. On 22 February 1973, American offensive operations in Laos ended and the gunships became totally committed to operations in the Cambodian conflict.\nOn 12 April 1975, the Khmer Rouge was threatening the capital of Phnom Penh and AC-130s were called on to help in Operation Eagle Pull, the final evacuation of American and allied officials from Phnom Penh before it was conquered by the communists. The AC-130 was also over Saigon on 30 April 1975 to protect the final evacuation in Operation Frequent Wind. Spectres were also called in when the USS \"Mayaguez\" was seized, on the open sea, by Khmer Rouge soldiers and sailors on 15 May 1975.\nSix AC-130s and 52 air crew members were lost during the war. AC-130s destroyed more than 10,000 trucks and participated in many crucial close-air-support missions in Vietnam.\nCold War and later action.\nWith the conclusion of hostilities in Southeast Asia in the mid-1970s, the AC-130H became the sole gunship in the regular Air Force, home based at Hurlburt Field, Florida, while the AC-130A fleet was transferred to the Air Force Reserve's 919th Tactical Airlift Group (919 TAG) at Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field #3/Duke Field, Florida. With the transition to the AC-130A, the 919 TAG was then redesignated as the 919th Special Operations Group.\nIn the late 1970s, when the AC-130H fleet was first being modified for in-flight refueling capability, a demonstration mission was planned and flown from Hurlburt Field, Florida, nonstop, to conduct a 2-hour live-fire mission over Empire Firing Range in the Republic of Panama, then return home. This 13-hour mission with two in-flight refuelings from KC-135 tankers proved the validity of flying long-range missions outside the contiguous United States to attack targets then return to home base without intermediate stops.\nAC-130s from both the 4th and 16th Special Operations Squadrons have been deployed in nearly every conflict in which the United States has been involved, officially and unofficially, since the end of the Vietnam War.\nIn July 1979, AC-130H crews deployed to Howard Air Force Base, Panama, as a precaution against possible hostile actions against American personnel during the Nicaraguan Revolution. New time aloft and nonstop distance records were subsequently set by a 16th SOS two-ship AC-130H formation flight that departed Hurlburt Field on 13 November 1979 and landed on 15 November at Andersen Air Force Base, Guam, a distance of and 29 hours 43 minutes nonstop, refueling four times in-flight. Refueling support for the Guam deployment was provided by KC-135 crews from the 305th Air Refueling Wing from Grissom AFB, Indiana.\nIn November 1979, four AC-130H gunships flew nonstop from Hurlburt Field to Anderson AFB, Guam, because of the hostage situation at the US Embassy in Iran. At Guam, AC-130H crews developed communications-out/lights-out refueling procedures for later employment by trial-and-error. This deployment with the 1 SOW/CC as task force commander was directed from the office of the CJCS for fear that Iranian militants could begin executing American Embassy personnel who had been taken hostage on 4 November. One early option considered AC-130H retaliatory punitive strikes deep within Iran. Later gunship flights exceeded the 1979 Hurlburt-to-Guam flight. Upon return in March 1980, the four planes soon found themselves in Egypt to support the ill-fated hostage rescue attempt.\nDuring Operation Urgent Fury in Grenada in 1983, AC-130s suppressed enemy air-defense systems and attacked ground forces enabling the assault of the Point Salines Airfield via airdrop and air-land of friendly forces. The AC-130 aircrew earned the Lieutenant General William H. Tunner Award for the mission.\nThe AC-130Hs of the 16th Special Operations Squadron unit maintained an ongoing rotation to Howard AB, Panama, monitoring activities in El Salvador and other Central American points of interest, with rules of engagement eventually permitting attacks on FMLN targets. This commitment of maintainers and crews started in 1983 and lasted until 1990. The AC-130 is considered to have hastened the end of the Salvadoran Civil War in the 1980s. Crews flew undercover missions from Honduras and attacked guerrilla camps and concentrations.\nAC-130s also had a primary role during the United States invasion of Panama (named Operation Just Cause) in 1989, when they destroyed Panama Defense Force headquarters and numerous command-and-control facilities, and provided close air support for US ground troops. Aircrews earned the Mackay Trophy for the most meritorious flight of the year, and the Tunner Award.\nGulf War and the 1990s.\nDuring the Gulf War of 1990\u201391 (Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm), Regular Air Force and Air Force Reserve AC-130s provided close air support and force protection (air base defense) for ground forces, and battlefield interdiction. The primary interdiction targets were early-warning/ground-control intercept sites along the southern border of Iraq. At its standard altitude of 12,000 feet, the aircraft had a proven ability to engage moving ground targets. The first gunship to enter the Battle of Khafji helped stop a southbound Iraqi armored column on 29 January 1991. One day later, three more gunships provided further aid to Marines participating in the operation. The gunships attacked Iraqi positions and columns moving south to reinforce their positions north of the city.\nDespite the threat of SAMs and increasing visibility during the early morning hours of 31 January 1991, one AC-130H, AF Serial No. 69-6567, call-sign Spirit 03, opted to stay to continue to protect the Marines. A lone Iraqi with a Strela-2 MANPADS shot Spirit 03 down, and all 14 crew members were killed.\nThe military has used AC-130 gunships during the humanitarian operations in Somalia (Operation Restore Hope and Operation United Shield) in 1992\u201393 and Operation Uphold Democracy in Haiti in 1994. AC-130s took part in Operation Assured Response in Liberia in 1996 and in Operation Silver Wake in 1997, the evacuation of American non-combatants from Albania.\nAC-130s took part in the NATO missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo during the 1990s.\nThe AC-130U gunship set a new record for the longest sustained flight by any C-130 on 22 and 23 October 1997, when two AC-130U gunships flew 36 hours nonstop from Hurlburt Field to Taegu Air Base (Daegu), South Korea, being refueled seven times in the air by KC-135 tankers. The two gunships took on 410,000\u00a0lb (186,000\u00a0kg) of fuel. Gunships also were part of the buildup of US forces in 1998 to compel Iraq to allow UNSCOM weapons inspections.\nWar on Terror.\nThe US has used gunships with deployments to the war in Afghanistan (Operation Enduring Freedom \u2013 Afghanistan) (2001\u20132014), and Iraq War (Operation Iraqi Freedom) (2003\u201311). AC-130 strikes were directed by special forces on known Taliban locations during the early days of the war in Afghanistan. US Special Operations Forces are using the AC-130 to support its operations. The day after arriving in Afghanistan, the AC-130s attacked Taliban and Al-Qaeda forces near the city of Konduz and were directly responsible for the city's surrender the next day. On 26 November 2001, Spectres were called in to put down a rebellion at the prison fort of Qala-I-Janghi. The 16 SOS flew missions over Mazar-i-Sharif, Kunduz, Kandahar, Shkin, Asadabad, Bagram, Baghran, Tora Bora, and virtually every other part of Afghanistan. The Spectre participated in countless operations within Afghanistan, performing on-call close air support and armed reconnaissance. In March 2002, three AC-130 Spectres provided 39 crucial combat missions in support of Operation Anaconda in Afghanistan. During the intense fighting, the planes fired more than 1,300 40\u00a0mm and 1,200 105\u00a0mm rounds.\nClose air support was the main mission of the AC-130 in Iraq. Night after night, at least one AC-130 was in the air to fulfill one or more air-support requests (ASRs). A typical mission had the AC\u2013130 supporting a single brigade's ASRs followed by aerial refueling and another two hours with another brigade or SOF team. The use of AC-130s in places like Fallujah, urban settings where insurgents were among crowded populations of non-combatants, was criticized by human rights groups. AC-130s were also used for intelligence gathering with their sophisticated long-range video, infrared and radar sensors. In 2007, US Special Operations forces also used the AC-130 in attacks on suspected Al-Qaeda militants in Somalia.\nEight AC-130H and 17 AC-130U aircraft were in active-duty service as of July 2010. In March 2011, the Air Force deployed two AC-130U gunships to take part in Operation Odyssey Dawn, the US military intervention in Libya, which eventually came under NATO as Operation Unified Protector.\nBy September 2013, 14 MC-130W Dragon Spear aircraft have been converted to AC-130W Stinger II gunships. The Stinger gunships have been deployed to Afghanistan to replace the aging AC-130H aircraft and provide an example for the new AC-130J Ghostrider. Modifications began by cutting holes in the plane to make room for weapons and adding kits and bomb bases for laser-guided munitions. Crews added a 105\u00a0mm cannon, 20-inch infrared and electro-optical sensors, and the ability to carry 250-lb bombs on the wings.\nThe final AC-130H Spectre gunship, tail number 69-6569 \"Excalibur\" was retired on 26 May 2015 at Cannon Air Force Base, New Mexico.\nOn 15 November 2015, two days after the attacks in Paris by ISIL, AC-130s and A-10 Thunderbolt II attack aircraft destroyed a convoy of over 100 ISIL-operated oil tanker trucks in Syria. The attacks were part of an intensification of the US-led Military intervention against ISIL called Operation Tidal Wave II (named after the original Operation Tidal Wave during World War II, a failed attempt to raid German oil fields that resulted in heavy aircraft and aircrew loss) in an attempt to cut off oil smuggling as a source of funding for the group.\nOn 3 October 2015, an AC-130 mistakenly attacked the Doctors Without Borders hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan, killing 42 people and injuring over 30. In five separate runs, the gunship struck the hospital, that was erroneously identified as the source of attacks on coalition members. Subsequent inquiries led to punishment of 16 military personnel and cited \"human error\" as the root cause.\nOn 30 September 2017, the Air Force declared the AC-130J Ghostrider had achieved initial operational capability, with six gunships having been delivered; the aircraft is planned to reach full operational capability by 2023 with 37 gunships delivered. The J-variant is lighter and more fuel efficient than previous versions, able to fly at with a range of and service ceiling of . The AC-130U returned from its final combat deployment on 8 July 2019; the final AC-130U was retired in August 2019. AFSOC started taking delivery of the AC-130J in spring 2019, and the aircraft began deploying to Afghanistan by the summer.\nVariants.\nIn Service.\nAC-130W Stinger II (formerly MC-130W Dragon Spear)\nAC-130J Ghostrider\nRetired.\nAC-130A Spectre (Project Gunship II, Surprise Package, Pave Pronto)\nAC-130E Spectre (Pave Spectre, Pave Aegis)\nAC-130H Spectre\nAC-130U Spooky\nAircraft on display.\nOne of the first seven AC-130A aircraft deployed to Vietnam was AF serial no. 53\u20133129, named \"First Lady\" in November 1970. This aircraft was a conversion of the first production C-130. On 25 March 1971, it took an anti-aircraft artillery hit in the belly just aft of the nose gear wheel well over the Ho Chi Minh trail in Laos. The 37\u00a0mm shell destroyed everything below the crew deck and barely missed striking two crew members. The pilot was able to crash land the aircraft safely. In 1975, after the conclusion of US involvement in the Vietnam war, it was transferred to the Air Force Reserve, where it served with the 711th Special Operations Squadron of the 919th Special Operations Wing. In 1980, the aircraft was upgraded from the original three-bladed propellers to the quieter four-bladed propellers and was eventually retired in late 1995. The retirement also marked an end to the Air Force Reserve Command flying the AC-130A. The aircraft now sits on display in the final Air Force Reserve Command configuration with grey paint, black markings, and the four-bladed Hamilton Sunstrand 54H60-91 props at the Air Force Armament Museum at Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, USA.\nA second aircraft, AF serial no. 56\u20130509, named the \"Ultimate End\", was originally accepted as a C-130A by the Air Force on 28 February 1957, and modified to the AC-130A configuration on 27 July 1970. The aircraft participated in the Vietnam War and the rescue of the SS Mayaguez. \"Ultimate End\" demonstrated the durability of the C-130 after surviving hits in five places by 37\u00a0mm anti-aircraft artillery on 12 December 1970, extensive left wing leading edge damage on 12 April 1971 and a 57\u00a0mm round damaging the belly and injuring one crewman on 4 March 1972. \"Ultimate End\" was reassigned to the Air Force Reserve's 919th Special Operations Wing at Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field No.3 / Duke Field on 17 June 1975, where it continued in service until retired in the fall 1994 and transferred to Air Force Special Operations Command's \"Heritage Air Park\" at Hurlburt Field, Florida. While assigned to the 711th Special Operations Squadron, \"Ultimate End\" served in Operations JUST CAUSE in Panama, DESERT STORM in Kuwait and Iraq, and UPHOLD DEMOCRACY in Haiti. After 36 years and seven months of service, 24 years as a gunship, \"Ultimate End\" retired from active service on 1 October 1994. It made its last flight from Duke Field to Hurlburt Field on 20 October 1994. The Spectre Association dedicated \"Ultimate End\" (which served with the 16 SOS in Vietnam) on 4 May 1995. Lt Col Michael Byers, then 16 SOS commander, represented the active-duty gunship force and Clyde Gowdy of the Spectre Association represented all Spectre personnel past and present for the unveiling of a monument at the aircraft and the dedication as a whole.\nA third AC-130A, AF serial no. 54\u20131630, is on display in the Cold War Gallery at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. Named \"Azrael\" for the angel of death in Islam who severs the soul from the body, this aircraft figured prominently in the closing hours of Operation Desert Storm. On 26 February 1991, Coalition ground forces were driving the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait. With an Air Force Reserve crew called to active duty, Azrael was sent to the Al Jahra highway (Highway 80) between Kuwait City and Basra, Iraq, to intercept the convoys of tanks, trucks, buses, and cars fleeing the battle. Facing SA-6 and SA-8 surface-to-air missiles and 37\u00a0mm and 57\u00a0mm radar-guided anti-aircraft artillery the crew attacked and destroyed or disabled most of the convoys. \"Azrael\" was also assigned to the 919th Special Operations Wing and retired to the museum in October 1995.\nAnother AC-130A, AF serial no. 54\u20131626, the original prototype AC-130 named \"Gunship II\" is on display at the outdoor Air Park at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. This aircraft served in Southeast Asia from 1967 to 1972, then served in JC-130A test configuration. It was transferred to the National Museum of the United States Air Force in 1976, and converted back to AC-130A configuration in the late 1990s.\nAC-130A serial no. 54\u20131623, c/n 3010, named \"Ghost Rider\" served in Southeast Asia and later conflicts until being retired in 1997 to Dobbins AFB, Georgia. Ghost Rider eventually was transferred and displayed at the Aviation Wing Museum at Marietta, Georgia.\nNotable appearances in media.\nThe AC-130 is a playable aircraft in many Call of Duty games, either as kill/scorestreaks in multiplayer or in missions in the campaigns."}
{"id": "3156", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3156", "title": "Albrecht Durer", "text": ""}
{"id": "3158", "revid": "21784372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3158", "title": "Alternative", "text": "Alternative or alternate may refer to:"}
{"id": "3160", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3160", "title": "Alternative algebra", "text": "In abstract algebra, an alternative algebra is an algebra in which multiplication need not be associative, only alternative. That is, one must have\nfor all \"x\" and \"y\" in the algebra.\nEvery associative algebra is obviously alternative, but so too are some strictly non-associative algebras such as the octonions.\nThe associator.\nAlternative algebras are so named because they are the algebras for which the associator is alternating. The associator is a trilinear map given by\nBy definition, a multilinear map is alternating if it vanishes whenever two of its arguments are equal. The left and right alternative identities for an algebra are equivalent to\nBoth of these identities together imply that the associator is totally skew-symmetric. That is,\nfor any permutation \"\u03c3\". It follows that\nfor all \"x\" and \"y\". This is equivalent to the \"flexible identity\"\nThe associator of an alternative algebra is therefore alternating. Conversely, any algebra whose associator is alternating is clearly alternative. By symmetry, any algebra which satisfies any two of:\nis alternative and therefore satisfies all three identities.\nAn alternating associator is always totally skew-symmetric. The converse holds so long as the characteristic of the base field is not 2.\nProperties.\nArtin's theorem states that in an alternative algebra the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative. Conversely, any algebra for which this is true is clearly alternative. It follows that expressions involving only two variables can be written unambiguously without parentheses in an alternative algebra. A generalization of Artin's theorem states that whenever three elements formula_12 in an alternative algebra associate (i.e., formula_13), the subalgebra generated by those elements is associative.\nA corollary of Artin's theorem is that alternative algebras are power-associative, that is, the subalgebra generated by a single element is associative. The converse need not hold: the sedenions are power-associative but not alternative.\nThe Moufang identities\nhold in any alternative algebra.\nIn a unital alternative algebra, multiplicative inverses are unique whenever they exist. Moreover, for any invertible element formula_17 and all formula_18 one has\nThis is equivalent to saying the associator formula_20 vanishes for all such formula_17 and formula_18. If formula_17 and formula_18 are invertible then formula_25 is also invertible with inverse formula_26. The set of all invertible elements is therefore closed under multiplication and forms a Moufang loop. This \"loop of units\" in an alternative ring or algebra is analogous to the group of units in an associative ring or algebra.\nKleinfeld's theorem states that any simple non-associative alternative ring is a generalized octonion algebra over its center.\nThe structure theory of alternative rings is presented in.\nApplications.\nThe projective plane over any alternative division ring is a Moufang plane.\nThe close relationship of alternative algebras and composition algebras was given by Guy Roos in 2008: He shows (page 162) the relation for an algebra \"A\" with unit element \"e\" and an involutive anti-automorphism formula_27 such that \"a\" + \"a\"* and \"aa\"* are on the line spanned by \"e\" for all \"a\" in \"A\". Use the notation \"n\"(\"a\") = \"aa\"*. Then if \"n\" is a non-singular mapping into the field of \"A\", and \"A\" is alternative, then (\"A,n\") is a composition algebra."}
