{"id": "10358", "revid": "1013149693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10358", "title": "Ephrem the Syrian", "text": "Ephrem the Syrian (, ; ; ; c. 306 \u2013 373), also known as Saint Ephrem, Ephrem of Edessa or Aprem of Nisibis, was a prominent Christian theologian and writer, who is revered as one of the most notable hymnographers of Eastern Christianity. He was born in Nisibis, served as a deacon and later lived in Edessa.\nEphrem is venerated as a saint by all traditional Churches. He is especially revered in Syriac Christianity, both in East Syriac tradition and West Syriac tradition, and also counted as a Venerable Father (i.e., a sainted Monk) in the Eastern Orthodox Church. His feast day is celebrated on 28 January and on the Saturday of the Venerable Fathers. He was declared a Doctor of the Church in the Roman Catholic Church in 1920.\nEphrem wrote a wide variety of hymns, poems, and sermons in verse, as well as prose exegesis. These were works of practical theology for the edification of the Church in troubled times. So popular were his works, that, for centuries after his death, Christian authors wrote hundreds of pseudepigraphal works in his name. He has been called the most significant of all of the fathers of the Syriac-speaking church tradition.\nLife.\nEphrem was born around the year 306 in the city of Nisibis (modern Nusaybin, Turkey), in the Roman province of Mesopotamia, that was recently acquired by the Roman Empire. Internal evidence from Ephrem's hymnody suggests that both his parents were part of the growing Christian community in the city, although later hagiographers wrote that his father was a pagan priest. In those days, religious culture in the region of Nisibis included local polytheism, Judaism and several varieties of the Early Christianity. Majority of population spoke Aramaic language, while Greek and Latin were languages of administration. The city had a complex ethnic composition, consisted of \"Assyrian, Arabs, Greeks, Jews, Parthians, Romans, and Iranians\".\nJacob, the second bishop of Nisibis, was appointed in 308, and Ephrem grew up under his leadership of the community. Jacob of Nisibis is recorded as a signatory at the First Council of Nicea in 325. Ephrem was baptized as a youth and almost certainly became a son of the covenant, an unusual form of Syriac proto-monasticism. Jacob appointed Ephrem as a teacher (Syriac \"malp\u0304\u0101n\u00e2\", a title that still carries great respect for Syriac Christians). He was ordained as a deacon either at his baptism or later. He began to compose hymns and write biblical commentaries as part of his educational office. In his hymns, he sometimes refers to himself as a \"herdsman\" (, \"\u2018all\u0101n\u00e2\"), to his bishop as the \"shepherd\" (, \"r\u0101\u2018y\u00e2\"), and to his community as a 'fold' (, \"dayr\u00e2\"). Ephrem is popularly credited as the founder of the School of Nisibis, which, in later centuries, was the centre of learning of the Church of the East.\nIn 337, Emperor Constantine I, who had legalised and promoted the practice of Christianity in the Roman Empire, died. Seizing on this opportunity, Shapur II of Persia began a series of attacks into Roman North Mesopotamia. Nisibis was besieged in 338, 346 and 350. During the first siege, Ephrem credits Bishop Jacob as defending the city with his prayers. In the third siege, of 350, Shapur rerouted the River Mygdonius to undermine the walls of Nisibis. The Nisibenes quickly repaired the walls while the Persian elephant cavalry became bogged down in the wet ground. Ephrem celebrated what he saw as the miraculous salvation of the city in a hymn that portrayed Nisibis as being like Noah's Ark, floating to safety on the flood.\nOne important physical link to Ephrem's lifetime is the baptistery of Nisibis. The inscription tells that it was constructed under Bishop Vologeses in 359. In that year, Shapur attacked again. The cities around Nisibis were destroyed one by one, and their citizens killed or deported. Constantius II was unable to respond; the campaign of Julian in 363 ended with his death in battle. His army elected Jovian as the new emperor, and to rescue his army, he was forced to surrender Nisibis to Persia (also in 363) and to permit the expulsion of the entire Christian population.\nEphrem, with the others, went first to Amida (Diyarbak\u0131r), eventually settling in Edessa (Urhay, in Aramaic) in 363. Ephrem, in his late fifties, applied himself to ministry in his new church and seems to have continued his work as a teacher, perhaps in the School of Edessa. Edessa had been an important center of the Aramaic-speaking world, and the birthplace of a specific Middle Aramaic dialect that came to be known as the Syriac language. The city was rich with rivaling philosophies and religions. Ephrem comments that orthodox Nicene Christians were simply called \"Palutians\" in Edessa, after a former bishop. Arians, Marcionites, Manichees, Bardaisanites and various gnostic sects proclaimed themselves as the true church. In this confusion, Ephrem wrote a great number of hymns defending Nicene orthodoxy. A later Syriac writer, Jacob of Serugh, wrote that Ephrem rehearsed all-female choirs to sing his hymns set to Syriac folk tunes in the forum of Edessa. After a ten-year residency in Edessa, in his sixties, Ephrem succumbed to the plague as he ministered to its victims. The most reliable date for his death is 9 June 373.\nLanguage.\nEphrem wrote exclusively in his native Aramaic language, using the local Edessan (\"Urhaya\") dialect, that later came to be known as the Classical Syriac. Ephrem's works contain several endonymic (native) references to his language (\"Aramaic\"), homeland (\"Aram\") and people (\"Arameans\"). He is therefore known as \"the authentic voice of Aramaic Christianity\".\nIn the early stages of modern scholarly studies, it was believed that some examples of the long-standing Greek practice of labeling Aramaic as \"Syrian/Syriac\", that are found in the \"\"Cave of Treasures\",\" can be attributed to Ephrem, but later scholarly analyses have shown that the work in question was written much later ( 600) by an unknown author, thus also showing that Ephrem's original works still belonged to the tradition unaffected by exonymic (foreign) labeling.\nOne of the early admirers of Ephrem's works, theologian Jacob of Serugh (d. 521), who already belonged to the generation that accepted the custom of a double naming of their language not only as Aramaic (\"\u0100r\u0101m\u0101y\u0101\") but also as \"Syriac\" (\"Sury\u0101y\u0101\"), wrote a homily (\"memr\u0101\") dedicated to Ephrem, praising him as the \"crown\" or \"wreath\" of the \"Arameans\" (), and the same praise was repeated in early liturgical texts. Only later, under the Greek influence, already prevalent in the works of Theodoret of Cyrus from the middle of the 5th century, it became customary to associate Ephrem with Syrian/Syriac identity, and label him only as \"the Syrian\" (), thus blurring his Aramaic self-identification, attested by his own writings and works of other Aramaic-speaking writers, and also by examples from the earliest liturgical tradition. \nSome of those problems persisted up to the recent times, even in scholarly literature, as a consequence of several methodological problems within the field of source editing. During the process of critical editing and translation of sources within Syriac studies, some scholars have practiced various forms of arbitrary (and often unexplained) interventions, including the occasional disregard for the importance of original terms, used as endonymic (native) designations for Arameans and their language (\u0101r\u0101m\u0101y\u0101). Such disregard was manifested primarily in translations and commentaries, by replacement of authentic terms with polysemic Syrian/Syriac labels. In previously mentioned \"memr\u0101\", dedicated to Ephrem, one of the terms for \"Aramean people\" ( / Arameandom) was published correctly in original script of the source, but in the same time it was translated in English as \"\"Syrian nation\",\" and then enlisted among quotations related to \"Syrian/Syriac\" identity, without any mention of Aramean-related terms in the source. Even when noticed and corrected by some scholars, such replacements of terms continue to create problems for others. \nSeveral translations of his writings exist in Classical Armenian, Coptic, Old Georgian, Koine Greek and other languages. Some of his works are extant only in translation (particularly in Armenian).\nWritings.\nOver four hundred hymns composed by Ephrem still exist. Granted that some have been lost, Ephrem's productivity is not in doubt. The church historian Sozomen credits Ephrem with having written over three million lines. Ephrem combines in his writing a threefold heritage: he draws on the models and methods of early Rabbinic Judaism, he engages skillfully with Greek science and philosophy, and he delights in the Mesopotamian/Persian tradition of mystery symbolism.\nThe most important of his works are his lyric, teaching hymns (, \"madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea\"). These hymns are full of rich, poetic imagery drawn from biblical sources, folk tradition, and other religions and philosophies. The madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea are written in stanzas of syllabic verse and employ over fifty different metrical schemes. Each madr\u0101\u0161\u00e2 had its \"q\u0101l\u00e2\" (), a traditional tune identified by its opening line. All of these q\u0101l\u00ea are now lost. It seems that Bardaisan and Mani composed madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea, and Ephrem felt that the medium was a suitable tool to use against their claims. The madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea are gathered into various hymn cycles. Each group has a title \u2014 \"Carmina Nisibena\", \"On Faith\", \"On Paradise\", \"On Virginity\", \"Against Heresies\" \u2014 but some of these titles do not do justice to the entirety of the collection (for instance, only the first half of the \"Carmina Nisibena\" is about Nisibis). Each madr\u0101\u0161\u00e2 usually had a refrain (, \"\u2018\u00fbn\u00ee\u1e6f\u00e2\"), which was repeated after each stanza. Later writers have suggested that the madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea were sung by all-women choirs with an accompanying lyre.\nParticularly influential were his \"Hymns Against Heresies\". Ephrem used these to warn his flock of the heresies that threatened to divide the early church. He lamented that the faithful were \"tossed to and fro and carried around with every wind of doctrine, by the cunning of men, by their craftiness and deceitful wiles\" (Eph 4:14). He devised hymns laden with doctrinal details to inoculate right-thinking Christians against heresies such as docetism. The \"Hymns Against Heresies\" employ colourful metaphors to describe the Incarnation of Christ as fully human and divine. Ephrem asserts that Christ's unity of humanity and divinity represents peace, perfection and salvation; in contrast, docetism and other heresies sought to divide or reduce Christ's nature and, in doing so, rend and devalue Christ's followers with their false teachings.\nEphrem also wrote verse homilies (, \"m\u00eamr\u00ea\"). These sermons in poetry are far fewer in number than the madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea. The m\u00eamr\u00ea were written in a heptosyllabic couplets (pairs of lines of seven syllables each).\nThe third category of Ephrem's writings is his prose work. He wrote a biblical commentary on the Diatessaron (the single gospel harmony of the early Syriac church), the Syriac original of which was found in 1957. His \"Commentary on Genesis and Exodus\" is an exegesis of Genesis and Exodus. Some fragments exist in Armenian of his commentaries on the Acts of the Apostles and Pauline Epistles.\nHe also wrote refutations against Bardaisan, Mani, Marcion and others.\nSyriac churches still use many of Ephrem's hymns as part of the annual cycle of worship. However, most of these liturgical hymns are edited and conflated versions of the originals.\nThe most complete, critical text of authentic Ephrem was compiled between 1955 and 1979 by Dom Edmund Beck, OSB, as part of the \"Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium\".\nEphrem is attributed with writing hagiographies such as \"The Life of Saint Mary the Harlot\", though this credit is called into question.\nOne of works attributed to Ephrem was the \"Cave of Treasures\", written by a much later but unknown author, who lived at the end of the 6th and the beginning of the 7th century.\nSymbols and metaphors.\nEphrem's writings contain a rich variety of symbols and metaphors. Christopher Buck gives a summary of analysis of a selection of six key scenarios (the way, robe of glory, sons and daughters of the Covenant, wedding feast, harrowing of hell, Noah\u2019s Ark/Mariner) and six root metaphors (physician, medicine of life, mirror, pearl, Tree of life, paradise).\nGreek Ephrem.\nEphrem's meditations on the symbols of Christian faith and his stand against heresy made him a popular source of inspiration throughout the church. There is a huge corpus of Ephrem pseudepigraphy and legendary hagiography in many languages. Some of these compositions are in verse, often mimicking Ephrem's heptasyllabic couplets.\nThere is a very large number of works by \"Ephrem\" extant in Greek. In the literature this material is often referred to as \"Greek Ephrem\", or \"Ephraem Graecus\" (as opposed to the real Ephrem the Syrian), as if it was by a single author. This is not the case, but the term is used for convenience. Some texts are in fact Greek translations of genuine works by Ephrem. Most are not. The best known of these writings is the \"Prayer of Saint Ephrem\", which is recited at every service during Great Lent and other fasting periods in Eastern Christianity.\nThere are also works by \"Ephrem\" in Latin, Slavonic and Arabic. \"Ephrem Latinus\" is the term given to Latin translations of \"Ephrem Graecus\". None is by Ephrem the Syrian. \"Pseudo Ephrem Latinus\" is the name given to Latin works under the name of Ephrem which are imitations of the style of Ephrem Latinus.\nThere has been very little critical examination of any of these works. They were edited uncritically by Assemani, and there is also a modern Greek edition by Phrantzolas.\nVeneration as a saint.\nSoon after Ephrem's death, legendary accounts of his life began to circulate. One of the earlier \"modifications\" is the statement that Ephrem's father was a pagan priest of Abnil or Abizal. However, internal evidence from his authentic writings suggest that he was raised by Christian parents.\nThe second legend attached to Ephrem is that he was a monk. In Ephrem's day, monasticism was in its infancy in Egypt. He seems to have been a part of the members of the covenant, a close-knit, urban community of Christians that had \"covenanted\" themselves to service and had refrained from sexual activity. Some of the Syriac terms that Ephrem used to describe his community were later used to describe monastic communities, but the assertion that he was a monk is anachronistic. Later hagiographers often painted a picture of Ephrem as an extreme ascetic, but the internal evidence of his authentic writings show him to have had a very active role, both within his church community and through witness to those outside of it.\nEphrem is venerated as an example of monastic discipline in Eastern Christianity. In the Eastern Orthodox scheme of hagiography, Ephrem is counted as a Venerable Father (i.e., a sainted monk). His feast day is celebrated on 28 January and on the Saturday of the Venerable Fathers (Cheesefare Saturday), which is the Saturday before the beginning of Great Lent.\nEphrem is popularly believed to have taken legendary journeys. In one of these he visits Basil of Caesarea. This links the Syrian Ephrem with the Cappadocian Fathers and is an important theological bridge between the spiritual view of the two, who held much in common. Ephrem is also supposed to have visited Saint Pishoy in the monasteries of Scetes in Egypt. As with the legendary visit with Basil, this visit is a theological bridge between the origins of monasticism and its spread throughout the church.\nOn 5 October 1920, Pope Benedict XV proclaimed Ephrem a Doctor of the Church (\"Doctor of the Syrians\"). This proclamation was made before critical editions of Ephrem's authentic writings were available.\nThe most popular title for Ephrem is \"Harp of the Spirit\" (Syriac: , \"Ken\u0101r\u00e2 d-R\u00fb\u1e25\u00e2\"). He is also referred to as the Deacon of Edessa, the Sun of the Syrians and a Pillar of the Church.\nHis Roman Catholic feast day of 9 June conforms to his date of death. For 48 years (1920\u20131969), it was on 18 June, and this date is still observed in the Extraordinary Form.\nEphrem is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on June 10."}
{"id": "10359", "revid": "35983929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10359", "title": "Amiga Enhanced Chip Set", "text": "The Enhanced Chip Set (ECS) is the second generation of the Amiga computer's chipset, offering minor improvements over the original chipset (OCS) design. ECS was introduced in 1990 with the launch of the Amiga 3000. Amigas produced from 1990 onwards featured a mix of OCS and ECS chips, such as later versions of the Amiga 500 and the Commodore CDTV. Other ECS models were the Amiga 500+ in 1991 and lastly the Amiga 600 in 1992.\nNotable improvements were the \"Super Agnus\" and the \"HiRes Denise\" chips. The sound and floppy controller chip, \"Paula\", remained unchanged from the OCS design. Super Agnus supports 2 MB of Chip RAM, whereas the original Agnus/\"Fat Agnus\" and subsequent \"Fatter Agnus\" can address 512 KB and 1 MB, respectively. The ECS Denise chip offers \"Productivity\" (640\u00d7480 non-interlaced) and \"SuperHiRes\" (1280\u00d7200 or 1280\u00d7256) display modes (also available in interlaced mode), which are however limited to only 4 on-screen colors. Essentially, a 35 ns pixel mode was added plus the ability to run arbitrary horizontal and vertical scan rates. This made other display modes possible, but only the aforementioned modes were supported originally out of the box. For example, the Linux Amiga framebuffer device driver allows the use of several other display modes. Other improvements were the ability of the blitter to copy regions larger than 1024\u00d71024 pixels in one operation and the ability to display sprites in border regions (outside of any display window where bitplanes are shown). ECS also allows software switching between 60\u00a0Hz and 50\u00a0Hz video modes.\nThese improvements largely favored application software, which benefited from higher resolution and VGA-like display modes, rather than games. As an incremental update, ECS was intended to be backward compatible with software designed for OCS machines, though some pre-ECS games were found to be incompatible. Additionally, features from the improved Kickstart 2 operating system were used in subsequent software, and since these two technologies largely overlap, some users misjudged the significance of ECS. It is possible to upgrade some OCS machines, such as the Amiga 500, to obtain partial or full ECS functionality by replacing OCS chips with ECS versions. ECS was followed by the third generation AGA chipset with the launch of the Amiga 4000 and Amiga 1200 in 1992."}
{"id": "10361", "revid": "280945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10361", "title": "European Space Operations Centre", "text": "The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) serves as the main mission control centre for the European Space Agency (ESA) and is located in Darmstadt, Germany. ESOC's primary function is the operation of unmanned spacecraft on behalf of ESA and the launch and early orbit phases (LEOP) of ESA and third-party missions. The Centre is also responsible for a range of operations-related activities within ESA and in cooperation with ESA's industry and international partners, including ground systems engineering, software development, flight dynamics and navigation, development of mission control tools and techniques and space debris studies.\nESOC's current major activities comprise operating planetary and solar missions, such as Mars Express and the Trace Gas Orbiter, astronomy &amp; fundamental physics missions, such as Gaia (spacecraft) and XMM Newton, and Earth observation missions such as CryoSat2 and Swarm (spacecraft).\nESOC is responsible for developing, operating and maintaining ESA's ESTRACK network of ground stations. Teams at the Centre are also involved in research and development related to advanced mission control concepts and Space Situational Awareness, and standardisation activities related to frequency management; mission operations; tracking, telemetry and telecommanding; and space debris.\nMissions.\nESOC's current missions comprise the following:\nPlanetary and solar missions\nAstronomy and fundamental physics missions\nEarth observation missions\nIn addition, the ground segment and mission control teams for several missions are in preparation and training, including:\nESTRACK.\nESOC hosts the control centre for the Agency's European Tracking ESTRACK station network. The core network comprises seven stations in seven countries: Kourou (French Guiana), Cebreros (Spain), Redu (Belgium), Santa Maria (Portugal), Kiruna (Sweden), Malarg\u00fce (Argentina) and New Norcia (Australia). Operators are on duty at ESOC 24 hours/day, year round, to conduct tracking passes, uploading telecommands and downloading telemetry and data.\nActivities.\nIn addition to 'pure' mission operations, a number of other activities take place at the Centre, most of which are directly related to ESA's broader space operations activities.\nHistory.\nThe European Space Operations Centre was formally inaugurated in Darmstadt, Germany, on 8 September 1967 by the then-Minister of Research of the Federal Republic of Germany, Gerhard Stoltenberg. Its role was to provide satellite control for the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), which is today known as its successor organisation, the European Space Agency (ESA).\nThe 90-person ESOC facility was, as it is today, located on the west side of Darmstadt; it employed the staff and resources previously allocated to the European Space Data Centre (ESDAC), which had been established in 1963 to conduct orbit calculations. These were augmented by mission control staff transferred from ESTEC to operate satellites and manage the ESTRACK tracking station network.\nWithin just eight months, ESOC, as part of ESRO, was already operating its first mission, ESRO-2B, a scientific research satellite and the first of many operated from ESOC for ESRO, and later ESA.\nBy July 2012, ESOC had operated over 56 missions spanning science, Earth observation, orbiting observatories, meteorology and space physics.\nLocation and expansion.\nESOC is located on the west side of the city of Darmstadt, some from the main train station, at Robert-Bosch-Stra\u00dfe 5. In 2011, ESA announced the first phase of the ESOC II modernisation and expansion project valued at \u20ac60 million. The new construction will be located across Robert-Bosch-Stra\u00dfe, opposite the current centre.\nEmployees.\nAt ESOC, ESA employs approximately 800, comprising some 250 permanent staff and about 550 contractors. Staff from ESOC are routinely dispatched to work at other ESA establishments, ESTRACK stations, the ATV Control Centre (Toulouse), the Columbus Control Centre (Oberpfaffenhofen) and at partner facilities in several countries."}
{"id": "10363", "revid": "41138957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10363", "title": "European Space Agency", "text": "The European Space Agency (ESA; , ASE; ) is an intergovernmental organisation of 22 member states dedicated to the exploration of space. Established in 1975 and headquartered in Paris, ESA has a worldwide staff of about 2,200 in 2018 and an annual budget of about \u20ac6.68\u00a0billion in 2020.\nESA's space flight programme includes human spaceflight (mainly through participation in the International Space Station program); the launch and operation of uncrewed exploration missions to other planets and the Moon; Earth observation, science and telecommunication; designing launch vehicles; and maintaining a major spaceport, the Guiana Space Centre at Kourou, French Guiana. The main European launch vehicle Ariane 5 is operated through Arianespace with ESA sharing in the costs of launching and further developing this launch vehicle. The agency is also working with NASA to manufacture the Orion Spacecraft service module that will fly on the Space Launch System.\nThe agency's facilities are distributed among the following centres:\nThe European Space Agency Science Programme is a long-term programme of space science and space exploration missions.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nAfter World War II, many European scientists left Western Europe in order to work with the United States. Although the 1950s boom made it possible for Western European countries to invest in research and specifically in space-related activities, Western European scientists realised solely national projects would not be able to compete with the two main superpowers. In 1958, only months after the Sputnik shock, Edoardo Amaldi (Italy) and Pierre Auger (France), two prominent members of the Western European scientific community, met to discuss the foundation of a common Western European space agency. The meeting was attended by scientific representatives from eight countries, including Harrie Massey (United Kingdom).\nThe Western European nations decided to have two agencies: one concerned with developing a launch system, ELDO (European Launch Development Organization), and the other the precursor of the European Space Agency, ESRO (European Space Research Organisation). The latter was established on 20 March 1964 by an agreement signed on 14 June 1962. From 1968 to 1972, ESRO launched seven research satellites.\nESA in its current form was founded with the ESA Convention in 1975, when ESRO was merged with ELDO. ESA had ten founding member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. These signed the ESA Convention in 1975 and deposited the instruments of ratification by 1980, when the convention came into force. During this interval the agency functioned in a de facto fashion. ESA launched its first major scientific mission in 1975, Cos-B, a space probe monitoring gamma-ray emissions in the universe, which was first worked on by ESRO.\nLater activities.\nESA collaborated with NASA on the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the world's first high-orbit telescope, which was launched in 1978 and operated successfully for 18 years. A number of successful Earth-orbit projects followed, and in 1986 ESA began Giotto, its first deep-space mission, to study the comets Halley and Grigg\u2013Skjellerup. Hipparcos, a star-mapping mission, was launched in 1989 and in the 1990s SOHO, \"Ulysses\" and the Hubble Space Telescope were all jointly carried out with NASA. Later scientific missions in cooperation with NASA include the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" space probe, to which ESA contributed by building the Titan landing module \"Huygens\".\nAs the successor of ELDO, ESA has also constructed rockets for scientific and commercial payloads. Ariane 1, launched in 1979, carried mostly commercial payloads into orbit from 1984 onward. The next two versions of the Ariane rocket were intermediate stages in the development of a more advanced launch system, the Ariane 4, which operated between 1988 and 2003 and established ESA as the world leader in commercial space launches in the 1990s. Although the succeeding Ariane 5 experienced a failure on its first flight, it has since firmly established itself within the heavily competitive commercial space launch market with 82 successful launches until 2018. The successor launch vehicle of Ariane 5, the Ariane 6, is under development and is envisioned to enter service in the 2020s.\nThe beginning of the new millennium saw ESA become, along with agencies like NASA, JAXA, ISRO, the CSA and Roscosmos, one of the major participants in scientific space research. Although ESA had relied on co-operation with NASA in previous decades, especially the 1990s, changed circumstances (such as tough legal restrictions on information sharing by the United States military) led to decisions to rely more on itself and on co-operation with Russia. A 2011 press issue thus stated:\nNotable ESA programmes include SMART-1, a probe testing cutting-edge space propulsion technology, the \"Mars Express\" and \"Venus Express\" missions, as well as the development of the Ariane 5 rocket and its role in the ISS partnership. ESA maintains its scientific and research projects mainly for astronomy-space missions such as Corot, launched on 27 December 2006, a milestone in the search for exoplanets.\nOn 21 January 2019, ArianeGroup and Arianespace announced a one-year contract with ESA to study and prepare for a mission to mine the Moon for lunar regolith.\nMission.\nThe treaty establishing the European Space Agency reads:\nESA is responsible for setting a unified space and related industrial policy, recommending space objectives to the member states, and integrating national programs like satellite development, into the European program as much as possible.\nJean-Jacques Dordain \u2013 ESA's Director General (2003\u20132015) \u2013 outlined the European Space Agency's mission in a 2003 interview:\nActivities and programmes.\nESA describes its work in two overlapping ways:\nActivities.\nAccording to the ESA website, the activities are:\nProgrammes.\nMandatory.\nEvery member country must contribute to these programmes:\nOptional.\nDepending on their individual choices the countries can contribute to the following programmes, listed according to:\nESA_LAB@.\nESA has formed partnerships with universities. ESA_LAB@ refers to research laboratories at universities. Currently there are ESA_LAB@\nMember states, funding and budget.\nMembership and contribution to ESA.\nBy 2015, ESA was an intergovernmental organisation of 22 member states. Member states participate to varying degrees in the mandatory (25% of total expenditures in 2008) and optional space programmes (75% of total expenditures in 2008). The 2008 budget amounted to \u20ac3.0\u00a0billion whilst the 2009 budget amounted to \u20ac3.6\u00a0billion. The total budget amounted to about \u20ac3.7\u00a0billion in 2010, \u20ac3.99\u00a0billion in 2011, \u20ac4.02\u00a0billion in 2012, \u20ac4.28\u00a0billion in 2013, \u20ac4.10\u00a0billion in 2014 and \u20ac4.33\u00a0billion in 2015. English is the main language within ESA. Additionally, official documents are also provided in German and documents regarding the Spacelab are also provided in Italian. If found appropriate, the agency may conduct its correspondence in any language of a member state.\nThe following table lists all the member states and adjunct members, their ESA convention ratification dates, and their contributions in 2020:\nNon-full member states.\nSlovenia.\nSince 2016, Slovenia has been an associated member of the ESA.\nLatvia.\nLatvia became the second current associated member on 30 June 2020, when the Association Agreement was signed by ESA Director Jan W\u00f6rner and the Minister of Education and Science of Latvia, Ilga \u0160uplinska in Riga. The Saeima ratified it on July 27. Previously associated members were Austria, Norway and Finland, all of which later joined ESA as full members.\nCanada.\nSince 1 January 1979, Canada has had the special status of a Cooperating State within ESA. By virtue of this accord, the Canadian Space Agency takes part in ESA's deliberative bodies and decision-making and also in ESA's programmes and activities. Canadian firms can bid for and receive contracts to work on programmes. The accord has a provision ensuring a fair industrial return to Canada. The most recent Cooperation Agreement was signed on 15 December 2010 with a term extending to 2020. For 2014, Canada's annual assessed contribution to the ESA general budget was \u20ac6,059,449 (CAD$8,559,050). For 2017, Canada has increased its annual contribution to \u20ac21,600,000 (CAD$30,000,000).\nBudget appropriation and allocation.\nESA is funded from annual contributions by national governments as well as from an annual contribution by the European Union (EU).\nThe budget of ESA was \u20ac5.250\u00a0billion in 2016. Every 3\u20134 years, ESA member states agree on a budget plan for several years at an ESA member states conference. This plan can be amended in future years, however provides the major guideline for ESA for several years. The 2016 budget allocations for major areas of ESA activity are shown in the chart on the right.\nCountries typically have their own space programmes that differ in how they operate organisationally and financially with ESA. For example, the French space agency CNES has a total budget of \u20ac2015\u00a0million, of which \u20ac755\u00a0million is paid as direct financial contribution to ESA. Several space-related projects are joint projects between national space agencies and ESA (e.g. COROT). Also, ESA is not the only European governmental space organisation (for example European Union Satellite Centre).\nEnlargement.\nAfter the decision of the ESA Council of 21/22 March 2001, the procedure for accession of the European states was detailed as described the document titled \"The Plan for European Co-operating States (PECS)\".\nNations that want to become a full member of ESA do so in 3 stages. First a Cooperation Agreement is signed between the country and ESA. In this stage, the country has very limited financial responsibilities. If a country wants to co-operate more fully with ESA, it signs a European Cooperating State (ECS) Agreement. The ECS Agreement makes companies based in the country eligible for participation in ESA procurements. The country can also participate in all ESA programmes, except for the Basic Technology Research Programme. While the financial contribution of the country concerned increases, it is still much lower than that of a full member state. The agreement is normally followed by a Plan For European Cooperating State (or PECS Charter). This is a 5-year programme of basic research and development activities aimed at improving the nation's space industry capacity. At the end of the 5-year period, the country can either begin negotiations to become a full member state or an associated state or sign a new PECS Charter. Many countries, most of which joined the EU in both 2004 and 2007, have started to co-operate with ESA on various levels:\nDuring the Ministerial Meeting in December 2014, ESA ministers approved a resolution calling for discussions to begin with Israel, Australia and South Africa on future association agreements. The ministers noted that \"concrete cooperation is at an advanced stage\" with these nations and that \"prospects for mutual benefits are existing\".\nA separate space exploration strategy resolution calls for further co-operation with the United States, Russia and China on \"LEO exploration, including a continuation of ISS cooperation and the development of a robust plan for the coordinated use of space transportation vehicles and systems for exploration purposes, participation in robotic missions for the exploration of the Moon, the robotic exploration of Mars, leading to a broad Mars Sample Return mission in which Europe should be involved as a full partner, and human missions beyond LEO in the longer term.\"\nRelationship with the European Union.\nThe political perspective of the European Union (EU) was to make ESA an agency of the EU by 2014, although this date was not met. The EU member states provide most of ESA's funding, and they are all either full ESA members or observers.\nLaunch vehicle fleet.\nESA has a fleet of different launch vehicles in service with which it competes in all sectors of the launch market. ESA's fleet consists of three major rocket designs: Ariane 5, Soyuz-2 and Vega. Rocket launches are carried out by Arianespace, which has 23 shareholders representing the industry that manufactures the Ariane 5 as well as CNES, at ESA's Guiana Space Centre. Because many communication satellites have equatorial orbits, launches from French Guiana are able to take larger payloads into space than from spaceports at higher latitudes. In addition, equatorial launches give spacecraft an extra 'push' of nearly 500\u00a0m/s due to the higher rotational velocity of the Earth at the equator compared to near the Earth's poles where rotational velocity approaches zero.\nAriane 5.\nThe Ariane 5 rocket is ESA's primary launcher. It has been in service since 1997 and replaced Ariane 4. Two different variants are currently in use. The heaviest and most used version, the , delivers two communications satellites of up to 10 tonnes into GTO. It failed during its first test flight in 2002, but has since made 82 consecutive successful flights until a partial failure in January 2018. The other version, , was used to launch the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) to the International Space Station (ISS) and will be used to launch four Galileo navigational satellites at a time.\nIn November 2012, ESA agreed to build an upgraded variant called (Mid-life Evolution) which would increase payload capacity to 11.5 tonnes to GTO and feature a restartable second stage to allow more complex missions. Ariane 5 ME was scheduled to fly in 2018, but the whole project was scrapped in favor of Ariane 6, planned to replace Ariane 5 in the 2020s.\nESA's Ariane 1, 2, 3 and 4 launchers (the last of which was ESA's long-time workhorse) have been retired.\nSoyuz.\nSoyuz-2 (also called the Soyuz-ST or Soyuz-STK) is a Russian medium payload launcher (ca. 3 metric tons to GTO) which was brought into ESA service in October 2011. ESA entered into a \u20ac340\u00a0million joint venture with the Russian Federal Space Agency over the use of the Soyuz launcher. Under the agreement, the Russian agency manufactures Soyuz rocket parts for ESA, which are then shipped to French Guiana for assembly.\nESA benefits because it gains a medium payload launcher, complementing its fleet while saving on development costs. In addition, the Soyuz rocket\u2014which has been the Russian's space launch workhorse for more than 50 years\u2014is proven technology with a very good safety record. Russia benefits in that it gets access to the Kourou launch site. Due to its proximity to the equator, launching from Kourou rather than Baikonur nearly doubles Soyuz's payload to GTO (3.0 tonnes vs. 1.7 tonnes).\nSoyuz first launched from Kourou on 21 October 2011, and successfully placed two Galileo satellites into orbit 23,222 kilometres above Earth.\nVega.\nVega is ESA's carrier for small satellites. Developed by seven ESA members led by Italy, it is capable of carrying a payload with a mass of between 300 and 1500\u00a0kg to an altitude of 700\u00a0km, for low polar orbit. Its maiden launch from Kourou was on 13 February 2012. Vega began full commercial exploitation in December 2015.\nThe rocket has three solid propulsion stages and a liquid propulsion upper stage (the AVUM) for accurate orbital insertion and the ability to place multiple payloads into different orbits.\nA larger version of the Vega launcher, Vega-C is in development and the first flight is expected in June 2021. The new evolution of the rocket incorporates a larger first stage booster, the P120C replacing the P80, an upgraded Zefiro (rocket stage) second stage, and the AVUM+ upper stage. This new variant enables larger single payloads, dual payloads, return missions, and orbital transfer capabilities.\nAriane launch vehicle development funding.\nHistorically, the Ariane family rockets have been funded primarily \"with money contributed by ESA governments seeking to participate in the program rather than through competitive industry bids. This [has meant that] governments commit multiyear funding to the development with the expectation of a roughly 90% return on investment in the form of industrial workshare.\" ESA is proposing changes to this scheme by moving to competitive bids for the development of the Ariane 6.\nHuman space flight.\nHistory.\nAt the time ESA was formed, its main goals did not encompass human space flight; rather it considered itself to be primarily a scientific research organisation for uncrewed space exploration in contrast to its American and Soviet counterparts. It is therefore not surprising that the first non-Soviet European in space was not an ESA astronaut on a European space craft; it was Czechoslovak Vladim\u00edr Remek who in 1978 became the first non-Soviet or American in space (the first man in space being Yuri Gagarin of the Soviet Union) \u2013 on a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, followed by the Pole Miros\u0142aw Hermaszewski and East German Sigmund J\u00e4hn in the same year. This Soviet co-operation programme, known as Intercosmos, primarily involved the participation of Eastern bloc countries. In 1982, however, Jean-Loup Chr\u00e9tien became the first non-Communist Bloc astronaut on a flight to the Soviet Salyut 7 space station.\nBecause Chr\u00e9tien did not officially fly into space as an ESA astronaut, but rather as a member of the French CNES astronaut corps, the German Ulf Merbold is considered the first ESA astronaut to fly into space. He participated in the STS-9 Space Shuttle mission that included the first use of the European-built Spacelab in 1983. STS-9 marked the beginning of an extensive ESA/NASA joint partnership that included dozens of space flights of ESA astronauts in the following years. Some of these missions with Spacelab were fully funded and organizationally and scientifically controlled by ESA (such as two missions by Germany and one by Japan) with European astronauts as full crew members rather than guests on board. Beside paying for Spacelab flights and seats on the shuttles, ESA continued its human space flight co-operation with the Soviet Union and later Russia, including numerous visits to Mir.\nDuring the latter half of the 1980s, European human space flights changed from being the exception to routine and therefore, in 1990, the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany was established. It selects and trains prospective astronauts and is responsible for the co-ordination with international partners, especially with regard to the International Space Station. As of 2006, the ESA astronaut corps officially included twelve members, including nationals from most large European countries except the United Kingdom.\nIn the summer of 2008, ESA started to recruit new astronauts so that final selection would be due in spring 2009. Almost 10,000 people registered as astronaut candidates before registration ended in June 2008. 8,413 fulfilled the initial application criteria. Of the applicants, 918 were chosen to take part in the first stage of psychological testing, which narrowed down the field to 192. After two-stage psychological tests and medical evaluation in early 2009, as well as formal interviews, six new members of the European Astronaut Corps were selected \u2013 five men and one woman.\nAstronaut names.\nThe astronauts of the European Space Agency are:\nCrew vehicles.\nIn the 1980s, France pressed for an independent European crew launch vehicle. Around 1978, it was decided to pursue a reusable spacecraft model and starting in November 1987 a project to create a mini-shuttle by the name of Hermes was introduced. The craft was comparable to early proposals for the Space Shuttle and consisted of a small reusable spaceship that would carry 3 to 5 astronauts and 3 to 4 metric tons of payload for scientific experiments. With a total maximum weight of 21 metric tons it would have been launched on the Ariane 5 rocket, which was being developed at that time. It was planned solely for use in low Earth orbit space flights. The planning and pre-development phase concluded in 1991; the production phase was never fully implemented because at that time the political landscape had changed significantly. With the fall of the Soviet Union ESA looked forward to co-operation with Russia to build a next-generation space vehicle. Thus the Hermes programme was cancelled in 1995 after about 3\u00a0billion dollars had been spent. The Columbus space station programme had a similar fate.\nIn the 21st century, ESA started new programmes in order to create its own crew vehicles, most notable among its various projects and proposals is Hopper, whose prototype by EADS, called Phoenix, has already been tested. While projects such as Hopper are neither concrete nor to be realised within the next decade, other possibilities for human spaceflight in co-operation with the Russian Space Agency have emerged. Following talks with the Russian Space Agency in 2004 and June 2005, a co-operation between ESA and the Russian Space Agency was announced to jointly work on the Russian-designed Kliper, a reusable spacecraft that would be available for space travel beyond LEO (e.g. the moon or even Mars). It was speculated that Europe would finance part of it. A \u20ac50\u00a0million participation study for Kliper, which was expected to be approved in December 2005, was finally not approved by the ESA member states. The Russian state tender for the project was subsequently cancelled in 2006.\nIn June 2006, ESA member states granted 15\u00a0million to the Crew Space Transportation System (CSTS) study, a two-year study to design a spacecraft capable of going beyond Low-Earth orbit based on the current Soyuz design. This project was pursued with Roskosmos instead of the cancelled Kliper proposal. A decision on the actual implementation and construction of the CSTS spacecraft was contemplated for 2008.\nIn mid-2009 EADS Astrium was awarded a \u20ac21\u00a0million study into designing a crew vehicle based on the European ATV which is believed to now be the basis of the Advanced Crew Transportation System design.\nIn November 2012, ESA decided to join NASA's Orion programme. The ATV would form the basis of a propulsion unit for NASA's new crewed spacecraft. ESA may also seek to work with NASA on Orion's launch system as well in order to secure a seat on the spacecraft for its own astronauts.\nIn September 2014, ESA signed an agreement with Sierra Nevada Corporation for co-operation in Dream Chaser project. Further studies on the Dream Chaser for European Utilization or DC4EU project were funded, including the feasibility of launching a Europeanized Dream Chaser onboard Ariane 5.\nCooperation with other countries and organisations.\nESA has signed co-operation agreements with the following states that currently neither plan to integrate as tightly with ESA institutions as Canada, nor envision future membership of ESA: Argentina, Brazil, China, India (for the Chandrayan mission), Russia and Turkey.\nAdditionally, ESA has joint projects with the European Union, NASA of the United States and is participating in the International Space Station together with the United States (NASA), Russia and Japan (JAXA).\nEuropean Union.\nESA is not an agency or body of the European Union (EU), and has non-EU countries (Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom) as members. There are however ties between the two, with various agreements in place and being worked on, to define the legal status of ESA with regard to the EU.\nThere are common goals between ESA and the EU. ESA has an EU liaison office in Brussels. On certain projects, the EU and ESA co-operate, such as the upcoming Galileo satellite navigation system. Space policy has since December 2009 been an area for voting in the European Council. Under the European Space Policy of 2007, the EU, ESA and its Member States committed themselves to increasing co-ordination of their activities and programmes and to organising their respective roles relating to space.\nThe Lisbon Treaty of 2009 reinforces the case for space in Europe and strengthens the role of ESA as an R&amp;D space agency. Article 189 of the Treaty gives the EU a mandate to elaborate a European space policy and take related measures, and provides that the EU should establish appropriate relations with ESA.\nFormer Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni, during his tenure as a Member of the European Parliament from 2004 to 2009, stressed the importance of the European Union as a driving force for space exploration, \"since other players are coming up such as India and China it is becoming ever more important that Europeans can have an independent access to space. We have to invest more into space research and technology in order to have an industry capable of competing with other international players.\"\nThe first EU-ESA International Conference on Human Space Exploration took place in Prague on 22 and 23 October 2009. A road map which would lead to a common vision and strategic planning in the area of space exploration was discussed. Ministers from all 29 EU and ESA members as well as members of parliament were in attendance.\nNASA.\nESA has a long history of collaboration with NASA. Since ESA's astronaut corps was formed, the Space Shuttle has been the primary launch vehicle used by ESA's astronauts to get into space through partnership programmes with NASA. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Spacelab programme was an ESA-NASA joint research programme that had ESA develop and manufacture orbital labs for the Space Shuttle for several flights on which ESA participate with astronauts in experiments.\nIn robotic science mission and exploration missions, NASA has been ESA's main partner. \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" was a joint NASA-ESA mission, along with the Infrared Space Observatory, INTEGRAL, SOHO, and others. Also, the Hubble Space Telescope is a joint project of NASA and ESA. Future ESA-NASA joint projects include the James Webb Space Telescope and the proposed Laser Interferometer Space Antenna. NASA has supported ESA's MarcoPolo-R mission which landed on asteroid Bennu in October 2020 and is scheduled to return a sample to Earth for further analysis in 2023. NASA and ESA will also likely join together for a Mars Sample Return Mission. In October 2020 the ESA entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with NASA to work together on the Artemis program, which will provide an orbiting lunar gateway and also accomplish the first manned lunar landing in 50 years, whose team will include the first woman on the Moon. Astronaut selection announcements are expected within two years of the 2024 scheduled launch date.\nCooperation with other space agencies.\nSince China has started to invest more money into space activities, the Chinese Space Agency has sought international partnerships. ESA is, beside the Russian Space Agency, one of its most important partners. Two space agencies cooperated in the development of the Double Star Mission. In 2017, ESA sent two astronauts to China for two weeks sea survival training with Chinese astronauts in Yantai, Shandong.\nESA entered into a major joint venture with Russia in the form of the CSTS, the preparation of French Guiana spaceport for launches of Soyuz-2 rockets and other projects. With India, ESA agreed to send instruments into space aboard the ISRO's Chandrayaan-1 in 2008. ESA is also co-operating with Japan, the most notable current project in collaboration with JAXA is the \"BepiColombo\" mission to Mercury.\nSpeaking to reporters at an air show near Moscow in August 2011, ESA head Jean-Jacques Dordain said ESA and Russia's Roskosmos space agency would \"carry out the first flight to Mars together.\"\nInternational Space Station.\nWith regard to the International Space Station (ISS) ESA is not represented by all of its member states: 10 of the 21 ESA member states currently participate in the project: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. Austria, Finland and Ireland chose not to participate, because of lack of interest or concerns about the expense of the project. The United Kingdom withdrew from the preliminary agreement because of concerns about the expense of the project. Portugal, Luxembourg, Greece, the Czech Republic, Romania and Poland joined ESA after the agreement had been signed. ESA is taking part in the construction and operation of the ISS with contributions such as Columbus, a science laboratory module that was brought into orbit by NASA's STS-122 Space Shuttle mission and the Cupola observatory module that was completed in July 2005 by Alenia Spazio for ESA. The current estimates for the ISS are approaching \u20ac100\u00a0billion in total (development, construction and 10 years of maintaining the station) of which ESA has committed to paying \u20ac8\u00a0billion. About 90% of the costs of ESA's ISS share will be contributed by Germany (41%), France (28%) and Italy (20%). German ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter was the first long-term ISS crew member.\nESA has developed the Automated Transfer Vehicle for ISS resupply. Each ATV has a cargo capacity of . The first ATV, \"Jules Verne\", was launched on 9 March 2008 and on 3 April 2008 successfully docked with the ISS. This manoeuvre, considered a major technical feat, involved using automated systems to allow the ATV to track the ISS, moving at 27,000\u00a0km/h, and attach itself with an accuracy of 2\u00a0cm. Five vehicles were launched before the program ended with the launch of the fifth ATV, \"Georges Lema\u00eetre\", in 2014.\nAs of 2020, the spacecraft establishing supply links to the ISS are the Russian Progress and Soyuz, Japanese Kounotori (HTV), and the USA vehicles Cargo Dragon 2 and Cygnus stemmed from the Commercial Resupply Services program.\nEuropean Life and Physical Sciences research on board the International Space Station (ISS) is mainly based on the European Programme for Life and Physical Sciences in Space programme that was initiated in 2001.\nLanguages.\nAccording to Annex 1, Resolution No. 8 of the \"ESA Convention and Council Rules of Procedure\", English, French and German may be used in all meetings of the Agency, with interpretation provided into these three languages. All official documents are available in English and French with all documents concerning the ESA Council being available in German as well.\nESA and the EU institutions.\nThe Flag of Europe is flown in space during missions (for example it was flown by ESA's Andre Kuipers during Delta mission).\nThe Commission is increasingly working together towards common objectives. Some 20 per cent of the funds managed by ESA now originate from the supranational budget of the European Union. In recent years the ties between ESA and the European institutions have been reinforced by the increasing role that space plays in supporting Europe's social, political and economic policies.\nThe legal basis for the EU/ESA co-operation is provided by a Framework Agreement which entered into force in May 2004. According to this agreement, the European Commission and ESA co-ordinate their actions through the Joint Secretariat, a small team of EC's administrators and ESA executive. The Member States of the two organisations meet at ministerial level in the Space Council, which is a concomitant meeting of the EU and ESA Councils, prepared by Member States representatives in the High-level Space Policy Group (HSPG).\nESA maintains a liaison office in Brussels to facilitate relations with the European institutions.\nGuaranteeing European access to space.\nIn May 2007, the 29 European countries expressed their support for the European Space Policy in a resolution of the Space Council, unifying the approach of ESA with those of the European Union and their member states.\nPrepared jointly by the European Commission and ESA's Director General, the European Space Policy sets out a basic vision and strategy for the space sector and addresses issues such as security and defence, access to space and exploration.\nThrough this resolution, the EU, ESA and their Member States all commit to increasing co-ordination of their activities and programmes and their respective roles relating to space.\nIncidents.\nOn 3 August 1984, ESA's Paris headquarters were severely damaged and six people were hurt when a bomb exploded, planted by the far-left armed Action Directe group.\nOn 14 December 2015, hackers from Anonymous breached ESA's subdomains and leaked thousands of login credentials."}
{"id": "10365", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10365", "title": "Embouchure", "text": "Embouchure () or lipping is the use of the lips, facial muscles, tongue, and teeth in playing a wind instrument. This includes shaping the lips to the mouthpiece of a woodwind instrument or the mouthpiece of a brass instrument. The word is of French origin and is related to the root \"\", 'mouth'. Proper embouchure allows instrumentalists to play their instrument at its full range with a full, clear tone and without strain or damage to their muscles.\nBrass embouchure.\nWhile performing on a brass instrument, the sound is produced by the player buzzing their lips into a mouthpiece. Pitches are changed in part through altering the amount of muscular contraction in the lip formation. The performer's use of the air, tightening of cheek and jaw muscles, as well as tongue manipulation can affect how the embouchure works.\nMaintaining an effective embouchure is an essential skill for any brass instrumentalist, but its personal and particular characteristics mean that different pedagogues and researchers have advocated differing, even contradictory, advice on what proper embouchure is and how it should be taught. One point on which there is some agreement is that proper embouchure is not one-size-fits-all: individual differences in dental structure, lip shape and size, jaw shape and the degree of jaw malocclusion, and other anatomical factors will affect whether a particular embouchure technique will be effective or not.\nIn 1962, Philip Farkas hypothesized that the air stream traveling through the lip aperture should be directed straight down the shank of the mouthpiece. He believed that it would be illogical to \"violently deflect\" the air stream downward at the point of where the air moves past the lips. In this text, Farkas also recommends that the lower jaw be protruded so that the upper and lower teeth are aligned.\nIn 1970, Farkas published a second text which contradicted his earlier writing. Out of 40 subjects, Farkas showed that 39 subjects directed the air downward to varying degrees and one subject directed the air in an upward direction at various degrees. The lower jaw position seen in these photographs shows more variation from his earlier text as well.\nThis supports what was written by trombonist and brass pedagogue Donald S. Reinhardt in 1942. In 1972, Reinhardt described and labeled different embouchure patterns according to such characteristics as mouthpiece placement and the general direction of the air stream as it travels past the lips. According to this later text, players who place the mouthpiece higher on the lips, so that more upper lip is inside the mouthpiece, will direct the air downwards to varying degrees while playing. Performers who place the mouthpiece lower, so that more lower lip is inside the mouthpiece, will direct the air to varying degrees in an upward manner. In order for the performer to be successful, the air stream direction and mouthpiece placement need to be personalized based on individual anatomical differences. Lloyd Leno confirmed the existence of both upstream and downstream embouchures.\nMore controversial was Reinhardt's description and recommendations regarding a phenomenon he termed a \"pivot\". According to Reinhardt, a successful brass embouchure depends on a motion wherein the performer moves both the mouthpiece and lips as a single unit along the teeth in an upward and downward direction. As the performer ascends in pitch, he or she will either move the lips and mouthpiece together slightly up towards the nose or pull them down together slightly towards the chin, and use the opposite motion to descend in pitch. Whether the player uses one general pivot direction or the other, and the degree to which the motion is performed, depends on the performer's anatomical features and stage of development. The placement of the mouthpiece upon the lips doesn't change, but rather the relationship of the rim and lips to the teeth. While the angle of the instrument may change as this motion follows the shape of the teeth and placement of the jaw, contrary to what many brass performers and teachers believe, the angle of the instrument does not actually constitute the motion Reinhardt advised as a pivot.\nLater research supports Reinhardt's claim that this motion exists and might be advisable for brass performers to adopt. John Froelich describes how mouthpiece pressure towards the lips (vertical forces) and shear pressure (horizontal forces) functioned in three test groups, student trombonists, professional trombonists, and professional symphonic trombonists. Froelich noted that the symphonic trombonists used the least amount of both direct and shear forces and recommends this model be followed. Other research notes that virtually all brass performers rely upon the upward and downward embouchure motion. Other authors and pedagogues remain skeptical about the necessity of this motion, but scientific evidence supporting this view has not been sufficiently developed at this time.\nSome noted brass pedagogues prefer to instruct the use of the embouchure from a less analytical point of view. Arnold Jacobs, a tubist and well-regarded brass teacher, believed that it was best for the student to focus on his or her use of the air and musical expression to allow the embouchure to develop naturally on its own. Other instructors, such as Carmine Caruso, believed that the brass player's embouchure could best be developed through coordination exercises and drills that bring all the muscles into balance that focus the student's attention on his or her time perception. Still other authors who have differing approaches to embouchure development include Louis Maggio, Jeff Smiley, Jerome Callet. and Clint McLaughlin.\nFarkas embouchure.\nMost professional performers, as well as instructors, use a combination called a puckered smile. Farkas told people to blow as if they were trying to cool soup. Raphael Mendez advised saying the letter \"M\". The skin under the lower lip will be taut with no air pocket. The lips do not overlap nor do they roll in or out. The corners of the mouth are held firmly in place. To play with an extended range one should use a pivot, tongue arch and lip to lip compression.\nAccording to Farkas the mouthpiece should have upper lip and lower lip (French horn), lower lip and upper lip (trumpet and cornet), and more latitude for lower brass (trombone, baritone, and tuba). For trumpet, some also advocate upper lip and lower lip. Farkas claimed placement was more important for the instruments with smaller mouthpieces. The lips should not overlap each other, nor should they roll in or out. The mouth corners should be held firm. Farkas speculated that the horn should be held in a downward angle to allow the air stream to go straight into the mouthpiece, although his later text shows that air stream direction actually is either upstream or downstream and is dependent upon the ratio of upper or lower lip inside the mouthpiece, not the horn angle. Farkas advised to moisten the outside of the lips, then form the embouchure and gently place the mouthpiece on it. He also recommended there must be a gap of or so between the teeth so that the air flows freely.\nArban vs. Saint-Jacome.\nArban and Saint-Jacome were both cornet soloists and authors of well respected and still used method books. Arban stated undogmatically that he believed the mouthpiece should be placed on the top lip. Saint-Jacome to the contrary said dogmatically that the mouthpiece should be placed \"two-thirds for the upper and the rest for the under according to all professors and one-third for the upper and two-thirds for the under according to one sole individual, whom I shall not name.\"\nBuzzing embouchure.\nThe Farkas set is the basis of most lip buzzing embouchures. Mendez did teach lip buzzing by making the student lip buzz for a month before they could play their trumpet and got great results. One can initiate this type of buzz by using the same sensation as spitting seeds, but maintaining a continued flow of air. This technique assists the development of the Farkas approach by preventing the player from using an aperture that is too open.\nStevens\u2013Costello embouchure.\nStevens\u2013Costello embouchure has its origins in the William Costello embouchure and was further developed by Roy Stevens. It uses a slight rolling in of both lips and touching evenly all the way across. It also uses mouthpiece placement of about 40\u201350% top lip and 50\u201360% lower lip. The teeth will be about apart and the teeth are parallel or the jaw slightly forward.\nThere is relative mouthpiece pressure to the given air column. One exercise to practice the proper weight to air relationship is the palm exercise where the player holds the horn by laying it on its side in the palm of the hand, not grasping it. The lips are placed on the mouthpiece and the player blows utilizing the weight of the horn in establishing a sound.\nMaggio embouchure.\nA puckered embouchure, used by most players, and sometimes used by jazz players for extremely high \"screamer\" notes. Maggio claimed that the pucker embouchure gives more endurance than some systems. Carlton MacBeth is the main proponent of the pucker embouchure. The Maggio system was established because Louis Maggio had sustained an injury which prevented him from playing. In this system the player cushions the lips by extending them or puckering (like a monkey). This puckering enables the players to overcome physical malformations. It also lets the player play for an extended time in the upper register. The pucker can make it easy to use to open an aperture. Much very soft practice can help overcome this. Claude Gordon was a student of Louis Maggio and Herbert L. Clarke and systematized the concepts of these teachers. Claude Gordon made use of pedal tones for embouchure development as did Maggio and Herbert L. Clarke. All three stressed that the mouthpiece should be placed higher on the top lip for a more free vibration of the lips.\nTongue-controlled embouchure.\nThis embouchure method, advocated by a minority of brass pedagogues such as Jerome Callet, has not yet been sufficiently researched to support the claims that this system is the most effective approach for all brass performers.\nAdvocates of Callet's approach believe that this method was recommended and taught by the great brass instructors of the early 20th century. Two French trumpet technique books, authored by Jean-Baptiste Arban and Saint-Jacome, were translated into English for use by American players. According to some, due to a misunderstanding arising from differences in pronunciation between French and English, the commonly used brass embouchure in Europe was incorrectly interpreted. Callet attributes this difference in embouchure technique as the reason the great players of the past were able to play at the level of technical virtuosity which they did, although the increased difficulty of contemporary compositions for brass seem to indicate that the level of brass technique achieved by today's performers equals or even exceeds that of most performers from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nCallet's method of brass embouchure consists of the tongue remaining forward and through the teeth at all times. The corners of the mouth always remain relaxed, and only a small amount of air is used. The top and bottom lips curl inward and grip the forward tongue. The tongue will force the teeth, and subsequently the throat, wide open, supposedly resulting in a bigger, more open sound. The forward tongue resists the pressure of the mouthpiece, controls the flow of air for lower and higher notes, and protects the lips and teeth from damage or injury from mouthpiece pressure. Because of the importance of the tongue in this method many refer to this as a \"tongue-controlled embouchure\". This technique facilitates the use of a smaller mouthpiece and larger bore instruments. It results in improved intonation and stronger harmonically related partials across the player's range.\nWoodwind embouchure.\nFlute embouchure.\nA variety of transverse flute embouchures are employed by professional flautists, though the most natural form is perfectly symmetrical, the corners of the mouth relaxed (i.e. not smiling), the lower lip placed along and at a short distance from the embouchure hole. It must be stressed, however, that achieving a symmetrical, or perfectly centred blowing hole ought not to be an end in itself. Indeed, French flautist Marcel Moyse did not play with a symmetrical embouchure.\nThe end-blown xiao, kaval, shakuhachi and hocchiku flutes demand especially difficult embouchures, sometimes requiring many lessons before any sound can be produced.\nThe embouchure is an important element to tone production. The right embouchure, developed with \"time, patience, and intelligent work\", will produce a beautiful sound and a correct intonation. The embouchure is produced with the muscles around the lips: principally the orbicularis oris muscle and the depressor anguli oris, whilst avoiding activation of zygomaticus major, which will produce a smile, flattening the top lip against the maxillary (upper jaw) teeth. Beginner flute-players tend to suffer fatigue in these muscles, and notably struggle to use the depressor muscle, which necessarily helps to keep the top lip directing the flow of air across the embouchure hole. These muscles have to be properly warmed up and exercised before practicing. Tone-development exercises including long notes and harmonics must be done as part of the warm up daily.\nSome further adjustments to the embouchure are necessary when moving from the transverse orchestral flute to the piccolo. With the piccolo, it becomes necessary to place the near side of the embouchure hole slightly higher on the lower lip, i.e. above the lip margin, and greater muscle tone from the lip muscles is needed to keep the stream/pressure of air directed across the smaller embouchure hole, particularly when playing in higher piccolo registers.\nReed instrument embouchure.\nWith the woodwinds, aside from the flute, piccolo, and recorder, the sound is generated by a reed and not with the lips. The embouchure is therefore based on sealing the area around the reed and mouthpiece. This serves to prevent air from escaping while simultaneously supporting the reed, allowing it to vibrate, and constrict the reed preventing it from vibrating too much. With woodwinds, it is important to ensure that the mouthpiece is not placed too far into the mouth, which would result in too much vibration (no control), often creating a sound an octave (or harmonic twelfth for the clarinet) above the intended note. If the mouthpiece is not placed far enough into the mouth, no sound will be generated, as the reed will not vibrate.\nThe standard embouchures for single reed woodwinds like the clarinet and saxophone are variants of the \"single lip embouchure\", formed by resting the reed upon the bottom lip, which rests on the teeth and is supported by the chin muscles and the buccinator muscles on the sides of the mouth. The top teeth rest on top of the mouthpiece. The manner in which the lower lip rests against the teeth differs between clarinet and saxophone embouchures. In clarinet playing, the lower lip is rolled over the teeth and corners of the mouth are drawn back, which has the effect of drawing the upper lip around the mouthpiece to create a seal due to the angle at which the mouthpiece rests in the mouth. With the saxophone embouchure, the lower lip rests against, but not over, the teeth as in pronouncing the letter \"V\" and the corners of the lip are drawn in (similar to a drawstring bag). With the less common double-lip embouchure, the top lip is placed under (around) the top teeth. In both instances, the position of the tongue in the mouth plays a vital role in focusing and accelerating the air stream blown by the player. This results in a more mature and full sound, rich in overtones.\nThe double reed woodwinds, the oboe and bassoon, have no mouthpiece. Instead the reed is two pieces of cane extending from a metal tube (oboe \u2013 staple) or placed on a bocal (bassoon, English horn). The reed is placed directly on the lips and then played like the double-lip embouchure described above. Compared to the single reed woodwinds, the reed is very small and subtle changes in the embouchure can have a dramatic effect on tuning, tone and pitch control."}
{"id": "10368", "revid": "24122651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10368", "title": "Elephant 6", "text": "Elephant 6 (sometimes referred to as the Elephant 6 Recording Company) is a loosely defined musical collective in the United States. Notable bands associated with the collective include the Apples in Stereo, Beulah, Circulatory System, Elf Power, the Minders, Neutral Milk Hotel, of Montreal, and the Olivia Tremor Control. Although there are many different genres explored by bands in the collective, there is a shared interest in psychedelic pop of the 1960s, with particular influence from bands such as the Beach Boys, the Beatles, and the Zombies. Recorded music will sometimes feature intentionally low fidelity production and experimental recording techniques.\nThe collective originated in Ruston, Louisiana in the late 1980s. The name was used to occasionally denote the home recordings made by four high school friends: Bill Doss, Will Cullen Hart, Jeff Mangum, and Robert Schneider. After high school, Schneider formed the Apples in Stereo; Doss, Hart, and Mangum formed the Olivia Tremor Control; and Mangum independently formed Neutral Milk Hotel. These three bands would serve as the basis for Elephant 6, and soon, many other bands joined the collective. Athens, Georgia, and Denver, Colorado, became major hub cities, and the mid-to-late 1990s represented the peak years of activity for the collective.\nDue to the confluence of new bands and the dissolution of Neutral Milk Hotel and the Olivia Tremor Control, the collective stagnated in activity in the early 2000s. A brief resurgence in the late 2000s ended with the death of Doss, and in recent years the collective has remained relatively dormant. Journalists have described the Elephant 6 collective as an important underground music movement, and a key contributor to the emergence of alternative rock and indie rock in the 1990s.\nDefining characteristics.\nNoel Murray and Marcus Gilmer of \"The A.V. Club\" note the difficulty in defining the exact parameters of the collective due to the multitude of associated acts. Each act has their own unique sound, and musicians are often a member of multiple bands. This problem is compounded by the fact that members of the collective will sometimes obfuscate the truth, such as misleading a \"Rolling Stone\" reporter in believing they lived in a communal compound in Athens. In 2012, the official Elephant 6 website read: \"A collective, a label ... a cult? Elephant 6 may be all of these things or none of these depending on your point of view. And we're certainly not going to try to define what it is now!\"\nElephant 6 bands explore a variety of music genres, including indie rock, synth-pop, and twee pop. A common interest for nearly every band associated with the collective however is psychedelic pop of the 1960s. Bands such as the Beach Boys, the Beatles, and the Zombies are important influences for Elephant 6 groups like the Apples in Stereo, Beulah, and the Olivia Tremor Control. Elephant 6's de facto leader Robert Schneider notes the particular influence of the Beach Boys' unfinished album \"Smile\", calling it the \"Holy Grail\" for many members of the collective. \"We read about \"Smile\" and obsessed over the Beach Boy records around it. We built it up in our minds what \"Smile\" was in this empty space where much of it wasn't available to hear.\"\nIn the 1990s, bands joined the Elephant 6 collective through invitation. Inspired by the Surrealist Manifestos, members of the collective issued their own manifesto in small hand-drawn catalogs, found within early releases. According to Schneider: \"We wanted [to find] these little pockets of people in different cities who listened to Pavement and the Beach Boys and were recording on 4-tracks.\" Schneider notes that another way a band may join the collective is by simply having a similar sound. He uses Beulah as an example, and in reference to the band's sound, he said: \"This is a kindred spirit. This is Elephant 6.\"\nMost Elephant 6 members are anti-consumer and possess a DIY ethic. Their music sometimes features intentionally low quality production, and bands may experiment with unique recording methods; for example, the Olivia Tremor Control's 1996 album \"\" features recording techniques such as tape manipulation and sound collages. Schneider notes his hatred of both indie music and modern pop music, and said that his vision for Elephant 6 is a \"perfect pop world,\" untarnished by commercial interests.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nElephant 6 originated in Ruston, Louisiana, in the late 1980s. The name was occasionally used to denote home recordings made by four high school friends: Bill Doss, Will Cullen Hart, Jeff Mangum, and Robert Schneider. These recordings were circulated between the four of them, and they did not seek approval from record labels or fanzines. Musician Laura Carter said: \"They were just 13-year-old boys yelling, 'Fuck your mama,' and bashing on the drums as hard as they can. It was just kids having fun, and they would fill up a whole cassette tape with this.\" When the group decided to create an imaginary label for their music, Hart came up with the name Elephant 6.\nWhen the four friends graduated high school, they dispersed to different cities in the United States, but continued to mail tapes to each other. Schneider moved to Denver, Colorado, while Doss, Hart, and Mangum moved to Athens, Georgia. The three were drawn to the city's burgeoning music scene, and played in a band called the Synthetic Flying Machine. While in Athens, the group began collaborating with New York musician Julian Koster, who was the first non-Rustonian musician associated with Elephant 6. In 1993, the Synthetic Flying Machine evolved into a band called the Olivia Tremor Control, and the band gained local attention for their psychedelic sound, which was in contrast to the prevalent grunge sound of the 1990s.\nIn Denver, Schneider formed a band called the Apples (later known as the Apples in Stereo) with Jim McIntyre, Hilarie Sidney and Chris Parfitt. Schneider created a record label called the Elephant 6 Recording Company as a vehicle for the Apples music, and in 1993, the first recording released on the label was an extended play titled \"Tidal Wave\". Around this time, Mangum left the Olivia Tremor Control, and became a vagabond. While living in Seattle, Mangum released the song \"Everything Is\" on Cher Doll Records in 1994, and was the first member of the collective to have their music released on a mainstream label. Mangum released the song under the name Neutral Milk Hotel.\nPeak years.\nThe mid-to-late 1990s saw the greatest amount of activity for the collective. The three main bands associated with Elephant 6 at the time\u2013the Apples in Stereo, Neutral Milk Hotel, and the Olivia Tremor Control\u2013grew in popularity, and each released an important album: \"Fun Trick Noisemaker\" by the Apples in Stereo (1995), \"Music from the Unrealized Film Script: Dusk at Cubist Castle\" by the Olivia Tremor Control (1996), and \"In the Aeroplane Over the Sea\" by Neutral Milk Hotel (1998). \"In the Aeroplane Over the Sea\" in particular is seen by journalists as the collective's magnum opus; \"The A.V. Club\" wrote: \"\"In the Aereoplane Over the Sea\" is the culmination of everything the [Elephant 6] collective was about in the mid-'90s: distinctive, ragged, catchy records ripped straight from their makers' veins.\"\nDuring this period, many other bands associated with the collective were formed, and Athens became a major hub city. Elf Power, of Montreal, and Doss' solo project the Sunshine Fix were among the more notable Athens based groups. of Montreal frontman Kevin Barnes said: \"The heyday, most of the late 1990s, everyone was involved in each others lives, and we would collaborate more, have dinners where everyone would make something.\" Schneider compares this period to the Summer of Love, and said the driving force for many of the bands was \"out-weirding [their] neighbor\" with their music. Elephant 6 bands would tour with each other, the larger bands allowed the smaller bands to open for them.\nDenver was the smaller of the two hub cities. In addition to the Apples in Stereo, the major bands from Denver were the Minders, Dressy Bessy, and McIntyre's solo project Von Hemmling. The main draw for Elephant 6 bands in Denver was Pet Sounds Studio, a recording studio Schneider built in McIntyre's house. Many Elephant 6 albums were recorded at Pet Sounds, and were produced by Schneider. In addition to the two main hub cities, Elephant 6 bands began forming in various cities in the United States, such as the Essex Green and the Ladybug Transistor in Brooklyn, and Beulah in San Francisco.\nStagnation of activity.\nIn the early 2000s, the Elephant 6 collective stagnated in activity. Neutral Milk Hotel member Scott Spillane identifies the sudden confluence of bands across the country as an important factor to this period. \"At the time the Elephant 6 thing was getting out of hand, and we started seeing all of these bands that had little Elephant 6 logos on them all over the place\" said Spillane. Bands began to tour more often, and the members had less time to interact with each other. Additionally, two driving bands for the collective\u2013Neutral Milk Hotel and the Olivia Tremor Control\u2013went on hiatus. Mangum became reclusive as he struggled to cope with his newfound stardom, while the members of the Olivia Tremor Control wanted to record their own solo music.\nBeulah member Pat Noel said many bands were dismayed at how journalists would \"pigeonhole\" them to the collective. \"We kind of made a conscious decision to distance ourselves a little bit from the whole thing.\" Schneider took a break from producing albums, and the final album to be affixed with the Elephant 6 Recording Company logo was \"Cul-De-Sacs and Dead Ends\" by the Minders in 1999. The collective slowly dissipated, although bands like the Apples in Stereo, Elf Power, and of Montreal continued making music throughout the 2000s.\nBrief reemergence.\nThe collective was relatively dormant until the release of \"New Magnetic Wonder\", a 2007 album by the Apples in Stereo. \"New Magnetic Wonder\" featured all four of the collective's originating members. While recording the album, they discussed new ideas, which in turn facilitated a need to make more music. The following year, Koster organized the \"Elephant 6 Holiday Surprise Tour,\" a short concert tour that featured fifteen artists and ten Elephant 6 bands. Koster said \"Elephant 6 is back,\" and added: \"Somehow, everything's happening for us now. I don't know why we were ever interrupted, and why all this is happening now. But we're all just so happy.\" The Olivia Tremor Control reunited in 2009, and Mangum returned to the public eye with solo concerts over the next few years.\nOn July 30, 2012, Doss died from a brain aneurysm. His death came as a shock to members of the collective, and stalled nearly all recordings at the time. Schneider said: \"I can't say what it means for the Elephant 6 or the Apples ... On a musical level it's too soon to say. I mean, I don't want to say definitively that I don't want to make music again, but on a musical level there's no way to come to terms with the loss.\" Members of the Olivia Tremor Control continued making music, and in 2017 Schneider confirmed he was producing unfinished recordings. Today, the Elephant 6 collective still exists, albeit on a much smaller scale. Bands like Elf Power and of Montreal continue to record music, and many bands have moved onto Elephant 6 offshoot labels such as Orange Twin Records and Cloud Recordings.\nImpact.\nSeveral journalists regard the Elephant 6 collective as an important underground music movement, and a key contributor to the alternative rock and indie rock explosion in the 1990s. Lee M. Shook Jr. of \"Paste\" wrote: \"The Elephant 6 Recording Company would raise the bar for wide-scale countercultural activity and underground pop art\u2014both musical, visual and otherwise\u2014well into the 21st century.\" Tom Murphy of \"Westword\" expanded on this statement, by writing: \"It became a movement of sorts because the music was so accessible and inclusive of a wide range of musical expression, allowing for immediate and enduring growth, however loose the association.\"\nThe Elephant 6 collective has influenced many indie rock bands, including Arcade Fire, Franz Ferdinand, and Tame Impala. Chris Chu of the Canadian band the Morning Benders said: \"Elephant 6 was the gateway for me. They seemed to be bridging that tradition from the 60s to a more modern, more indie approach. It was exactly what I was looking for, a new take on that stuff.\"\nAssociated acts.\nThe official Elephant 6 website lists forty-seven acts associated with the collective, although Shook Jr. reports there are more than fifty acts. Among the collective's more notable acts include:"}
{"id": "10369", "revid": "1004527876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10369", "title": "Echolocation", "text": "Echolocation is the use of \"sound\" as a form of navigation "}
{"id": "10370", "revid": "121745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10370", "title": "Evangelicalism", "text": "Evangelicalism (), evangelical Christianity, or evangelical Protestantism, is a worldwide trans-denominational movement within Protestant Christianity that maintains the belief that the essence of the Gospel consists of the doctrine of salvation by grace alone, solely through faith in Jesus's atonement. Evangelicals believe in the centrality of the conversion or \"born again\" experience in receiving salvation, in the authority of the Bible as God's revelation to humanity, and in spreading the Christian message. The movement has long had a presence in the Anglosphere before spreading further afield in the 19th, 20th and early 21st centuries.\nIts origins are usually traced to 1738, with various theological streams contributing to its foundation, including Pietism, Puritanism, Presbyterianism and Moravianism (in particular its bishop Nicolaus Zinzendorf and his community at Herrnhut). Preeminently, John Wesley and other early Methodists were at the root of sparking this new movement during the First Great Awakening. Today, evangelicals are found across many Protestant branches, as well as in various denominations not subsumed to a specific branch. Among leaders and major figures of the evangelical Protestant movement were John Wesley, George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards, Billy Graham, Bill Bright, Harold Ockenga, John Stott and Martyn Lloyd-Jones. The movement gained great momentum during the 18th and 19th centuries with the Great Awakenings in Great Britain and the United States.\nIn 2016, there were an estimated 619 million evangelicals in the world, meaning that one in four Christians would be classified as evangelical. The United States has the largest proportion of evangelicals in the world. American evangelicals are a quarter of that nation's population and its single largest religious group. As a trans-denominational coalition, evangelicals can be found in nearly every Protestant denomination and tradition, particularly within the Reformed, Baptist, Wesleyan, Pentecostal and charismatic churches.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"evangelical\" has its etymological roots in the Greek word for \"gospel\" or \"good news\": \"euangelion\", from \"eu\" \"good\", \"angel\"- the stem of, among other words, \"angelos\" \"messenger, angel\", and the neuter suffix -\"ion\". By the English Middle Ages, the term had expanded semantically to include not only the message, but also the New Testament which contained the message as well as more specifically the Gospels, which portray the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus. The first published use of \"evangelical\" in English was in 1531, when William Tyndale wrote \"He exhorteth them to proceed constantly in the evangelical truth.\" One year later, Thomas More wrote the earliest recorded use in reference to a theological distinction when he spoke of \"Tyndale [and] his evangelical brother Barns\".\nDuring the Reformation, Protestant theologians embraced the term as referring to \"gospel truth\". Martin Luther referred to the \"evangelische Kirche\" (\"evangelical church\") to distinguish Protestants from Catholics in the Catholic Church. Into the 21st century, \"evangelical\" has continued in use as a synonym for (mainline) Protestant in continental Europe, and elsewhere. This usage is reflected in the names of Protestant denominations, such as the Evangelical Church in Germany (a union of Lutheran and Reformed churches) and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America.\nIn the English-speaking world, \"evangelical\" was commonly applied to describe the series of revival movements that occurred in Britain and North America during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Christian historian David W. Bebbington writes that, \"Although 'evangelical', with a lower-case initial, is occasionally used to mean 'of the gospel', the term 'Evangelical', with a capital letter, is applied to any aspect of the movement beginning in the 1730s.\" According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", \"evangelicalism\" was first used in 1831. In 1812, the term \"evangelicalism\" appeared in \"The History of Lynn\" by William Richards. In the summer of 1811 the term \"evangelicalists\" was used in \"The Sin and Danger of Schism\" by Rev. Dr. Andrew Burnaby, Archdeacon of Leicester.\nThe term may also be used outside any religious context to characterize a generic missionary, reforming, or redeeming impulse or purpose. For example, \"The Times Literary Supplement\" refers to \"the rise and fall of evangelical fervor within the Socialist movement\".\nBeliefs.\nOne influential definition of evangelicalism has been proposed by historian David Bebbington. Bebbington notes four distinctive aspects of evangelical faith: conversionism, biblicism, crucicentrism, and activism, noting, \"Together they form a quadrilateral of priorities that is the basis of Evangelicalism.\"\nConversionism, or belief in the necessity of being \"born again\", has been a constant theme of evangelicalism since its beginnings. To evangelicals, the central message of the gospel is justification by faith in Christ and repentance, or turning away, from sin. Conversion differentiates the Christian from the non-Christian, and the change in life it leads to is marked by both a rejection of sin and a corresponding personal holiness of life. A conversion experience can be emotional, including grief and sorrow for sin followed by great relief at receiving forgiveness. The stress on conversion differentiates evangelicalism from other forms of Protestantism by the associated belief that an assurance will accompany conversion. Among evangelicals, individuals have testified to both sudden and gradual conversions.\nBiblicism is reverence for the Bible and high regard for biblical authority. All evangelicals believe in biblical inspiration, though they disagree over how this inspiration should be defined. Many evangelicals believe in biblical inerrancy, while other evangelicals believe in biblical infallibility.\nCrucicentrism is the centrality that evangelicals give to the Atonement, the saving death and the resurrection of Jesus, that offers forgiveness of sins and new life. This is understood most commonly in terms of a substitutionary atonement, in which Christ died as a substitute for sinful humanity by taking on himself the guilt and punishment for sin.\nActivism describes the tendency toward active expression and sharing of the gospel in diverse ways that include preaching and social action. This aspect of evangelicalism continues to be seen today in the proliferation of evangelical voluntary religious groups and parachurch organizations.\nChurch government and membership.\nThe word \"church\" has several meanings among evangelicals. It can refer to the universal church (the body of Christ) including all Christians everywhere. It can also refer to the local church, which is the visible representation of the invisible church. It is responsible for teaching and administering the sacraments or ordinances (baptism and the Lord's Supper, but some evangelicals also count footwashing as an ordinance as well).\nMany evangelical traditions adhere to the doctrine of the believers' Church, which teaches that one becomes a member of the Church by the new birth and profession of faith. This originated in the Radical Reformation with Anabaptists but is held by denominations that practice believer's baptism. Evangelicals in the Anglican, Methodist and Reformed traditions practice infant baptism as one's initiation into the community of faith and the New Testament counterpart to circumcision, while also stressing the necessity of personal conversion later in life for salvation.\nSome evangelical denominations operate according to episcopal polity or presbyterian polity. However, the most common form of church government within Evangelicalism is congregational polity. This is especially common among non-denominational evangelical churches. Many churches are members of Evangelical Christian denominations and adhere to a common confession of faith and regulations. Common ministries within evangelical congregations are pastor, elder, deacon, evangelist and worship leader. The ministry of bishop with a function of supervision over churches on a regional or national scale is present in all the Evangelical Christian denominations, even if the titles president of the council or general overseer are mainly used for this function. The term bishop is explicitly used in certain denominations. Some evangelical denominations are members of the World Evangelical Alliance and its 129 national alliances.\nSome evangelical denominations officially authorize the ordination of women in churches. The female ministry is justified by the fact that Mary Magdalene was chosen by Jesus to announce his resurrection to the apostles. The first Baptist woman who was consecrated pastor is the American Clarissa Danforth in the denomination Free Will Baptist in 1815. In 1882, in the National Baptist Convention, USA. In the Assemblies of God of the United States, since 1927. In 1961, in the Progressive National Baptist Convention. In 1975, in The Foursquare Church.\nWorship service.\nFor evangelicals, there are three interrelated meanings to the term \"worship\". It can refer to living a \"God-pleasing and God-focused way of life\", specific actions of praise to God, and a public Worship service. Diversity characterizes evangelical worship practices. Liturgical, contemporary, charismatic and seeker-sensitive worship styles can all be found among evangelical churches. Overall, evangelicals tend to be more flexible and experimental with worship practices than mainline Protestant churches. It is usually run by a Christian pastor. A service is often divided into several parts, including congregational singing, a sermon, intercessory prayer, and other ministry. During worship there is usually a nursery for babies. Children and young people receive an adapted education, Sunday school, in a separate room.\nPlaces of worship are usually called \"churches\". In some megachurches, the building is called \"campus\". The architecture of places of worship is mainly characterized by its sobriety. The latin cross is one of the only spiritual symbols that can usually be seen on the building of an evangelical church and that identifies the place's belonging.\nSome services take place in theaters, schools or multipurpose rooms, rented for Sunday only. Because of their understanding of the second of the Ten Commandments, evangelicals do not have religious material representations such as statues, icons, or paintings in their places of worship. There is usually a baptistery on the stage of the auditorium (also called sanctuary) or in a separate room, for the baptisms by immersion.\nIn some countries of the world which apply sharia or communism, government authorizations for worship are complex for Evangelical Christians. Because of persecution of Christians, Evangelical house churches have thus developed. For example, there is the Evangelical house churches in China movement. The meetings thus take place in private houses, in secret and in \"illegality\".\nThe main Christian feasts celebrated by the Evangelicals are Christmas, Pentecost (by a majority of Evangelical denominations) and Easter for all believers.\nEducation.\nEvangelical churches have been involved in the establishment of elementary and secondary schools. It also enabled the development of several bible colleges, colleges and universities in the United States during the 19th century. Other evangelical universities have been established in various countries of the world.\nSexuality.\nIn matters of sexuality, several evangelical churches promote the virginity pledge among young Evangelical Christians, who are invited to commit themselves during a public ceremony at sexual abstinence until Christian marriage. This pledge is often symbolized by a purity ring.\nIn evangelical churches, young adults and unmarried couples are encouraged to marry early in order to live a sexuality according to the will of God.\nA 2009 American study of the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy reported that 80 percent of young, unmarried evangelicals had had sex and that 42 percent were in a relationship with sex, when surveyed.\nThe majority of evangelical Christian churches are against abortion and support adoption agencies and social support agencies for young mothers.\nMasturbation is seen as being prohibited by some evangelical pastors because of the sexual thoughts that may accompany it. In the United States and Nigeria, other evangelical pastors believe that masturbation can be beneficial for the body and that it is a gift from God to avoid fornication, especially for singles.\nSome evangelical churches speak only of sexual abstinence and do not speak of sexuality in marriage. Other evangelical churches in the United States and Switzerland speak of satisfying sexuality as a gift from God and a component of a Christian marriage harmonious, in messages during worship services or conferences. Many evangelical books and websites are specialized on the subject. The book \"\" published in 1976 by Baptist pastor Tim LaHaye and his wife Beverly LaHaye was a pioneer in the field.\nThe perceptions of homosexuality in the Evangelical Churches are varied. They range from liberal to conservative, through moderate. It is in the fundamentalist and conservative positions, that there are anti-gay activists on TV or radio who claim that homosexuality is the cause of many social problems, such as terrorism. Some evangelical denominations have adopted neutral positions, leaving the choice to local churches to decide for same-sex marriage. Some churches have a moderate position. Although they do not approve homosexual practices, they show sympathy and respect for homosexuals. A 2011 Pew Research Center study found that 84 percent of evangelical leaders surveyed believed homosexuality should be discouraged.\nOther views.\nFor a majority of evangelical Christians, a belief in biblical inerrancy ensures that the miracles described in the Bible are still relevant and may be present in the life of the believer. Healings, academic or professional successes, the birth of a child after several attempts, the end of an addiction, etc., would be tangible examples of God's intervention with the faith and prayer, by the Holy Spirit. In the 1980s, the neo-charismatic movement re-emphasized miracles and faith healing. In certain churches, a special place is thus reserved for faith healings with laying on of hands during worship services or for evangelization campaigns. Faith healing or divine healing is considered to be an inheritance of Jesus acquired by his death and resurrection.\nIn terms of science and the origin of the earth and human life, some evangelicals support pseudoscientific young Earth creationism. For example, Answers in Genesis, founded in Australia in 1986, is an evangelical organization that defends this thesis. In 2007, it founded the Creation Museum in Petersburg, in Kentucky \nand in 2016 the Ark Encounter in Williamstown. Since the end of the 20th century, literalist creationism has been abandoned by some evangelicals in favor of intelligent design. For example, the think tank Discovery Institute, established in 1991 in Seattle, defends this thesis. Other evangelicals who accept the scientific consensus on evolution and the age of Earth believe in theistic evolution or evolutionary creation\u2014the notion that God used the process of evolution to create life; a Christian organization that espouses this view is the BioLogos Foundation.\nDiversity.\nAs a trans-denominational movement, evangelicalism occurs in nearly every Protestant denomination and tradition. The Reformed, Baptist, Wesleyan, Pentecostal, Churches of Christ, Plymouth Brethren, charismatic Protestant, and nondenominational Protestant traditions have all had strong influence within contemporary evangelicalism. Some Anabaptist denominations (such as the Brethren Church) are evangelical, and some Lutherans self-identify as evangelicals. There are also evangelical Anglicans.\nIn the early 20th century, evangelical influence declined within mainline Protestantism and Christian fundamentalism developed as a distinct religious movement. Between 1950 and 2000 a mainstream evangelical consensus developed that sought to be more inclusive and more culturally relevant than fundamentalism while maintaining conservative Protestant teaching. According to Brian Stanley, professor of world Christianity, this new postwar consensus is termed \"neo-evangelicalism\", the \"new evangelicalism\", or simply \"evangelicalism\" in the United States, while in Great Britain and in other English-speaking countries, it is commonly termed \"conservative evangelicalism\". Over the years, less-conservative evangelicals have challenged this mainstream consensus to varying degrees. Such movements have been classified by a variety of labels, such as progressive, open, post-conservative, and post-evangelical.\nSome commentators have complained that Evangelicalism as a movement is too broad and its definition too vague to be of any practical value. Theologian Donald Dayton has called for a \"moratorium\" on use of the term. Historian D. G. Hart has also argued that \"evangelicalism needs to be relinquished as a religious identity because it does not exist\".\nChristian fundamentalism.\nFundamentalism regards biblical inerrancy, the virgin birth of Jesus, penal substitutionary atonement, the literal resurrection of Christ, and the Second Coming of Christ as fundamental Christian doctrines. Fundamentalism arose among evangelicals in the 1920s to combat modernist or liberal theology in mainline Protestant churches. Failing to reform the mainline churches, fundamentalists separated from them and established their own churches, refusing to participate in ecumenical organizations such as the National Council of Churches (founded in 1950). They also made separatism (rigid separation from non-fundamentalist churches and their culture) a true test of faith. According to historian George Marsden, most fundamentalists are Baptists and dispensationalist.\nMainstream varieties.\nMainstream evangelicalism is historically divided between two main orientations: confessionalism and revivalism. These two streams have been critical of each other. Confessional evangelicals have been suspicious of unguarded religious experience, while revivalist evangelicals have been critical of overly intellectual teaching that (they suspect) stifles vibrant spirituality. In an effort to broaden their appeal, many contemporary evangelical congregations intentionally avoid identifying with any single form of evangelicalism. These \"generic evangelicals\" are usually theologically and socially conservative, but their churches often present themselves as nondenominational (or, if a denominational member, strongly de-emphasizing its ties to such, such as a church name which excludes the denominational name) within the broader evangelical movement.\nIn the words of Albert Mohler, president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, confessional evangelicalism refers to \"that movement of Christian believers who seek a constant convictional continuity with the theological formulas of the Protestant Reformation\". While approving of the evangelical distinctions proposed by Bebbington, confessional evangelicals believe that authentic evangelicalism requires more concrete definition in order to protect the movement from theological liberalism and from heresy. According to confessional evangelicals, subscription to the ecumenical creeds and to the Reformation-era confessions of faith (such as the confessions of the Reformed churches) provides such protection. Confessional evangelicals are represented by conservative Presbyterian churches (emphasizing the Westminster Confession), certain Baptist churches that emphasize historic Baptist confessions such as the Second London Confession, evangelical Anglicans who emphasize the Thirty-Nine Articles (such as in the Anglican Diocese of Sydney, Australia), Methodist churches that adhere to the Articles of Religion, and some confessional Lutherans with pietistic convictions.\nThe emphasis on historic Protestant orthodoxy among confessional evangelicals stands in direct contrast to an anti-creedal outlook that has exerted its own influence on evangelicalism, particularly among churches strongly affected by revivalism and by pietism. Revivalist evangelicals are represented by some quarters of Methodism, the Wesleyan Holiness churches, the Pentecostal/charismatic churches, some Anabaptist churches, and some Baptists and Presbyterians. Revivalist evangelicals tend to place greater emphasis on religious experience than their confessional counterparts.\nNon-conservative varieties.\nEvangelicals dissatisfied with the movement's conservative mainstream have been variously described as progressive evangelicals, post-conservative evangelicals, Open Evangelicals and post-evangelicals. Progressive evangelicals, also known as the evangelical left, share theological or social views with other progressive Christians while also identifying with evangelicalism. Progressive evangelicals commonly advocate for women's equality, pacifism and social justice.\nAs described by Baptist theologian Roger E. Olson, post-conservative evangelicalism is a theological school of thought that adheres to the four marks of evangelicalism, while being less rigid and more inclusive of other Christians. According to Olson, post-conservatives believe that doctrinal truth is secondary to spiritual experience shaped by Scripture. Post-conservative evangelicals seek greater dialogue with other Christian traditions and support the development of a multicultural evangelical theology that incorporates the voices of women, racial minorities, and Christians in the developing world. Some post-conservative evangelicals also support open theism and the possibility of near universal salvation.\nThe term \"Open Evangelical\" refers to a particular Christian school of thought or churchmanship, primarily in Great Britain (especially in the Church of England). Open evangelicals describe their position as combining a traditional evangelical emphasis on the nature of scriptural authority, the teaching of the ecumenical creeds and other traditional doctrinal teachings, with an approach towards culture and other theological points-of-view which tends to be more inclusive than that taken by other evangelicals. Some open evangelicals aim to take a middle position between conservative and charismatic evangelicals, while others would combine conservative theological emphases with more liberal social positions.\nBritish author Dave Tomlinson coined the phrase \"post-evangelical\" to describe a movement comprising various trends of dissatisfaction among evangelicals. Others use the term with comparable intent, often to distinguish evangelicals in the emerging church movement from post-evangelicals and anti-evangelicals. Tomlinson argues that \"linguistically, the distinction \"[between evangelical and post-evangelical]\" resembles the one that sociologists make between the modern and postmodern eras\".\nHistory.\nBackground.\nEvangelicalism emerged in the 18th century, first in Britain and its North American colonies. Nevertheless, there were earlier developments within the larger Protestant world that preceded and influenced the later evangelical revivals. According to religion scholar Randall Balmer, Evangelicalism resulted \"from the confluence of Pietism, Presbyterianism, and the vestiges of Puritanism. Evangelicalism picked up the peculiar characteristics from each strain \u2013 warmhearted spirituality from the Pietists (for instance), doctrinal precisionism from the Presbyterians, and individualistic introspection from the Puritans\". Historian Mark Noll adds to this list High Church Anglicanism, which contributed to Evangelicalism a legacy of \"rigorous spirituality and innovative organization\".\nDuring the 17th century, Pietism emerged in Europe as a movement for the revival of piety and devotion within the Lutheran church. As a protest against \"cold orthodoxy\" or against an overly formal and rational Christianity, Pietists advocated for an experiential religion that stressed high moral standards both for clergy and for lay people. The movement included both Christians who remained in the liturgical, state churches as well as separatist groups who rejected the use of baptismal fonts, altars, pulpits, and confessionals. As Pietism spread, the movement's ideals and aspirations influenced and were absorbed by evangelicals.\nThe Presbyterian heritage not only gave Evangelicalism a commitment to Protestant orthodoxy but also contributed a revival tradition that stretched back to the 1620s in Scotland and northern Ireland. Central to this tradition was the communion season, which normally occurred in the summer months. For Presbyterians, celebrations of Holy Communion were infrequent but popular events preceded by several Sundays of preparatory preaching and accompanied with preaching, singing, and prayers.\nPuritanism combined Calvinism with a doctrine that conversion was a prerequisite for church membership and with an emphasis on the study of Scripture by lay people. It took root in the colonies of New England, where the Congregational church became an established religion. There the Half-Way Covenant of 1662 allowed parents who had not testified to a conversion experience to have their children baptized, while reserving Holy Communion for converted church members alone. By the 18th century Puritanism was in decline and many ministers expressed alarm at the loss of religious piety. This concern over declining religious commitment led many people to support evangelical revival.\nHigh-Church Anglicanism also exerted influence on early Evangelicalism. High Churchmen were distinguished by their desire to adhere to primitive Christianity. This desire included imitating the faith and ascetic practices of early Christians as well as regularly partaking of Holy Communion. High Churchmen were also enthusiastic organizers of voluntary religious societies. Two of the most prominent were the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (founded in London in 1698), which distributed Bibles and other literature and built schools, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, which was founded in England in 1701 to facilitate missionary work in British colonies (especially among colonists in North America). Samuel and Susanna Wesley, the parents of John and Charles Wesley (born 1703 and 1707 respectively), were both devoted advocates of High-Church ideas.\n18th century.\nIn the 1730s, Evangelicalism emerged as a distinct phenomenon out of religious revivals that began in Britain and New England. While religious revivals had occurred within Protestant churches in the past, the evangelical revivals that marked the 18th century were more intense and radical. Evangelical revivalism imbued ordinary men and women with a confidence and enthusiasm for sharing the gospel and converting others outside of the control of established churches, a key discontinuity with the Protestantism of the previous era.\nIt was developments in the doctrine of assurance that differentiated Evangelicalism from what went before. Bebbington says, \"The dynamism of the Evangelical movement was possible only because its adherents were assured in their faith.\" He goes on:\nThe first local revival occurred in Northampton, Massachusetts, under the leadership of Congregationalist minister Jonathan Edwards. In the fall of 1734, Edwards preached a sermon series on \"Justification By Faith Alone\", and the community's response was extraordinary. Signs of religious commitment among the laity increased, especially among the town's young people. The revival ultimately spread to 25 communities in western Massachusetts and central Connecticut until it began to wane by the spring of 1735. Edwards was heavily influenced by Pietism, so much so that one historian has stressed his \"American Pietism\". One practice clearly copied from European Pietists was the use of small groups divided by age and gender, which met in private homes to conserve and promote the fruits of revival.\nAt the same time, students at Yale University (at that time Yale College) in New Haven, Connecticut, were also experiencing revival. Among them was Aaron Burr, Sr., who would become a prominent Presbyterian minister and future president of Princeton University. In New Jersey, Gilbert Tennent, another Presbyterian minister, was preaching the evangelical message and urging the Presbyterian Church to stress the necessity of converted ministers.\nThe spring of 1735 also marked important events in England and Wales. Howell Harris, a Welsh schoolteacher, had a conversion experience on May 25 during a communion service. He described receiving assurance of God's grace after a period of fasting, self-examination, and despair over his sins. Sometime later, Daniel Rowland, the Anglican curate of Llangeitho, Wales, experienced conversion as well. Both men began preaching the evangelical message to large audiences, becoming leaders of the Welsh Methodist revival. At about the same time that Harris experienced conversion in Wales, George Whitefield was converted at Oxford University after his own prolonged spiritual crisis. Whitefield later remarked, \"About this time God was pleased to enlighten my soul, and bring me into the knowledge of His free grace, and the necessity of being justified in His sight by \"faith only\"\".\nWhitefield's fellow Holy Club member and spiritual mentor, Charles Wesley, reported an evangelical conversion in 1738. In the same week, Charles' brother and future founder of Methodism, John Wesley was also converted after a long period of inward struggle. During this spiritual crisis, John Wesley was directly influenced by Pietism. Two years before his conversion, Wesley had traveled to the newly established colony of Georgia as a missionary for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. He shared his voyage with a group of Moravian Brethren led by August Gottlieb Spangenberg. The Moravians' faith and piety deeply impressed Wesley, especially their belief that it was a normal part of Christian life to have an assurance of one's salvation. Wesley recounted the following exchange with Spangenberg on February 7, 1736:\nWesley finally received the assurance he had been searching for at a meeting of a religious society in London. While listening to a reading from Martin Luther's preface to the Epistle to the Romans, Wesley felt spiritually transformed:\nPietism continued to influence Wesley, who had translated 33 Pietist hymns from German to English. Numerous German Pietist hymns became part of the English Evangelical repertoire. By 1737, Whitefield had become a national celebrity in England where his preaching drew large crowds, especially in London where the Fetter Lane Society had become a center of evangelical activity. Whitfield joined forces with Edwards to \"fan the flame of revival\" in the Thirteen Colonies in 1739\u201340. Soon the First Great Awakening stirred Protestants throughout America.\nEvangelical preachers emphasized personal salvation and piety more than ritual and tradition. Pamphlets and printed sermons crisscrossed the Atlantic, encouraging the revivalists. The Awakening resulted from powerful preaching that gave listeners a sense of deep personal revelation of their need of salvation by Jesus Christ. Pulling away from ritual and ceremony, the Great Awakening made Christianity intensely personal to the average person by fostering a deep sense of spiritual conviction and redemption, and by encouraging introspection and a commitment to a new standard of personal morality. It reached people who were already church members. It changed their rituals, their piety and their self-awareness. To the evangelical imperatives of Reformation Protestantism, 18th century American Christians added emphases on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that implanted within new believers an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and forwarded the newly created Evangelicalism into the early republic.\nBy the 1790s, the Evangelical party in the Church of England remained a small minority but were not without influence. John Newton and Joseph Milner were influential evangelical clerics. Evangelical clergy networked together through societies such as the Eclectic Society in London and the Elland Society in Yorkshire. The Old Dissenter denominations (the Baptists, Congregationalists and Quakers) were falling under evangelical influence, with the Baptists most affected and Quakers the least. Evangelical ministers dissatisfied with both Anglicanism and Methodism often chose to work within these churches. In the 1790s, all of these evangelical groups, including the Anglicans, were Calvinist in orientation.\nMethodism (the \"New Dissent\") was the most visible expression of evangelicalism by the end of the 18th century. The Wesleyan Methodists boasted around 70,000 members throughout the British Isles, in addition to the Calvinistic Methodists in Wales and the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, which was organized under George Whitefield's influence. The Wesleyan Methodists, however, were still nominally affiliated with the Church of England and would not completely separate until 1795, four years after Wesley's death. The Wesleyan Methodist Church's Arminianism distinguished it from the other evangelical groups.\nAt the same time, evangelicals were an important faction within the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Influential ministers included John Erskine, Henry Wellwood Moncrieff and Stevenson Macgill. The church's General Assembly, however, was controlled by the Moderate Party, and evangelicals were involved in the First and Second Secessions from the national church during the 18th century.\n19th century.\nThe start of the 19th century saw an increase in missionary work and many of the major missionary societies were founded around this time (see Timeline of Christian missions). Both the Evangelical and high church movements sponsored missionaries.\nThe Second Great Awakening (which actually began in 1790) was primarily an American revivalist movement and resulted in substantial growth of the Methodist and Baptist churches. Charles Grandison Finney was an important preacher of this period.\nIn Britain in addition to stressing the traditional Wesleyan combination of \"Bible, cross, conversion, and activism\", the revivalist movement sought a universal appeal, hoping to include rich and poor, urban and rural, and men and women. Special efforts were made to attract children and to generate literature to spread the revivalist message.\n\"Christian conscience\" was used by the British Evangelical movement to promote social activism. Evangelicals believed activism in government and the social sphere was an essential method in reaching the goal of eliminating sin in a world drenched in wickedness. The Evangelicals in the Clapham Sect included figures such as William Wilberforce who successfully campaigned for the abolition of slavery.\nIn the late 19th century, the revivalist Wesleyan-Holiness movement based on John Wesley's doctrine of \"entire sanctification\" came to the forefront, and while many adherents remained within mainline Methodism, others established new denominations, such as the Free Methodist Church and Wesleyan Methodist Church. In urban Britain the Holiness message was less exclusive and censorious.\nKeswickianism taught the doctrine of the second blessing in non-Methodist circles and came to influence evangelicals of the Calvinistic (Reformed) tradition, leading to the establishment of denominations such as the Christian and Missionary Alliance.\nJohn Nelson Darby of the Plymouth Brethren was a 19th-century Irish Anglican minister who devised modern dispensationalism, an innovative Protestant theological interpretation of the Bible that was incorporated in the development of modern Evangelicalism. Cyrus Scofield further promoted the influence of dispensationalism through the explanatory notes to his Scofield Reference Bible. According to scholar Mark S. Sweetnam, who takes a cultural studies perspective, dispensationalism can be defined in terms of its Evangelicalism, its insistence on the literal interpretation of Scripture, its recognition of stages in God's dealings with humanity, its expectation of the imminent return of Christ to rapture His saints, and its focus on both apocalypticism and premillennialism.\nDuring the 19th century, the megachurches, churches with more than 2,000 people, began to develop. The first evangelical megachurch, the Metropolitan Tabernacle with a 6000-seat auditorium, was inaugurated in 1861 in London by Charles Spurgeon. Dwight L. Moody founded the Illinois Street Church in Chicago.\nAn advanced theological perspective came from the Princeton theologians from the 1850s to the 1920s, such as Charles Hodge, Archibald Alexander and B.B. Warfield.\n20th century.\nAfter 1910 the Fundamentalist movement dominated Evangelicalism in the early part of the 20th century; the Fundamentalists rejected liberal theology and emphasized the inerrancy of the Scriptures.\nFollowing the 1904\u20131905 Welsh revival, the Azusa Street Revival in 1906 began the spread of Pentecostalism in North America.\nThe 20th century also marked by the emergence of the televangelism. Aimee Semple McPherson, who founded the megachurch \"Angelus Temple\" in Los Angeles, used radio in the 1920s to reach a wider audience.\nAfter the Scopes trial in 1925, \"Christian Century\" wrote of \"Vanishing Fundamentalism.\" In 1929 Princeton University, once the bastion of conservative theology, added several modernists to its faculty, resulting in the departure of J. Gresham Machen and a split in the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.\nEvangelicalism began to reassert itself in the second half of the 1930s. One factor was the advent of the radio as a means of mass communication. When [Charles E. Fuller] began his \"Old Fashioned Revival Hour\" on October 3, 1937, he sought to avoid the contentious issues that had caused fundamentalists to be characterized as narrow.\nOne hundred forty-seven representatives from thirty-four denominations met from April 7 through 9, 1942, in St. Louis, Missouri, for a \"National Conference for United Action among Evangelicals.\" The next year six hundred representatives in Chicago established the National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) with Harold Ockenga as its first president. The NAE was partly a reaction to the founding of the American Council of Christian Churches (ACCC) under the leadership of the fundamentalist Carl McIntire. The ACCC in turn had been founded to counter the influence of the Federal Council of Churches (later merged into the National Council of Churches), which fundamentalists saw as increasingly embracing modernism in its ecumenism. Those who established the NAE had come to view the name fundamentalist as \"an embarrassment instead of a badge of honor.\"\nEvangelical revivalist radio preachers organized themselves in the National Religious Broadcasters in 1944 in order to regulate their activity.\nWith the founding of the NAE, American Protestantism was divided into three large groups\u2014the fundamentalists, the modernists, and the new evangelicals, who sought to position themselves between the other two. In 1947 Harold Ockenga coined the term \"neo-evangelicalism\" to identify a movement distinct from fundamentalism. The neo-evangelicals had three broad characteristics that distinguished them from the conservative fundamentalism of the ACCC:\nEach of these characteristics took concrete shape by the mid-1950s. In 1947 Carl F. H. Henry's book \"The Uneasy Conscience of Fundamentalism\" called on evangelicals to engage in addressing social concerns:\nIn the same year Fuller Theological Seminary was established with Ockenga as its president and Henry as the head of its theology department.\nThe strongest impetus, however, was the development of the work of Billy Graham. Graham had begun his career with the support of McIntire and fellow conservatives Bob Jones Sr. and John R. Rice. However, in broadening the reach of his London crusade of 1954, he accepted the support of denominations that those men disapproved of. When he went even further in his 1957 New York crusade, conservatives strongly condemned him and withdrew their support. According to William Martin:\nA fourth development\u2014the founding of \"Christianity Today\" (\"CT\") with Henry as its first editor\u2014was strategic in giving neo-evangelicals a platform to promote their views and in positioning them between the fundamentalists and modernists. In a letter to Harold Lindsell, Graham said that \"CT\" would:\nThe post-war period also saw growth of the ecumenical movement and the founding of the World Council of Churches, which the Evangelical community generally regarded with suspicion.\nIn the United Kingdom, John Stott (1921\u20132011) and Martyn Lloyd-Jones (1899\u20131981) emerged as key leaders in Evangelical Christianity.\nThe charismatic movement began in the 1960s and resulted in the introduction of Pentecostal theology and practice into many mainline denominations. New charismatic groups such as the Association of Vineyard Churches and Newfrontiers trace their roots to this period (see also British New Church Movement).\nThe closing years of the 20th century saw controversial postmodern influences entering some parts of Evangelicalism, particularly with the emerging church movement. Also controversial is the relationship between spiritualism and contemporary military metaphors and practices animating many branches of Christianity but especially relevant in the sphere of Evangelicalism. Spiritual warfare is the latest iteration in a long-standing partnership between religious organization and militarization, two spheres that are rarely considered together, although aggressive forms of prayer have long been used to further the aims of expanding Evangelical influence. Major moments of increased political militarization have occurred concurrently with the growth of prominence of militaristic imagery in evangelical communities. This paradigmatic language, paired with an increasing reliance on sociological and academic research to bolster militarized sensibility, serves to illustrate the violent ethos that effectively underscores militarized forms of evangelical prayer.\n21st century.\nIn Nigeria, evangelical megachurches, such as Redeemed Christian Church of God and Living Faith Church Worldwide, have built autonomous cities with houses, supermarkets, banks, universities, and power plants.\nEvangelical Christian film production societies were founded in the early 2000s, such as Sherwood Pictures and Pure Flix .\nThe growth of evangelical churches continues with the construction of new places of worship or enlargements in various regions of the world.\nGlobal statistics.\nAccording to a 2011 Pew Forum study on global Christianity, 285,480,000 or 13.1 percent of all Christians are Evangelicals. These figures do not include the Pentecostalism and Charismatic movements. The study states that the category \"Evangelicals\" should not be considered as a separate category of \"Pentecostal and Charismatic\" categories, since some believers consider themselves in both movements where their church is affiliated with an Evangelical association.\nIn 2015, the World Evangelical Alliance is \"a network of churches in 129 nations that have each formed an Evangelical alliance and over 100 international organizations joining together to give a world-wide identity, voice, and platform to more than 600 million Evangelical Christians\". The Alliance was formed in 1951 by Evangelicals from 21 countries. It has worked to support its members to work together globally.\nAccording to S\u00e9bastien Fath of CNRS, in 2016, there are 619 million Evangelicals in the world, one in four Christians. In 2017, about 630 million, an increase of 11\u00a0million, including Pentecostals.\nOperation World estimates the number of Evangelicals at 545.9\u00a0million, which makes for 7.9 percent of the world's population. From 1960 to 2000, the global growth of the number of reported Evangelicals grew three times the world's population rate, and twice that of Islam. According to Operation World, the Evangelical population's current annual growth rate is 2.6 percent, still more than twice the world's population growth rate.\nAfrica.\nIn the 21st century, there are Evangelical churches active in Sudan, Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Rwanda, Uganda, Ghana, Kenya, Zambia, South Africa, and Nigeria. They have grown especially since independence came in the 1960s, the strongest movements are based on Pentecostal-charismatic beliefs. There is a wide range of theology and organizations, including some sponsored by European missionaries and others that have emerged from African culture such as the Apostolic and Zionist Churches which enlist 40 percent of black South Africans, and their Aladura counterparts in western Africa.\nIn Nigeria the Evangelical Church Winning All (formerly \"Evangelical Church of West Africa\") is the largest church organization with five thousand congregations and over three million members. It sponsors two seminaries and eight Bible colleges, and 1600 missionaries who serve in Nigeria and other countries with the Evangelical Missionary Society (EMS). There have been serious confrontations since 1999 between Muslims and Christians standing in opposition to the expansion of Sharia law in northern Nigeria. The confrontation has radicalized and politicized the Christians. Violence has been escalating.\nIn Kenya, mainstream Evangelical denominations have taken the lead in promoting political activism and backers, with the smaller Evangelical sects of less importance. Daniel arap Moi was president 1978 to 2002 and claimed to be an Evangelical; he proved intolerant of dissent or pluralism or decentralization of power.\nThe Berlin Missionary Society (BMS) was one of four German Protestant mission societies active in South Africa before 1914. It emerged from the German tradition of Pietism after 1815 and sent its first missionaries to South Africa in 1834. There were few positive reports in the early years, but it was especially active 1859\u20131914. It was especially strong in the Boer republics. The World War cut off contact with Germany, but the missions continued at a reduced pace. After 1945 the missionaries had to deal with decolonization across Africa and especially with the apartheid government. At all times the BMS emphasized spiritual inwardness, and values such as morality, hard work and self-discipline. It proved unable to speak and act decisively against injustice and racial discrimination and was disbanded in 1972.\nSince 1974, young professionals have been the active proselytizers of Evangelicalism in the cities of Malawi.\nIn Mozambique, Evangelical Protestant Christianity emerged around 1900 from black migrants whose converted previously in South Africa. They were assisted by European missionaries, but, as industrial workers, they paid for their own churches and proselytizing. They prepared southern Mozambique for the spread of Evangelical Protestantism. During its time as a colonial power in Mozambique, the Catholic Portuguese government tried to counter the spread of Evangelical Protestantism.\nEast African Revival.\nThe East African Revival was a renewal movement within Evangelical churches in East Africa during the late 1920s and 1930s that began at a Church Missionary Society mission station in the Belgian territory of Ruanda-Urundi in 1929, and spread to: Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya during the 1930s and 1940s contributing to the significant growth of the church in East Africa through the 1970s and had a visible influence on Western missionaries who were observer-participants of the movement.\nLatin America.\nIn modern Latin America, the term \"Evangelical\" is often simply a synonym for \"Protestant\".\nBrazil.\nProtestantism in Brazil largely originated with German immigrants and British and American missionaries in the 19th century, following up on efforts that began in the 1820s.\nIn the late nineteenth century, while the vast majority of Brazilians were nominal Catholics, the nation was underserved by priests, and for large numbers their religion was only nominal. The Catholic Church in Brazil was de-established in 1890, and responded by increasing the number of dioceses and the efficiency of its clergy. Many Protestants came from a large German immigrant community, but they were seldom engaged in proselytism and grew mostly by natural increase.\nMethodists were active along with Presbyterians and Baptists. The Scottish missionary Dr. Robert Reid Kalley, with support from the Free Church of Scotland, moved to Brazil in 1855, founding the first Evangelical church among the Portuguese-speaking population there in 1856. It was organized according to the Congregational policy as the Igreja Evang\u00e9lica Fluminense; it became the mother church of Congregationalism in Brazil. The Seventh-day Adventists arrived in 1894, and the YMCA was organized in 1896. The missionaries promoted schools colleges and seminaries, including a liberal arts college in S\u00e3o Paulo, later known as Mackenzie, and an agricultural school in Lavras. The Presbyterian schools in particular later became the nucleus of the governmental system. In 1887 Protestants in Rio de Janeiro formed a hospital. The missionaries largely reached a working-class audience, as the Brazilian upper-class was wedded either to Catholicism or to secularism. By 1914, Protestant churches founded by American missionaries had 47,000 communicants, served by 282 missionaries. In general, these missionaries were more successful than they had been in Mexico, Argentina or elsewhere in Latin America.\nThere were 700,000 Protestants by 1930, and increasingly they were in charge of their own affairs. In 1930, the Methodist Church of Brazil became independent of the missionary societies and elected its own bishop. Protestants were largely from a working-class, but their religious networks help speed their upward social mobility.\nProtestants accounted for fewer than 5 percent of the population until the 1960s, but grew exponentially by proselytizing and by 2000 made up over 15 percent of Brazilians affiliated with a church. Pentecostals and charismatic groups account for the vast majority of this expansion.\nPentecostal missionaries arrived early in the 20th century. Pentecostal conversions surged during the 1950s and 1960s, when native Brazilians began founding autonomous churches. The most influential included Brasil Para o Cristo (Brazil for Christ), founded in 1955 by Manoel de Mello. With an emphasis on personal salvation, on God's healing power, and on strict moral codes these groups have developed broad appeal, particularly among the booming urban migrant communities. In Brazil, since the mid-1990s, groups committed to uniting black identity, antiracism, and Evangelical theology have rapidly proliferated. Pentecostalism arrived in Brazil with Swedish and American missionaries in 1911. it grew rapidly, but endured numerous schisms and splits. In some areas the Evangelical Assemblies of God churches have taken a leadership role in politics since the 1960s. They claimed major credit for the election of Fernando Collor de Mello as president of Brazil in 1990.\nAccording to the 2000 census, 15.4 percent of the Brazilian population was Protestant. A recent research conducted by the Datafolha institute shows that 25 percent of Brazilians are Protestants, of which 19 percent are followers of Pentecostal denominations. The 2010 census found out that 22.2 percent were Protestant at that date. Protestant denominations saw a rapid growth in their number of followers since the last decades of the 20th century. They are politically and socially conservative, and emphasize that God's favor translates into business success. The rich and the poor remained traditional Catholics, while most Evangelical Protestants were in the new lower-middle class\u2013known as the \"C class\" (in a A\u2013E classification system).\nChesnut argues that Pentecostalism has become \"one of the principal organizations of the poor,\" for these churches provide the sort of social network that teach members the skills they need to thrive in a rapidly developing meritocratic society.\nOne large Evangelical church that originated from Brazil is the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (IURD), a neo\u2010Pentecostal denomination begun in 1977. It now has a presence in many countries, and claims millions of members worldwide.\nGuatemala.\nProtestants remained a small portion of the population until the late-twentieth century, when various Protestant groups experienced a demographic boom that coincided with the increasing violence of the Guatemalan Civil War. Two former Guatemalan heads of state, General Efra\u00edn R\u00edos Montt and Jorge Serrano El\u00edas have been practicing Evangelical Protestants, as is Guatemala's former President, Jimmy Morales. General Montt, an Evangelical from the Pentecostal tradition, came to power through a coup. He escalated the war against leftist guerrilla insurgents as a holy war against atheistic \"forces of evil\".\nAsia.\nSouth Korea.\nProtestant missionary activity in Asia was most successful in Korea. American Presbyterians and Methodists arrived in the 1880s and were well received. Between 1910 and 1945, when Korea was a Japanese colony, Christianity became in part an expression of nationalism in opposition to Japan's efforts to enforce the Japanese language and the Shinto religion. In 1914, out of 16 million people, there were 86,000 Protestants and 79,000 Catholics; by 1934, the numbers were 168,000 and 147,000. Presbyterian missionaries were especially successful. Since the Korean War (1950\u201353), many Korean Christians have migrated to the U.S., while those who remained behind have risen sharply in social and economic status. Most Korean Protestant churches in the 21st century emphasize their Evangelical heritage. Korean Protestantism is characterized by theological conservatism coupled with an emotional revivalistic style. Most churches sponsor revival meetings once or twice a year. Missionary work is a high priority, with 13,000 men and women serving in missions across the world, putting Korea in second place just behind the US.\nSukman argues that since 1945, Protestantism has been widely seen by Koreans as the religion of the middle class, youth, intellectuals, urbanites, and modernists. It has been a powerful force supporting South Korea's pursuit of modernity and emulation of the United States, and opposition to the old Japanese colonialism and to the authoritarianism of North Korea.\nSouth Korea has been referred as an \"evangelical superpower\" for being the home to some of the largest and most dynamic Christian churches in the world; South Korea is also second to the U.S. in the number of missionaries sent abroad.\nAccording to 2015 South Korean census, 9.7\u00a0million or 19.7 percent of the population described themselves as Protestants, many of whom belong to Presbyterian churches shaped by Evangelicalism.\nPhilippines.\nAccording to the 2010 census, 2.68 percent of Filipinos are Evangelicals. The Philippine Council of Evangelical Churches (PCEC), an organization of more than seventy Evangelical and Mainline Protestant churches, and more than 210 para-church organizations in the Philippines, counts more than 11 million members as of 2011.\nEurope.\nFrance.\nIn 2019, it was reported that Evangelicalism in France is growing and a new Evangelical church is built every 10 days and now counts 700,000 followers across France.\nGreat Britain.\nJohn Wesley (1703\u20131791) was an Anglican cleric and theologian who, with his brother Charles Wesley (1707\u20131788) and fellow cleric George Whitefield (1714 \u2013 1770), founded Methodism. After 1791 the movement became independent of the Anglican Church as the \"Methodist Connection\". It became a force in its own right, especially among the working class.\nThe \"Clapham Sect\" was a group of Church of England evangelicals and social reformers based in Clapham, London; they were active 1780s\u20131840s). John Newton (1725\u20131807) was the founder. They are described by the historian Stephen Tomkins as \"a network of friends and families in England, with William Wilberforce as its centre of gravity, who were powerfully bound together by their shared moral and spiritual values, by their religious mission and social activism, by their love for each other, and by marriage\".\nEvangelicalism was a major force in the Anglican Church from about 1800 to the 1860s. By 1848 when an evangelical John Bird Sumner became Archbishop of Canterbury, between a quarter and a third of all Anglican clergy were linked to the movement, which by then had diversified greatly in its goals and they were no longer considered an organized faction.\nIn the 21st century there are an estimated 2 million Evangelicals in the UK. According to research performed by the Evangelical Alliance in 2013, 87 percent of UK evangelicals attend Sunday morning church services every week and 63 percent attend weekly or fortnightly small groups. An earlier survey conducted in 2012 found that 92 percent of evangelicals agree it is a Christian's duty to help those in poverty and 45 percent attend a church which has a fund or scheme that helps people in immediate need, and 42 percent go to a church that supports or runs a foodbank. 63 percent believe in tithing, and so give around 10 percent of their income to their church, Christian organizations and various charities 83 percent of UK evangelicals believe that the Bible has supreme authority in guiding their beliefs, views and behavior and 52 percent read or listen to the Bible daily. The Evangelical Alliance, formed in 1846, was the first ecumenical evangelical body in the world and works to unite evangelicals, helping them listen to, and be heard by, the government, media and society.\nUnited States.\nBy the late 19th to early 20th century, most American Protestants were Evangelicals. A bitter divide had arisen between the more liberal-modernist mainline denominations and the fundamentalist denominations, the latter typically consisting of Evangelicals. Key issues included the truth of the Bible\u2014literal or figurative, and teaching of evolution in the schools.\nDuring and after World War II, Evangelicals became increasingly organized. There was a great expansion of Evangelical activity within the United States, \"a revival of revivalism.\" Youth for Christ was formed; it later became the base for Billy Graham's revivals. The National Association of Evangelicals formed in 1942 as a counterpoise to the mainline Federal Council of Churches. In 1942\u201343, the Old-Fashioned Revival Hour had a record-setting national radio audience. With this organization, though, fundamentalist groups separated from Evangelicals.\nAccording to a Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life study, Evangelicals can be broadly divided into three camps: traditionalist, centrist, and modernist. A 2004 Pew survey identified that while 70.4 percent of Americans call themselves \"Christian,\" Evangelicals only make up 26.3 percent of the population, while Catholics make up 22 percent and mainline Protestants make up 16 percent.\nEvangelicals have been socially active throughout US history, a tradition dating back to the abolitionist movement of the Antebellum period and the prohibition movement. As a group, evangelicals are most often associated with the Christian right. However, a large number of black self-labeled Evangelicals, and a small proportion of liberal white self-labeled Evangelicals, gravitate towards the Christian left.\nRecurrent themes within American Evangelical discourse include abortion, the creation\u2013evolution controversy, secularism, and the notion of the United States as a Christian nation.\nEvangelical humanitarian aid.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, evangelical churches developed the importance of social justice and Christian humanitarian aid. The majority of evangelical Christian humanitarian organizations were founded in the second half of the 20th century. Among those with the most partner countries, there was the foundation of World Vision International (1950), Samaritan's Purse (1970), Mercy Ships (1978), Prison Fellowship International (1979), International Justice Mission (1997).\nControversies.\nA particularly controversial doctrine within the Evangelical Churches is that of prosperity theology, which spread in the 1970s and 1980s in the United States, mainly through Pentecostal and charismatic televangelists. This doctrine is centered on the teaching of Christian faith as a means to enrich oneself financially and materially through a \"positive confession\" and a contribution to Christian ministries. Promises of divine healing and prosperity are guaranteed in exchange for certain amounts of donations. Fidelity in the tithe would allow one to avoid the curses of God, the attacks of the devil and poverty. The offerings and the tithe occupies a lot of time in the worship services. Often associated with the tithe mandatory, this doctrine is sometimes compared to a religious business. In 2012, the National Council of Evangelicals of France published a document denouncing this doctrine, mentioning that prosperity was indeed possible for a believer, but that this theology taken to the extreme leads to materialism and to idolatry, which is not the purpose of the gospel.\nSince the 1970s, multiple financial scandals of embezzlement have been reported in churches and evangelical organizations. The Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability was founded in 1979 to strengthen financial integrity in evangelical organizations and churches that voluntarily wish to be members and to undergo annual accounting audits.\nIn Pentecostalism, drifts accompanied the teaching of faith healing. In some churches, pricing for prayer against promises of healing has been observed. Some pastors and evangelists have been charged with claiming false healings. Some churches in the United States and Nigeria, have advised their members against vaccination or medicine, stating that it is for the weak in faith and that with a positive confession, they would be immune. In 2019, in Mbandjock, in Cameroon, three deaths are linked to this position in a church. This position is not representative of all evangelical churches, as the document indicates \"The Miraculous Healing\" published in 2015 by the National Council of Evangelicals of France, which mentions that medicine is one of the gifts of God made to humans. Churches and certain evangelical humanitarian organizations are also involved in medical health programs. Pentecostal pastors adhering to prosperity theology have been criticized by journalists for their bling-bling lifestyle (luxury clothes, big houses, cars high end, private plane, etc.).\nSome churches and evangelical organizations have been criticized by victims of rape and domestic violence for their silent handling of cases of abuse by pastors or members. Failure to report abuses to the police appears to be prevalent in churches which are not members of evangelical Christian denomination, or affiliated to denominations which attach great importance to a large autonomy of the churches. The evangelical organization GRACE was founded in 2004 by the Baptist professor Boz Tchividjian to help churches combat sexual abuses, psychological abuses and physical abuses in Christian organizations.\nIn 2011, American evangelical professor Ed Stetzer attributed to individualism the reason for the increase in the number of evangelical churches claiming to be non-denominational Christianity.\nIn 2018, Baptist theologian Russell D. Moore criticized some American Baptist churches for their moralism emphasizing strongly the condemnation of certain personal sins, but silent on the social injustices that afflict entire populations, such as racism.\nIn 2018, American professor Scot McKnight of Northern Baptist Theological Seminary criticized evangelical megachurches for the weak external accountability relationship of their leaders by not being members of Christian denomination, further exposing them to abuse of power.\nThe fact that evangelicals do evangelism and speak about their faith in public is often criticized by the media and associated with proselytism. According to the evangelicals, freedom of religion and freedom of expression allow them to talk about their faith like anything else. Christian films made by American evangelical production companies are also regularly associated with proselytism. \nAccording to Sarah-Jane Murray, screenwriting teacher at the US Film and Christian Television Commission United, Christian films are works of art, not proselytism. For Hubert de Kerangat, communications manager at Saje distribution, distributor of these American Christian films in France, if Christian films are \"proselytes\", all films are \"proselytes\", since each film transmits a message, whether the viewer is free to approve or not."}
{"id": "10371", "revid": "36528928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10371", "title": "Euphonium", "text": "The euphonium is a medium-sized, 3 or 4-valve, often compensating, conical-bore, tenor-voiced brass instrument that derives its name from the Ancient Greek word \"euph\u014dnos\", meaning \"well-sounding\" or \"sweet-voiced\" ( \"eu\" means \"well\" or \"good\" and \"ph\u014dn\u0113\" means \"sound\", hence \"of good sound\"). The euphonium is a valved instrument. Nearly all current models have piston valves, though some models with rotary valves do exist.\nThe euphonium may be played in bass clef as a non-transposing instrument or in treble clef as a transposing instrument. In British brass bands, it is typically treated as a treble-clef instrument, while in American band music, parts may be written in either treble clef or bass clef, or both.\nName.\nThe euphonium is in the family of brass instruments, more particularly low-brass instruments with many relatives. It is extremely similar to a baritone horn. The difference is that the bore size of the baritone horn is typically smaller than that of the euphonium, and the baritone is a primarily cylindrical bore, whereas the euphonium is predominantly conical bore. It is controversial whether this is sufficient to make them two different instruments. In the trombone family large and small bore trombones are both called trombones, while the cylindrical trumpet and the conical flugelhorn are given different names. As with the trumpet and flugelhorn, the two instruments are easily doubled by one player, with some modification of breath and embouchure, since the two have identical range and essentially identical fingering. The cylindrical baritone offers a brighter sound and the conical euphonium offers a more mellow sound.\nThe \"American baritone\", featuring three valves on the front of the instrument and a curved, forward-pointing bell, was dominant in American school bands throughout most of the 20th century, its weight, shape, and configuration conforming to the needs of the marching band. While this instrument is a conical-cylindrical bore hybrid, somewhere between the classic baritone horn and euphonium, it was almost universally labelled a \"baritone\" by both band directors and composers, thus contributing to the confusion of terminology in the United States.\nSeveral late 19th century music catalogs (such as Pepper and Lyon &amp; Healy) sold a euphonium-like instrument called the \"B bass\" (to distinguish it from the E and BB bass). In these catalog drawings, the B Bass had thicker tubing than the baritone; both had three valves. Along the same lines, drum and bugle corps introduced the \"Bass-baritone\", and distinguished it from the baritone. The thicker tubing of the three-valve B bass allowed for production of strong false-tones, providing chromatic access to the pedal register.\nFerdinand Sommer's original name for the instrument was the \"euphonion\". It is sometimes called the tenor tuba in B, although this can also refer to other varieties of tuba. Names in other languages, as included in scores, can be ambiguous as well. They include French \"basse\", \"saxhorn basse\", and \"tuba basse\"; German \"Baryton\", \"Tenorbass\", and \"Tenorbasshorn\"; Italian \"baritono\", \"bombardino\", \"eufonio\", and \"flicorno basso\". The most common German name, \"Baryton\", may have influenced Americans to adopt the name \"baritone\" for the instrument, due to the influx of German musicians to the United States in the nineteenth century.\nHistory and development.\nAs a baritone-voiced brass instrument, the euphonium traces its ancestry to the ophicleide and ultimately back to the serpent. The search for a satisfactory foundational wind instrument that could support massed sound above its pitch took many years. While the serpent was used for over two centuries dating back to the late Renaissance, it was notoriously difficult to control its pitch and tone quality due to its disproportionately small open finger holes. The ophicleide, which was used in bands and orchestras for a few decades in the early to mid-19th century, used a system of keys and was an improvement over the serpent but was still unreliable, especially in the high register.\nWith the invention of the piston valve system 1818, the construction of brass instruments with an even sound and facility of playing in all registers became possible. The euphonium is said to have been invented, as a \"wide-bore, valved bugle of baritone range\", by Ferdinand Sommer of Weimar in 1843, though Carl Moritz in 1838 and Adolphe Sax in 1843 have also been credited. While Sax's family of saxhorns were invented at about the same time and the bass saxhorn is very similar to a euphonium, there are also differences\u2014such as the bass saxhorn being narrower throughout the length of the instrument.\nThe \"British-style\" compensating euphonium was developed by David Blaikley in 1874, and has been in use in Britain with the basic construction little changed since then.\nModern day euphonium makers have been working to further enhance the construction of the euphonium. Companies such as Adams and Besson have been leading the way in perfecting the instrument. Adams euphoniums have developed an adjustable lead pipe receiver which allows players to change the timbre of the instrument to whatever they find preferable. Besson has also been credited with the adjustable main tuning slide trigger, which allows players more flexibility with intonation.\nConstruction and general characteristics.\nThe euphonium, like the tenor trombone, is pitched in concert B. For a valved brass instrument like the euphonium, this means that when no valves are in use the instrument will produce partials of the B harmonic series. It is generally orchestrated as a non-transposing instrument like the trombone, written at concert pitch in the bass clef with higher passages in the tenor clef. Treble clef euphonium parts transposing down a major ninth are included in much concert band music: in the British-style brass band tradition, euphonium music is always written this way. In continental European band music, parts for the euphonium may be written in the bass clef as a B transposing instrument sounding a major second lower than written.\nProfessional models have three top-action valves, played with the first three fingers of the right hand, plus a \"compensating\" fourth valve, generally found midway down the right side of the instrument, played with the left index finger; such an instrument is shown at the top of this page. Beginner models often have only the three top-action valves, while some intermediate \"student\" models may have a fourth top-action valve, played with the fourth finger of the right hand. Compensating systems are expensive to build, and there is in general a substantial difference in price between compensating and non-compensating models. For a thorough discussion of the valves and the compensation system, see the article on brass instruments.\nThe euphonium has an extensive range, comfortably from E2 to about E4 for intermediate players (using scientific pitch notation). In professional hands this may extend from B0 to as high as B5. The lowest notes obtainable depend on the valve set-up of the instrument. All instruments are chromatic down to E2, but four-valved instruments extend that down to at least C2. Non-compensating four-valved instruments suffer from intonation problems from E2 down to C2 and cannot produce the low B1; compensating instruments do not have such intonation problems and can play the low B1. From B1 down lies the \"pedal range\", i.e., the fundamentals of the instrument's harmonic series. They are easily produced on the euphonium as compared to other brass instruments, and the extent of the range depends on the make of the instrument in exactly the same way as just described. Thus, on a compensating four-valved instrument, the lowest note possible is B0, sometimes called double pedal B, which is six ledger lines below the bass clef.\nAs with the other conical-bore instruments, the cornet, flugelhorn, horn, and tuba, the euphonium's tubing (excepting the tubing in the valve section, which is necessarily cylindrical) gradually increases in diameter throughout its length, resulting in a softer, gentler tone compared to cylindrical-bore instruments such as the trumpet, trombone, sudrophone, and baritone horn. While a truly characteristic euphonium sound is rather hard to define precisely, most players would agree that an ideal sound is dark, rich, warm, and velvety, with virtually no hardness to it. This also has to do with the different models preferred by British and American players.\nThough the euphonium's fingerings are no different from those of the trumpet or tuba, beginning euphoniumists will likely experience significant problems with intonation, response and range compared to other beginning brass players. In addition, it is very difficult for students, even of high-school age, to develop the rich sound characteristic of the euphonium, due partly to the instrument models used in schools and partly to the lack of awareness of good euphonium sound models.\nTypes.\nCompensating.\nThe compensating euphonium is common among professionals. It utilizes a three-plus-one-valve system with three upright valves and one side valve. The compensating valve system uses extra tubing, usually coming off of the back of the three upright valves, in order to achieve proper intonation in the lower range of the instrument. This range being from E2 down to B1. Not all four-valve and three-plus-one-valve euphoniums are compensating. Only those designed with extra tubing are compensating. There were, at one time, three-valve compensating euphoniums available. This configuration utilized extra tubing, just as the three-plus-one compensating models did, in order to bring the notes C2 and B1 in tune. This three-valve compensating configuration is still available in British style baritone horns, usually on professional models.\nDouble-bell.\nA creation unique to the United States was the double-bell euphonium, featuring a second smaller bell in addition to the main one; the player could switch bells for certain passages or even for individual notes by use of an additional valve, operated with the left hand. Ostensibly, the smaller bell was intended to emulate the sound of a trombone (it was cylindrical-bore) and was possibly intended for performance situations in which trombones were not available. The extent to which the difference in sound and timbre was apparent to the listener, however, is up for debate. \"Harry Whittier\" of the Patrick S. Gilmore band introduced the instrument in 1888, and it was used widely in both school and service bands for several decades. \"Harold Brasch\" (see \"List of important players\" below) brought the British-style compensating euphonium to the United States c. 1939, but the double-belled euphonium may have remained in common use even into the 1950s and 1960s. In any case, they have become rare (they were last in Conn's advertisements in the 1940s, and King's catalog in the 1960s), and are generally unknown to younger players. They are chiefly known now through their mention in the song \"Seventy-Six Trombones\" from the musical \"The Music Man\" by Meredith Willson.\nMarching.\nA marching version of the euphonium may be found in a marching band, though it is often replaced by its smaller, easier-to-carry cousin, the marching baritone (which has a similar bell and valve configuration to a trumpet). Marching euphoniums are used by marching bands in schools, and in Drum and Bugle Corps, and some corps (such as the Blue Devils and Santa Clara Vanguard) march all-euphonium sections rather than only marching Baritone or a mix of both. Depending on the manufacturer, the weight of these instruments can be straining to the average marcher and require great strength to hold during practices and performances, leading to nerve problems in the right pinky, a callus on the left hand, and possibly back and arm problems. Marching euphoniums and marching baritones commonly have 3 valves, opposed to the regular euphonium having 4.\nAnother form of the marching euphonium is the convertible euphonium. Recently widely produced, the horn resembles a convertible tuba, being able to change from a concert upright to a marching forward bell on either the left or right shoulder. These are mainly produced by Jupiter or Yamaha, but other less expensive versions can be found.\nFive valves.\nThe five-valve euphonium (noncompensating) is an extremely rare variation of the euphonium manufactured in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by Britain's Besson musical instrument company and Highams of Manchester Musical Instrument Company. \nHigham and Besson's \"Clearbore\" five-valve euphonium was economical but not widely used.\nThe Besson five-valve euphonium featured the standard three piston valves horizontally not on top, but had an additional two piston valves off to the side. The standard euphonium has eight possible fingering and non-fingering positions by which sound is produced. The Besson and the Highams \"clearbore\" model rare fourth and fifth extra \"side\" valves change the possible fingering and non-fingering positions from eight to thirty-two.\nThe term 'five-valve euphonium' does not refer to variations of the double bell euphonium made by various brass instrument companies during the same time period. Some of the double-bell euphoniums had five valves, with the fifth valve either not on top with the other four, or by itself off to the side, but the double-bell fifth valve was used for switching the sound to the second smaller trombone-sized bell, and not for changing the fingering pitch of the instrument. Also, Musical Instruments manufactures several euphoniums with five vertical rotary valves today, but this is an unrelated recent development.\nNotable euphonium players.\nGerman Ferdinand Sommer, if one discounts the claims of Moritz and Sax each of whose horns also approached a euphonium in nature, in addition to being credited with inventing the euphonium as the Sommerhorn in 1843, as a soloist on the horn, qualifies as the first euphonium player to significantly advance and alter the understanding of the instrument.\nRepertoire.\nThe \"euphonium repertoire\" consists of solo literature and orchestral, or, more commonly, concert band parts written for the euphonium. Since its invention in 1843, the euphonium has always had an important role in ensembles, but solo literature was slow to appear, consisting of only a handful of lighter solos until the 1960s. Since then, however, the breadth and depth of the solo euphonium repertoire has increased dramatically.\nIn the current age, there has been a huge number of new commissions and repertoire development and promotion through Steven Mead's World of the Euphonium Series and the Beyond the Horizon series from Euphonium.com. There has also been a vast number of new commissions by more and more players and a proliferation of large scale Consortium Commissions that are occurring including current ones in 2008 and 2009 organized by Brian Meixner (Libby Larson), Adam Frey (The Euphonium Foundation Consortium), and Jason Ham (David Gillingham).\nUpon its invention, it was clear that the euphonium had, compared to its predecessors the serpent and ophicleide, a wide range and had a consistently rich, pleasing sound throughout that range. It was flexible both in tone quality and intonation and could blend well with a variety of ensembles, gaining it immediate popularity with composers and conductors as the principal tenor-voices solo instrument in brass band settings, especially in Britain. It is no surprise, then, that when British composers \u2013 some of the same ones who were writing for brass bands \u2013 began to write serious, original music for the concert band in the early 20th century, they used the euphonium in a very similar role.\nWhen American composers also began writing for the concert band as its own artistic medium in the 1930s and 1940s, they continued the British brass and concert band tradition of using the euphonium as the principal tenor-voiced solo.\nThis is not to say that composers, then and now, valued the euphonium only for its lyrical capabilities. Indeed, examination of a large body of concert band literature reveals that the euphonium functions as a \"jack of all trades.\"\nThough the euphonium was, as previously noted, embraced from its earliest days by composers and arrangers in band settings, orchestral composers have, by and large, not taken advantage of this capability. There are, nevertheless, several orchestral works, a few of which are standard repertoire, in which composers have called for instruments, such as the Wagner tuba, for which euphonium is commonly substituted in the present.\nIn contrast to the long-standing practice of extensive euphonium use in wind bands and orchestras, there was, until approximately forty years ago, literally no body of solo literature written specifically for the euphonium, and euphonium players were forced to borrow the literature of other instruments. Fortunately, given the instrument's multifaceted capabilities discussed above, solos for many different instruments are easily adaptable to performance on the euphonium.\nThe earliest surviving solo composition written specifically for euphonium or one of its saxhorn cousins is the \"Concerto per Flicorno Basso\" (1872) by Amilcare Ponchielli. For almost a century after this, the euphonium solo repertoire consisted of only a dozen or so virtuosic pieces, mostly light in character. However, in the 1960s and 1970s, American composers began to write the first of the \"new school\" of serious, artistic solo works specifically for euphonium. Since then, there has been a virtual explosion of solo repertoire for the euphonium. In a mere four decades, the solo literature has expanded from virtually zero to thousands of pieces. More and more composers have become aware of the tremendous soloistic capabilities of the euphonium, and have constantly \"pushed the envelope\" with new literature in terms of tessitura, endurance, technical demands, and extended techniques.\nFinally, the euphonium has, thanks to a handful of enterprising individuals, begun to make inroads in jazz, pop and other non-concert performance settings."}
{"id": "10372", "revid": "34212885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10372", "title": "Entire function", "text": "In complex analysis, an entire function, also called an integral function, is a complex-valued function that is holomorphic on the whole complex plane. Typical examples of entire functions are polynomials and the exponential function, and any finite sums, products and compositions of these, such as the trigonometric functions sine and cosine and their hyperbolic counterparts sinh and cosh, as well as derivatives and integrals of entire functions such as the error function. If an entire function \"f\"(\"z\") has a root at \"w\", then \"f\"(\"z\")/(\"z\u2212w\"), taking the limit value at \"w\", is an entire function. On the other hand, neither the natural logarithm nor the square root is an entire function, nor can they be continued analytically to an entire function.\nA transcendental entire function is an entire function that is not a polynomial.\nProperties.\nEvery entire function \"f\"(\"z\") can be represented as a power series\nthat converges everywhere in the complex plane, hence uniformly on compact sets. The radius of convergence is infinite, which implies that\nor\nAny power series satisfying this criterion will represent an entire function.\nIf (and only if) the coefficients of the power series are all real then the function evidently takes real values for real arguments, and the value of the function at the complex conjugate of \"z\" will be the complex conjugate of the value at \"z\". Such functions are sometimes called self-conjugate (the conjugate function, formula_4, being given by formula_5\nIf the real part of an entire function is known in a neighborhood of a point then both the real and imaginary parts are known for the whole complex plane, up to an imaginary constant. For instance, if the real part is known in a neighborhood of zero, then we can find the coefficients for \"n\" &gt; 0 from the following derivatives with respect to a real variable \"r\":\n(Likewise, if the imaginary part is known in a neighborhood then the function is determined up to a real constant.) In fact, if the real part is known just on an arc of a circle, then the function is determined up to an imaginary constant. (For instance, if the real part is known on part of the unit circle, then it is known on the whole unit circle by analytic extension, and then the coefficients of the infinite series are determined from the coefficients of the Fourier series for the real part on the unit circle.) Note however that an entire function is not determined by its real part on all curves. In particular, if the real part is given on any curve in the complex plane where the real part of some other entire function is zero, then any multiple of that function can be added to the function we are trying to determine. For example, if the curve where the real part is known is the real line, then we can add \"i\" times any self-conjugate function. If the curve forms a loop, then it is determined by the real part of the function on the loop since the only functions whose real part is zero on the curve are those that are everywhere equal to some imaginary number.\nThe Weierstrass factorization theorem asserts that any entire function can be represented by a product involving its zeroes (or \"roots\").\nThe entire functions on the complex plane form an integral domain (in fact a Pr\u00fcfer domain). They also form a commutative unital associative algebra over the complex numbers.\nLiouville's theorem states that any bounded entire function must be constant. Liouville's theorem may be used to elegantly prove the fundamental theorem of algebra.\nAs a consequence of Liouville's theorem, any function that is entire on the whole Riemann sphere (complex plane \"and\" the point at infinity) is constant. Thus any non-constant entire function must have a singularity at the complex point at infinity, either a pole for a polynomial or an essential singularity for a transcendental entire function. Specifically, by the Casorati\u2013Weierstrass theorem, for any transcendental entire function \"f\" and any complex \"w\" there is a sequence formula_7 such that \nPicard's little theorem is a much stronger result: any non-constant entire function takes on every complex number as value, possibly with a single exception. When an exception exists, it is called a lacunary value of the function. The possibility of a lacunary value is illustrated by the exponential function, which never takes on the value 0. One can take a suitable branch of the logarithm of an entire function that never hits 0, so that this will also be an entire function (according to the Weierstrass factorization theorem). The logarithm hits every complex number except possibly one number, which implies that the first function will hit any value other than 0 an infinite number of times. Similarly, a non-constant, entire function that does not hit a particular value will hit every other value an infinite number of times.\nLiouville's theorem is a special case of the following statement:\nGrowth.\nEntire functions may grow as fast as any increasing function: for any increasing function \"g\": [0,\u221e) \u2192 [0,\u221e) there exists an entire function \"f\" such that \"f\"(\"x\") &gt; \"g\"(|\"x\"|) for all real \"x\". Such a function \"f\" may be easily found of the form:\nfor a constant \"c\" and a strictly increasing sequence of positive integers \"nk\". Any such sequence defines an entire function \"f\"(\"z\"), and if the powers are chosen appropriately we may satisfy the inequality \"f\"(\"x\") &gt; \"g\"(|\"x\"|) for all real \"x\". (For instance, it certainly holds if one chooses \"c\" := \"g\"(2) and, for any integer formula_14 one chooses an even exponent formula_15 such that formula_16).\nOrder and type.\nThe order (at infinity) of an entire function formula_17 is defined using the limit superior as:\nwhere \"Br\" is the disk of radius \"r\" and formula_19 denotes the supremum norm of formula_17 on \"Br\". The order is a non-negative real number or infinity (except when formula_21 for all \"z\"). In other words, the order of formula_17 is the infimum of all \"m\" such that: \nThe example of formula_24 shows that this does not mean \"f\"(\"z\") = O(exp(|\"z\"|\"m\")) if formula_17 is of order \"m\".\nIf formula_26 one can also define the type:\nIf the order is 1 and the type is \"\u03c3\", the function is said to be \"of exponential type \"\u03c3\"\". If it is of order less than 1 it is said to be of exponential type 0.\nIf\nthen the order and type can be found by the formulas\nLet formula_30 denote the \"n\"th derivative of \"f\", then we may restate these formulas in terms of the derivatives at any arbitrary point \"z\"0:\nThe type may be infinite, as in the case of the reciprocal gamma function, or zero (see example below under #Order 1).\nExamples.\nHere are some examples of functions of various orders:\nOrder \u03c1.\nFor arbitrary positive numbers \"\u03c1\" and \"\u03c3\" one can construct an example of an entire function of order \"\u03c1\" and type \"\u03c3\" using:\nOrder 1/4.\nwhere \nOrder 1/3.\nwhere\nGenus.\nEntire functions of finite order have Hadamard's canonical representation:\nwhere formula_41 are those roots of formula_42 that are not zero (formula_43), formula_44 is the order of the zero of formula_42 at formula_46 (the case formula_47 being taken to mean formula_48), formula_49 a polynomial (whose degree we shall call formula_50), and formula_51 is the smallest non-negative integer such that the series\nconverges. The non-negative integer formula_53 is called the genus of the entire function formula_42.\nIf the order \u03c1 is not an integer, then formula_55 is the integer part of formula_56. If the order is a positive integer, then there are two possibilities: formula_57 or formula_58.\nFor example, formula_59 and formula_60 are entire functions of genus \"1\".\nOther examples.\nAccording to J. E. Littlewood, the Weierstrass sigma function is a 'typical' entire function. This statement can be made precise in the theory of random entire functions: the asymptotic behavior of almost all entire functions is similar to that of the sigma function. Other examples include the Fresnel integrals, the Jacobi theta function, and the reciprocal Gamma function. The exponential function and the error function are special cases of the Mittag-Leffler function. According to the fundamental theorem of Paley and Wiener, Fourier transforms of functions (or distributions) with bounded support are entire functions of order \"1\" and finite type.\nOther examples are solutions of linear differential equations with polynomial coefficients. If the coefficient at the highest derivative is constant, then all solutions of such equations are entire functions. For example, the exponential function, sine, cosine, Airy functions and Parabolic cylinder functions arise in this way. The class of entire functions is closed with respect to compositions. This makes it possible to study dynamics of entire functions.\nAn entire function of the square root of a complex number is entire if the original function is even, for example formula_61.\nIf a sequence of polynomials all of whose roots are real converges in a neighborhood of the origin to a limit which is not identically equal to zero, then this limit is an entire function. Such entire functions form the Laguerre\u2013P\u00f3lya class, which can also be characterized in terms of the Hadamard product, namely, \"f\" belongs to this class if and only if in the Hadamard representation all \"zn\" are real, \"p\" \u2264 1, and \"P\"(\"z\") = \"a\" + \"bz\" + \"cz\"2, where \"b\" and \"c\" are real, and \"c\" \u2264 0. For example, the sequence of polynomials \nconverges, as \"n\" increases, to exp(\u2212(\"z\"\u2212\"d\")2). The polynomials \nhave all real roots, and converge to cos(\"z\"). The polynomials \nalso converge to cos(\"z\"), showing the buildup of the Hadamard product for cosine."}
{"id": "10373", "revid": "206179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10373", "title": "Elliptical curve", "text": ""}
{"id": "10374", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10374", "title": "Essay", "text": "An essay is, generally, a piece of writing that gives the author's own argument, but the definition is vague, overlapping with those of a letter, a paper, an article, a pamphlet, and a short story. Essays have traditionally been sub-classified as formal and informal. Formal essays are characterized by \"serious purpose, dignity, logical organization, length,\" whereas the informal essay is characterized by \"the personal element (self-revelation, individual tastes and experiences, confidential manner), humor, graceful style, rambling structure, unconventionality or novelty of theme,\" etc.\nEssays are commonly used as literary criticism, political manifestos, learned arguments, observations of daily life, recollections, and reflections of the author. Almost all modern essays are written in prose, but works in verse have been dubbed essays (e.g., Alexander Pope's \"An Essay on Criticism\" and \"An Essay on Man\"). While brevity usually defines an essay, voluminous works like John Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" and Thomas Malthus's \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\" are counterexamples.\nIn some countries (e.g., the United States and Canada), essays have become a major part of formal education. Secondary students are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills; admission essays are often used by universities in selecting applicants, and in the humanities and social sciences essays are often used as a way of assessing the performance of students during final exams.\nThe concept of an \"essay\" has been extended to other media beyond writing. A film essay is a movie that often incorporates documentary filmmaking styles and focuses more on the evolution of a theme or idea. A photographic essay covers a topic with a linked series of photographs that may have accompanying text or captions.\nDefinitions.\nThe word \"essay\" derives from the French infinitive , \"to try\" or \"to attempt\". In English \"essay\" first meant \"a trial\" or \"an attempt\", and this is still an alternative meaning. The Frenchman Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592) was the first author to describe his work as essays; he used the term to characterize these as \"attempts\" to put his thoughts into writing.\nSubsequently, \"essay\" has been defined in a variety of ways. One definition is a \"prose composition with a focused subject of discussion\" or a \"long, systematic discourse\".\nIt is difficult to define the genre into which essays fall. Aldous Huxley, a leading essayist, gives guidance on the subject. He notes that \"the essay is a literary device for saying almost everything about almost anything\", and adds that \"by tradition, almost by definition, the essay is a short piece\". Furthermore, Huxley argues that \"essays belong to a literary species whose extreme variability can be studied most effectively within a three-poled frame of reference\".\nThese three poles (or worlds in which the essay may exist) are:\nHuxley adds that the most satisfying essays \"...make the best not of one, not of two, but of all the three worlds in which it is possible for the essay to exist.\"\nHistory.\nMontaigne.\nMontaigne's \"attempts\" grew out of his commonplacing. Inspired in particular by the works of Plutarch, a translation of whose \"\u0152uvres Morales\" (\"Moral works\") into French had just been published by Jacques Amyot, Montaigne began to compose his essays in 1572; the first edition, entitled \"Essais\", was published in two volumes in 1580. For the rest of his life, he continued revising previously published essays and composing new ones. A third volume was published posthumously; together, their over 100 examples are widely regarded as the predecessor of the modern essay.\nEurope.\nWhile Montaigne's philosophy was admired and copied in France, none of his most immediate disciples tried to write essays. But Montaigne, who liked to fancy that his family (the Eyquem line) was of English extraction, had spoken of the English people as his \"cousins\", and he was early read in England, notably by Francis Bacon.\nBacon's essays, published in book form in 1597 (only five years after the death of Montaigne, containing the first ten of his essays), 1612, and 1625, were the first works in English that described themselves as \"essays\". Ben Jonson first used the word \"essayist\" in 1609, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nOther English essayists included Sir William Cornwallis, who published essays in 1600 and 1617 that were popular at the time, Robert Burton (1577\u20131641) and Sir Thomas Browne (1605\u20131682). In Italy, Baldassare Castiglione wrote about courtly manners in his essay \"Il Cortigiano\". In the 17th century, the Spanish Jesuit Baltasar Graci\u00e1n wrote about the theme of wisdom.\nIn England, during the Age of Enlightenment, essays were a favored tool of polemicists who aimed at convincing readers of their position; they also featured heavily in the rise of periodical literature, as seen in the works of Joseph Addison, Richard Steele and Samuel Johnson. Addison and Steele used the journal \"Tatler\" (founded in 1709 by Steele) and its successors as storehouses of their work, and they became the most celebrated eighteenth-century essayists in England. Johnson's essays appear during the 1750s in various similar publications. As a result of the focus on journals, the term also acquired a meaning synonymous with \"article\", although the content may not the strict definition. On the other hand, Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" is not an essay at all, or cluster of essays, in the technical sense, but still it refers to the experimental and tentative nature of the inquiry which the philosopher was undertaking.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, Edmund Burke and Samuel Taylor Coleridge wrote essays for the general public. The early 19th century, in particular, saw a proliferation of great essayists in English\u2014William Hazlitt, Charles Lamb, Leigh Hunt and Thomas de Quincey all penned numerous essays on diverse subjects, reviving the earlier graceful style. Later in the century, Robert Louis Stevenson also raised the form's literary level. In the 20th century, a number of essayists, such as T.S. Eliot, tried to explain the new movements in art and culture by using essays. Virginia Woolf, Edmund Wilson, and Charles du Bos wrote literary criticism essays.\nIn France, several writers produced longer works with the title of that were not true examples of the form. However, by the mid-19th century, the \"Causeries du lundi\", newspaper columns by the critic Sainte-Beuve, are literary essays in the original sense. Other French writers followed suit, including Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Anatole France, Jules Lema\u00eetre and \u00c9mile Faguet.\nJapan.\nAs with the novel, essays existed in Japan several centuries before they developed in Europe with a genre of essays known as \"zuihitsu\"\u2014loosely connected essays and fragmented ideas. Zuihitsu have existed since almost the beginnings of Japanese literature. Many of the most noted early works of Japanese literature are in this genre. Notable examples include \"The Pillow Book\" (c. 1000), by court lady Sei Sh\u014dnagon, and \"Tsurezuregusa\" (1330), by particularly renowned Japanese Buddhist monk Yoshida Kenk\u014d. Kenk\u014d described his short writings similarly to Montaigne, referring to them as \"nonsensical thoughts\" written in \"idle hours\". Another noteworthy difference from Europe is that women have traditionally written in Japan, though the more formal, Chinese-influenced writings of male writers were more prized at the time.\nChina.\nThe eight-legged essay (Chinese: \u516b\u80a1\u6587; pinyin: \"b\u0101g\u01d4w\u00e9n\"; 'eight bone text') was a style of essay in imperial examinations during the Ming and Qing dynasties in China. The eight-legged essay was needed for those test takers in these civil service tests to show their merits for government service, often focusing on Confucian thought and knowledge of the Four Books and Five Classics, in relation to governmental ideals. Test takers could not write in innovative or creative ways, but needed to conform to the standards of the eight-legged essay. Various skills were examined, including the ability to write coherently and to display basic logic. In certain times, the candidates were expected to spontaneously compose poetry upon a set theme, whose value was also sometimes questioned, or eliminated as part of the test material. This was a major argument in favor of the eight-legged essay, arguing that it were better to eliminate creative art in favor of prosaic literacy. In the history of Chinese literature, the eight-legged essay is often said to have caused China's \"cultural stagnation and economic backwardness\" in the 19th century.\nForms and styles.\nThis section describes the different forms and styles of essay writing. These are used by an array of authors, including university students and professional essayists.\nCause and effect.\nThe defining features of a \"cause and effect\" essay are causal chains that connect from a cause to an effect, careful language, and chronological or emphatic order. A writer using this rhetorical method must consider the subject, determine the purpose, consider the audience, think critically about different causes or consequences, consider a thesis statement, arrange the parts, consider the language, and decide on a conclusion.\nClassification and division.\nClassification is the categorization of objects into a larger whole while division is the breaking of a larger whole into smaller parts.\nCompare and contrast.\nCompare and contrast essays are characterized by a basis for comparison, points of comparison, and analogies. It is grouped by the object (chunking) or by point (sequential). The comparison highlights the similarities between two or more similar objects while contrasting highlights the differences between two or more objects. When writing a compare/contrast essay, writers need to determine their purpose, consider their audience, consider the basis and points of comparison, consider their thesis statement, arrange and develop the comparison, and reach a conclusion. Compare and contrast is arranged emphatically.\nExpository.\nAn expository essay is used to inform, describe or explain a topic, using important facts to teach the reader about a topic. Mostly written in third-person, using \"it\", \"he\", \"she\", \"they,\" the expository essay uses formal language to discuss someone or something. Examples of expository essays are: a medical or biological condition, social or technological process, life or character of a famous person. The writing of an expository essay often consists of the following steps: organizing thoughts (brainstorming), researching a topic, developing a thesis statement, writing the introduction, writing the body of essay, and writing the conclusion. Expository essays are often assigned as a part of SAT and other standardized testing or as homework for high school and college students.\nDescriptive.\nDescriptive writing is characterized by sensory details, which appeal to the physical senses, and details that appeal to a reader's emotional, physical, or intellectual sensibilities. Determining the purpose, considering the audience, creating a dominant impression, using descriptive language, and organizing the description are the rhetorical choices to consider when using a description. A description is usually arranged spatially but can also be chronological or emphatic. The focus of a description is the scene. Description uses tools such as denotative language, connotative language, figurative language, metaphor, and simile to arrive at a dominant impression. One university essay guide states that \"descriptive writing says what happened or what another author has discussed; it provides an account of the topic\".\nLyric essays are an important form of descriptive essays.\nDialectic.\nIn the dialectic form of the essay, which is commonly used in philosophy, the writer makes a thesis and argument, then objects to their own argument (with a counterargument), but then counters the counterargument with a final and novel argument. This form benefits from presenting a broader perspective while countering a possible flaw that some may present. This type is sometimes called an ethics paper.\nExemplification.\nAn exemplification essay is characterized by a generalization and relevant, representative, and believable examples including anecdotes. Writers need to consider their subject, determine their purpose, consider their audience, decide on specific examples, and arrange all the parts together when writing an exemplification essay.\nFamiliar.\nAn essayist writes a \"familiar essay\" if speaking to a single reader, writing about both themselves, and about particular subjects. Anne Fadiman notes that \"the genre's heyday was the early nineteenth century,\" and that its greatest exponent was Charles Lamb. She also suggests that while critical essays have more brain than the heart, and personal essays have more heart than brain, familiar essays have equal measures of both.\nHistory (thesis).\nA history essay sometimes referred to as a thesis essay describes an argument or claim about one or more historical events and supports that claim with evidence, arguments, and references. The text makes it clear to the reader why the argument or claim is as such.\nNarrative.\nA narrative uses tools such as flashbacks, flash-forwards, and transitions that often build to a climax. The focus of a narrative is the plot. When creating a narrative, authors must determine their purpose, consider their audience, establish their point of view, use dialogue, and organize the narrative. A narrative is usually arranged chronologically.\nArgumentative.\nAn argumentative essay is a critical piece of writing, aimed at presenting objective analysis of the subject matter, narrowed down to a single topic. The main idea of all the criticism is to provide an opinion either of positive or negative implication. As such, a critical essay requires research and analysis, strong internal logic and sharp structure. Its structure normally builds around introduction with a topic's relevance and a thesis statement, body paragraphs with arguments linking back to the main thesis, and conclusion. In addition, an argumentative essay may include a refutation section where conflicting ideas are acknowledged, described, and criticized. Each argument of an argumentative essay should be supported with sufficient evidence, relevant to the point.\nProcess.\nA process essay is used for an explanation of making or breaking something. Often, it is written in chronological order or numerical order to show step-by-step processes. It has all the qualities of a technical document with the only difference is that it is often written in descriptive mood, while a technical document is mostly in imperative mood.\nEconomic.\nAn economic essay can start with a thesis, or it can start with a theme. It can take a narrative course and a descriptive course. It can even become an argumentative essay if the author feels the need. After the introduction, the author has to do his/her best to expose the economic matter at hand, to analyze it, evaluate it, and draw a conclusion. If the essay takes more of a narrative form then the author has to expose each aspect of the economic puzzle in a way that makes it clear and understandable for the reader\nReflective.\nA \"reflective essay\" is an analytical piece of writing in which the writer describes a real or imaginary scene, event, interaction, passing thought, memory, or form\u2014adding a personal reflection on the meaning of the topic in the author's life. Thus, the focus is not merely descriptive. The writer doesn't just describe the situation, but revisits the scene with more detail and emotion to examine what went well, or reveal a need for additional learning\u2014and may relate what transpired to the rest of the author's life.\nOther logical structures.\nThe logical progression and organizational structure of an essay can take many forms. Understanding how the movement of thought is managed through an essay has a profound impact on its overall cogency and ability to impress. A number of alternative logical structures for essays have been visualized as diagrams, making them easy to implement or adapt in the construction of an argument.\nAcademic.\nIn countries like the United States and the United Kingdom, essays have become a major part of a formal education in the form of free response questions. Secondary students in these countries are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills, and essays are often used by universities in these countries in selecting applicants (\"see\" admissions essay). In both secondary and tertiary education, essays are used to judge the mastery and comprehension of the material. Students are asked to explain, comment on, or assess a topic of study in the form of an essay. In some courses, university students must complete one or more essays over several weeks or months. In addition, in fields such as the humanities and social sciences, mid-term and end of term examinations often require students to write a short essay in two or three hours.\nIn these countries, so-called academic essays, also called \"papers\", are usually more formal than literary ones. They may still allow the presentation of the writer's own views, but this is done in a logical and factual manner, with the use of the first person often discouraged. Longer academic essays (often with a word limit of between 2,000 and 5,000 words) are often more discursive. They sometimes begin with a short summary analysis of what has previously been written on a topic, which is often called a literature review.\nLonger essays may also contain an introductory page that defines words and phrases of the essay's topic. Most academic institutions require that all substantial facts, quotations, and other supporting material in an essay be referenced in a bibliography or works cited page at the end of the text. This scholarly convention helps others (whether teachers or fellow scholars) to understand the basis of facts and quotations the author uses to support the essay's argument and helps readers evaluate to what extent the argument is supported by evidence, and to evaluate the quality of that evidence. The academic essay tests the student's ability to present their thoughts in an organized way and is designed to test their intellectual capabilities.\nOne of the challenges facing universities is that in some cases, students may submit essays purchased from an essay mill (or \"paper mill\") as their own work. An \"essay mill\" is a ghostwriting service that sells pre-written essays to university and college students. Since plagiarism is a form of academic dishonesty or academic fraud, universities and colleges may investigate papers they suspect are from an essay mill by using plagiarism detection software, which compares essays against a database of known mill essays and by orally testing students on the contents of their papers.\nMagazine or newspaper.\nEssays often appear in magazines, especially magazines with an intellectual bent, such as \"The Atlantic\" and \"Harpers\". Magazine and newspaper essays use many of the essay types described in the section on forms and styles (e.g., descriptive essays, narrative essays, etc.). Some newspapers also print essays in the op-ed section.\nEmployment.\nEmployment essays detailing experience in a certain occupational field are required when applying for some jobs, especially government jobs in the United States. Essays known as Knowledge Skills and Executive Core Qualifications are required when applying to certain US federal government positions.\nA KSA, or \"Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities,\" is a series of narrative statements that are required when applying to Federal government job openings in the United States. KSAs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. The knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary for the successful performance of a position are contained on each job vacancy announcement. KSAs are brief and focused essays about one's career and educational background that presumably qualify one to perform the duties of the position being applied for.\nAn Executive Core Qualification, or ECQ, is a narrative statement that is required when applying to Senior Executive Service positions within the US Federal government. Like the KSAs, ECQs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. The Office of Personnel Management has established five executive core qualifications that all applicants seeking to enter the Senior Executive Service must demonstrate.\nNon-literary types.\nFilm.\nA film essay (or \"cinematic essay\") consists of the evolution of a theme or an idea rather than a plot per se, or the film literally being a cinematic accompaniment to a narrator reading an essay. From another perspective, an essay film could be defined as a documentary film visual basis combined with a form of commentary that contains elements of self-portrait (rather than autobiography), where the signature (rather than the life story) of the filmmaker is apparent. The cinematic essay often blends documentary, fiction, and experimental film making using tones and editing styles.\nThe genre is not well-defined but might include propaganda works of early Soviet parliamentarians like Dziga Vertov, present-day filmmakers including Chris Marker, Michael Moore (\"Roger &amp; Me\", \"Bowling for Columbine\" and \"Fahrenheit 9/11\"), Errol Morris (\"The Thin Blue Line\"), Morgan Spurlock (\"Supersize Me\") and Agn\u00e8s Varda. Jean-Luc Godard describes his recent work as \"film-essays\". Two filmmakers whose work was the antecedent to the cinematic essay include Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s and Bertolt Brecht. M\u00e9li\u00e8s made a short film (\"The Coronation of Edward VII\" (1902)) about the 1902 coronation of King Edward VII, which mixes actual footage with shots of a recreation of the event. Brecht was a playwright who experimented with film and incorporated film projections into some of his plays. Orson Welles made an essay film in his own pioneering style, released in 1974, called \"F for Fake\", which dealt specifically with art forger Elmyr de Hory and with the themes of deception, \"fakery,\" and authenticity in general. These are often published online on video hosting services.\nDavid Winks Gray's article \"The essay film in action\" states that the \"essay film became an identifiable form of filmmaking in the 1950s and '60s\". He states that since that time, essay films have tended to be \"on the margins\" of the filmmaking the world. Essay films have a \"peculiar searching, questioning tone ... between documentary and fiction\" but without \"fitting comfortably\" into either genre. Gray notes that just like written essays, essay films \"tend to marry the personal voice of a guiding narrator (often the director) with a wide swath of other voices\". The University of Wisconsin Cinematheque website echoes some of Gray's comments; it calls a film essay an \"intimate and allusive\" genre that \"catches filmmakers in a pensive mood, ruminating on the margins between fiction and documentary\" in a manner that is \"refreshingly inventive, playful, and idiosyncratic\".\nMusic.\nIn the realm of music, composer Samuel Barber wrote a set of \"Essays for Orchestra,\" relying on the form and content of the music to guide the listener's ear, rather than any extra-musical plot or story.\nPhotography.\nA photographic essay strives to cover a topic with a linked series of photographs. Photo essays range from purely photographic works to photographs with captions or small notes to full-text essays with a few or many accompanying photographs. Photo essays can be sequential in nature, intended to be viewed in a particular order\u2014or they may consist of non-ordered photographs viewed all at once or in an order that the viewer chooses. All photo essays are collections of photographs, but not all collections of photographs are photo essays. Photo essays often address a certain issue or attempt to capture the character of places and events.\nVisual arts.\nIn the visual arts, an essay is a preliminary drawing or sketch that forms a basis for a final painting or sculpture, made as a test of the work's composition (this meaning of the term, like several of those following, comes from the word \"essay\"'s meaning of \"attempt\" or \"trial\")."}
{"id": "10375", "revid": "49021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10375", "title": "Error detection and correction", "text": "In information theory and coding theory with applications in computer science and telecommunication, error detection and correction or error control are techniques that enable reliable delivery of digital data over unreliable communication channels. Many communication channels are subject to channel noise, and thus errors may be introduced during transmission from the source to a receiver. Error detection techniques allow detecting such errors, while error correction enables reconstruction of the original data in many cases.\nDefinitions.\n\"Error detection \" is the detection of errors caused by noise or other impairments during transmission from the transmitter to the receiver. \"Error correction\" is the detection of errors and reconstruction of the original, error-free data.\nHistory.\nIn classical antiquity, copyists of the Hebrew Bible were paid for their work according to the number of s (lines of verse). As the prose books of the Bible were hardly ever written in stichs, the copyists, in order to estimate the amount of work, had to count the letters. This also helped ensure accuracy in the transmission of the text with the production of subsequent copies. Between the 7th and 10th centuries CE a group of Jewish scribes formalized and expanded this to create the Numerical Masorah to ensure accurate reproduction of the sacred text. It included counts of the number of words in a line, section, book and groups of books, noting the middle stich of a book, word use statistics, and commentary. Standards became such that a deviation in even a single letter in a Torah scroll was considered unacceptable. The effectiveness of their error correction method was verified by the accuracy of copying through the centuries demonstrated by discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in 1947-1956, dating from c.150 BCE-75 CE.\nThe modern development of error correction codes is credited to Richard Hamming in 1947. A description of Hamming's code appeared in Claude Shannon's \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\" and was quickly generalized by Marcel J. E. Golay.\nIntroduction.\nAll error-detection and correction schemes add some redundancy (i.e., some extra data) to a message, which receivers can use to check consistency of the delivered message, and to recover data that has been determined to be corrupted. Error-detection and correction schemes can be either systematic or non-systematic. In a systematic scheme, the transmitter sends the original data, and attaches a fixed number of \"check bits\" (or \"parity data\"), which are derived from the data bits by some deterministic algorithm. If only error detection is required, a receiver can simply apply the same algorithm to the received data bits and compare its output with the received check bits; if the values do not match, an error has occurred at some point during the transmission. In a system that uses a non-systematic code, the original message is transformed into an encoded message carrying the same information and that has at least as many bits as the original message.\nGood error control performance requires the scheme to be selected based on the characteristics of the communication channel. Common channel models include memoryless models where errors occur randomly and with a certain probability, and dynamic models where errors occur primarily in bursts. Consequently, error-detecting and correcting codes can be generally distinguished between \"random-error-detecting/correcting\" and \"burst-error-detecting/correcting\". Some codes can also be suitable for a mixture of random errors and burst errors.\nIf the channel characteristics cannot be determined, or are highly variable, an error-detection scheme may be combined with a system for retransmissions of erroneous data. This is known as automatic repeat request (ARQ), and is most notably used in the Internet. An alternate approach for error control is hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), which is a combination of ARQ and error-correction coding.\nTypes of error correction.\nThere are three major types of error correction. \nAutomatic repeat request (ARQ).\nAutomatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) is an error control method for data transmission that makes use of error-detection codes, acknowledgment and/or negative acknowledgment messages, and timeouts to achieve reliable data transmission. An \"acknowledgment\" is a message sent by the receiver to indicate that it has correctly received a data frame.\nUsually, when the transmitter does not receive the acknowledgment before the timeout occurs (i.e., within a reasonable amount of time after sending the data frame), it retransmits the frame until it is either correctly received or the error persists beyond a predetermined number of retransmissions.\nThree types of ARQ protocols are Stop-and-wait ARQ, Go-Back-N ARQ, and Selective Repeat ARQ.\nARQ is appropriate if the communication channel has varying or unknown capacity, such as is the case on the Internet. However, ARQ requires the availability of a back channel, results in possibly increased latency due to retransmissions, and requires the maintenance of buffers and timers for retransmissions, which in the case of network congestion can put a strain on the server and overall network capacity.\nFor example, ARQ is used on shortwave radio data links in the form of ARQ-E, or combined with multiplexing as ARQ-M.\nForward error correction.\nForward error correction (FEC) is a process of adding redundant data such as an error-correcting code (ECC) to a message so that it can be recovered by a receiver even when a number of errors (up to the capability of the code being used) were introduced, either during the process of transmission, or on storage. Since the receiver does not have to ask the sender for retransmission of the data, a backchannel is not required in forward error correction, and it is therefore suitable for simplex communication such as broadcasting. Error-correcting codes are frequently used in lower-layer communication, as well as for reliable storage in media such as CDs, DVDs, hard disks, and RAM.\nError-correcting codes are usually distinguished between convolutional codes and block codes:\nShannon's theorem is an important theorem in forward error correction, and describes the maximum information rate at which reliable communication is possible over a channel that has a certain error probability or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This strict upper limit is expressed in terms of the channel capacity. More specifically, the theorem says that there exist codes such that with increasing encoding length the probability of error on a discrete memoryless channel can be made arbitrarily small, provided that the code rate is smaller than the channel capacity. The code rate is defined as the fraction \"k/n\" of \"k\" source symbols and \"n\" encoded symbols.\nThe actual maximum code rate allowed depends on the error-correcting code used, and may be lower. This is because Shannon's proof was only of existential nature, and did not show how to construct codes which are both optimal and have efficient encoding and decoding algorithms.\nHybrid schemes.\nHybrid ARQ is a combination of ARQ and forward error correction. There are two basic approaches:\nThe latter approach is particularly attractive on an erasure channel when using a rateless erasure code.\nError detection schemes.\nError detection is most commonly realized using a suitable hash function (or specifically, a checksum, cyclic redundancy check or other algorithm). A hash function adds a fixed-length \"tag\" to a message, which enables receivers to verify the delivered message by recomputing the tag and comparing it with the one provided.\nThere exists a vast variety of different hash function designs. However, some are of particularly widespread use because of either their simplicity or their suitability for detecting certain kinds of errors (e.g., the cyclic redundancy check's performance in detecting burst errors).\nMinimum distance coding.\nA random-error-correcting code based on minimum distance coding can provide a strict guarantee on the number of detectable errors, but it may not protect against a preimage attack.\nRepetition codes.\nA repetition code is a coding scheme that repeats the bits across a channel to achieve error-free communication. Given a stream of data to be transmitted, the data are divided into blocks of bits. Each block is transmitted some predetermined number of times. For example, to send the bit pattern \"1011\", the four-bit block can be repeated three times, thus producing \"1011 1011 1011\". If this twelve-bit pattern was received as \"1010 1011 1011\" \u2013 where the first block is unlike the other two \u2013 an error has occurred.\nA repetition code is very inefficient, and can be susceptible to problems if the error occurs in exactly the same place for each group (e.g., \"1010 1010 1010\" in the previous example would be detected as correct). The advantage of repetition codes is that they are extremely simple, and are in fact used in some transmissions of numbers stations.\nParity bit.\nA \"parity bit\" is a bit that is added to a group of source bits to ensure that the number of set bits (i.e., bits with value 1) in the outcome is even or odd. It is a very simple scheme that can be used to detect single or any other odd number (i.e., three, five, etc.) of errors in the output. An even number of flipped bits will make the parity bit appear correct even though the data is erroneous.\nParity bits added to each \"word\" sent are called transverse redundancy checks, while those added at the end of a stream of \"words\" are called longitudinal redundancy checks. For example, if each of a series of m-bit \"words\" has a parity bit added, showing whether there were an odd or even number of ones in that word, any word with a single error in it will be detected. It will not be known where in the word the error is, however. If, in addition, after each stream of n words a parity sum is sent, each bit of which shows whether there were an odd or even number of ones at that bit-position sent in the most recent group, the exact position of the error can be determined and the error corrected. This method is only guaranteed to be effective, however, if there are no more than 1 error in every group of n words. With more error correction bits, more errors can be detected and in some cases corrected.\nThere are also other bit-grouping techniques.\nChecksum.\nA \"checksum\" of a message is a modular arithmetic sum of message code words of a fixed word length (e.g., byte values). The sum may be negated by means of a ones'-complement operation prior to transmission to detect unintentional all-zero messages.\nChecksum schemes include parity bits, check digits, and longitudinal redundancy checks. Some checksum schemes, such as the Damm algorithm, the Luhn algorithm, and the Verhoeff algorithm, are specifically designed to detect errors commonly introduced by humans in writing down or remembering identification numbers.\nCyclic redundancy check.\nA \"cyclic redundancy check\" (CRC) is a non-secure hash function designed to detect accidental changes to digital data in computer networks. It is not suitable for detecting maliciously introduced errors. It is characterized by specification of a \"generator polynomial\", which is used as the divisor in a polynomial long division over a finite field, taking the input data as the dividend. The remainder becomes the result.\nA CRC has properties that make it well suited for detecting burst errors. CRCs are particularly easy to implement in hardware and are therefore commonly used in computer networks and storage devices such as hard disk drives.\nThe parity bit can be seen as a special-case 1-bit CRC.\nCryptographic hash function.\nThe output of a \"cryptographic hash function\", also known as a \"message digest\", can provide strong assurances about data integrity, whether changes of the data are accidental (e.g., due to transmission errors) or maliciously introduced. Any modification to the data will likely be detected through a mismatching hash value. Furthermore, given some hash value, it is typically infeasible to find some input data (other than the one given) that will yield the same hash value. If an attacker can change not only the message but also the hash value, then a \"keyed hash\" or message authentication code (MAC) can be used for additional security. Without knowing the key, it is not possible for the attacker to easily or conveniently calculate the correct keyed hash value for a modified message.\nError correction code.\nAny error-correcting code can be used for error detection. A code with \"minimum Hamming distance\", \"d\", can detect up to \"d\" \u2212 1 errors in a code word. Using minimum-distance-based error-correcting codes for error detection can be suitable if a strict limit on the minimum number of errors to be detected is desired.\nCodes with minimum Hamming distance \"d\" = 2 are degenerate cases of error-correcting codes, and can be used to detect single errors. The parity bit is an example of a single-error-detecting code.\nApplications.\nApplications that require low latency (such as telephone conversations) cannot use automatic repeat request (ARQ); they must use forward error correction (FEC). By the time an ARQ system discovers an error and re-transmits it, the re-sent data will arrive too late to be usable.\nApplications where the transmitter immediately forgets the information as soon as it is sent (such as most television cameras) cannot use ARQ; they must use FEC because when an error occurs, the original data is no longer available.\nApplications that use ARQ must have a return channel; applications having no return channel cannot use ARQ.\nApplications that require extremely low error rates (such as digital money transfers) must use ARQ due to the possibility of uncorrectable errors with FEC.\nReliability and inspection engineering also make use of the theory of error-correcting codes.\nInternet.\nIn a typical TCP/IP stack, error control is performed at multiple levels:\nDeep-space telecommunications.\nThe development of error-correction codes was tightly coupled with the history of deep-space missions due to the extreme dilution of signal power over interplanetary distances, and the limited power availability aboard space probes. Whereas early missions sent their data uncoded, starting in 1968, digital error correction was implemented in the form of (sub-optimally decoded) convolutional codes and Reed\u2013Muller codes. The Reed\u2013Muller code was well suited to the noise the spacecraft was subject to (approximately matching a bell curve), and was implemented for the Mariner spacecraft and used on missions between 1969 and 1977.\nThe Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 missions, which started in 1977, were designed to deliver color imaging and scientific information from Jupiter and Saturn. This resulted in increased coding requirements, and thus, the spacecraft were supported by (optimally Viterbi-decoded) convolutional codes that could be concatenated with an outer Golay (24,12,8) code. The Voyager 2 craft additionally supported an implementation of a Reed\u2013Solomon code. The concatenated Reed\u2013Solomon\u2013Viterbi (RSV) code allowed for very powerful error correction, and enabled the spacecraft's extended journey to Uranus and Neptune. After ECC system upgrades in 1989, both crafts used V2 RSV coding.\nThe Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems currently recommends usage of error correction codes with performance similar to the Voyager 2 RSV code as a minimum. Concatenated codes are increasingly falling out of favor with space missions, and are replaced by more powerful codes such as Turbo codes or LDPC codes.\nThe different kinds of deep space and orbital missions that are conducted suggest that trying to find a one-size-fits-all error correction system will be an ongoing problem. For missions close to Earth, the nature of the noise in the communication channel is different from that which a spacecraft on an interplanetary mission experiences. Additionally, as a spacecraft increases its distance from Earth, the problem of correcting for noise becomes more difficult.\nSatellite broadcasting.\nThe demand for satellite transponder bandwidth continues to grow, fueled by the desire to deliver television (including new channels and high-definition television) and IP data. Transponder availability and bandwidth constraints have limited this growth. Transponder capacity is determined by the selected modulation scheme and the proportion of capacity consumed by FEC.\nData storage.\nError detection and correction codes are often used to improve the reliability of data storage media. A parity track capable of detecting single-bit errors was present on the first magnetic tape data storage in 1951. The optimal rectangular code used in group coded recording tapes not only detects but also corrects single-bit errors. Some file formats, particularly archive formats, include a checksum (most often CRC32) to detect corruption and truncation and can employ redundancy or parity files to recover portions of corrupted data. Reed-Solomon codes are used in compact discs to correct errors caused by scratches.\nModern hard drives use Reed\u2013Solomon codes to detect correct minor errors in sector reads, and to recover corrupted data from failing sectors and store that data in the spare sectors. RAID systems use a variety of error correction techniques to recover data when a hard drive completely fails. Filesystems such as ZFS or Btrfs, as well as some RAID implementations, support data scrubbing and resilvering, which allows bad blocks to be detected and (hopefully) recovered before they are used. The recovered data may be re-written to exactly the same physical location, to spare blocks elsewhere on the same piece of hardware, or the data may be rewritten onto replacement hardware.\nError-correcting memory.\nDRAM memory may provide stronger protection against soft errors by relying on error-correcting codes. Such error-correcting memory, known as \"ECC\" or \"EDAC-protected\" memory, is particularly desirable for mission-critical applications, such as scientific computing, financial, medical, etc. as well as deep-space applications due to the increased radiation in space.\nError-correcting memory controllers traditionally use Hamming codes, although some use triple modular redundancy.\nInterleaving allows distributing the effect of a single cosmic ray potentially upsetting multiple physically neighboring bits across multiple words by associating neighboring bits to different words. As long as a single event upset (SEU) does not exceed the error threshold (e.g., a single error) in any particular word between accesses, it can be corrected (e.g., by a single-bit error-correcting code), and the illusion of an error-free memory system may be maintained.\nIn addition to hardware providing features required for ECC memory to operate, operating systems usually contain related reporting facilities that are used to provide notifications when soft errors are transparently recovered. An increasing rate of soft errors might indicate that a DIMM module needs replacing, and such feedback information would not be easily available without the related reporting capabilities. One example is the Linux kernel's \"EDAC\" subsystem (previously known as \"Bluesmoke\"), which collects the data from error-checking-enabled components inside a computer system; besides collecting and reporting back the events related to ECC memory, it also supports other checksumming errors, including those detected on the PCI bus.\nA few systems also support memory scrubbing."}
{"id": "10376", "revid": "1012477928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10376", "title": "Euclidean domain", "text": "In mathematics, more specifically in ring theory, a Euclidean domain (also called a Euclidean ring) is an integral domain that can be endowed with a Euclidean function which allows a suitable generalization of the Euclidean division of the integers. This generalized Euclidean algorithm can be put to many of the same uses as Euclid's original algorithm in the ring of integers: in any Euclidean domain, one can apply the Euclidean algorithm to compute the greatest common divisor of any two elements. In particular, the greatest common divisor of any two elements exists and can be written as a linear combination \nof them (B\u00e9zout's identity). Also every ideal in a Euclidean domain is principal, which implies a suitable generalization of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic: every Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain.\nIt is important to compare the class of Euclidean domains with the larger class of principal ideal domains (PIDs). An arbitrary PID has much the same \"structural properties\" of a Euclidean domain (or, indeed, even of the ring of integers), but when an explicit algorithm for Euclidean division is known, one may use Euclidean algorithm and extended Euclidean algorithm to compute greatest common divisors and B\u00e9zout's identity. In particular, the existence of efficient algorithms for Euclidean division of integers and of polynomials in one variable over a field is of basic importance in computer algebra.\nSo, given an integral domain , it is often very useful to know that has a Euclidean function: in particular, this implies that is a PID. However, if there is no \"obvious\" Euclidean function, then determining whether is a PID is generally a much easier problem than determining whether it is a Euclidean domain.\nEuclidean domains appear in the following chain of class inclusions:\nDefinition.\nLet be an integral domain. A Euclidean function on is a function from } to the non-negative integers satisfying the following fundamental division-with-remainder property:\nA Euclidean domain is an integral domain which can be endowed with at least one Euclidean function. It is important to note that a particular Euclidean function is \"not\" part of the structure of a Euclidean domain; in general, a Euclidean domain will admit many different Euclidean functions.\nMost algebra texts require a Euclidean function to have the following additional property:\nHowever, one can show that (EF1) alone suffices to define a Euclidean domain. If an integral domain is endowed with a function satisfying (EF1), then can also be endowed with a function satisfying both (EF1) and (EF2) simultaneously. Indeed, for }, one can define as follows:\nIn words, one may define to be the minimum value attained by on the set of all non-zero elements of the principal ideal generated by .\nA Euclidean function is multiplicative if and is never zero. It follows that . More generally, if and only if is a unit.\nNotes on the definition.\nMany authors use other terms in place of \"Euclidean function\", such as \"degree function\", \"valuation function\", \"gauge function\" or \"norm function\". Some authors also require the domain of the Euclidean function to be the entire ring ; however this does not essentially affect the definition, since (EF1) does not involve the value of . The definition is sometimes generalized by allowing the Euclidean function to take its values in any well-ordered set; this weakening does not affect the most important implications of the Euclidean property.\nThe property (EF1) can be restated as follows: for any principal ideal of with nonzero generator , all nonzero classes of the quotient ring have a representative with . Since the possible values of are well-ordered, this property can be established by proving that for any with minimal value of in its class. Note that, for a Euclidean function that is so established, there need not exist an effective method to determine and in (EF1).\nExamples.\nExamples of Euclidean domains include:\nExamples of domains that are \"not\" Euclidean domains include:\nProperties.\nLet \"R\" be a domain and \"f\" a Euclidean function on \"R\". Then:\nHowever, in many finite extensions of Q with trivial class group, the ring of integers is Euclidean (not necessarily with respect to the absolute value of the field norm; see below).\nAssuming the extended Riemann hypothesis, if \"K\" is a finite extension of Q and the ring of integers of \"K\" is a PID with an infinite number of units, then the ring of integers is Euclidean.\nIn particular this applies to the case of totally real quadratic number fields with trivial class group.\nIn addition (and without assuming ERH), if the field \"K\" is a Galois extension of Q, has trivial class group and unit rank strictly greater than three, then the ring of integers is Euclidean.\nAn immediate corollary of this is that if the number field is Galois over Q, its class group is trivial and the extension has degree greater than 8 then the ring of integers is necessarily Euclidean.\nNorm-Euclidean fields.\nAlgebraic number fields \"K\" come with a canonical norm function on them: the absolute value of the field norm \"N\" that takes an algebraic element \"\u03b1\" to the product of all the conjugates of \"\u03b1\". This norm maps the ring of integers of a number field \"K\", say \"O\"\"K\", to the nonnegative rational integers, so it is a candidate to be a Euclidean norm on this ring. If this norm satisfies the axioms of a Euclidean function then the number field \"K\" is called \"norm-Euclidean\" or simply \"Euclidean\". Strictly speaking it is the ring of integers that is Euclidean since fields are trivially Euclidean domains, but the terminology is standard.\nIf a field is not norm-Euclidean then that does not mean the ring of integers is not Euclidean, just that the field norm does not satisfy the axioms of a Euclidean function. In fact, the rings of integers of number fields may be divided in several classes:\nThe norm-Euclidean quadratic fields have been fully classified; they are formula_8, where \"d\" takes the values\nEvery Euclidean imaginary quadratic field is norm-Euclidean and is one of the five first fields in the preceding list."}
{"id": "10377", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10377", "title": "Euclidean algorithm", "text": "In mathematics, the Euclidean algorithm, or Euclid's algorithm, is an efficient method for computing the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two integers (numbers), the largest number that divides them both without a remainder. It is named after the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid, who first described it in his \"Elements\" (c. 300 BC).\nIt is an example of an \"algorithm\", a step-by-step procedure for performing a calculation according to well-defined rules,\nand is one of the oldest algorithms in common use. It can be used to reduce fractions to their simplest form, and is a part of many other number-theoretic and cryptographic calculations.\nThe Euclidean algorithm is based on the principle that the greatest common divisor of two numbers does not change if the larger number is replaced by its difference with the smaller number. For example, 21 is the GCD of 252 and 105 (as 252\u00a0=\u00a021\u00a0\u00d7\u00a012 and 105\u00a0=\u00a021\u00a0\u00d7\u00a05), and the same number 21 is also the GCD of 105 and 252\u00a0\u2212\u00a0105\u00a0=\u00a0147. Since this replacement reduces the larger of the two numbers, repeating this process gives successively smaller pairs of numbers until the two numbers become equal. When that occurs, they are the GCD of the original two numbers. By reversing the steps or using the extended Euclidean algorithm, the GCD can be expressed as a linear combination of the two original numbers, that is the sum of the two numbers, each multiplied by an integer (for example, 21 = 5 \u00d7 105 + (\u22122) \u00d7 252). The fact that the GCD can always be expressed in this way is known as B\u00e9zout's identity.\nThe version of the Euclidean algorithm described above (and by Euclid) can take many subtraction steps to find the GCD when one of the given numbers is much bigger than the other. A more efficient version of the algorithm shortcuts these steps, instead replacing the larger of the two numbers by its remainder when divided by the smaller of the two (with this version, the algorithm stops when reaching a zero remainder). With this improvement, the algorithm never requires more steps than five times the number of digits (base 10) of the smaller integer. This was proven by Gabriel Lam\u00e9 in 1844, and marks the beginning of computational complexity theory. Additional methods for improving the algorithm's efficiency were developed in the 20th century.\nThe Euclidean algorithm has many theoretical and practical applications. It is used for reducing fractions to their simplest form and for performing division in modular arithmetic. Computations using this algorithm form part of the cryptographic protocols that are used to secure internet communications, and in methods for breaking these cryptosystems by factoring large composite numbers. The Euclidean algorithm may be used to solve Diophantine equations, such as finding numbers that satisfy multiple congruences according to the Chinese remainder theorem, to construct continued fractions, and to find accurate rational approximations to real numbers. Finally, it can be used as a basic tool for proving theorems in number theory such as Lagrange's four-square theorem and the uniqueness of prime factorizations. The original algorithm was described only for natural numbers and geometric lengths (real numbers), but the algorithm was generalized in the 19th century to other types of numbers, such as Gaussian integers and polynomials of one variable. This led to modern abstract algebraic notions such as Euclidean domains.\nBackground: greatest common divisor.\nThe Euclidean algorithm calculates the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two natural numbers \"a\" and \"b\". The greatest common divisor \"g\" is the largest natural number that divides both \"a\" and \"b\" without leaving a remainder. Synonyms for the GCD include the \"greatest common factor\" (GCF), the \"highest common factor\" (HCF), the \"highest common divisor\" (HCD), and the \"greatest common measure\" (GCM). The greatest common divisor is often written as gcd(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\") or, more simply, as (\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"), although the latter notation is ambiguous, also used for concepts such as an ideal in the ring of integers, which is closely related to GCD.\nIf gcd(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\")\u00a0=\u00a01, then \"a\" and \"b\" are said to be coprime (or relatively prime). This property does not imply that \"a\" or \"b\" are themselves prime numbers. For example, neither 6 nor 35 is a prime number, since they both have two prime factors: 6\u00a0=\u00a02\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03 and 35\u00a0=\u00a05\u00a0\u00d7\u00a07. Nevertheless, 6 and 35 are coprime. No natural number other than 1 divides both 6 and 35, since they have no prime factors in common.\nLet \"g\" = gcd(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"). Since \"a\" and \"b\" are both multiples of \"g\", they can be written \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"mg\" and \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"ng\", and there is no larger number \"G\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"g\" for which this is true. The natural numbers \"m\" and \"n\" must be coprime, since any common factor could be factored out of \"m\" and \"n\" to make \"g\" greater. Thus, any other number \"c\" that divides both \"a\" and \"b\" must also divide \"g\". The greatest common divisor \"g\" of \"a\" and \"b\" is the unique (positive) common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\" that is divisible by any other common divisor \"c\".\nThe GCD can be visualized as follows. Consider a rectangular area \"a\" by \"b\", and any common divisor \"c\" that divides both \"a\" and \"b\" exactly. The sides of the rectangle can be divided into segments of length \"c\", which divides the rectangle into a grid of squares of side length \"c\". The greatest common divisor \"g\" is the largest value of \"c\" for which this is possible. For illustration, a 24-by-60 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of: 1-by-1 squares, 2-by-2 squares, 3-by-3 squares, 4-by-4 squares, 6-by-6 squares or 12-by-12 squares. Therefore, 12 is the greatest common divisor of 24 and 60. A 24-by-60 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of 12-by-12 squares, with two squares along one edge (24/12\u00a0=\u00a02) and five squares along the other (60/12\u00a0=\u00a05).\nThe GCD of two numbers \"a\" and \"b\" is the product of the prime factors shared by the two numbers, where a same prime factor can be used multiple times, but only as long as the product of these factors divides both \"a\" and \"b\". For example, since 1386 can be factored into 2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u00d7\u00a07\u00a0\u00d7\u00a011, and 3213 can be factored into 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u00d7\u00a07\u00a0\u00d7\u00a017, the greatest common divisor of 1386 and 3213 equals 63\u00a0=\u00a03\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u00d7\u00a07, the product of their shared prime factors. If two numbers have no prime factors in common, their greatest common divisor is 1 (obtained here as an instance of the empty product), in other words they are coprime. A key advantage of the Euclidean algorithm is that it can find the GCD efficiently without having to compute the prime factors. Factorization of large integers is believed to be a computationally very difficult problem, and the security of many widely used cryptographic protocols is based upon its infeasibility.\nAnother definition of the GCD is helpful in advanced mathematics, particularly ring theory. The greatest common divisor \"g\"\u00a0 of two nonzero numbers \"a\" and \"b\" is also their smallest positive integral linear combination, that is, the smallest positive number of the form \"ua\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"vb\" where \"u\" and \"v\" are integers. The set of all integral linear combinations of \"a\" and \"b\" is actually the same as the set of all multiples of \"g\" (\"mg\", where \"m\" is an integer). In modern mathematical language, the ideal generated by \"a\" and \"b\" is the ideal generated by\u00a0\"g\" alone (an ideal generated by a single element is called a principal ideal, and all ideals of the integers are principal ideals). Some properties of the GCD are in fact easier to see with this description, for instance the fact that any common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\" also divides the GCD (it divides both terms of \"ua\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"vb\"). The equivalence of this GCD definition with the other definitions is described below.\nThe GCD of three or more numbers equals the product of the prime factors common to all the numbers, but it can also be calculated by repeatedly taking the GCDs of pairs of numbers. For example,\nThus, Euclid's algorithm, which computes the GCD of two integers, suffices to calculate the GCD of arbitrarily many integers.\nDescription.\nProcedure.\nThe Euclidean algorithm proceeds in a series of steps such that the output of each step is used as an input for the next one. Let \"k\" be an integer that counts the steps of the algorithm, starting with zero. Thus, the initial step corresponds to \"k\"\u00a0=\u00a00, the next step corresponds to \"k\"\u00a0=\u00a01, and so on.\nEach step begins with two nonnegative remainders \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22122. Since the algorithm ensures that the remainders decrease steadily with every step, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 is less than its predecessor \"r\"\"k\"\u22122. The goal of the \"k\"th step is to find a quotient \"q\"\"k\" and remainder \"r\"\"k\" that satisfy the equation\nand that have 0 \u2264 \"r\"\"k\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\"r\"\"k\"\u22121. In other words, multiples of the smaller number \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 are subtracted from the larger number \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 until the remainder \"r\"\"k\" is smaller than \"r\"\"k\"\u22121.\nIn the initial step (\"k\"\u00a0=\u00a00), the remainders \"r\"\u22122 and \"r\"\u22121 equal \"a\" and \"b\", the numbers for which the GCD is sought. In the next step (\"k\"\u00a0=\u00a01), the remainders equal \"b\" and the remainder \"r\"0 of the initial step, and so on. Thus, the algorithm can be written as a sequence of equations\nIf \"a\" is smaller than \"b\", the first step of the algorithm swaps the numbers. For example, if \"a\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\"b\", the initial quotient \"q\"0 equals zero, and the remainder \"r\"0 is \"a\". Thus, \"r\"\"k\" is smaller than its predecessor \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 for all \"k\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a00.\nSince the remainders decrease with every step but can never be negative, a remainder \"r\"\"N\" must eventually equal zero, at which point the algorithm stops. The final nonzero remainder \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 is the greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\". The number \"N\" cannot be infinite because there are only a finite number of nonnegative integers between the initial remainder \"r\"0 and zero.\nProof of validity.\nThe validity of the Euclidean algorithm can be proven by a two-step argument. In the first step, the final nonzero remainder \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 is shown to divide both \"a\" and \"b\". Since it is a common divisor, it must be less than or equal to the greatest common divisor \"g\". In the second step, it is shown that any common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\", including \"g\", must divide \"r\"\"N\"\u22121; therefore, \"g\" must be less than or equal to \"r\"\"N\"\u22121. These two conclusions are inconsistent unless \"r\"\"N\"\u22121\u00a0=\u00a0\"g\".\nTo demonstrate that \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 divides both \"a\" and \"b\" (the first step), \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 divides its predecessor \"r\"\"N\"\u22122\nsince the final remainder \"r\"\"N\" is zero. \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 also divides its next predecessor \"r\"\"N\"\u22123\nbecause it divides both terms on the right-hand side of the equation. Iterating the same argument, \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 divides all the preceding remainders, including \"a\" and \"b\". None of the preceding remainders \"r\"\"N\"\u22122, \"r\"\"N\"\u22123, etc. divide \"a\" and \"b\", since they leave a remainder. Since \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 is a common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\", \"r\"\"N\"\u22121\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"g\".\nIn the second step, any natural number \"c\" that divides both \"a\" and \"b\" (in other words, any common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\") divides the remainders \"r\"\"k\". By definition, \"a\" and \"b\" can be written as multiples of \"c\" : \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"mc\" and \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"nc\", where \"m\" and \"n\" are natural numbers. Therefore, \"c\" divides the initial remainder \"r\"0, since \"r\"0\u00a0=\u00a0\"a\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"q\"0\"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"mc\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"q\"0\"nc\"\u00a0=\u00a0(\"m\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"q\"0\"n\")\"c\". An analogous argument shows that \"c\" also divides the subsequent remainders \"r\"1, \"r\"2, etc. Therefore, the greatest common divisor \"g\" must divide \"r\"\"N\"\u22121, which implies that \"g\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"r\"\"N\"\u22121. Since the first part of the argument showed the reverse (\"r\"\"N\"\u22121\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"g\"), it follows that \"g\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"r\"\"N\"\u22121. Thus, \"g\" is the greatest common divisor of all the succeeding pairs:\nWorked example.\nFor illustration, the Euclidean algorithm can be used to find the greatest common divisor of \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a01071 and \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0462. To begin, multiples of 462 are subtracted from 1071 until the remainder is less than 462. Two such multiples can be subtracted (\"q\"0\u00a0=\u00a02), leaving a remainder of 147:\nThen multiples of 147 are subtracted from 462 until the remainder is less than 147. Three multiples can be subtracted (\"q\"1\u00a0=\u00a03), leaving a remainder of 21:\nThen multiples of 21 are subtracted from 147 until the remainder is less than 21. Seven multiples can be subtracted (\"q\"2\u00a0=\u00a07), leaving no remainder:\nSince the last remainder is zero, the algorithm ends with 21 as the greatest common divisor of 1071 and 462. This agrees with the gcd(1071, 462) found by prime factorization . In tabular form, the steps are:\nVisualization.\nThe Euclidean algorithm can be visualized in terms of the tiling analogy given above for the greatest common divisor. Assume that we wish to cover an \"a\"-by-\"b\" rectangle with square tiles exactly, where \"a\" is the larger of the two numbers. We first attempt to tile the rectangle using \"b\"-by-\"b\" square tiles; however, this leaves an \"r\"0-by-\"b\" residual rectangle untiled, where \"r\"0\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\"b\". We then attempt to tile the residual rectangle with \"r\"0-by-\"r\"0 square tiles. This leaves a second residual rectangle \"r\"1-by-\"r\"0, which we attempt to tile using \"r\"1-by-\"r\"1 square tiles, and so on. The sequence ends when there is no residual rectangle, i.e., when the square tiles cover the previous residual rectangle exactly. The length of the sides of the smallest square tile is the GCD of the dimensions of the original rectangle. For example, the smallest square tile in the adjacent figure is 21-by-21 (shown in red), and 21 is the GCD of 1071 and 462, the dimensions of the original rectangle (shown in green).\nEuclidean division.\nAt every step \"k\", the Euclidean algorithm computes a quotient \"q\"\"k\" and remainder \"r\"\"k\" from two numbers \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22122\nwhere the \"r\"\"k\" is non-negative and is strictly less than the absolute value of \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. The theorem which underlies the definition of the Euclidean division ensures that such a quotient and remainder always exist and are unique.\nIn Euclid's original version of the algorithm, the quotient and remainder are found by repeated subtraction; that is, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 is subtracted from \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 repeatedly until the remainder \"r\"\"k\" is smaller than \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. After that \"r\"\"k\" and \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 are exchanged and the process is iterated. Euclidean division reduces all the steps between two exchanges into a single step, which is thus more efficient. Moreover, the quotients are not needed, thus one may replace Euclidean division by the modulo operation, which gives only the remainder. Thus the iteration of the Euclidean algorithm becomes simply\nImplementations.\nImplementations of the algorithm may be expressed in pseudocode. For example, the division-based version may be programmed as\n function gcd(a, b)\n while b \u2260 0\n t := b\n b := a mod b\n a := t\n return a\nAt the beginning of the \"k\"th iteration, the variable \"b\" holds the latest remainder \"r\"\"k\"\u22121, whereas the variable \"a\" holds its predecessor, \"r\"\"k\"\u22122. The step \"b\" := \"a\" mod \"b\" is equivalent to the above recursion formula \"r\"\"k\" \u2261 \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 mod \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. The temporary variable \"t\" holds the value of \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 while the next remainder \"r\"\"k\" is being calculated. At the end of the loop iteration, the variable \"b\" holds the remainder \"r\"\"k\", whereas the variable \"a\" holds its predecessor, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121.\nIn the subtraction-based version which was Euclid's original version, the remainder calculation (codice_1) is replaced by repeated subtraction. Contrary to the division-based version, which works with arbitrary integers as input, the subtraction-based version supposes that the input consists of positive integers and stops when \"a\" = \"b\":\n function gcd(a, b)\n while a \u2260 b \n if a &gt; b\n a := a \u2212 b\n else\n b := b \u2212 a\n return a\nThe variables \"a\" and \"b\" alternate holding the previous remainders \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22122. Assume that \"a\" is larger than \"b\" at the beginning of an iteration; then \"a\" equals \"r\"\"k\"\u22122, since \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 &gt; \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. During the loop iteration, \"a\" is reduced by multiples of the previous remainder \"b\" until \"a\" is smaller than \"b\". Then \"a\" is the next remainder \"r\"\"k\". Then \"b\" is reduced by multiples of \"a\" until it is again smaller than \"a\", giving the next remainder \"r\"\"k\"+1, and so on.\nThe recursive version is based on the equality of the GCDs of successive remainders and the stopping condition gcd(\"r\"\"N\"\u22121,\u00a00)\u00a0=\u00a0\"r\"\"N\"\u22121.\n function gcd(a, b)\n if b = 0\n return a\n else\n return gcd(b, a mod b)\nFor illustration, the gcd(1071,\u00a0462) is calculated from the equivalent gcd(462,\u00a01071\u00a0mod\u00a0462)\u00a0=\u00a0gcd(462,\u00a0147). The latter GCD is calculated from the gcd(147,\u00a0462\u00a0mod\u00a0147)\u00a0=\u00a0gcd(147,\u00a021), which in turn is calculated from the gcd(21,\u00a0147\u00a0mod\u00a021)\u00a0=\u00a0gcd(21,\u00a00)\u00a0=\u00a021.\nMethod of least absolute remainders.\nIn another version of Euclid's algorithm, the quotient at each step is increased by one if the resulting negative remainder is smaller in magnitude than the typical positive remainder. Previously, the equation\nassumed that . However, an alternative negative remainder can be computed:\nif or\nif .\nIf is replaced by when , then one gets a variant of Euclidean algorithm such that\nat each step.\nLeopold Kronecker has shown that this version requires the fewest steps of any version of Euclid's algorithm. More generally, it has been proven that, for every input numbers \"a\" and \"b\", the number of steps is minimal if and only if is chosen in order that formula_3 where formula_4 is the golden ratio.\nHistorical development.\nThe Euclidean algorithm is one of the oldest algorithms in common use. It appears in Euclid's \"Elements\" (c.\u00a0300\u00a0BC), specifically in Book\u00a07 (Propositions 1\u20132) and Book\u00a010 (Propositions 2\u20133). In Book\u00a07, the algorithm is formulated for integers, whereas in Book\u00a010, it is formulated for lengths of line segments. (In modern usage, one would say it was formulated there for real numbers. But lengths, areas, and volumes, represented as real numbers in modern usage, are not measured in the same units and there is no natural unit of length, area, or volume; the concept of real numbers was unknown at that time.) The latter algorithm is geometrical. The GCD of two lengths \"a\" and \"b\" corresponds to the greatest length \"g\" that measures \"a\" and \"b\" evenly; in other words, the lengths \"a\" and \"b\" are both integer multiples of the length \"g\".\nThe algorithm was probably not discovered by Euclid, who compiled results from earlier mathematicians in his \"Elements\". The mathematician and historian B. L. van der Waerden suggests that Book VII derives from a textbook on number theory written by mathematicians in the school of Pythagoras. The algorithm was probably known by Eudoxus of Cnidus (about 375 BC). The algorithm may even pre-date Eudoxus, judging from the use of the technical term \u1f00\u03bd\u03b8\u03c5\u03c6\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b5\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (\"anthyphairesis\", reciprocal subtraction) in works by Euclid and Aristotle.\nCenturies later, Euclid's algorithm was discovered independently both in India and in China, primarily to solve Diophantine equations that arose in astronomy and making accurate calendars. In the late 5th century, the Indian mathematician and astronomer Aryabhata described the algorithm as the \"pulverizer\", perhaps because of its effectiveness in solving Diophantine equations. Although a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem had already been described in the Chinese book \"Sunzi Suanjing\", the general solution was published by Qin Jiushao in his 1247 book \"Shushu Jiuzhang\" (\u6578\u66f8\u4e5d\u7ae0 \"Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections\"). The Euclidean algorithm was first described \"numerically\" and popularized in Europe in the second edition of Bachet's \"Probl\u00e8mes plaisants et d\u00e9lectables\" (\"Pleasant and enjoyable problems\", 1624). In Europe, it was likewise used to solve Diophantine equations and in developing continued fractions. The extended Euclidean algorithm was published by the English mathematician Nicholas Saunderson, who attributed it to Roger Cotes as a method for computing continued fractions efficiently.\nIn the 19th century, the Euclidean algorithm led to the development of new number systems, such as Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers. In 1815, Carl Gauss used the Euclidean algorithm to demonstrate unique factorization of Gaussian integers, although his work was first published in 1832. Gauss mentioned the algorithm in his \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" (published 1801), but only as a method for continued fractions. Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet seems to have been the first to describe the Euclidean algorithm as the basis for much of number theory. Lejeune Dirichlet noted that many results of number theory, such as unique factorization, would hold true for any other system of numbers to which the Euclidean algorithm could be applied. Lejeune Dirichlet's lectures on number theory were edited and extended by Richard Dedekind, who used Euclid's algorithm to study algebraic integers, a new general type of number. For example, Dedekind was the first to prove Fermat's two-square theorem using the unique factorization of Gaussian integers. Dedekind also defined the concept of a Euclidean domain, a number system in which a generalized version of the Euclidean algorithm can be defined (as described below). In the closing decades of the 19th century, the Euclidean algorithm gradually became eclipsed by Dedekind's more general theory of ideals.\nOther applications of Euclid's algorithm were developed in the 19th century. In 1829, Charles Sturm showed that the algorithm was useful in the Sturm chain method for counting the real roots of polynomials in any given interval.\nThe Euclidean algorithm was the first integer relation algorithm, which is a method for finding integer relations between commensurate real numbers. Several novel integer relation algorithms have been developed, such as the algorithm of Helaman Ferguson and R.W. Forcade (1979) and the LLL algorithm.\nIn 1969, Cole and Davie developed a two-player game based on the Euclidean algorithm, called \"The Game of Euclid\", which has an optimal strategy. The players begin with two piles of \"a\" and \"b\" stones. The players take turns removing \"m\" multiples of the smaller pile from the larger. Thus, if the two piles consist of \"x\" and \"y\" stones, where \"x\" is larger than \"y\", the next player can reduce the larger pile from \"x\" stones to \"x\" \u2212 \"my\" stones, as long as the latter is a nonnegative integer. The winner is the first player to reduce one pile to zero stones.\nMathematical applications.\nB\u00e9zout's identity.\nB\u00e9zout's identity states that the greatest common divisor \"g\" of two integers \"a\" and \"b\" can be represented as a linear sum of the original two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". In other words, it is always possible to find integers \"s\" and \"t\" such that \"g\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"sa\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"tb\".\nThe integers \"s\" and \"t\" can be calculated from the quotients \"q\"0, \"q\"1, etc. by reversing the order of equations in Euclid's algorithm. Beginning with the next-to-last equation, \"g\" can be expressed in terms of the quotient \"q\"\"N\"\u22121 and the two preceding remainders, \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"N\"\u22123:\nThose two remainders can be likewise expressed in terms of their quotients and preceding remainders,\nSubstituting these formulae for \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"N\"\u22123 into the first equation yields \"g\" as a linear sum of the remainders \"r\"\"N\"\u22124 and \"r\"\"N\"\u22125. The process of substituting remainders by formulae involving their predecessors can be continued until the original numbers \"a\" and \"b\" are reached:\nAfter all the remainders \"r\"0, \"r\"1, etc. have been substituted, the final equation expresses \"g\" as a linear sum of \"a\" and \"b\": \"g\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"sa\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"tb\". B\u00e9zout's identity, and therefore the previous algorithm, can both be generalized to the context of Euclidean domains.\nPrincipal ideals and related problems.\nB\u00e9zout's identity provides yet another definition of the greatest common divisor \"g\" of two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". Consider the set of all numbers \"ua\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"vb\", where \"u\" and \"v\" are any two integers. Since \"a\" and \"b\" are both divisible by \"g\", every number in the set is divisible by \"g\". In other words, every number of the set is an integer multiple of \"g\". This is true for every common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\". However, unlike other common divisors, the greatest common divisor is a member of the set; by B\u00e9zout's identity, choosing \"u\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"s\" and \"v\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"t\" gives \"g\". A smaller common divisor cannot be a member of the set, since every member of the set must be divisible by \"g\". Conversely, any multiple \"m\" of \"g\" can be obtained by choosing \"u\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"ms\" and \"v\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"mt\", where \"s\" and \"t\" are the integers of B\u00e9zout's identity. This may be seen by multiplying B\u00e9zout's identity by \"m\",\nTherefore, the set of all numbers \"ua\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"vb\" is equivalent to the set of multiples \"m\" of \"g\". In other words, the set of all possible sums of integer multiples of two numbers (\"a\" and \"b\") is equivalent to the set of multiples of gcd(\"a\", \"b\"). The GCD is said to be the generator of the ideal of \"a\" and \"b\". This GCD definition led to the modern abstract algebraic concepts of a principal ideal (an ideal generated by a single element) and a principal ideal domain (a domain in which every ideal is a principal ideal).\nCertain problems can be solved using this result. For example, consider two measuring cups of volume \"a\" and \"b\". By adding/subtracting \"u\" multiples of the first cup and \"v\" multiples of the second cup, any volume \"ua\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"vb\" can be measured out. These volumes are all multiples of \"g\"\u00a0=\u00a0gcd(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\").\nExtended Euclidean algorithm.\nThe integers \"s\" and \"t\" of B\u00e9zout's identity can be computed efficiently using the extended Euclidean algorithm. This extension adds two recursive equations to Euclid's algorithm\nwith the starting values\nUsing this recursion, B\u00e9zout's integers \"s\" and \"t\" are given by \"s\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"s\"\"N\" and \"t\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"t\"\"N\", where \"N+1\" is the step on which the algorithm terminates with \"r\"\"N+1\"\u00a0=\u00a00.\nThe validity of this approach can be shown by induction. Assume that the recursion formula is correct up to step \"k\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 of the algorithm; in other words, assume that\nfor all \"j\" less than \"k\". The \"k\"th step of the algorithm gives the equation\nSince the recursion formula has been assumed to be correct for \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22121, they may be expressed in terms of the corresponding \"s\" and \"t\" variables\nRearranging this equation yields the recursion formula for step \"k\", as required\nMatrix method.\nThe integers \"s\" and \"t\" can also be found using an equivalent matrix method. The sequence of equations of Euclid's algorithm\ncan be written as a product of 2-by-2 quotient matrices multiplying a two-dimensional remainder vector\nLet M represent the product of all the quotient matrices\nThis simplifies the Euclidean algorithm to the form\nTo express \"g\" as a linear sum of \"a\" and \"b\", both sides of this equation can be multiplied by the inverse of the matrix M. The determinant of M equals (\u22121)\"N\"+1, since it equals the product of the determinants of the quotient matrices, each of which is negative one. Since the determinant of M is never zero, the vector of the final remainders can be solved using the inverse of M\nSince the top equation gives\nthe two integers of B\u00e9zout's identity are \"s\"\u00a0=\u00a0(\u22121)\"N\"+1\"m\"22 and \"t\"\u00a0=\u00a0(\u22121)\"N\"\"m\"12. The matrix method is as efficient as the equivalent recursion, with two multiplications and two additions per step of the Euclidean algorithm.\nEuclid's lemma and unique factorization.\nB\u00e9zout's identity is essential to many applications of Euclid's algorithm, such as demonstrating the unique factorization of numbers into prime factors. To illustrate this, suppose that a number \"L\" can be written as a product of two factors \"u\" and \"v\", that is, \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"uv\". If another number \"w\" also divides \"L\" but is coprime with \"u\", then \"w\" must divide \"v\", by the following argument: If the greatest common divisor of \"u\" and \"w\" is 1, then integers \"s\" and \"t\" can be found such that\nby B\u00e9zout's identity. Multiplying both sides by \"v\" gives the relation\nSince \"w\" divides both terms on the right-hand side, it must also divide the left-hand side, \"v\". This result is known as Euclid's lemma. Specifically, if a prime number divides \"L\", then it must divide at least one factor of \"L\". Conversely, if a number \"w\" is coprime to each of a series of numbers \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., \"a\"\"n\", then \"w\" is also coprime to their product, \"a\"1\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\"a\"2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0...\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\"a\"\"n\".\nEuclid's lemma suffices to prove that every number has a unique factorization into prime numbers. To see this, assume the contrary, that there are two independent factorizations of \"L\" into \"m\" and \"n\" prime factors, respectively\nSince each prime \"p\" divides \"L\" by assumption, it must also divide one of the \"q\" factors; since each \"q\" is prime as well, it must be that \"p\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"q\". Iteratively dividing by the \"p\" factors shows that each \"p\" has an equal counterpart \"q\"; the two prime factorizations are identical except for their order. The unique factorization of numbers into primes has many applications in mathematical proofs, as shown below.\nLinear Diophantine equations.\nDiophantine equations are equations in which the solutions are restricted to integers; they are named after the 3rd-century Alexandrian mathematician Diophantus. A typical \"linear\" Diophantine equation seeks integers \"x\" and \"y\" such that\nwhere \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" are given integers. This can be written as an equation for \"x\" in modular arithmetic:\nLet \"g\" be the greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\". Both terms in \"ax\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"by\" are divisible by \"g\"; therefore, \"c\" must also be divisible by \"g\", or the equation has no solutions. By dividing both sides by \"c\"/\"g\", the equation can be reduced to Bezout's identity\nwhere \"s\" and \"t\" can be found by the extended Euclidean algorithm. This provides one solution to the Diophantine equation, \"x\"1\u00a0=\u00a0\"s\" (\"c\"/\"g\") and \"y\"1\u00a0=\u00a0\"t\" (\"c\"/\"g\").\nIn general, a linear Diophantine equation has no solutions, or an infinite number of solutions. To find the latter, consider two solutions, (\"x\"1,\u00a0\"y\"1) and (\"x\"2,\u00a0\"y\"2), where\nor equivalently\nTherefore, the smallest difference between two \"x\" solutions is \"b\"/\"g\", whereas the smallest difference between two \"y\" solutions is \"a\"/\"g\". Thus, the solutions may be expressed as\nBy allowing \"u\" to vary over all possible integers, an infinite family of solutions can be generated from a single solution (\"x\"1,\u00a0\"y\"1). If the solutions are required to be \"positive\" integers (\"x\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00,\u00a0\"y\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00), only a finite number of solutions may be possible. This restriction on the acceptable solutions allows some systems of Diophantine equations with more unknowns than equations to have a finite number of solutions; this is impossible for a system of linear equations when the solutions can be any real number (see Underdetermined system).\nMultiplicative inverses and the RSA algorithm.\nA finite field is a set of numbers with four generalized operations. The operations are called addition, subtraction, multiplication and division and have their usual properties, such as commutativity, associativity and distributivity. An example of a finite field is the set of 13 numbers {0,\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a0...,\u00a012} using modular arithmetic. In this field, the results of any mathematical operation (addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division) is reduced modulo 13; that is, multiples of 13 are added or subtracted until the result is brought within the range 0\u201312. For example, the result of 5\u00a0\u00d7\u00a07\u00a0=\u00a035\u00a0mod\u00a013\u00a0=\u00a09. Such finite fields can be defined for any prime \"p\"; using more sophisticated definitions, they can also be defined for any power \"m\" of a prime \"p\"\u00a0\"m\". Finite fields are often called Galois fields, and are abbreviated as GF(\"p\") or GF(\"p\"\u00a0\"m\").\nIn such a field with \"m\" numbers, every nonzero element \"a\" has a unique modular multiplicative inverse, \"a\"\u22121 such that This inverse can be found by solving the congruence equation \"ax\"\u00a0\u2261\u00a01\u00a0mod\u00a0\"m\", or the equivalent linear Diophantine equation\nThis equation can be solved by the Euclidean algorithm, as described above. Finding multiplicative inverses is an essential step in the RSA algorithm, which is widely used in electronic commerce; specifically, the equation determines the integer used to decrypt the message. Although the RSA algorithm uses rings rather than fields, the Euclidean algorithm can still be used to find a multiplicative inverse where one exists. The Euclidean algorithm also has other applications in error-correcting codes; for example, it can be used as an alternative to the Berlekamp\u2013Massey algorithm for decoding BCH and Reed\u2013Solomon codes, which are based on Galois fields.\nChinese remainder theorem.\nEuclid's algorithm can also be used to solve multiple linear Diophantine equations. Such equations arise in the Chinese remainder theorem, which describes a novel method to represent an integer \"x\". Instead of representing an integer by its digits, it may be represented by its remainders \"x\"\"i\" modulo a set of \"N\" coprime numbers \"m\"\"i\":\nThe goal is to determine \"x\" from its \"N\" remainders \"x\"\"i\". The solution is to combine the multiple equations into a single linear Diophantine equation with a much larger modulus \"M\" that is the product of all the individual moduli \"m\"\"i\", and define \"M\"\"i\" as\nThus, each \"M\"\"i\" is the product of all the moduli \"except\" \"m\"\"i\". The solution depends on finding \"N\" new numbers \"h\"\"i\" such that\nWith these numbers \"h\"\"i\", any integer \"x\" can be reconstructed from its remainders \"x\"\"i\" by the equation\nSince these numbers \"h\"\"i\" are the multiplicative inverses of the \"M\"\"i\", they may be found using Euclid's algorithm as described in the previous subsection.\nStern\u2013Brocot tree.\nThe Euclidean algorithm can be used to arrange the set of all positive rational numbers into an infinite binary search tree, called the Stern\u2013Brocot tree.\nThe number 1 (expressed as a fraction 1/1) is placed at the root of the tree, and the location of any other number \"a\"/\"b\" can be found by computing gcd(\"a\",\"b\") using the original form of the Euclidean algorithm, in which each step replaces the larger of the two given numbers by its difference with the smaller number (not its remainder), stopping when two equal numbers are reached. A step of the Euclidean algorithm that replaces the first of the two numbers corresponds to a step in the tree from a node to its right child, and a step that replaces the second of the two numbers corresponds to a step in the tree from a node to its left child. The sequence of steps constructed in this way does not depend on whether \"a\"/\"b\" is given in lowest terms, and forms a path from the root to a node containing the number \"a\"/\"b\". This fact can be used to prove that each positive rational number appears exactly once in this tree.\nFor example, 3/4 can be found by starting at the root, going to the left once, then to the right twice:\nThe Euclidean algorithm has almost the same relationship to another binary tree on the rational numbers called the Calkin\u2013Wilf tree. The difference is that the path is reversed: instead of producing a path from the root of the tree to a target, it produces a path from the target to the root.\nContinued fractions.\nThe Euclidean algorithm has a close relationship with continued fractions. The sequence of equations can be written in the form\nThe last term on the right-hand side always equals the inverse of the left-hand side of the next equation. Thus, the first two equations may be combined to form\nThe third equation may be used to substitute the denominator term \"r\"1/\"r\"0, yielding\nThe final ratio of remainders \"r\"\"k\"/\"r\"\"k\"\u22121 can always be replaced using the next equation in the series, up to the final equation. The result is a continued fraction\nIn the worked example above, the gcd(1071, 462) was calculated, and the quotients \"q\"\"k\" were 2, 3 and 7, respectively. Therefore, the fraction 1071/462 may be written\nas can be confirmed by calculation.\nFactorization algorithms.\nCalculating a greatest common divisor is an essential step in several integer factorization algorithms, such as Pollard's rho algorithm, Shor's algorithm, Dixon's factorization method and the Lenstra elliptic curve factorization. The Euclidean algorithm may be used to find this GCD efficiently. Continued fraction factorization uses continued fractions, which are determined using Euclid's algorithm.\nAlgorithmic efficiency.\nThe computational efficiency of Euclid's algorithm has been studied thoroughly. This efficiency can be described by the number of division steps the algorithm requires, multiplied by the computational expense of each step. The first known analysis of Euclid's algorithm is due to A. A. L. Reynaud in 1811, who showed that the number of division steps on input (\"u\", \"v\") is bounded by \"v\"; later he improved this to \"v\"/2 \u00a0+\u00a02. Later, in 1841, P. J. E. Finck showed that the number of division steps is at most 2\u00a0log2\u00a0\"v\"\u00a0+\u00a01, and hence Euclid's algorithm runs in time polynomial in the size of the input. \u00c9mile L\u00e9ger, in 1837, studied the worst case, which is when the inputs are consecutive Fibonacci numbers. Finck's analysis was refined by Gabriel Lam\u00e9 in 1844, who showed that the number of steps required for completion is never more than five times the number \"h\" of base-10 digits of the smaller number\u00a0\"b\".\nIn the uniform cost model (suitable for analyzing the complexity of gcd calculation on numbers that fit into a single machine word), each step of the algorithm takes constant time, and Lam\u00e9's analysis implies that the total running time is also \"O\"(\"h\"). However, in a model of computation suitable for computation with larger numbers, the computational expense of a single remainder computation in the algorithm can be as large as \"O\"(\"h\"2). In this case the total time for all of the steps of the algorithm can be analyzed using a telescoping series, showing that it is also \"O\"(\"h\"2). Modern algorithmic techniques based on the Sch\u00f6nhage\u2013Strassen algorithm for fast integer multiplication can be used to speed this up, leading to quasilinear algorithms for the GCD.\nNumber of steps.\nThe number of steps to calculate the GCD of two natural numbers, \"a\" and \"b\", may be denoted by \"T\"(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"). If \"g\" is the GCD of \"a\" and \"b\", then \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"mg\" and \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"ng\" for two coprime numbers \"m\" and \"n\". Then\nas may be seen by dividing all the steps in the Euclidean algorithm by \"g\". By the same argument, the number of steps remains the same if \"a\" and \"b\" are multiplied by a common factor \"w\": \"T\"(\"a\", \"b\") = \"T\"(\"wa\", \"wb\"). Therefore, the number of steps \"T\" may vary dramatically between neighboring pairs of numbers, such as T(\"a\", \"b\") and T(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a01), depending on the size of the two GCDs.\nThe recursive nature of the Euclidean algorithm gives another equation\nwhere \"T\"(\"x\", 0)\u00a0=\u00a00 by assumption.\nWorst-case.\nIf the Euclidean algorithm requires \"N\" steps for a pair of natural numbers \"a\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00, the smallest values of \"a\" and \"b\" for which this is true are the Fibonacci numbers \"F\"\"N\"+2 and \"F\"\"N\"+1, respectively. More precisely, if the Euclidean algorithm requires \"N\" steps for the pair \"a\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"b\", then one has \"a\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"N\"+2 and \"b\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"N\"+1. This can be shown by induction. If \"N\"\u00a0=\u00a01, \"b\" divides \"a\" with no remainder; the smallest natural numbers for which this is true is \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a01 and \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a02, which are \"F\"2 and \"F\"3, respectively. Now assume that the result holds for all values of \"N\" up to \"M\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01. The first step of the \"M\"-step algorithm is \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"q\"0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"r\"0, and the Euclidean algorithm requires \"M\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 steps for the pair \"b\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"r\"0. By induction hypothesis, one has \"b\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"+1 and \"r\"0\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"M\". Therefore, \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"q\"0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"r\"0\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"r\"0\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"+1\u00a0+\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"+2,\nwhich is the desired inequality.\nThis proof, published by Gabriel Lam\u00e9 in 1844, represents the beginning of computational complexity theory, and also the first practical application of the Fibonacci numbers.\nThis result suffices to show that the number of steps in Euclid's algorithm can never be more than five times the number of its digits (base 10). For if the algorithm requires \"N\" steps, then \"b\" is greater than or equal to \"F\"\"N\"+1 which in turn is greater than or equal to \"\u03c6\"\"N\"\u22121, where \"\u03c6\" is the golden ratio. Since \"b\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"\u03c6\"\"N\"\u22121, then \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\u00a0\u2264\u00a0log\"\u03c6\"\"b\". Since log10\"\u03c6\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01/5, (\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)/5\u00a0&lt;\u00a0log10\"\u03c6\"\u00a0log\"\u03c6\"\"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0log10\"b\". Thus, \"N\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a05\u00a0log10\"b\". Thus, the Euclidean algorithm always needs less than \"O\"(\"h\") divisions, where \"h\" is the number of digits in the smaller number \"b\".\nAverage.\nThe average number of steps taken by the Euclidean algorithm has been defined in three different ways. The first definition is the average time \"T\"(\"a\") required to calculate the GCD of a given number \"a\" and a smaller natural number \"b\" chosen with equal probability from the integers 0 to \"a\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\nwith the residual error being of order \"a\"\u2212(1/6) + \"\u03b5\", where \"\u03b5\" is infinitesimal. The constant \"C\" (\"Porter's Constant\") in this formula equals\nwhere \"\u03b3\" is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant and \u03b6' is the derivative of the Riemann zeta function. The leading coefficient (12/\u03c02) ln 2 was determined by two independent methods.\nSince the first average can be calculated from the tau average by summing over the divisors \"d\" of\u00a0\"a\"\nit can be approximated by the formula\nwhere \u039b(\"d\") is the Mangoldt function.\nA third average \"Y\"(\"n\") is defined as the mean number of steps required when both \"a\" and \"b\" are chosen randomly (with uniform distribution) from 1 to \"n\"\nSubstituting the approximate formula for \"T\"(\"a\") into this equation yields an estimate for \"Y\"(\"n\")\nComputational expense per step.\nIn each step \"k\" of the Euclidean algorithm, the quotient \"q\"\"k\" and remainder \"r\"\"k\" are computed for a given pair of integers \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22121\nThe computational expense per step is associated chiefly with finding \"q\"\"k\", since the remainder \"r\"\"k\" can be calculated quickly from \"r\"\"k\"\u22122, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121, and \"q\"\"k\"\nThe computational expense of dividing \"h\"-bit numbers scales as \"O\"(\"h\"(\"\u2113\"+1)), where \"\u2113\" is the length of the quotient.\nFor comparison, Euclid's original subtraction-based algorithm can be much slower. A single integer division is equivalent to the quotient \"q\" number of subtractions. If the ratio of \"a\" and \"b\" is very large, the quotient is large and many subtractions will be required. On the other hand, it has been shown that the quotients are very likely to be small integers. The probability of a given quotient \"q\" is approximately ln|\"u\"/(\"u\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)| where \"u\"\u00a0=\u00a0(\"q\"\u00a0+\u00a01)2. For illustration, the probability of a quotient of 1, 2, 3, or 4 is roughly 41.5%, 17.0%, 9.3%, and 5.9%, respectively. Since the operation of subtraction is faster than division, particularly for large numbers, the subtraction-based Euclid's algorithm is competitive with the division-based version. This is exploited in the binary version of Euclid's algorithm.\nCombining the estimated number of steps with the estimated computational expense per step shows that the Euclid's algorithm grows quadratically (\"h\"2) with the average number of digits \"h\" in the initial two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". Let \"h\"0, \"h\"1, ..., \"h\"\"N\"\u22121 represent the number of digits in the successive remainders \"r\"0,\u00a0\"r\"1,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"r\"\"N\"\u22121. Since the number of steps \"N\" grows linearly with \"h\", the running time is bounded by\nAlternative methods.\nEuclid's algorithm is widely used in practice, especially for small numbers, due to its simplicity. For comparison, the efficiency of alternatives to Euclid's algorithm may be determined.\nOne inefficient approach to finding the GCD of two natural numbers \"a\" and \"b\" is to calculate all their common divisors; the GCD is then the largest common divisor. The common divisors can be found by dividing both numbers by successive integers from 2 to the smaller number \"b\". The number of steps of this approach grows linearly with \"b\", or exponentially in the number of digits. Another inefficient approach is to find the prime factors of one or both numbers. As noted above, the GCD equals the product of the prime factors shared by the two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". Present methods for prime factorization are also inefficient; many modern cryptography systems even rely on that inefficiency.\nThe binary GCD algorithm is an efficient alternative that substitutes division with faster operations by exploiting the binary representation used by computers. However, this alternative also scales like \"O\"(\"h\"\u00b2). It is generally faster than the Euclidean algorithm on real computers, even though it scales in the same way. Additional efficiency can be gleaned by examining only the leading digits of the two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". The binary algorithm can be extended to other bases (\"k\"-ary algorithms), with up to fivefold increases in speed. Lehmer's GCD algorithm uses the same general principle as the binary algorithm to speed up GCD computations in arbitrary bases.\nA recursive approach for very large integers (with more than 25,000 digits) leads to quasilinear integer GCD algorithms, such as those of Sch\u00f6nhage, and Stehl\u00e9 and Zimmermann. These algorithms exploit the 2\u00d72 matrix form of the Euclidean algorithm given above. These quasilinear methods generally scale as \nGeneralizations.\nAlthough the Euclidean algorithm is used to find the greatest common divisor of two natural numbers (positive integers), it may be generalized to the real numbers, and to other mathematical objects, such as polynomials, quadratic integers and Hurwitz quaternions. In the latter cases, the Euclidean algorithm is used to demonstrate the crucial property of unique factorization, i.e., that such numbers can be factored uniquely into irreducible elements, the counterparts of prime numbers. Unique factorization is essential to many proofs of number theory.\nRational and real numbers.\nEuclid's algorithm can be applied to real numbers, as described by Euclid in Book 10 of his \"Elements\". The goal of the algorithm is to identify a real number such that two given real numbers, and , are integer multiples of it: and , where and are integers. This identification is equivalent to finding an integer relation among the real numbers and ; that is, it determines integers and such that . Euclid uses this algorithm to treat the question of incommensurable lengths.\nThe real-number Euclidean algorithm differs from its integer counterpart in two respects. First, the remainders are real numbers, although the quotients are integers as before. Second, the algorithm is not guaranteed to end in a finite number of steps. If it does, the fraction is a rational number, i.e., the ratio of two integers\nand can be written as a finite continued fraction . If the algorithm does not stop, the fraction is an irrational number and can be described by an infinite continued fraction . Examples of infinite continued fractions are the golden ratio and the square root of two, . The algorithm is unlikely to stop, since almost all ratios of two real numbers are irrational.\nAn infinite continued fraction may be truncated at a step to yield an approximation to that improves as is increased. The approximation is described by convergents ; the numerator and denominators are coprime and obey the recurrence relation\nwhere and are the initial values of the recursion. The convergent is the best rational number approximation to with denominator :\nPolynomials.\nPolynomials in a single variable \"x\" can be added, multiplied and factored into irreducible polynomials, which are the analogs of the prime numbers for integers. The greatest common divisor polynomial of two polynomials and is defined as the product of their shared irreducible polynomials, which can be identified using the Euclidean algorithm. The basic procedure is similar to that for integers. At each step , a quotient polynomial and a remainder polynomial are identified to satisfy the recursive equation\nwhere and . Each quotient polynomial is chosen such that each remainder is either zero or has a degree that is smaller than the degree of its predecessor: . Since the degree is a nonnegative integer, and since it decreases with every step, the Euclidean algorithm concludes in a finite number of steps. The last nonzero remainder is the greatest common divisor of the original two polynomials, and .\nFor example, consider the following two quartic polynomials, which each factor into two quadratic polynomials\nDividing by yields a remainder . In the next step, is divided by yielding a remainder . Finally, dividing by yields a zero remainder, indicating that is the greatest common divisor polynomial of and , consistent with their factorization.\nMany of the applications described above for integers carry over to polynomials. The Euclidean algorithm can be used to solve linear Diophantine equations and Chinese remainder problems for polynomials; continued fractions of polynomials can also be defined.\nThe polynomial Euclidean algorithm has other applications, such as Sturm chains, a method for counting the zeros of a polynomial that lie inside a given real interval. This in turn has applications in several areas, such as the Routh\u2013Hurwitz stability criterion in control theory.\nFinally, the coefficients of the polynomials need not be drawn from integers, real numbers or even the complex numbers. For example, the coefficients may be drawn from a general field, such as the finite fields described above. The corresponding conclusions about the Euclidean algorithm and its applications hold even for such polynomials.\nGaussian integers.\nThe Gaussian integers are complex numbers of the form , where and are ordinary integers and is the square root of negative one. By defining an analog of the Euclidean algorithm, Gaussian integers can be shown to be uniquely factorizable, by the argument above. This unique factorization is helpful in many applications, such as deriving all Pythagorean triples or proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares. In general, the Euclidean algorithm is convenient in such applications, but not essential; for example, the theorems can often be proven by other arguments.\nThe Euclidean algorithm developed for two Gaussian integers and is nearly the same as that for ordinary integers, but differs in two respects. As before, the task at each step is to identify a quotient and a remainder such that\nwhere , where , and where every remainder is strictly smaller than its predecessor: . The first difference is that the quotients and remainders are themselves Gaussian integers, and thus are complex numbers. The quotients are generally found by rounding the real and complex parts of the exact ratio (such as the complex number ) to the nearest integers. The second difference lies in the necessity of defining how one complex remainder can be \"smaller\" than another. To do this, a norm function is defined, which converts every Gaussian integer into an ordinary integer. After each step of the Euclidean algorithm, the norm of the remainder is smaller than the norm of the preceding remainder, . Since the norm is a nonnegative integer and decreases with every step, the Euclidean algorithm for Gaussian integers ends in a finite number of steps. The final nonzero remainder is , the Gaussian integer of largest norm that divides both and ; it is unique up to multiplication by a unit, or .\nMany of the other applications of the Euclidean algorithm carry over to Gaussian integers. For example, it can be used to solve linear Diophantine equations and Chinese remainder problems for Gaussian integers; continued fractions of Gaussian integers can also be defined.\nEuclidean domains.\nA set of elements under two binary operations, denoted as addition and multiplication, is called a Euclidean domain if it forms a commutative ring and, roughly speaking, if a generalized Euclidean algorithm can be performed on them. The two operations of such a ring need not be the addition and multiplication of ordinary arithmetic; rather, they can be more general, such as the operations of a mathematical group or monoid. Nevertheless, these general operations should respect many of the laws governing ordinary arithmetic, such as commutativity, associativity and distributivity.\nThe generalized Euclidean algorithm requires a \"Euclidean function\", i.e., a mapping from into the set of nonnegative integers such that, for any two nonzero elements and in , there exist and in such that and . Examples of such mappings are the absolute value for integers, the degree for univariate polynomials, and the norm for Gaussian integers above. The basic principle is that each step of the algorithm reduces \"f\" inexorably; hence, if can be reduced only a finite number of times, the algorithm must stop in a finite number of steps. This principle relies on the well-ordering property of the non-negative integers, which asserts that every non-empty set of non-negative integers has a smallest member.\nThe fundamental theorem of arithmetic applies to any Euclidean domain: Any number from a Euclidean domain can be factored uniquely into irreducible elements. Any Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain (UFD), although the converse is not true. The Euclidean domains and the UFD's are subclasses of the GCD domains, domains in which a greatest common divisor of two numbers always exists. In other words, a greatest common divisor may exist (for all pairs of elements in a domain), although it may not be possible to find it using a Euclidean algorithm. A Euclidean domain is always a principal ideal domain (PID), an integral domain in which every ideal is a principal ideal. Again, the converse is not true: not every PID is a Euclidean domain.\nThe unique factorization of Euclidean domains is useful in many applications. For example, the unique factorization of the Gaussian integers is convenient in deriving formulae for all Pythagorean triples and in proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares. Unique factorization was also a key element in an attempted proof of Fermat's Last Theorem published in 1847 by Gabriel Lam\u00e9, the same mathematician who analyzed the efficiency of Euclid's algorithm, based on a suggestion of Joseph Liouville. Lam\u00e9's approach required the unique factorization of numbers of the form , where and are integers, and is an th root of 1, that is, . Although this approach succeeds for some values of (such as , the Eisenstein integers), in general such numbers do factor uniquely. This failure of unique factorization in some cyclotomic fields led Ernst Kummer to the concept of ideal numbers and, later, Richard Dedekind to ideals.\nUnique factorization of quadratic integers.\nThe quadratic integer rings are helpful to illustrate Euclidean domains. Quadratic integers are generalizations of the Gaussian integers in which the imaginary unit \"i\" is replaced by a number . Thus, they have the form , where and are integers and has one of two forms, depending on a parameter . If does not equal a multiple of four plus one, then\nIf, however, \"D\" does equal a multiple of four plus one, then\nIf the function corresponds to a norm function, such as that used to order the Gaussian integers above, then the domain is known as \"norm-Euclidean\". The norm-Euclidean rings of quadratic integers are exactly those where is one of the values \u221211, \u22127, \u22123, \u22122, \u22121, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57, or 73. The cases and yield the Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers, respectively.\nIf is allowed to be any Euclidean function, then the list of possible values of for which the domain is Euclidean is not yet known. The first example of a Euclidean domain that was not norm-Euclidean (with ) was published in 1994. In 1973, Weinberger proved that a quadratic integer ring with is Euclidean if, and only if, it is a principal ideal domain, provided that the generalized Riemann hypothesis holds.\nNoncommutative rings.\nThe Euclidean algorithm may be applied to some noncommutative rings such as the set of Hurwitz quaternions. Let and represent two elements from such a ring. They have a common right divisor if and for some choice of and in the ring. Similarly, they have a common left divisor if and for some choice of and in the ring. Since multiplication is not commutative, there are two versions of the Euclidean algorithm, one for right divisors and one for left divisors. Choosing the right divisors, the first step in finding the by the Euclidean algorithm can be written\nwhere represents the quotient and the remainder. This equation shows that any common right divisor of and is likewise a common divisor of the remainder . The analogous equation for the left divisors would be\nWith either choice, the process is repeated as above until the greatest common right or left divisor is identified. As in the Euclidean domain, the \"size\" of the remainder (formally, its norm) must be strictly smaller than , and there must be only a finite number of possible sizes for , so that the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate.\nMost of the results for the GCD carry over to noncommutative numbers. For example, B\u00e9zout's identity states that the right can be expressed as a linear combination of and . In other words, there are numbers and such that\nThe analogous identity for the left GCD is nearly the same:\nB\u00e9zout's identity can be used to solve Diophantine equations. For instance, one of the standard proofs of Lagrange's four-square theorem, that every positive integer can be represented as a sum of four squares, is based on quaternion GCDs in this way."}
{"id": "10378", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10378", "title": "European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts", "text": "The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) is an independent intergovernmental organisation supported by most of the nations of Europe and is based at Shinfield Park, Reading, United Kingdom. It operates one of the largest supercomputer complexes in Europe and the world's largest archive of numerical weather prediction data.\nECMWF was established in 1975, in recognition of the need to pool the scientific and technical resources of Europe's meteorological services and institutions for the production of weather forecasts for medium-range timescales (up to approximately two weeks) and of the economic and social benefits expected from it.\nIt comprises 23 European countries:\nIt also has co-operation agreements with other states: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Morocco, Romania and Slovakia.\nThe Centre employs about 350 staff, mostly appointed from across the member states and co-operating states.\nIn 2017, the centre's member states accepted an offer from the Italian Government to move ECMWF's data centre to Bologna, Italy. The new site, a former tobacco factory, would be redesigned by the architecture firm gmp.\nDuring 2020 the Centre arranged to move its Copernicus operations away from Reading and into European Union territory. Following bids from Toulouse, Italy, Austria, Germany, Spain and Ireland, eventually Bonn (Germany) was chosen. The move has been directly attributed to Brexit.\nObjectives.\nECMWF aims to provide accurate medium-range global weather forecasts out to 15 days and seasonal forecasts out to 12 months. Its products are provided to the national weather services of its member states and co-operating states as a complement to their national short-range and climatological activities, and those national states use ECMWF's products for their own national duties, in particular to give early warning of potentially damaging severe weather.\nECMWF's core mission is to:\nTo deliver this core mission, the Centre provides:\nThe Centre develops and operates global atmospheric models and data assimilation systems for the dynamics, thermodynamics and composition of the Earth's atmosphere and for interacting parts of the Earth-system. It uses numerical weather prediction methods to prepare forecasts and their initial conditions, and it contributes to monitoring the relevant parts of the Earth system.\nWork and projects.\nForecasting.\nNumerical weather prediction (NWP) requires input of meteorological data, collected by satellites and earth observation systems such as automatic and manned stations, aircraft, ships and weather balloons. Assimilation of this data is used to produce an initial state of a computer model of the atmosphere, from which an atmospheric model is used to forecast the weather. These forecasts are typically:\nOver the past three decades ECMWF's wide-ranging programme of research has played a major role in developing such assimilation and modelling systems. This improves the accuracy and reliability of weather forecasting by about a day per decade, so that a seven-day forecast now (2015) is as accurate as a three-day forecast was four decades ago (1975).\nMonthly and seasonal forecasts.\nECMWF's monthly and seasonal forecasts provide early predictions of events such as heat waves, cold spells and droughts, as well as their impacts on sectors such as agriculture, energy and health. Since ECMWF runs a wave model, there are also predictions of coastal waves and storm surges in European waters which can be used to provide warnings.\nEarly warning of severe weather events.\nForecasts of severe weather events allow appropriate mitigating action to be taken and contingency plans to be put into place by the authorities and the public. The increased time gained by issuing accurate warnings can save lives, for instance by evacuating people from a storm surge area. Authorities and businesses can plan to maintain services around threats such as high winds, floods or snow.\nIn October 2012 the ECMWF model suggested seven days in advance that Hurricane Sandy was likely to make landfall on the East Coast of the United States.\nIt also predicted the intensity and track of the November 2012 nor'easter, which impacted the east coast a week after Sandy.\nECMWF's Extreme Forecast Index (EFI) was developed as a tool to identify where the EPS (Ensemble Prediction System) forecast distribution differs substantially from that of the model climate. It contains information regarding variability of weather parameters, in location and time and can highlight an abnormality of a weather situation without having to define specific space- and time-dependent thresholds.\nSatellite data.\nECMWF, through its partnerships with EUMETSAT, ESA, the EU and the European Science community has established a leading position for Europe in the exploitation of satellite data for operational numerical weather prediction, and for operational seasonal forecasting with coupled atmosphere-ocean-land models. The increasing amount of satellite data and the development of more sophisticated ways of extraction information from that data have made a major contribution to improving the accuracy and utility of NWP forecasts. ECMWF continuously endeavours to improve the use of satellite observations for NWP.\nReanalysis.\nECMWF makes significant contributions to support research on climate variability, pioneering an approach known as reanalysis. This involves feeding weather observations collected over decades into a NWP system to recreate past atmospheric, sea- and land-surface conditions over specific time periods to obtain a clearer picture of how the climate has changed. Reanalysis provides a four-dimensional picture of the atmosphere and effectively allows monitoring of the variability and change of global climate, thereby contributing also to the understanding and attribution of climate change.\nTo date, and with support from Europe's National Meteorological Services and the European Commission, ECMWF has conducted several major reanalyses of the global atmosphere: the first ECMWF re-analysis (ERA-15) project generated reanalyses from December 1978 to February 1994; the ERA-40 project generated reanalyses from September 1957 to August 2002. The ERA-Interim reanalysis covered the period from 1979 onwards. A reanalysis product (ERA5) with higher spatial resolution (31\u00a0km) was released by ECMWF in 2019 as part of the Copernicus Climate Change Service.\nOperational forecast model.\nECMWF's operational forecasts are produced from its \"Integrated Forecast System\" (sometimes informally known in the United States as the \"European model\") which is run every twelve hours and forecasts out to ten days.\nIt includes both a \"deterministic forecast\" mode and an ensemble. The deterministic forecast is a single model run that is relatively high in resolution as well as in computational expense. The ensemble is relatively low (about half that of the deterministic) in resolution (and in computational expense), so less accurate. But it is run 51 times in parallel, from slightly different initial conditions to give a spread of likelihood over the range of the forecast.\nCopernicus.\nThe centre currently serves as the Entrusted Entity responsible for delivery of two of the Services of the EU's Copernicus Programme. The two services are the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) and the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S).\nIn September 2020, the centre could be at risk of losing an expansion contract due of Brexit."}
{"id": "10380", "revid": "1012071561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10380", "title": "European Broadcasting Union", "text": "The European Broadcasting Union (EBU; ; ) is an alliance of public service media organisations, established on 12 February 1950. The organisation is made up of 115 member organisations in 56 countries, and 34 associate members from a further 21 countries. It is best known for producing the Eurovision Song Contest. It also hosted debates between candidates for the European Commission presidency for the 2014 and 2019 parliamentary elections but is unrelated to the European Union itself.\nGeneral description.\nEBU members are public service media (PSM) broadcasters whose output is made, financed and controlled by the public, for the public. PSM broadcasters are often established by law but are non-partisan, independent and run for the benefit of society as a whole.\nEBU members come from as far north as Iceland and as far south as Egypt, from Ireland in the west and Azerbaijan in the east, and almost every nation from geographical Europe in between. Associate Members are from countries and territories beyond Europe, such as Canada, Japan, India and China. Associate members from the United States include ABC, CBS, NBC, CPB, NPR, APM and the only individual station, Chicago-based classical music radio WFMT.\nMembership is for media organisations whose countries are within the European Broadcasting Area (EBA), as defined by the International Telecommunication Union, or who are members of the Council of Europe.\nMembers benefit from:\nThe EBU's highest-profile production is the Eurovision Song Contest. The EBU also organises the Eurovision Dance Contest, the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, the Eurovision Young Dancers competition, and other competitions which are modeled along similar lines.\nRadio collaborations include Euroclassic Notturno \u2013 an overnight classical music stream, produced by BBC Radio 3 and broadcast in the United Kingdom as \"Through the Night\" \u2013 and special theme days, such as the annual Christmas music relays from around Europe. The EBU is a member of the International Music Council.\nMost EBU broadcasters have group deals to carry major sporting events including the FIFA World Cup and the inaugural European Championships. Another annually recurring event which is broadcast across Europe through the EBU is the Vienna New Year's Concert.\nEurovision Media Services is the business arm of the EBU and provides first-class media services for many media organisations and sports federations around the world.\nThe theme music played before EBU broadcasts is Marc-Antoine Charpentier's \"Prelude to Te Deum\". It is well known to Europeans as it is played before and after the Eurovision Song Contest and other important events.\nHistory.\nThe EBU was a successor to the International Broadcasting Union (IBU) that was founded in 1925 and had its administrative headquarters in Geneva and technical office in Brussels. It fostered programming exchanges between members and mediated technical disputes between members that were mostly concerned with frequency and interference issues. It was in effect taken over by Nazi Germany during the Second World War and when the conflict ended in the eyes of the Allies it was a compromised organisation that they could not trust.\nIn the spring of 1946, representatives of the Soviet radio committee proposed forming a new organisation; however, at the same time preparations were being made for an inter-governmental \u201cEuropean Broadcasting Conference\u201d (EBC) in Copenhagen in 1948 to draw up a new plan for frequency use in the European Broadcasting Area (EBA). It was considered necessary to have an organisation that could implement the \u201cCopenhagen Wavelength Plan\u201d but there was disagreement among broadcasters and particularly a fear expressed by the BBC that a new association might be dominated by the USSR and its proposal to give each of its constituent states one vote. France proposed that it would have four votes with the inclusion of its North African colonies. The United Kingdom felt it would have little influence with just one vote.\nOn 27 June 1946, the alternative International Broadcasting Organisation (IBO) was founded with 26 members and without British participation. The following day the IBU met in General Assembly and an attempt was made to dissolve it but failed; though 18 of its 28 members left to join the IBO. For a period of time in the late 1940s both the IBU and IBO vied for the role of organising frequencies but Britain decided to be in involved in neither. The BBC attempted but failed to find suitable working arrangements with them. However, for practical purposes, the IBO rented the IBU technical centre in Brussels and employed its staff. The BBC then proposed a new solution based on the IBO changing its constitution so there will be only one member per ITU country, thus ensuring a Western majority over the USSR and its satellite states. In August 1949 a meeting took place in Stresa, Italy but it resulted in disagreement between delegates on how to resolve the problems. One proposal was for the European Broadcasting Area to be replaced by one that would exclude Eastern Europe, the Levant and North Africa.\nAfter Stresa, a consensus emerged among the Western Europeans to form a new organisation and the BBC proposed it be based in London. Meetings in Paris on 31 October and 1 November 1949 sealed the fate of the IBU and IBO, but it was decided not to allow West Germany to be a founder of the new organisation. On 13 February 1950 the European Broadcasting Union had its first meeting with 23 members from the ITU defined European Broadcasting Area at the Imperial Hotel in Torquay, England, United Kingdom. The first president was Ian Jacob of the BBC who remained at the helm for 10 years while its operation was largely dominated by the BBC due to its financial, technical and staff input. The most important difference between the EBU and its predecessors was that EBU membership was for broadcasters and not governments. Early delegates said EBU meetings were cordial and professional and very different from the abrupt tone of its predecessors. West Germany was admitted in 1951 and a working relationship forged with the USSR's Organisation for International Radio and TV (OIRT) which existed in parallel with the EBU until its merger on 1 January 1993.\nIn 1967, the first concert in the International Concert Season of the European Broadcasting Union was broadcast from the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London.\nTechnical activities.\nThe objective of the EBU's technical activities is simply to assist EBU Members (see below) in this period of unprecedented technological changes. This includes the provision of technical information to Members via conferences and workshops, as well as in written form (such as the EBU Technical Review, and the EBU tech-\"i\" magazine).\nThe EBU also encourages active collaboration between its Members on the basis that they can freely share their knowledge and experience, thus achieving considerably more than individual Members could achieve by themselves. Much of this collaboration is achieved through Project Groups which study specific technical issues of common interest: for example, EBU Members have long been preparing for the revision of the 1961 Stockholm Plan.\nThe EBU places great emphasis on the use of open standards. Widespread use of open standards (such as MPEG-2, DAB, DVB, etc.) ensures interoperability between products from different vendors, as well as facilitating the exchange of programme material between EBU Members and promoting \"horizontal markets\" for the benefit of all consumers.\nEBU Members and the EBU Technical Department have long played an important role in the development of many systems used in radio and television broadcasting, such as:\nThe EBU has also actively encouraged the development and implementation of:\nBelarusian state broadcaster controversy of 2021.\nThe National State Television and Radio Company of Belarus (BTRC) has been accused of repressing its own employees, having fired more than 100 people since the Belarus protests against president Lukashenka started in 2020 after alleged election fraud. Many of them have also been jailed. Many voices have been raised against the participation of Belarus and the BTRC in the otherwise unpolitical Eurovision Song Contest in 2021, the argument being that the EBU would make a political statement if it did endorse Belarus by essentially and silently saying that democracy is unimportant and so are basic human rights such as freedom of speech.\nGreek state broadcaster controversy of 2013.\nOn 11 June 2013, the Greek government shut down the state broadcaster ERT, at short notice, citing government spending concerns related to the Euro crisis. In response, the European Broadcasting Union set up a makeshift studio on the same day, near the former ERT offices in Athens, in order to continue providing EBU members with the news-gathering and broadcast relay services which had formerly been provided by ERT.\nThe EBU put out a statement expressing its \"profound dismay\" at the shutdown, urged the Greek Prime Minister \"to use all his powers to immediately reverse this decision\" and offered the \"advice, assistance and expertise necessary for ERT to be preserved\".\nStarting on 4 May 2014, the New Hellenic Radio, Internet and Television broadcaster began nationwide transmissions, taking over ERT's vacant active membership slot in the EBU. On 11 June 2015, two years after ERT's closure, NERIT SA renamed as ERT SA which reopened with a comprehensive program in all radio stations (with nineteen regional, two world-range and five pan-Hellenic range radio stations) and three TV channels ERT1, ERT2 and ERT3.\nMembers.\nThe Member list , comprises the following 72 broadcasting companies from 56 countries.\nAssociate Members.\nAny group or organisation from an International Telecommunication Union (ITU) member country, which provides a radio or television service outside of the European Broadcasting Area, is permitted to submit applications to the EBU for Associate Membership.\nIt was also noted by the EBU that any country that is granted Associate Member status does not include any access into the Eurovision events (with the exceptions of Australia, who have participated in the Eurovision Song Contest and the Junior Eurovision Song Contest since 2015, Canada in Eurovision Young Dancers between 1987 and 1989 and Kazakhstan, who have participated in Junior Eurovision since 2018).\nThe list of Associate Members of EBU comprised the following 34 broadcasting companies from 21 countries .\nApproved participant members.\nAny groups or organisations from a country with International Telecommunication Union (ITU) membership, which does not qualify for either the EBU's Active or Associate memberships, but still provide a broadcasting activity for the EBU, are granted a unique Approved Participants membership, which lasts approximately five years. An application for this status may be submitted to the EBU at any given time, providing an annual fee is paid.\nThe following seven EBU broadcast members had status as Approved Participants in May 2016.\nOrganised events.\nThe EBU in co-operation with the respective host broadcaster organises competitions and events in which its members can participate if they wish to do so. These include:\nEurovision Song Contest.\nThe Eurovision Song Contest () is an annual international song competition between EBU Members, that was first held in Lugano, Switzerland, on 24 May 1956. Seven countries participated \u2013 each submitting two songs, for a total of 14. This was the only contest in which more than one song per country was performed: since 1957 all contests have allowed one entry per country. The 1956 contest was won by the host nation, Switzerland. The most recent host city was Tel Aviv, Israel, where the Netherlands won the competition.\nLet the Peoples Sing.\nLet the Peoples Sing is a biennial choir competition, the participants of which are chosen from radio recordings entered by EBU radio members. The final, encompassing three categories and around ten choirs, is offered as a live broadcast to all EBU members. The overall winner is awarded the \"Silver Rose Bowl\".\nJeux sans fronti\u00e8res.\nJeux sans fronti\u00e8res (, or Games Without Borders) was a Europe-wide television game show. In its original conception, it was broadcast from 1965 to 1999 under the auspices of the EBU. The original series run ended in 1982 but was revived in 1988 with a different complexion of nations and was hosted by smaller broadcasters.\nEurovision Young Musicians.\nEurovision Young Musicians is a competition for European musicians that are between the ages of 12 and 21 years old. It is organised by the EBU and is a member of EMCY. The first competition was held in Manchester, the United Kingdom on 11 May 1982.\nThe televised competition is held every two years, with some countries holding national heats. Since its foundation in 1982, the Eurovision Young Musicians competition has become one of the most important music competitions on an international level.\nEurovision Young Dancers.\nThe Eurovision Young Dancers is a biennial dance showcase broadcast on television throughout Europe. The first competition was held in Reggio Emilia, Italy on 16 June 1985.\nIt uses a format similar to the Eurovision Song Contest, every country that is a member of the EBU has had the opportunity to send a dance act to compete for the title of \"Eurovision Young Dancer\". The competition is for solo dancers and all contestants must be between the ages of 16 and 21 years and not professionally engaged.\nEuroclassic Notturno.\nEuroclassic Notturno is a six-hour sequence of classical music recordings assembled by BBC Radio from material supplied by members of the EBU and streamed back to those broadcasters by satellite for use in their overnight classical-music schedules. The recordings used are taken not from commercial CDs but from earlier (usually live) radio broadcasts.\nJunior Eurovision Song Contest.\nJunior Eurovision Song Contest (), is an annual international song competition, that was first held in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 15 November 2003. Sixteen countries participated \u2013 each submitting one song, for a total of 16 entries. The 2003 Contest was won by Croatia and the current winner is France.\nEurovision Dance Contest.\nThe Eurovision Dance Contest (not to be confused with the \"Eurovision Young Dancers Competition\") was an international dancing competition that was held for the first time in London, the United Kingdom on 1 September 2007. The competition was repeated in 2008 when it was held in Glasgow, United Kingdom, but has not been held since.\nEurovision Magic Circus Show.\nThe Eurovision Magic Circus Show was an entertainment show organised by the EBU, which took place in 2010, 2011 and 2012 in Geneva. Children aged between 7-14 representing 8 countries within the EBU membership area, performed a variety of circus acts at the \"Geneva Christmas Circus\" (). The main show was also accompanied by the \"Magic Circus Show Orchestra\".\nEurovision Choir.\nThe inaugural Eurovision Choir featuring non-professional choirs selected by EBU Members, took place on 22 July 2017 in Riga, hosted by the Latvian broadcaster Latvijas Telev\u012bzija (LTV). 9 countries took part in the first edition. Carmen Manet from Slovenia was the first winner.\nEuropean Sports Championships.\nThe European Sports Championships is a multi-sport event involving some of the leading sports in Europe. The European Governing Bodies for athletics, aquatics, cycling, rowing, golf, gymnastics and triathlon, will coordinate their individual championships as part of the first edition in the summer of 2018, hosted by the cities of Berlin (already chosen as the host for the 2018 European Athletics Championships) and Glasgow (already chosen as the host for the 2018 European Aquatics Championships, and which will now also host the events of the other sports)."}
{"id": "10381", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10381", "title": "Electrothermal-Chemical technology", "text": ""}
{"id": "10382", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10382", "title": "Electrothermal-chemical technology", "text": "Electrothermal-chemical (ETC) technology is an attempt to increase accuracy and muzzle energy of future tank, artillery, and close-in weapon system guns by improving the predictability and rate of expansion of propellants inside the barrel.\nAn electrothermal-chemical gun uses a plasma cartridge to ignite and control the ammunition's propellant, using electrical energy to trigger the process. ETC increases the performance of conventional solid propellants, reduces the effect of temperature on propellant expansion and allows for more advanced, higher density propellants to be used.\nThe technology has been under development since the mid-1980s and at present is actively being researched in the United States by the Army Research Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratories and defense industry contractors, including FMC Corporation, General Dynamics Land Systems, Olin Ordnance, and Soreq Nuclear Research Center. It is possible that electrothermal-chemical gun propulsion will be an integral part of US Army's future combat system and those of other countries such as Germany and the United Kingdom. \nElectrothermal-chemical technology is part of a broad research and development program that encompasses all electric gun technology, such as railguns and coil guns.\nBackground.\nThe constant battle between armour and armor-piercing round has led to continuous development of the main battle tank design. The evolution of American anti-tank weapons can be traced back to requirements to combat Soviet tanks. In the late 1980s, it was thought that the protection level of the Future Soviet Tank (FST) could exceed 700\u00a0mm of rolled homogeneous armour equivalence at its maximum thickness, which was effectively immune against the contemporary M829 armour piercing fin stabilized discarding sabot. In the 1980s the most immediate method available to NATO to counter Soviet advances in armour technology was the adoption of a 140\u00a0mm main gun, but this required a redesigned turret that could incorporate the larger breech and ammunition, and it also required some sort of automatic loader. Although the 140\u00a0mm gun was considered a real interim solution it was decided after the fall of the Soviet Union that the increase in muzzle energy it provided was not worth the increase in weight. Resources were therefore spent on research into other programs that could provide the needed muzzle energy. One of the most successful alternative technologies remains electrothermal-chemical ignition.\nMost proposed advances in gun technology are based on the assumption that the solid propellant as a stand-alone propulsion system is no longer capable of delivering the required muzzle energy. This requirement has been underscored by the appearance of the Russian T-90 main battle tank. Even the elongation of current gun tubes, such as the new German 120\u00a0mm L/55, which was introduced by Rheinmetall is considered only an interim solution as it does not offer the required increase in muzzle velocity. Even advanced kinetic energy ammunition such as the United States' M829A3 is considered only an interim solution against future threats. To that extent the solid propellant is considered to have reached the end of its usefulness, although it will remain the principal propulsion method for at least the next decade until newer technologies mature. To improve on the capabilities of a solid propellant weapon the electrothermal-chemical gun may see production as early as 2016.\nETC technology offers a medium-risk upgrade and is developed to the point that further improvements are so minor that it can be considered mature. The lightweight American 120\u00a0mm XM291 came close to achieving 17 MJ of muzzle energy, which is the lower-end muzzle energy spectrum for a 140\u00a0mm gun. However, the success of the XM291 does not imply the success of ETC technology as there are key parts of the propulsion system that are not yet understood or fully developed, such as the plasma ignition process. Nevertheless, there is substantial existing evidence that ETC technology is viable and worth the money to continue development. Furthermore, it can be integrated into current gun systems.\nHow it works.\nAn electrothermal-chemical gun uses a plasma cartridge to ignite and control the ammunition's propellant, using electrical energy as a catalyst to begin the process. Originally researched by Dr. Jon Parmentola for the U.S. Army, it has grown into a very plausible successor to a standard solid propellant tank gun. Since the beginning of research the United States has funded the XM291 gun project with USD 4,000,000, basic research with USD 300,000, and applied research with USD 600,000. Since then it has been proven to work, although efficiency to the level required has not yet been accomplished. ETC increases the performance of conventional solid propellants, reduces the effect of temperature on propellant expansion and allows for more advanced, higher density propellants to be used. It will also reduce pressure placed on the barrel in comparison to alternative technologies that offer the same muzzle energy given the fact that it helps spread the propellant's gas much more smoothly during ignition. Currently, there are two principal methods of plasma initiation: the flashboard large area emitter (FLARE) and the triple coaxial plasma igniter (TCPI).\nFlashboard large area emitter.\nFlashboards run in several parallel strings to provide a large area of plasma or ultraviolet radiation and uses the breakdown and vaporization of gaps of diamonds to produce the required plasma. These parallel strings are mounted in tubes and oriented to have their gaps azimuthal to the tube's axis. It discharges by using high pressure air to move air out of the way. FLARE initiators can ignite propellants through the release of plasma, or even through the use of ultraviolet heat radiation. The absorption length of a solid propellant is sufficient to be ignited by radiation from a plasma source. However, FLARE has most likely not reached optimal design requirements and further understanding of FLARE and how it works is completely necessary to ensure the evolution of the technology. If FLARE provided the XM291 gun project with the sufficient radiative heat to ignite the propellant to achieve a muzzle energy of 17 MJ one could only imagine the possibilities with a fully developed FLARE plasma igniter. Current areas of study include how plasma will affect the propellant through radiation, the deliverance of mechanical energy and heat directly and by driving gas flow. Despite these daunting tasks FLARE has been seen as the most plausible igniter for future application on ETC guns.\nTriple coaxial plasma igniter.\nA coaxial igniter consists of a fully insulated conductor, covered by four strips of aluminum foil. All of this is further insulated in a tube about 1.6\u00a0cm in diameter that is perforated with small holes. The idea is to use an electrical flow through the conductor and then exploding the flow into vapor and then breaking it down into plasma. Consequently, the plasma escapes through the constant perforations throughout the insulating tube and initiates the surrounding propellant. A TCPI igniter is fitted in individual propellant cases for each piece of ammunition. However, TCPI is no longer considered a viable method of propellant ignition because it may damage the fins and does not deliver energy as efficiently as a FLARE igniter.\nFeasibility.\nThe XM291 is the best existing example of a working electrothermal-chemical gun. It was an alternative technology to the heavier caliber 140\u00a0mm gun by using the dual-caliber approach. It uses a breech that is large enough to accept 140\u00a0mm ammunition and be mounted with both a 120\u00a0mm barrel and a 135\u00a0mm or 140\u00a0mm barrel. The XM291 also mounts a larger gun tube and a larger ignition chamber than the existing M256 L/44 main gun. Through the application of electrothermal-chemical technology the XM291 has been able to achieve muzzle energy outputs that equate that to a low-level 140\u00a0mm gun, while achieving muzzle velocities greater than those of the larger 140\u00a0mm gun. Although the XM291 does not mean that ETC technology is viable it does offer an example that it is possible.\nETC is also a more viable option than other alternatives by definition. ETC requires much less energy input from outside sources, like a battery, than a railgun or a coilgun would. Tests have shown that energy output by the propellant is higher than energy input from outside sources on ETC guns. In comparison, a railgun currently cannot achieve a higher muzzle velocity than the amount of energy input. Even at 50% efficiency a rail gun launching a projectile with a kinetic energy of 20 MJ would require an energy input into the rails of 40 MJ, and 50% efficiency has not yet been achieved. To put this into perspective, a rail gun launching at 9 MJ of energy would need roughly 32 MJ worth of energy from capacitors. Current advances in energy storage allow for energy densities as high as 2.5 MJ/dm\u00b3, which means that a battery delivering 32 MJ of energy would require a volume of 12.8 dm\u00b3 per shot; this is not a viable volume for use in a modern main battle tank, especially one designed to be lighter than existing models. There has even been discussion about eliminating the necessity for an outside electrical source in ETC ignition by initiating the plasma cartridge through a small explosive force.\nFurthermore, ETC technology is not only applicable to solid propellants. To increase muzzle velocity even further electrothermal-chemical ignition can work with liquid propellants, although this would require further research into plasma ignition. ETC technology is also compatible with existing projects to reduce the amount of recoil delivered to the vehicle while firing. Understandably, recoil of a gun firing a projectile at 17 MJ or more will increase directly with the increase in muzzle energy in accordance to Newton's third law of motion and successful implementation of recoil reduction mechanisms will be vital to the installation of an ETC powered gun in an existing vehicle design. For example, OTO Melara's new lightweight 120\u00a0mm L/45 gun has achieved a recoil force of 25 t by using a longer recoil mechanism (550\u00a0mm) and a pepperpot muzzle brake. Reduction in recoil can also be achieved through mass attenuation of the thermal sleeve. The ability of ETC technology to be applied to existing gun designs means that for future gun upgrades there's no longer the necessity to redesign the turret to include a larger breech or caliber gun barrel.\nSeveral countries have already determined that ETC technology is viable for the future and have funded indigenous projects considerably. These include the United States, Germany and the United Kingdom, amongst others. The United States' XM360, which was planned to equip the Future Combat Systems Mounted Combat System light tank and may be the M1 Abrams' next gun upgrade, is reportedly based on the XM291 and may include ETC technology, or portions of ETC technology. Tests of this gun have been performed using \"precision ignition\" technology, which may refer to ETC ignition."}
{"id": "10383", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10383", "title": "ES-3 Shadow", "text": ""}
{"id": "10384", "revid": "10248457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10384", "title": "Boeing E-3 Sentry", "text": "The Boeing E-3 Sentry is an American airborne early warning and control (AEW&amp;C) aircraft developed by Boeing. E-3s are commonly known as AWACS (Airborne Warning and Control System). Derived from the Boeing 707, it provides all-weather surveillance, command, control, and communications, and is used by the United States Air Force, NATO, Royal Air Force, French Air and Space Force, and Royal Saudi Air Force. The E-3 is distinguished by the distinctive rotating radar dome (rotodome) above the fuselage. Production ended in 1992 after 68 aircraft had been built.\nIn the mid-1960s, the U.S. Air Force (USAF) was seeking an aircraft to replace its piston-engined Lockheed EC-121 Warning Star, which had been in service for over a decade. After issuing preliminary development contracts to three companies, the USAF picked Boeing to construct two airframes to test Westinghouse Electric and Hughes's competing radars. Both radars used pulse-Doppler technology, with Westinghouse's design emerging as the contract winner. Testing on the first production E-3 began in October 1975.\nThe first USAF E-3 was delivered in March 1977, and during the next seven years, a total of 34 aircraft were manufactured. E-3s were also purchased by NATO (18), the United Kingdom (7), France (4) and Saudi Arabia (5).\nIn 1991, when the last aircraft had been delivered, E-3s participated in the Persian Gulf War, playing a crucial role of directing coalition aircraft against Iraqi forces. The aircraft's capabilities have been maintained and enhanced through numerous upgrades. In 1996, Westinghouse Electric's Defense &amp; Electronic Systems division was acquired by Northrop Corporation, before being renamed Northrop Grumman Mission Systems, which currently supports the E-3's radar.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nIn 1963, the USAF asked for proposals for an Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) to replace its EC-121 Warning Stars, which had served in the airborne early warning role for over a decade. The new aircraft would take advantage of improvements in radar technology and computer-aided radar data analysis and data reduction. These developments allowed airborne radars to \"look down\", i.e. to detect the movement of low-flying aircraft, and discriminate, even over land, target aircraft's movements; previously this had been impossible due to the inability to discriminate an aircraft's track from ground clutter. Contracts were issued to Boeing, Douglas, and Lockheed, the latter being eliminated in July 1966. In 1967, a parallel program was put into place to develop the radar, with Westinghouse Electric Corporation and Hughes Aircraft being asked to compete in producing the radar system. In 1968, it was referred to as Overland Radar Technology (ORT) during development tests on the modified EC-121Q. The Westinghouse radar antenna was going to be used by whichever company won the radar competition since Westinghouse had pioneered the design of high-power radio frequency (RF) phase-shifters, which are used to both focus the RF into a pencil beam and scan electronically for altitude determination.\nBoeing initially proposed a purpose-built aircraft, but tests indicated it would not outperform the already-operational 707, so the latter was chosen instead. To increase endurance, this design was to be powered by eight General Electric TF34s. It would carry its radar in a rotating dome mounted at the top of a forward-swept tail, above the fuselage. Boeing was selected ahead of McDonnell Douglas's DC-8-based proposal in July 1970. Initial orders were placed for two aircraft, designated EC-137D as test beds to evaluate the two competing radars. As the test beds did not need the same 14-hour endurance demanded of the production aircraft, the EC-137s retained the Pratt &amp; Whitney JT3D commercial engines, and a later reduction in the endurance requirement led to retention of the JT3D engines in production.\nThe first EC-137 made its maiden flight on 9 February 1972, with the fly-off between the two radars taking place from March to July of that year. Favorable test results led to the selection of Westinghouse's radar for the production aircraft. Hughes' radar was initially thought to be a certain winner due to its related development of the APG-63 radar for the new F-15 Eagle. The Westinghouse radar used a pipelined fast Fourier transform (FFT) to digitally resolve 128 Doppler frequencies, while Hughes's radars used analog filters based on the design for the F-15. Westinghouse's engineering team won this competition by using a programmable 18-bit computer whose software could be modified before each mission. This computer was the AN/AYK-8 design from the B-57G program, and designated AYK-8-EP1 for its much expanded memory. This radar also multiplexed a beyond-the-horizon (BTH) pulse mode that could complement the pulse-Doppler radar mode. This proved to be beneficial especially when the BTH mode is used to detect ships at sea when the radar beam is directed below the horizon.\nFull-scale development.\nApproval was given on 26 January 1973 for the full-scale development of the AWACS system. To allow further development of the aircraft's systems, orders were placed for three preproduction aircraft, the first of which performed its maiden flight in February 1975. IBM and Hazeltine were selected to develop the mission computer and display system. The IBM computer was designated 4PI, and the software was written in JOVIAL. A Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) or back-up interceptor control (BUIC) operator would immediately be at home with the track displays and tabular displays, but differences in symbology would create compatibility problems in tactical ground radar systems in Iceland, mainland Europe, and South Korea over Link-11 (TADIL-A). In 1977, Iran placed an order for ten E-3s, however this order was cancelled following the Iranian Revolution.\nEngineering, test and evaluation began on the first E-3 Sentry in October 1975. Between 1977 and 1992, a total of 68 E-3s were built.\nFuture status.\nBecause the Boeing 707 is no longer in production, the E-3 mission package has been fitted into the Boeing E-767 for the Japan Air Self Defense Forces. The E-10 MC2A was intended to replace USAF E-3s\u2014along with the RC-135 and the E-8 Joint STARS, but the program was canceled by the Department of Defense.\nNATO intends to extend the operational status of its AWACS until 2035 when it is due to be replaced by the Alliance Future Surveillance and Control (AFSC) program. The Royal Air Force (RAF) chose to limit investment in its E-3D fleet in the early 2000s, diverting Sentry upgrade funds to a replacement program. On 22 March 2019, the UK Defence Secretary announced a $1.98 billion contract to purchase five E-7 Wedgetails.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe E-3 Sentry's airframe is a modified Boeing 707-320B Advanced model. Modifications include a rotating radar dome (rotodome), uprated hydraulics from 241 to 345 bar (3500\u20135000 PSI) to drive the rotodome, single-point ground refueling, air refueling, and a bail-out tunnel or chute. A second bail-out chute was deleted to cut mounting costs.\nUSAF and NATO E-3s have an unrefueled range of or 8 hours of flying. The newer E-3 versions bought by France, Saudi Arabia, and the UK are equipped with newer CFM56-2 turbofan engines, and these can fly for about 11 hours or more than . The Sentry's range and on-station time can be increased through air-to-air refueling and the crews can work in shifts by the use of an on-board crew rest and meals area. The aircraft are equipped with one toilet in the rear, and one behind the cockpit. Saudi E-3s were delivered with an additional toilet in the rear.\nWhen deployed, the E-3 monitors an assigned area of the battlefield and provides information for commanders of air operations to gain and maintain control of the battle; while as an air defense asset, E-3s can detect, identify, and track airborne enemy forces far from the boundaries of the U.S. or NATO countries and can direct interceptor aircraft to these targets. In support of air-to-ground operations, the E-3 can provide direct information needed for interdiction, reconnaissance, airlift, and close-air support for friendly ground forces.\nAvionics.\nThe unpressurized rotodome is in diameter, thick at the center, and is held above the fuselage by 2 struts. It is tilted down at the front to reduce its aerodynamic drag, which lessens its detrimental effect on take-offs and endurance. This tilt is corrected electronically by both the radar and secondary surveillance radar antenna phase shifters. The rotodome uses bleed air, outside cooling doors, and fluorocarbon-based cold plate cooling to maintain the electronic and mechanical equipment temperatures. The hydraulically rotated antenna system permits the and AN/APY-2 passive electronically scanned array radar system to provide surveillance from the Earth's surface up into the stratosphere, over land or water.\nOther major subsystems in the E-3 Sentry are navigation, communications, and computers. 14 consoles display computer-processed data in graphic and tabular format on screens. Its operators perform surveillance, identification, weapons control, battle management and communications functions. Data may be forwarded in real-time to any major command and control center in rear areas or aboard ships. In times of crisis, data may also be forwarded to the National Command Authority in the U.S. via RC-135 or aircraft carrier task forces.\nElectrical generators mounted in each of the E-3's four engines provide 1 megawatt of electrical power required by the aircraft's radars and electronics. Its pulse-Doppler radar has a range of more than 250\u00a0mi (400\u00a0km) for low-flying targets at its operating altitude, and the pulse (BTH) radar has a range of approximately 400\u00a0mi (650\u00a0km) for aircraft flying at medium to high altitudes. The radar, combined with a secondary surveillance radar (SSR) and electronic support measures (ESM), provides a look down capability, to detect, identify, and track low-flying aircraft, while eliminating ground clutter returns.\nUpgrades.\nBetween 1987 and 2001, USAF E-3s were upgraded under the \"Block 30/35 Modification Program\". Enhancements included:\nRSIP.\nThe Radar System Improvement Program (RSIP) was a joint US/NATO development program. RSIP enhances the operational capability of the E-3 radars' electronic countermeasures, and improves the system's reliability, maintainability, and availability. Essentially, this program replaced the older transistor-transistor logic (TTL) and emitter-coupled logic (MECL) electronic components, long-since out of production, with off-the-shelf computers that utilised a High-level programming language instead of assembly language. Significant improvement came from adding pulse compression to the pulse-Doppler mode. These hardware and software modifications improve the E-3 radars' performance, providing enhanced detection with an emphasis towards low radar cross-section (RCS) targets.\nThe RAF had also joined the USAF in adding RSIP to upgrade the E-3's radars. The retrofitting of the E-3 squadrons was completed in December 2000. Along with the RSIP upgrade was installation of the Global Positioning System/Inertial Navigation Systems which improved positioning accuracy. In 2002, Boeing was awarded a contract to add RSIP to the small French AWACS squadron. Installation was completed in 2006.\nNATO Mid Term Program.\nBetween 2000 and 2008 NATO upgraded its E-3s to \"Mid Term Program\" (MTP) standard. This involved technical upgrades and a total multi-sensor-systems integration\nDRAGON.\nIn 2009, the USAF, in cooperation with NATO, entered into a major flight deck avionics modernization program in order to maintain compliance with worldwide airspace mandates. The program, called DRAGON (for DMS Replacement of Avionics for Global Operation and Navigation), was awarded to Boeing and Rockwell Collins in 2010. Collins. Drawing on their Flight2 Flight Management System (FMS), almost all the avionics were replaced with more modern digital equipment from Rockwell Collins. Main upgrades include a Digital Audio Distribution System, Mode-5/ADS-B transponder, Inmarsat &amp; VDL datalinks, and a Terrain Avoidance and Warning System (TAWS). The centerpiece flight deck hardware consists of five 6x8 color graphics displays and two color CDUs. DRAGON layed the foundation for subsequent upgrades including GPS M-Code, Iridium ATC, and Autopilot. USAF DRAGON Production began in 2018.\nUSAF Block 40/45.\nIn 2014 the USAF began upgrading block 30/35 E-3B/Cs into block 40/45 E-3Gs. This upgrade replaces the main flight computer with a Linux Red Hat-based system, as well as replacing the DOS 2.0-like operating system with a Windows 95-like system on the operator workstations. In 2016, a three-week long cybersecurity vulnerability test revealed that the 40/45 block and its supporting ground equipment were vulnerable to cyber threats, and were thus deemed \"not survivable.\" This caused a delay of approximately two years. 24 E-3s are projected to complete this upgrade to 40/45 by the end of fiscal year 2020, while seven aircraft will be retired to save upgrade costs and harvest out-of-production components.\nNATO Final Lifetime Extension Program.\nNATO intends to extend the operational status of its AWACS until 2035 by significantly upgrading fourteen aircraft in the \"Final Lifetime Extension Program\" (FLEP) between 2019 and 2026. Upgrades include the expansion of data capacity, expansion of bandwidth for satellite communications, new encryption equipment, new HAVE QUICK radios, upgraded mission computing software and new operator consoles. The supporting ground systems (mission training center and mission planning and evaluation system) will also be upgraded to the latest standaard. NATO Airborne Early Warning &amp; Control Program Management Agency (NAPMA) is the preparing and executing authority for the FLEP. FLEP will be combined with the standard planned higher echelon technical maintenance.\nOperational history.\nIn March 1977 the 552nd Airborne Warning and Control Wing received the first E-3 aircraft at Tinker AFB, Oklahoma. The 34th and last USAF Sentry was delivered in June 1984. The USAF has a total of thirty-one E-3s in active service. Twenty-seven are stationed at Tinker AFB and belong to the Air Combat Command (ACC). Four are assigned to the Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) and stationed at Kadena AB, Okinawa and Elmendorf AFB, Alaska. One aircraft (TS-3) was assigned to Boeing for testing and development (retired/scrapped June 2012).\nE-3 Sentry aircraft were among the first to deploy during Operation Desert Shield, where they established a radar screen to monitor Iraqi forces. During Operation Desert Storm, E-3s flew 379 missions and logged 5,052 hours of on-station time. The data collection capability of the E-3 radar and computer subsystems allowed an entire air war to be recorded for the first time. In addition to providing senior leadership with time-critical information on the actions of enemy forces, E-3 controllers assisted in 38 of the 41 air-to-air kills recorded during the conflict.\nNATO, UK, French and USAF AWACS played an important role in the air campaign against Serbia and Montenegro in the former republic of Yugoslavia. From March to June 1999 the aircraft were deployed in operation Allied Force directing allied strike and air defence aircraft to and from their targets. Over 1,000 aircraft operating from bases in Germany and Italy took part in the air campaign which was intended to destroy Yugoslav air defenses and high-value targets such as the bridges across the Danube river, factories, power stations, telecommunications facilities, and military installations.\nOn 18 November 2015, an E-3G was deployed to the Middle East to begin flying combat missions in support of Operation Inherent Resolve against ISIL, marking the first combat deployment of the upgraded Block 40/45 aircraft.\nFrance and United Kingdom.\nIn February 1987 the UK and France ordered E-3 aircraft in a joint project which saw deliveries start in 1991. The British requirement arose due to the cancellation of the Nimrod AEW3 project. While France operates its E-3F aircraft independently of NATO, UK E-3Ds formed the E-3D Component of the NATO Airborne Early Warning and Control Force (NAEWCF), receiving much of their tasking directly from NATO. However, RAF E-3Ds remain UK manned and capable of independent, national tasking. This has been done on numerous occasions, notably when E-3Ds were committed to operations over Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2003. The UK fleet has slowly been reduced from 7 since 2011 with plans for replacement by five E-7 Wedgetails from 2023. France operates four aircraft, all fitted with the newer CFM56-2 engines.\nOn 27 January 2015, the RAF deployed an E-3D Sentry to Cyprus in support of U.S.-led coalition airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria.\nNATO.\nNATO acquired 18 E-3As and support equipment, with the first aircraft delivered in January 1982. The aircraft are registered in Luxembourg. The eighteen E-3s were operated by Number 1, 2 and 3 Squadrons of NATO's E-3 Component, based at Geilenkirchen. Presently, 16 NATO E-3As are in the inventory, since one E-3 was lost in a crash and one was retired from service in 2015. The latter was due for its six-year cycle Depot Level Maintenance (DLM) inspection which would have been very costly. \nThe so-called \"449 Retirement Project\" resulted in reclamation of critical parts with a value of upwards of $40,000,000 which will be used to support the 16 active aircraft. Some of the parts to be removed are no longer on the market or have become very expensive.\nNATO E-3s participated in Operation Eagle Assist after the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon. NATO and RAF E-3s participated in the military intervention in Libya.\nIncidents and accidents.\nE-3s have been involved in three hull-loss accidents, and one radar antenna was destroyed during RSIP development (see photo under Avionics).\nReferences.\nNotes\nCitations\nBibliography"}
{"id": "10385", "revid": "2043601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10385", "title": "Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint STARS", "text": "The Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) is a United States Air Force airborne ground surveillance, battle management and command and control aircraft. It tracks ground vehicles and some aircraft, collects imagery, and relays tactical pictures to ground and air theater commanders. The aircraft is operated by both active duty U.S. Air Force and Air National Guard units and also carries specially trained U.S. Army personnel as additional flight crew.\nDevelopment.\nJoint STARS evolved from separate United States Army and Air Force programs to develop technology to detect, locate and attack enemy armor at ranges beyond the forward area of troops. In 1982, the programs were merged and the U.S. Air Force became the lead agent. The concept and sensor technology for the E-8 was developed and tested on the Tacit Blue experimental aircraft. The prime contract was awarded to Grumman Aerospace Corporation in September 1985 for two E-8A development systems.\nUpgrades.\nIn late 2005, Northrop Grumman was awarded a contract for upgrading engines and other systems. Pratt &amp; Whitney, in a joint venture with Seven Q Seven (SQS), will produce and deliver JT8D-219 engines for the E-8s. Their greater efficiency will allow the Joint STARS to spend more time on station, take off from a wider range of runways, climb faster, fly higher all with a much reduced cost per flying hour.\nIn December 2008, an E-8C test aircraft took its first flight with the new engines. In 2009, the company began engine replacement and additional upgrade efforts. However, the re-engining funding was temporarily halted in 2009 as the Air Force began to consider other options for performing the JSTARS mission.\nDesign.\nThe E-8C is an aircraft modified from the Boeing 707-300 series commercial airliner. The E-8 carries specialized radar, communications, operations and control subsystems. The most prominent external feature is the 40\u00a0ft (12\u00a0m) canoe-shaped radome under the forward fuselage that houses the 24\u00a0ft (7.3\u00a0m) APY-7 active electronically scanned array side looking airborne radar antenna.\nThe E-8C can respond quickly and effectively to support worldwide military contingency operations. It is a jam-resistant system capable of operating while experiencing heavy electronic countermeasures. The E-8C can fly a mission profile for 9 hours without refueling. Its range and on-station time can be substantially increased through in-flight refueling.\nRadar and systems.\nThe AN/APY-7 radar can operate in wide area surveillance, ground moving target indicator (GMTI), fixed target indicator (FTI) target classification, and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) modes.\nTo pick up moving targets, the Doppler radar looks at the Doppler frequency shift of the returned signal. It can look from a long range, which the military refers to as a high standoff capability. The antenna can be tilted to either side of the aircraft for a 120-degree field of view covering nearly 50,000\u00a0km2 (19,305 mile\u00b2) and can simultaneously track 600 targets at more than 250\u00a0km (152 miles). The GMTI modes cannot pick up objects that are too small, insufficiently dense, or stationary. Data processing allows the APY-7 to differentiate between armored vehicles (tracked tanks) and trucks, allowing targeting personnel to better select the appropriate ordnance for various targets.\nThe system's SAR modes can produce images of stationary objects. Objects with many angles (for example, the interior of a pick-up bed) will give a much better radar signature, or specular return. In addition to being able to detect, locate and track large numbers of ground vehicles, the radar has a limited capability to detect helicopters, rotating antennas and low, slow-moving fixed-wing aircraft.\nThe radar and computer subsystems on the E-8C can gather and display broad and detailed battlefield information. Data is collected as events occur. This includes position and tracking information on enemy and friendly ground forces. The information is relayed in near-real time to the US Army's common ground stations via the secure jam-resistant surveillance and control data link (SCDL) and to other ground C4I nodes beyond line-of-sight via ultra high frequency satellite communications.\nOther major E-8C prime mission equipment are the communications/datalink (COMM/DLX) and operations and control (O&amp;C)subsystems. Eighteen operator workstations display computer-processed data in graphic and tabular format on video screens. Operators and technicians perform battle management, surveillance, weapons, intelligence, communications and maintenance functions.\nNorthrop Grumman has tested the installation of a MS-177 camera on an E-8C to provide real time visual target confirmation.\nBattle management.\nIn missions from peacekeeping operations to major theater war, the E-8C can provide targeting data and intelligence for attack aviation, naval surface fire, field artillery and friendly maneuver forces. The information helps air and land commanders to control the battlespace.\nThe E-8's ground-moving radar can tell approximate number of vehicles, location, speed, and direction of travel. It cannot identify exactly what type of vehicle a target is, tell what equipment it has, or discern whether it is friendly, hostile, or a bystander, so commanders often crosscheck the JSTARS data against other sources. In the Army, JSTARS data is analyzed in and disseminated from a Ground Station Module (GSM).\nOperational history.\nThe two E-8A development aircraft were deployed in 1991 to participate in Operation Desert Storm under the direction of USAF Colonel Harry H. Heimple, Program Director, even though they were still in development. The joint program accurately tracked mobile Iraqi forces, including tanks and Scud missiles. Crews flew developmental aircraft on 49 combat sorties, accumulating more than 500 combat hours and a 100% mission effectiveness rate.\nThese Joint STARS developmental aircraft also participated in Operation Joint Endeavor, a NATO peacekeeping mission, in December 1995. While flying in friendly air space, the test-bed E-8A and pre-production E-8C aircraft monitored ground movements to confirm compliance with the Dayton Peace Accords agreements. Crews flew 95 consecutive operational sorties and more than 1,000 flight hours with a 98% mission effectiveness rate.\nThe 93d Air Control Wing, which activated 29 January 1996, accepted its first aircraft, 11 June 1996, and deployed in support of Operation Joint Endeavor in October. The provisional 93d Air Expeditionary Group monitored treaty compliance while NATO rotated troops through Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first production E-8C and a pre-production E-8C flew 36 operational sorties and more than 470 flight hours with a 100% effectiveness rate. The wing declared initial operational capability 18 December 1997 after receiving the second production aircraft. Operation Allied Force saw Joint STARS in action again from February to June 1999 accumulating more than 1,000 flight hours and a 94.5% mission-effectiveness rate in support of the U.S. lead Kosovo War.\nOn 1 October 2002, the 93d Air Control Wing (93 ACW) was \"blended\" with the 116th Bomb Wing in a ceremony at Robins Air Force Base, Georgia. The 116 BW was an Air National Guard wing equipped with the B-1B Lancer bomber at Robins AFB. As a result of a USAF reorganization of the B-1B force, all B-1Bs were assigned to active duty wings, resulting in the 116 BW lacking a current mission. The newly created wing was designated as the 116th Air Control Wing (116 ACW). The 93 ACW was inactivated the same day. The 116 ACW constituted the first fully blended wing of active duty and Air National Guard airmen.\nThe wing took delivery of the 17th and final E-8C on 23 March 2005. The E-8C Joint STARS routinely supports various taskings of the Combined Force Command Korea during the North Korean winter exercise cycle and for the United Nations enforcing resolutions on Iraq. The twelfth production aircraft, outfitted with an upgraded operations and control subsystem, was delivered to the USAF on 5 November 2001.\nIn March 2009, a Joint STARS aircraft was damaged beyond economical repair when a test plug was left on a fuel tank vent, subsequently causing the fuel tank to rupture during in-flight refueling. There were no casualties but the aircraft sustained $25 million in damage.\nIn September 2009, Loren B. Thompson of the Lexington Institute raised the question of why most of the Joint STARS fleet was sitting idle instead of being used to track insurgents in Afghanistan. Thompson states that the Joint STARS' radar has an inherent capacity to find what the Army calls 'dismounted' targets\u2014insurgents walking around or placing roadside bombs. Thompson's neutrality has been questioned by some since Lexington Institute has been heavily funded by defense contractors, including Northrop Grumman.\nRecent trials of Joint STARS in Afghanistan are destined to develop tactics, techniques and procedures in tracking dismounted, moving groups of Taliban.\nIn January 2011, Northrop Grumman's E-8C Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) test bed aircraft completed the second of two deployments to Naval Air Station Point Mugu, California, in support of the U.S. Navy Joint Surface Warfare Joint Capability Technology Demonstration to test its Network-Enabled Weapon (NEW) architecture. The Joint STARS aircraft executed three Operational Utility Assessment flights and demonstrated its ability to guide anti-ship weapons against surface combatants at a variety of standoff distances in the NEW architecture. \nFrom 2001 to January 2011 the Joint STARS fleet flew more than 63,000 hours in 5,200 combat missions in support of Operations Iraqi Freedom, Enduring Freedom and New Dawn.\nOn 1 October 2011, the \"blended\" wing construct of the 116th Air Control Wing (116 ACW), combining Air National Guard and Regular Air Force personnel in a single unit was discontinued. On this date, the 461st Air Control Wing (461 ACW) was established at Robins AFB as the Air Force's sole active duty E-8 Joint STARS wing while the 116 ACW reverted to a traditional Air National Guard wing within the Georgia Air National Guard. Both units share the same E-8 aircraft and will often fly with mixed crews, but now function as separate units.\nFuture.\nThe Air Force began an analysis of alternatives (AOA) in March 2010 for its next generation ground GMTI radar aircraft fleet. The study was completed in March 2012 and recommended buying a new business jet-based ISR aircraft, such as a version of the P-8 Poseidon, and the RQ-4B Global Hawk Block 40. The Air Force says Joint STARS is in a phase of capability improvements and is expected to remain in operation through 2030.\nOn 23 January 2014, the USAF revealed a plan for the acquisition of a new business jet-class replacement for the E-8C Joint STARS. The program is called Joint STARS Recap and plans for the aircraft to reach initial operating capability (IOC) by 2022. The airframe must be more efficient, and separate contracts will be awarded for developing the aircraft, airborne sensor, battle management command and control (BMC2) system, and communications subsystem. \nOn 8 April 2014, the Air Force held an industry day for companies interested in competing for JSTARS Recap; attendees included Boeing, Bombardier Aerospace, and Gulfstream Aerospace. Air Force procurement documents called for a replacement for the Boeing 707-based E-8C as a \"business jet class\" airframe that is \"significantly smaller and more efficient.\" Indicative specification were for an aircraft with a 10-13 person crew with a radar array and capable of flying at 38,000\u00a0ft for eight hours. \nIn August 2015, the Air Force issued contracts to Boeing, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman for a one-year pre-engineering and manufacturing development effort to mature and test competing designs ahead of a downselect in late 2017. \nDuring the fiscal 2019 budget rollout briefing it was announced that the Air Force will not move forward with an E-8C replacement aircraft. Funding for the JSTARS recapitalization program was instead be diverted to pay for development of an advanced battle management system.\nOperators.\nAir Combat Command - 1991\u2013present "}
{"id": "10388", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10388", "title": "Eric Cheney", "text": "Eric Cheney (5 January 1924 \u2013 30 December 2001) was an English motorcycle racer, designer and independent constructor. He was known as one of the best motorcycle frame designers of his era, concentrating mainly in the off-road competition aftermarket.\nEarly life.\nCheney attended a school in Winchester based on Lancasterian principles before joining the Royal Navy at the age of 18, where he served on wartime Arctic convoys and in motor torpedo boats and gained experience of engineering and working on high performance engines. Cheney also worked on the development of remote controlled submarines for the Royal Navy.\nCareer.\nAfter World War II, Cheney joined the motorcycle dealers Archers of Aldershot as a mechanic. Cheney began racing motocross and became one Britain's best riders, along with his travelling companion Les Archer, who went on to become European champion. He had ten successful years on the Continental circuit but a prolonged illness due to an infection contracted while racing in Algeria ended his riding career. He moved into bike preparation and designs for motorcycle chassis and suspension systems.\nCheney had no formal training as a motorcycle designer yet was able to create original and high-performance motorcycle chassis designs working in a simple workshop that was essentially a domestic garage. His approach has been described as \"like a medieval engineer\" as in an age of computer-aided design and significant resources for research and development teams, he worked entirely by intuition. Eric relied on his long personal experience of international off-road competition riding and would prepare his initial designs for a new motorcycle frame in chalk on the wall of his workshop. Experimenting with different lines until he was satisfied, Cheney would then form the steel tubing using his chalk drawings as a guide. Only when he had built a working prototype motorcycle would he start work on a final jig for mass production. He was once quoted as saying \"I know when it's right and it screams at me when it's wrong.\"\nIn the late 1960s, the British motorcycle industry was unable to support a national team to compete in the International Six Days Trial so, Cheney hand built a limited number of ISDT Cheney-Triumphs using his own design of twin down-tube frame with a specially tuned Triumph 5TA engine. Fitted with tapered conical hubs, special motocross forks and large alloy fuel tanks, a Cheney Triumph was first used in the 1968 British Trophy Team. In 1970 and 1971 three 504cc Cheney Triumphs were used by the British team in the ISDT, in which Cheney won a manufacturer's prize. Replicas were built, but production was short-lived due to a shortage of engines.\nCheney's most noted successes were in the Grand Prix road racing championships, with Phil Read using his chassis in tandem with a Yamaha engine to win the 1971 250cc world championship. His designs were the last British ones to win a Grand Prix. He never worked for any of the major manufacturers but maintained a productive relationship with BSA in its heyday. After the demise of BSA in 1972, Cheney joined with former BSA factory rider John Banks to develop and campaign a highly successful BSA powered motocross bike.\nSome of Cheney's motorcycle designs are now famous in their own right, such as the competition BSA Gold Stars of Jerry Scott and Keith Hickman and the John Banks replica which used a BSA B50 engine specially tuned by Cheney. He also built some racing frames for Suzuki Grand Prix motorcycles in 1968 and, it has been suggested that Suzuki engineers incorporated features of Cheney's designs, such as magnesium hubs and lower fork legs into production road going motorcycles. Cheney's company was originally known as Eric Cheney Designs, then changed to Inter-Moto, now known as Cheney Racing.\nSteve McQueen.\nAmerican actor Steve McQueen, an experienced off-road rider who represented the United States in the ISDT bought a number of Cheney's motorcycles at full price because he considered them better than other makes."}
{"id": "10390", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10390", "title": "Econometrics", "text": "Econometrics is the application of statistical methods to economic data in order to give empirical content to economic relationships. More precisely, it is \"the quantitative analysis of actual economic phenomena based on the concurrent development of theory and observation, related by appropriate methods of inference\". An introductory economics textbook describes econometrics as allowing economists \"to sift through mountains of data to extract simple relationships\". The first known use of the term \"econometrics\" (in cognate form) was by Polish economist Pawe\u0142 Ciompa in 1910. Jan Tinbergen is considered by many to be one of the founding fathers of econometrics. Ragnar Frisch is credited with coining the term in the sense in which it is used today.\nA basic tool for econometrics is the multiple linear regression model. \"Econometric theory\" uses statistical theory and mathematical statistics to evaluate and develop econometric methods. Econometricians try to find estimators that have desirable statistical properties including unbiasedness, efficiency, and consistency. \"Applied econometrics\" uses theoretical econometrics and real-world data for assessing economic theories, developing econometric models, analysing economic history, and forecasting.\nBasic models: linear regression.\nA basic tool for econometrics is the multiple linear regression model. In modern econometrics, other statistical tools are frequently used, but linear regression is still the most frequently used starting point for an analysis. Estimating a linear regression on two variables can be visualised as fitting a line through data points representing paired values of the independent and dependent variables.\nFor example, consider Okun's law, which relates GDP growth to the unemployment rate. This relationship is represented in a linear regression where the change in unemployment rate (formula_1) is a function of an intercept (formula_2), a given value of GDP growth multiplied by a slope coefficient formula_3 and an error term, formula_4:\nThe unknown parameters formula_2 and formula_3 can be estimated. Here formula_3 is estimated to be \u22121.77 and formula_2 is estimated to be 0.83. This means that if GDP growth increased by one percentage point, the unemployment rate would be predicted to drop by 0.83 - 1.77 *1 points. The model could then be tested for statistical significance as to whether an increase in growth is associated with a decrease in the unemployment, as hypothesized. If the estimate of formula_3 were not significantly different from 0, the test would fail to find evidence that changes in the growth rate and unemployment rate were related. The variance in a prediction of the dependent variable (unemployment) as a function of the independent variable (GDP growth) is given in polynomial least squares.\nTheory.\nEconometric theory uses statistical theory and mathematical statistics to evaluate and develop econometric methods. Econometricians try to find estimators that have desirable statistical properties including unbiasedness, efficiency, and consistency. An estimator is unbiased if its expected value is the true value of the parameter; it is consistent if it converges to the true value as the sample size gets larger, and it is efficient if the estimator has lower standard error than other unbiased estimators for a given sample size. Ordinary least squares (OLS) is often used for estimation since it provides the BLUE or \"best linear unbiased estimator\" (where \"best\" means most efficient, unbiased estimator) given the Gauss-Markov assumptions. When these assumptions are violated or other statistical properties are desired, other estimation techniques such as maximum likelihood estimation, generalized method of moments, or generalized least squares are used. Estimators that incorporate prior beliefs are advocated by those who favour Bayesian statistics over traditional, classical or \"frequentist\" approaches.\nMethods.\n\"Applied econometrics\" uses theoretical econometrics and real-world data for assessing economic theories, developing econometric models, analysing economic history, and forecasting.\nEconometrics may use standard statistical models to study economic questions, but most often they are with observational data, rather than in controlled experiments. In this, the design of observational studies in econometrics is similar to the design of studies in other observational disciplines, such as astronomy, epidemiology, sociology and political science. Analysis of data from an observational study is guided by the study protocol, although exploratory data analysis may be useful for generating new hypotheses. Economics often analyses systems of equations and inequalities, such as supply and demand hypothesized to be in equilibrium. Consequently, the field of econometrics has developed methods for identification and estimation of simultaneous equations models. These methods are analogous to methods used in other areas of science, such as the field of system identification in systems analysis and control theory. Such methods may allow researchers to estimate models and investigate their empirical consequences, without directly manipulating the system.\nOne of the fundamental statistical methods used by econometricians is regression analysis. Regression methods are important in econometrics because economists typically cannot use controlled experiments. Econometricians often seek illuminating natural experiments in the absence of evidence from controlled experiments. Observational data may be subject to omitted-variable bias and a list of other problems that must be addressed using causal analysis of simultaneous-equation models.\nIn addition to natural experiments, quasi-experimental methods have been used increasingly commonly by econometricians since the 1980s, in order to credibly identify causal effects.\nExample.\nA simple example of a relationship in econometrics from the field of labour economics is:\nThis example assumes that the natural logarithm of a person's wage is a linear function of the number of years of education that person has acquired. The parameter formula_12 measures the increase in the natural log of the wage attributable to one more year of education. The term formula_4 is a random variable representing all other factors that may have direct influence on wage. The econometric goal is to estimate the parameters, formula_14 under specific assumptions about the random variable formula_4. For example, if formula_4 is uncorrelated with years of education, then the equation can be estimated with ordinary least squares.\nIf the researcher could randomly assign people to different levels of education, the data set thus generated would allow estimation of the effect of changes in years of education on wages. In reality, those experiments cannot be conducted. Instead, the econometrician observes the years of education of and the wages paid to people who differ along many dimensions. Given this kind of data, the estimated coefficient on Years of Education in the equation above reflects both the effect of education on wages and the effect of other variables on wages, if those other variables were correlated with education. For example, people born in certain places may have higher wages and higher levels of education. Unless the econometrician controls for place of birth in the above equation, the effect of birthplace on wages may be falsely attributed to the effect of education on wages.\nThe most obvious way to control for birthplace is to include a measure of the effect of birthplace in the equation above. Exclusion of birthplace, together with the assumption that formula_17 is uncorrelated with education produces a misspecified model. Another technique is to include in the equation additional set of measured covariates which are not instrumental variables, yet render formula_12 identifiable. An overview of econometric methods used to study this problem were provided by Card (1999).\nJournals.\nThe main journals that publish work in econometrics are \"Econometrica\", the \"Journal of Econometrics\", \"The Review of Economics and Statistics\", \"Econometric Theory\", the \"Journal of Applied Econometrics\", \"Econometric Reviews\", \"The Econometrics Journal\", and the \"Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics\".\nLimitations and criticisms.\nLike other forms of statistical analysis, badly specified econometric models may show a spurious relationship where two variables are correlated but causally unrelated. In a study of the use of econometrics in major economics journals, McCloskey concluded that some economists report p-values (following the Fisherian tradition of tests of significance of point null-hypotheses) and neglect concerns of type II errors; some economists fail to report estimates of the size of effects (apart from statistical significance) and to discuss their economic importance. She also argues that some economists also fail to use economic reasoning for model selection, especially for deciding which variables to include in a regression.\nIn some cases, economic variables cannot be experimentally manipulated as treatments randomly assigned to subjects. In such cases, economists rely on observational studies, often using data sets with many strongly associated covariates, resulting in enormous numbers of models with similar explanatory ability but different covariates and regression estimates. Regarding the plurality of models compatible with observational data-sets, Edward Leamer urged that \"professionals ... properly withhold belief until an inference can be shown to be adequately insensitive to the choice of assumptions\"."}
{"id": "10391", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10391", "title": "Ellen van Langen", "text": "Ellen Gezina Maria van Langen (born February 9, 1966) is a Dutch former middle distance runner, who specialised in the 800 metres. A talented but injury-ridden athlete, she was the 1992 Olympic Champion for the women's 800 meters. She is now the director of the FBK games (the Hengelo meeting).\nCareer.\nVan Langen was born in Oldenzaal, Overijssel. Before she started running she played football. She only started to run seriously at 20. In 1989, she won her first of four national championships in the 800 meters and went on to win a silver medal behind Ana Quirot (Cuba) at the World Student Games (Universiade), running 1:59.82. In 1990, she finished fourth in the final of the European Championships in Split, with a Dutch national record of 1:57.57, behind the East German athletes Sigrun Wodars (gold), Christine Wachtel (silver) and Liliya Nurutdinova (bronze) from the Soviet Union.\nDuring the year 1991, she was troubled by an Achilles tendon injury. At the Tokyo World Championships she was eliminated in the heats. The next year, leading up to the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, she defeated Tokyo gold medallist Liliya Nurutdinova at the Fanny Blankers-Koen Games in Hengelo on 28 June in 1:56.66, the fastest time of the season prior to the Games. Just two weeks before the Olympics, she ran another fast time of 1:56.92 at Hechtel.\nAt the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Van Langen won the Olympic title in the 800 metres in a time of 1:55.54, a time which is still the Dutch national record. Fearing her final sprint, her competitors including favorites Nurutdinova, Quirot, Ella Kovacs (Romania) and Maria Mutola (Mozambique) set a rapid pace, running the first lap in a very fast time of 55.73, with Van Langen only in 6th position. Entering the final stretch Nurutdinova, who had led the final from the start, had a slight lead but Van Langen moved through on the inside in the last 50m to win a surprise victory, beating Nurutdinova (silver) and Quirot (bronze).\nThe year 1992 remained her top year, winning 10 of her 11 races over 800m. After her Olympic triumph, she was plagued by various injuries. Her best result after 1992 was a 6th-place finish at the 1995 World Championships at Gothenburg. The ongoing injuries prevented her from defending her Olympic title in 1996. She retired from the sport in 1998.\nVan Langen later explained the secret of her success. \"I think what I could do well is I could die very well in a race and still continue,\u201d she said. \u201cThat is very hard, because it hurts running the 800 meters. You have to overcome some boundaries in yourself to continue when it hurts like hell. I was good at it. If the Olympic race would have been run by each athlete individual and the fastest time was the winner I would not have won.\" She added: \"I was also good in tactics, looking around me and taking the right decisions.\"\nAfter her gold medal win in 1992 the Amsterdam unemployment benefits office terminated her dole on grounds that she might earn money from her victory in the future. She has a degree in economics from the University of Amsterdam, and currently works as an event manager for Global Sports Communication.\nExternal links.\n&lt;br&gt;\n \n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "10392", "revid": "36029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10392", "title": "Emacs Lisp", "text": "Emacs Lisp is a dialect of the Lisp programming language used as a scripting language by Emacs (a text editor family most commonly associated with GNU Emacs and XEmacs). It is used for implementing most of the editing functionality built into Emacs, the remainder being written in C, as is the Lisp interpreter. Emacs Lisp is also termed Elisp, although there is also an older, unrelated Lisp dialect with that name.\nUsers of Emacs commonly write Emacs Lisp code to customize and extend Emacs. Other options include the \"Customize\" feature that's been in GNU Emacs since version 20. Itself written in Emacs Lisp, Customize provides a set of preferences pages allowing the user to set options and preview their effect in the running Emacs session. When the user saves their changes, Customize simply writes the necessary Emacs Lisp code to the user's config file, which can be set to a special file that only Customize uses, to avoid the possibility of altering the user's own file.\nEmacs Lisp can also function as a scripting language, much like the Unix Bourne shell or Perl, by calling Emacs in \"batch mode\". In this way it may be called from the command line or via an executable file, and its editing functions, such as buffers and movement commands are available to the program just as in the normal mode. No user interface is presented when Emacs is started in batch mode; it simply executes the passed-in script and exits, displaying any output from the script.\nCompared to other Lisp dialects.\nEmacs Lisp is most closely related to Maclisp, with some later influence from Common Lisp. It supports imperative and functional programming methods. Richard Stallman chose Lisp as the extension language for his rewrite of Emacs (the original used Text Editor and Corrector (TECO) as its extension language) because of its powerful features, including the ability to treat functions as data. Although the Common Lisp standard had yet to be formulated, Scheme existed at the time Stallman was rewriting Gosling Emacs into GNU Emacs. He chose not to use it because of its comparatively poor performance on workstations (as opposed to the minicomputers that were Emacs' traditional home), and he wanted to develop a dialect which he thought would be more easily optimized.\nThe Lisp dialect used in Emacs differs substantially from the more modern Common Lisp and Scheme dialects used for applications programming. A prominent characteristic of Emacs Lisp is in its use of dynamic rather than lexical scope by default (see below). That is, a function may reference local variables in the scope it is called from, but not in the scope where it was defined.\nExample.\nTo understand the logic behind Emacs Lisp, it is important to remember that there is an emphasis on providing data structures and features specific to making a versatile text editor over implementing a general-purpose programming language. For example, Emacs Lisp cannot easily read a file a line at a time\u2014the entire file must be read into an Emacs buffer. However, Emacs Lisp provides many features for navigating and modifying buffer text at a sentence, paragraph, or higher syntactic level as defined by modes.\nHere follows a simple example of an Emacs extension written in Emacs Lisp. In Emacs, the editing area can be split into separate areas called \"windows\", each displaying a different \"buffer\". A buffer is a region of text loaded into Emacs' memory (possibly from a file) which can be saved into a text document.\nUsers can press the default C-x 2 key binding to open a new window. This runs the Emacs Lisp function codice_1. Normally, when the new window appears, it displays the same buffer as the previous one. Suppose we wish to make it display the next available buffer. In order to do this, the user writes the following Emacs Lisp code, in either an existing Emacs Lisp source file or an empty Emacs buffer:\n (interactive)\n (split-window-below)\n (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))\nThe first statement, codice_2, defines a new function, codice_3, which calls codice_1 (the old window-splitting function), then tells the new window to display another (new) buffer. The second statement, codice_5 re-binds the key sequence \"C-x 2\" to the new function.\nThis can also be written using the feature called \"advice\", which allows the user to create wrappers around existing functions instead of defining their own. This has the advantage of not requiring keybindings to be changed and working wherever the original function is called, as well as being simpler to write but the disadvantage of making debugging more complicated. For this reason, \"advice\" is not allowed in the source code of GNU Emacs, but if a user wishes, the advice feature can be used in their code to reimplement the above code as follows:\n(defadvice split-window-below\n (after my-window-splitting-advice first () activate)\n (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))\nThis instructs codice_1 to execute the user-supplied code whenever it is called, before executing the rest of the function. Advice can also be specified to execute after the original function, around it\u2014literally wrapping the original, or to conditionally execute the original function based on the results of the advice.\nEmacs 24.4 replaces this codice_7 mechanism with codice_8, which is claimed to be more flexible and simpler. The advice above could be reimplemented using the new system as:\n (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))\nThese changes take effect as soon as the code is evaluated. It is not necessary to recompile, restart Emacs, or even rehash a configuration file. If the code is saved into an Emacs init file, then Emacs will load the extension the next time it starts. Otherwise, the changes must be reevaluated manually when Emacs is restarted.\nSource code.\nEmacs Lisp code is stored in filesystems as plain text files, by convention with the filename suffix \".el\". The user's init file is an exception, often appearing as \".emacs\" despite being evaluated as any Emacs Lisp code. Recent versions of Emacs (\"recent\" in a 40-year-old program meaning roughly any version released since the mid-1990s) will also load ~/.emacs.el and ~/.emacs.d/init.el. Additionally, users may specify any file to load as a config file on the command line, or explicitly state that no config file is to be loaded. When the files are loaded, an interpreter component of the Emacs program reads and parses the functions and variables, storing them in memory. They are then available to other editing functions, and to user commands. Functions and variables can be freely modified and redefined without restarting the editor or reloading the config file.\nIn order to save time and memory space, much of the functionality of Emacs loads only when required. Each set of optional features shipped with Emacs is implemented by a collection of Emacs code called a package or library. For example, there is a library for highlighting keywords in program source code, and a library for playing the game of Tetris. Each library is implemented using one or more Emacs Lisp source files. Libraries can define one or more \"major modes\" to activate and control their function.\nEmacs developers write certain functions in C. These are \"primitives\", also termed \"built-in functions\" or \"subrs\". Although primitives can be called from Lisp code, they can only be modified by editing the C source files and recompiling. In GNU Emacs, primitives are not available as external libraries; they are part of the Emacs executable. In XEmacs, runtime loading of such primitives is possible, using the operating system's support for dynamic linking. Functions may be written as primitives because they need access to external data and libraries not otherwise available from Emacs Lisp, or because they are called often enough that the comparative speed of C versus Emacs Lisp makes a worthwhile difference.\nHowever, because errors in C code can easily lead to segmentation violations or to more subtle bugs, which crash the editor, and because writing C code that interacts correctly with the Emacs Lisp garbage collector is error-prone, the number of functions implemented as primitives is kept to a necessary minimum.\nByte code.\n\"Byte-compiling\" can make Emacs Lisp code execute faster. Emacs contains a compiler which can translate Emacs Lisp source files into a special representation termed bytecode. Emacs Lisp bytecode files have the filename suffix \".elc\". Compared to source files, bytecode files load faster, occupy less space on the disk, use less memory when loaded, and run faster.\nBytecode still runs more slowly than primitives, but functions loaded as bytecode can be easily modified and re-loaded. In addition, bytecode files are platform-independent. The standard Emacs Lisp code distributed with Emacs is loaded as bytecode, although the matching source files are usually provided for the user's reference as well. User-supplied extensions are typically not byte-compiled, as they are neither as large nor as computationally intensive.\nLanguage features.\nNotably, the \"cl\" package implements a fairly large subset of Common Lisp.\nEmacs Lisp (unlike some other Lisp implementations) does not do tail-call optimization. Without this, tail recursions can eventually lead to stack overflow.\nThe apel library aids in writing portable Emacs Lisp code, with the help of the polysylabi platform bridge.\nEmacs Lisp is a Lisp-2 meaning that it has a function namespace which is separate from the namespace it uses for other variables.\nFrom dynamic to lexical scoping.\nLike MacLisp, Emacs Lisp uses dynamic scope, offering static (or lexical) as an option starting from version 24. It can be activated by setting the file local variable codice_9.\nIn dynamic scoping, if a programmer declares a variable within the scope of a function, it is available to subroutines called from within that function. Originally, this was intended as an optimization; lexical scoping was still uncommon and of uncertain performance. \"I asked RMS when he was implementing emacs lisp why it was dynamically scoped and his exact reply was that lexical scope was too inefficient.\" Dynamic scoping was also meant to provide greater flexibility for user customizations. However, dynamic scoping has several disadvantages. Firstly, it can easily lead to bugs in large programs, due to unintended interactions between variables in different functions. Secondly, accessing variables under dynamic scoping is generally slower than under lexical scoping.\nAlso, the codice_10 macro in the \"cl\" package does provide effective lexical scope to Emacs Lisp programmers, but while \"cl\" is widely used, codice_10 is rarely used."}
{"id": "10393", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10393", "title": "Edward Bulwer-Lytton", "text": "Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Baron Lytton, PC (25 May 1803 \u2013 18 January 1873) was an English writer and politician. He served as a Whig member of Parliament from 1831 to 1841 and a Conservative from 1851 to 1866. He was Secretary of State for the Colonies from June 1858 to June 1859, choosing Richard Clement Moody as founder of British Columbia. He declined the Crown of Greece in 1862 after King Otto abdicated. He was created Baron Lytton of Knebworth in 1866. His marriage to the writer Rosina Bulwer Lytton broke down. Her detention in an insane asylum provoked a public outcry. Bulwer-Lytton's works sold and paid him well. He coined the phrases \"the great unwashed\", \"pursuit of the almighty dollar\", \"the pen is mightier than the sword\", and \"dweller on the threshold\", and the opening phrase \"It was a dark and stormy night.\" Yet his standing declined and he is little read today. The sardonic Bulwer-Lytton Fiction Contest, held annually since 1982, claims to seek the \"opening sentence of the worst of all possible novels\".\nLife.\nBulwer was born on 25 May 1803 to General William Earle Bulwer of Heydon Hall and Wood Dalling, Norfolk and Elizabeth Barbara Lytton, daughter of Richard Warburton Lytton of Knebworth House, Hertfordshire. He had two older brothers, William Earle Lytton Bulwer (1799\u20131877) and Henry (1801\u20131872), later Lord Dalling and Bulwer.\nHis father died and his mother moved to London when he was four years old. When he was 15, a tutor named Wallington, who tutored him at Ealing, encouraged him to publish an immature work: \"Ishmael and Other Poems\". Around this time, Bulwer fell in love, but the woman's father induced her to marry another man. She died about the time that Bulwer went to Cambridge and he stated that her loss affected all his subsequent life.\nIn 1822 Bulwer-Lytton entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he met John Auldjo, but soon moved to Trinity Hall. In 1825 he won the Chancellor's Gold Medal for English verse. In the following year he took his BA degree and printed for private circulation a small volume of poems, \"Weeds and Wild Flowers\". He purchased an army commission in 1826, but sold it in 1829 without serving.\nIn August 1827, he married Rosina Doyle Wheeler (1802\u20131882), a noted Irish beauty, but against the wishes of his mother, who withdrew his allowance, forcing him to work for a living. They had two children, Emily Elizabeth Bulwer-Lytton (1828\u20131848), and (Edward) Robert Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Earl of Lytton (1831\u20131891) who became Governor-General and Viceroy of British India (1876\u20131880). His writing and political work strained their marriage and his infidelity embittered Rosina. In 1833 they separated acrimoniously and in 1836 the separation became legal. Three years later, Rosina published \"Cheveley, or the Man of Honour\" (1839), a near-libellous fiction satirising her husband's alleged hypocrisy. In June 1858, when her husband was standing as parliamentary candidate for Hertfordshire, she denounced him at the hustings. He retaliated by threatening her publishers, withholding her allowance and denying her access to their children. Finally he had her committed to a mental asylum, but she was released a few weeks later after a public outcry. This she chronicled in a memoir, \"A Blighted Life\" (1880). She continued attacking her husband's character for several years.\nThe death of Bulwer's mother in 1843 meant his \"exhaustion of toil and study had been completed by great anxiety and grief,\" and by \"about the January of 1844, I was thoroughly shattered.\" In his mother's room at Knebworth House, which he inherited, he \"had inscribed above the mantelpiece a request that future generations preserve the room as his beloved mother had used it.\" It remains hardly changed to this day. On 20 February 1844, in accordance with his mother's will, he changed his surname from Bulwer to Bulwer-Lytton and assumed the arms of Lytton by royal licence. His widowed mother had done the same in 1811. His brothers remained plain \"Bulwer\".\nBy chance Bulwer-Lytton encountered a copy of \"Captain Claridge's work on the \"Water Cure\", as practised by Priessnitz, at Graefenberg\", and \"making allowances for certain exaggerations therein\", pondered the option of travelling to Graefenberg, but preferred to find something closer to home, with access to his own doctors in case of failure: \"I who scarcely lived through a day without leech or potion!\". After reading a pamphlet by Doctor James Wilson, who operated a hydropathic establishment with James Manby Gully at Malvern, he stayed there for \"some nine or ten weeks\", after which he \"continued the system some seven weeks longer under Doctor Weiss, at Petersham\", then again at \"Doctor Schmidt's magnificent hydropathic establishment at Boppart\" (at the former Marienberg Convent at Boppard), after developing a cold and fever upon his return home.\nWhen Otto, King of Greece abdicated in 1862, Bulwer-Lytton was offered the Greek Crown, but declined.\nThe English Rosicrucian society, founded in 1867 by Robert Wentworth Little, claimed Bulwer-Lytton as their \"Grand Patron\", but he wrote to the society complaining that he was \"extremely surprised\" by their use of the title, as he had \"never sanctioned such.\" Nevertheless, a number of esoteric groups have continued to claim Bulwer-Lytton as their own, chiefly because some of his writings \u2013 such as the 1842 book \"Zanoni\" \u2013 have included Rosicrucian and other esoteric notions. According to the Fulham Football Club, he once resided in the original Craven Cottage, today the site of their stadium.\nBulwer-Lytton had long suffered from a disease of the ear, and for the last two or three years of his life lived in Torquay nursing his health. After an operation to cure deafness, an abscess formed in the ear and burst; he endured intense pain for a week and died at 2\u00a0am on 18 January 1873, just short of his 70th birthday. The cause of death was unclear but it was thought the infection had affected his brain and caused a fit. Rosina outlived him by nine years. Against his wishes, Bulwer-Lytton was honoured with a burial in Westminster Abbey. His unfinished history \"Athens: Its Rise and Fall\" was published posthumously.\nPolitical career.\nBulwer began his political career as a follower of Jeremy Bentham. In 1831 he was elected member for St Ives, Cornwall, after which he was returned for Lincoln in 1832, and sat in Parliament for that city for nine years. He spoke in favour of the Reform Bill and took the lead in securing the reduction, after vainly essaying the repeal, of the newspaper stamp duties. His influence was perhaps most keenly felt when, on the Whigs' dismissal from office in 1834, he issued a pamphlet entitled \"A Letter to a Late Cabinet Minister on the Crisis\". Lord Melbourne, then Prime Minister, offered him a lordship of the Admiralty, which he declined as likely to interfere with his activity as an author.\nBulwer was created a baronet, of Knebworth House in the County of Hertford, in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom, in 1838. In 1841, he left Parliament and spent much of his time in travel. He did not return to politics until 1852, when having differed from Lord John Russell over the Corn Laws, he stood for Hertfordshire as a Conservative. Bulwer-Lytton held that seat until 1866, when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Lytton of Knebworth in the County of Hertford. In 1858 he entered Lord Derby's government as Secretary of State for the Colonies, thus serving alongside his old friend Disraeli. He was comparatively inactive in the House of Lords.\n\"Just prior to his government's defeat in 1859 the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, notified Sir George Ferguson Bowen of his appointment as Governor of the new colony to be known as \u2018Queen's Land\u2019.\" The draft letter was ranked #4 in the \u2018Top 150: Documenting Queensland\u2019 exhibition when it toured to venues around Queensland from February 2009 to April 2010. The exhibition was part of Queensland State Archives\u2019 events and exhibition program which contributed to the state's Q150 celebrations, marking the 150th anniversary of the separation of Queensland from New South Wales.\nBritish Columbia.\nWhen news of the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush reached London, Bulwer-Lytton, as Secretary of State for the Colonies, requested that the War Office recommend a field officer, \"a man of good judgement possessing a knowledge of mankind\", to lead a Corps of 150 (later increased to 172) Royal Engineers, who had been selected for their \"superior discipline and intelligence\". The War Office chose Richard Clement Moody, and Lord Lytton, who described Moody as his \"distinguished friend\", accepted the nomination in view of Moody's military record, his success as Governor of the Falkland Islands, and the distinguished record of his father, Colonel Thomas Moody, Knight at the Colonial Office. Moody was charged to establish British order and transform the newly established Colony of British Columbia (1858\u201366) into the British Empire's \"bulwark in the farthest west\" and \"found a second England on the shores of the Pacific.\" Lytton desired to send to the colony \"representatives of the best of British culture, not just a police force\": he sought men who possessed \"courtesy, high breeding and urbane knowledge of the world,\" and decided to send Moody, whom the Government considered to be the archetypal \"English gentleman and British Officer.\" at the head of the Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment, to whom he wrote an impassioned letter.\nThe former HBC Fort Dallas at Camchin, the confluence of the Thompson and Fraser Rivers, was renamed in his honour by Governor Sir James Douglas in 1858 as Lytton, British Columbia.\nLiterary works.\nBulwer-Lytton's literary career began in 1820 with the publication of a book of poems and spanned much of the 19th century. He wrote in a variety of genres, including historical fiction, mystery, romance, the occult and science fiction. He financed his extravagant way of life with a varied and prolific literary output, sometimes publishing anonymously. \nBulwer-Lytton published \"Falkland\" in 1827, a novel which was only a moderate success. But \"Pelham\" brought him public acclaim in 1828 and established his reputation as a wit and dandy. Its intricate plot and humorous, intimate portrayal of pre-Victorian dandyism kept gossips busy trying to associate public figures with characters in the book. \"Pelham\" resembled Benjamin Disraeli's first novel \"Vivian Grey\" (1827). The character of the villainous Richard Crawford in \"The Disowned\", also published in 1828, borrowed much from that of banker and forger Henry Fauntleroy, who was hanged in London in 1824 before a crowd of some 100,000.\nBulwer-Lytton admired Disraeli's father Isaac D'Israeli, himself a noted author. They began corresponding in the late 1820s and met for the first time in March 1830, when Isaac D'Israeli dined at Bulwer-Lytton's house. Also present that evening were Charles Pelham Villiers and Alexander Cockburn. The young Villiers had a long parliamentary career, while Cockburn became Lord Chief Justice of England in 1859.\nBulwer-Lytton reached his height of popularity with the publication of \"Godolphin\" (1833). This was followed by \"The Pilgrims of the Rhine\" (1834), \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1834), \"Rienzi, Last of the Roman Tribunes\" about Cola di Rienzo (1835), \"Leila; or, The Siege of Granada\" (1838), and \"Harold, the Last of the Saxons\" (1848). \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" was inspired by Karl Briullov's painting \"The Last Day of Pompeii\", which Bulwer-Lytton saw in Milan.\nHis \"New Timon\" lampooned Tennyson, who responded in kind. Bulwer-Lytton also wrote the horror story \"The Haunted and the Haunters; or, The House and the Brain\" (1859). Another novel with a supernatural theme was \"A Strange Story\" (1862), which was an influence on Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\".\nBulwer-Lytton wrote many other works, including \"Vril: The Power of the Coming Race\" (1871) which drew heavily on his interest in the occult and contributed to the early growth of the science fiction genre. Its story of a subterranean race waiting to reclaim the surface of the Earth is an early science fiction theme. The book popularised the Hollow Earth theory and may have inspired Nazi mysticism. His term \"vril\" lent its name to Bovril meat extract. \"Vril\" has been adopted by theosophists and occultists since the 1870s and became closely associated with the ideas of an esoteric neo-Nazism after 1945.\nHis play \"Money\" (1840) was first produced at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, London, on 8 December 1840. The first American production was at the Old Park Theater in New York on 1 February 1841. Subsequent productions include the Prince of Wales's Theatre's in 1872 and as the inaugural play at the new California Theatre (San Francisco) in 1869.\nAmong Bulwer-Lytton's lesser-known contributions to literature was that he convinced Charles Dickens to revise the ending of \"Great Expectations\" to make it more palatable to the reading public, as in the original version of the novel, Pip and Estella do not get together.\nLegacy.\nQuotations.\nBulwer-Lytton's most famous quotation is \"The pen is mightier than the sword\" from his play \"Richelieu\":\nbeneath the rule of men entirely great, the pen is mightier than the sword\nHe popularized the phrase \"pursuit of the almighty dollar\" from his novel \"The Coming Race\", and he is credited with \"the great unwashed\", using this disparaging term in his 1830 novel \"Paul Clifford\":\nHe is certainly a man who bathes and \"lives cleanly\", (two especial charges preferred against him by Messrs. the Great Unwashed). \nTheosophy.\nThe writers of theosophy were among those influenced by Bulwer-Lytton's work. Annie Besant and especially Helena Blavatsky incorporated his thoughts and ideas, particularly from \"The Last Days of Pompeii\", \"Vril, the Power of the Coming Race\" and \"Zanoni\" in her own books.\nContest.\nBulwer-Lytton's name lives on in the annual Bulwer-Lytton Fiction Contest, in which contestants think up terrible openings for imaginary novels, inspired by the first line of his 1830 novel \"Paul Clifford\":\nIt was a dark and stormy night; the rain fell in torrentsexcept at occasional intervals, when it was checked by a violent gust of wind which swept up the streets (for it is in London that our scene lies), rattling along the housetops, and fiercely agitating the scanty flame of the lamps that struggled against the darkness.\nEntrants in the contest seek to capture the rapid changes in point of view, the florid language, and the atmosphere of the full sentence. The opening was popularized by the \"Peanuts\" comic strip, in which Snoopy's sessions on the typewriter usually began with \"It was a dark and stormy night\". The same words also form the first sentence of Madeleine L'Engle's Newbery Medal-winning novel \"A Wrinkle in Time\". Similar wording appears in Edgar Allan Poe's 1831 short story \"The Bargain Lost\", although not at the very beginning. It reads:\nIt was a dark and stormy night. The rain fell in cataracts; and drowsy citizens started, from dreams of the deluge, to gaze upon the boisterous sea, which foamed and bellowed for admittance into the proud towers and marble palaces. Who would have thought of passions so fierce in that calm water that slumbers all day long? At a slight alabaster stand, trembling beneath the ponderous tomes which it supported, sat the hero of our story.\nOperas.\nSeveral of Bulwer-Lytton's novels were made into operas. One of them, \"Rienzi, der Letzte der Tribunen\" (1842) by Richard Wagner, eventually became more famous than the novel. \"Leonora\" (1846) by William Henry Fry, the first European-styled \"grand\" opera composed in the United States, is based on Bulwer-Lytton's play \"The Lady of Lyons\", as is Frederic Cowen's first opera \"Pauline\" (1876). Verdi rival Errico Petrella's most successful opera, \"Jone\" (1858), was based upon Bulwer-Lytton's \"The Last Days of Pompeii\", and was performed all over the world until the First World War. \"Harold, the Last of the Saxons\" (1848) was the source for Verdi's opera \"Aroldo\" in 1857.\nMagazines.\nIn addition to his political and literary work, Bulwer-Lytton became the editor of the \"New Monthly\" in 1831, but he resigned the following year. In 1841, he started the \"Monthly Chronicle\", a semi-scientific magazine. During his career he wrote poetry, prose, and stage plays; his last novel was \"Kenelm Chillingly\", which was in course of publication in \"Blackwood's Magazine\" at the time of his death in 1873.\nTranslations.\nBulwer-Lytton's works of fiction and non-fiction were translated in his day and since then into many languages, including Serbian (by Laza Kostic), German, Russian, Norwegian, Swedish, French, Finnish, and Spanish. In 1879, his \"Ernest Maltravers\" was the first complete novel from the West to be translated into Japanese.\nPlace names.\nIn Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, the suburb of Lytton, the town of Bulwer on Moreton Island (Moorgumpin) and the neighbourhood (former island) of Bulwer Island are named after him. The township of Lytton, Quebec (today part of Montcerf-Lytton) was named after him as was Lytton, British Columbia, and Lytton, Iowa. Lytton Road in Gisborne, New Zealand was named after the novelist. Later a state secondary school, Lytton High School, was founded in the road.\nPortrayal on television.\nBulwer-Lytton was portrayed by the actor Brett Usher in the 1978 television serial \"Disraeli\"."}
{"id": "10394", "revid": "70", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10394", "title": "Euclidean ring", "text": ""}
{"id": "10400", "revid": "3182609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10400", "title": "History of Esperanto", "text": "L. L. Zamenhof developed Esperanto in the 1870s and '80s. \"Unua Libro\", the first print discussion of the language, appeared in 1887. The number of Esperanto speakers have increased gradually since then, without much support from governments and international organizations. Its use has, in some instances, been outlawed or otherwise suppressed.\nStandardized Yiddish.\nAround 1880, while in Moscow and approximately simultaneously with working on Esperanto, Zamenhof made an aborted attempt to standardize Yiddish, based on his native Bialystok (Northeastern) dialect, as a unifying language for the Jews of the Russian Empire. He even used a Latin alphabet, with the letters \"\u0107, h\u0301, \u015b, \u017a\" (the same as in early drafts of Esperanto, later \"\u0109, \u0125, \u015d, \u0135\") and \"\u011b\" for schwa. However, he concluded there was no future for such a project, and abandoned it, dedicating himself to Esperanto as a unifying language for all humankind. Paul Wexler proposed that Esperanto was not an arbitrary pastiche of major European languages but a Latinate relexification of Yiddish, a native language of its founder. This model is generally unsupported by mainstream linguists.\nDevelopment of the language before publication.\nZamenhof would later say that he had dreamed of a world language since he was a child. At first he considered a revival of Latin, but after learning it in school he decided it was too complicated to be a common means of international communication. When he learned English, he realised that verb conjugations were unnecessary, and that grammatical systems could be much simpler than he had expected. He still had the problem of memorising a large vocabulary, until he noticed two Russian signs labelled \"\u0428\u0432\u0435\u0439\u0446\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\" (\"\u0161vejtsarskaja,\" a porter's lodge \u2013 from \"\u0448\u0432\u0435\u0439\u0446\u0430\u0440\" \"\u0161vejtsar,\" a porter) and \"\u041a\u043e\u043d\u0434\u0438\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\" (\"konditerskaja,\" a confectioner's shop \u2013 from \"\u043a\u043e\u043d\u0434\u0438\u0442\u0435\u0440\" \"konditer,\" a confectioner). He then realised that a judicious use of affixes could greatly decrease the number of root words needed for communication. He chose to take his vocabulary from Romance and Germanic, the languages that were most widely taught in schools around the world and would therefore be recognisable to the largest number of people.\nZamenhof taught an early version of the language to his high-school classmates. Then, for several years, he worked on translations and poetry to refine his creation. In 1895 he wrote, \"I worked for six years perfecting and testing the language, even though it had seemed to me in 1878 that it was already completely ready.\" When he was ready to publish, the Czarist censors would not allow it. Stymied, he spent his time in translating works such as the Bible and Shakespeare. This enforced delay led to continued improvement. In July 1887 he published his \"Unua Libro\" (\"First Book\"), a basic introduction to the language. This was essentially the language spoken today.\n\"Unua Libro\" to Declaration of Boulogne (1887\u20131905).\n\"Unua Libro\" was published in 1887. At first the movement grew most in the Russian empire and eastern Europe, but soon spread to western Europe and beyond: to Argentina in 1889; to Canada in 1901; to Algeria, Chile, Japan, Mexico, and Peru in 1903; to Tunisia in 1904; and to Australia, the United States, Guinea, Indochina, New Zealand, Tonkin, and Uruguay in 1905.\nIn its first years Esperanto was used mainly in publications by Zamenhof and early adopters like Antoni Grabowski, in extensive correspondence (mostly now lost), in the magazine \"La Esperantisto\", published from 1889 to 1895 and only occasionally in personal encounters.\nIn 1894, under pressure from Wilhelm Trompeter, the publisher of the magazine \"La Esperantisto\", and some other leading users, Zamenhof reluctantly put forward a radical reform to be voted on by readers. He proposed the reduction of the alphabet to 22 letters (by eliminating the accented letters and most of their sounds), the change of the plural to \"-i\", the use of a positional accusative instead of the ending \"-n\", the removal of the distinction between adjectives and adverbs, the reduction of the number of participles from six to two, and the replacement of the table of correlatives with more Latinate words or phrases. These reforms were overwhelmingly rejected, but some were picked up in subsequent reforms (such as Ido) and criticisms of the language. In the following decade Esperanto spread into western Europe, especially France. By 1905 there were already 27 magazines being published (Auld 1988).\nA small international conference was held in 1904, leading to the first world congress in August 1905 in Boulogne-sur-Mer, France. There were 688 Esperanto speakers present from 20 nationalities. At this congress, Zamenhof officially resigned his leadership of the Esperanto movement, as he did not want personal prejudice against himself (or anti-Semitism) to hinder the progress of the language. He proposed a declaration on founding principles of the Esperanto movement, which the attendees of the congress endorsed.\nDeclaration of Boulogne to present (1905\u2013present).\nWorld congresses have been held every year since 1905, except during the two World Wars.\nThe autonomous territory of Neutral Moresnet, between Belgium and Germany, had a sizable proportion of Esperanto-speakers among its small and multiethnic population. There was a proposal to make Esperanto its official language. In 1908, it was eventually accepted alongside Dutch, German, and French.\nIn the early 1920s, a great opportunity seemed to arise for Esperanto when the Iranian delegation to the League of Nations proposed that it be adopted for use in international relations, following a report by Nitobe Inaz\u014d, an official delegate of League of Nations during the 13th World Congress of Esperanto in Prague. Ten delegates accepted the proposal with only one voice against, the French delegate, Gabriel Hanotaux, who employed France's Council veto privilege to squash all League attempts at recognition of Esperanto, starting on the first vote on 18 December 1920 and continuing through the next three years. Hanotaux did not like how the French language was losing its position as the international language and saw Esperanto as a threat. However, two years later the League recommended that its member states include Esperanto in their educational curricula. The French retaliated by banning all instruction in Esperanto in French schools and universities. The French Ministry of Instruction said that acceptance of Esperanto would mean that \"French and English would perish and that the literary standard of the world would be debased\". Nonetheless, many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the Esperanto movement.\nIn 1941, the Soviet Union started performing mass arrests, deportations, and killings of many Esperantists and their relatives for fear of an anti-nationalistic movement, but it was interrupted by the Nazi invasion.\nHitler wrote in \"Mein Kampf\" that Esperanto was created as a universal language to unite the Jewish diaspora.\nThe creation of a Jew-free National German Esperanto League was not enough to placate the Nazis.\nThe teaching of Esperanto was not allowed in German prisoner-of-war camps during World War II. Esperantists sometimes were able to get around the ban by convincing guards that they were teaching Italian, the language of Germany's closest ally.\nIn the early years of the Soviet Union, Esperanto was given a measure of government support, and an officially recognized Soviet Esperanto Association came into being. However, in 1937, Stalin reversed this policy and the use of Esperanto was effectively banned until 1956.\nWhile Esperanto itself was not enough cause for execution, its use was extended among Jews or trade unionists and encouraged contacts with foreigners.\nFascist Italy, on the other hand, made some efforts of promoting tourism in Italy through Esperanto leaflets and appreciated the similarities of Italian and Esperanto.\nPortugal's right-wing governments cracked down on the language from 1936 until the Carnation Revolution of 1974. After the Spanish Civil War, Francoist Spain cracked down on the Anarchists and Catalan nationalists among whom the speaking of Esperanto had been quite widespread; but in the 1950s, the Esperanto movement was tolerated again, with Francisco Franco accepting the honorary patronage of the Madrid World Esperanto Congress.\nThe Cold War, especially in the 1950s and 1960s, put a damper on the Esperanto movement as well, as there were fears on both sides that Esperanto could be used for enemy propaganda. However, the language experienced something of a renaissance in the 1970s and spread to new parts of the world, such as its veritable explosion in popularity in Iran in 1975. By 1991 there were enough African Esperantists to warrant a pan-African congress. The language continues to spread, although it is not officially recognised by any country, and is part of the state educational curriculum of only a few.\nEvolution of the language.\nThe Declaration of Boulogne (1905) limited changes to Esperanto. That declaration stated, among other things, that the basis of the language should remain the \"Fundamento de Esperanto\" (\"Foundation of Esperanto\", a group of early works by Zamenhof), which is to be binding forever: nobody has the right to make changes to it. The declaration also permits new concepts to be expressed as the speaker sees fit, but it recommends doing so in accordance with the original style.\nMany Esperantists believe this declaration stabilising the language is a major reason why the Esperanto speaker community grew beyond the levels attained by other constructed languages and has developed a flourishing culture. Other constructed languages have been hindered from developing a stable speaking community by continual tinkering. Also, many developers of constructed languages have been possessive of their creation and have worked to prevent others from contributing to the language. One such ultimately disastrous case was Schleyer's Volap\u00fck. In contrast, Zamenhof declared that \"Esperanto belongs to the Esperantists\", and moved to the background once the language was published, allowing others to share in the early development of the language.\nThe grammatical description in the earliest books was somewhat vague, so a consensus on usage (influenced by Zamenhof's answers to some questions) developed over time within boundaries set by the initial outline (Auld 1988). Even before the Declaration of Boulogne, the language was remarkably stable; only one set of lexical changes were made in the first year after publication, namely changing \"when\", \"then\", \"never\", \"sometimes\", \"always\" from \"kian\", \"tian\", \"nenian\", \"ian\", \"\u0109ian\" to \"kiam\", \"tiam\", \"neniam\" etc., to avoid confusion with the accusative forms of \"kia\" \"what sort of\", \"tia\" \"that sort of\", etc. Thus Esperanto achieved a stability of structure and grammar similar to that which natural languages enjoy by virtue of their native speakers and established bodies of literature. One could learn Esperanto without having it move from underfoot. Changes could and did occur in the language, but only by acquiring widespread popular support; there was no central authority making arbitrary changes, as happened with Volap\u00fck and some other languages.\nModern Esperanto usage may in fact depart from that originally described in the \"Fundamento\", though the differences are largely semantic (involving changed meaning of words) rather than grammatical or phonological. The translation given for \"I like this one\", in the sample phrases in the main Esperanto article, offers a significant example. According to the \"Fundamento\", \"Mi \u015datas \u0109i tiun\" would in fact have meant \"I esteem this one\". The traditional usage is \"Tiu \u0109i pla\u0109as al mi\" (literally, \"this one is pleasing to me\"), which reflects the phrasing of most European languages (French \"celui-ci me pla\u00eet\", Spanish \"\u00e9ste me gusta\", Russian \"\u044d\u0442\u043e \u043c\u043d\u0435 \u043d\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0442\u0441\u044f\" [eto mnye nravitsya], German \"Das gef\u00e4llt mir\", Italian \"mi piace\"). However, the original \"\u0108i tiu pla\u0109as al mi\" continues to be commonly used.\nFor later changes to the language, see Modern evolution of Esperanto.\nDialects, reform projects and derived languages.\nEsperanto has not fragmented into regional dialects through natural language use. This may be because it is the language of daily communication for only a small minority of its speakers. However at least three other factors work against dialects, namely the centripetal force of the Fundamento, the unifying influence of the Plena Vortaro and its successors, which exemplified usage from the works of Zamenhof and leading writers, and the transnational ambitions of the speech community itself. Slang and jargon have developed to some extent, but such features interfere with universal communication \u2013 the whole point of Esperanto \u2013 and so have generally been avoided.\nHowever, in the early twentieth century numerous reform projects were proposed. Almost all of these Esperantidos were stillborn, but the very first, Ido (\"offspring\"), had significant success for several years. Ido was proposed by the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language in Paris in October 1907. Its main reforms were in bringing the alphabet, semantics, and some grammatical features into closer alignment with the Romance languages, as well as removal of adjectival agreement and the accusative case except when necessary. At first, a number of leading Esperantists put their support behind the Ido project, but the movement stagnated and declined, first with the accidental death of one of its main proponents and later as people proposed further changes, and the number of current speakers is estimated at between 250 and 5000. However, Ido has proven to be a rich source of Esperanto vocabulary.\nSome more focused reform projects, affecting only a particular feature of the language, have gained a few adherents. One of these is riism, which modifies the language to incorporate non-sexist language and gender-neutral pronouns. However, most of these projects are specific to individual nationalities (riism from English speakers, for example), and the only changes that have gained acceptance in the Esperanto community have been the minor and gradual bottom-up reforms discussed in the last section.\nEsperanto is credited with influencing or inspiring several later competing language projects, such as Occidental (1922) and Novial (1928). These always lagged far behind Esperanto in their popularity. By contrast, Interlingua (1951) has greatly surpassed Ido in terms of popularity. It shows little or no Esperanto influence, however."}
{"id": "10402", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10402", "title": "Esperanto grammar", "text": "Esperanto is a constructed language intended for international communication. It was designed with a highly regular grammar, and as such is considered an easy language to learn.\nEach part of speech has a characteristic ending: nouns end with \"\u2011o\"; adjectives with \"\u2011a\"; present\u2011tense indicative verbs with \"\u2011as\", and so on.\nAn extensive system of prefixes and suffixes may be freely combined with roots to generate vocabulary, so that it is possible to communicate effectively with a vocabulary of 400 to 500 root words. The original vocabulary of Esperanto had around 900 root words, but was quickly expanded.\nReference grammars include the \"\" () by K\u00e1lm\u00e1n Kalocsay and Gaston Waringhien, and the \"Plena Manlibro de Esperanta Gramatiko\" () by Bertilo Wennergren.\nGrammatical summary.\nEsperanto has an agglutinative morphology, no grammatical gender, and simple verbal and nominal inflections. Verbal suffixes indicate four moods, of which the indicative has three tenses, and are derived for several aspects, but do not agree with the grammatical person or number of their subjects. Nouns and adjectives have two cases, nominative/oblique and accusative/allative, and two numbers, singular and plural; the adjectival form of personal pronouns behaves like a genitive case. Adjectives generally agree with nouns in case and number. In addition to indicating direct objects, the accusative/allative case is used with nouns, adjectives and adverbs for showing the destination of a motion, or to replace certain prepositions; the nominative/oblique is used in all other situations. The case system allows for a flexible word order that reflects information flow and other pragmatic concerns, as in Russian, Greek, and Latin.\nScript and pronunciation.\nEsperanto uses the Latin alphabet with six additional letters\u0109, \u011d, \u0125, \u0135, \u015d, and \u016dand does not use the letters q, w, x, or y.\nZamenhof suggested Italian as a model for Esperanto pronunciation.\nThe article.\nEsperanto has a single definite article, \"la\", which is invariable. It is similar to English \"the\".\n\"La\" is used:\nThe article is also used for inalienable possession of body parts and kin terms, where English would use a possessive adjective:\nThe article \"la\", like the demonstrative adjective \"tiu\" (this, that), occurs at the beginning of the noun phrase.\nThere is no grammatically required indefinite article: \"homo\" means either \"human being\" or \"a human being\", depending on the context, and similarly the plural \"homoj\" means \"human beings\" or \"some human beings\". The words \"iu\" and \"unu\" (or their plurals \"iuj\" and \"unuj\") may be used somewhat like indefinite articles, but they're closer in meaning to \"some\" and \"a certain\" than to English \"a\". This use of \"unu\" corresponds to English \"a\" when the \"a\" indicates a specific individual.\nFor example, it is used to introduce new participants (\"Unu viro ekvenis al mi kaj diris ...\" 'A man came up to me and said ...').\nParts of speech.\nThe suffixes \"\u2011o\", \"\u2011a\", \"\u2011e\", and \"\u2011i\" indicate that a word is a noun, adjective, adverb, and infinitive verb, respectively. Many new words can be derived simply by changing these suffixes. Derivations from the word \"vidi\" (to see) are \"vida\" (visual), \"vide\" (visually), and \"vido\" (vision).\nEach root word has an inherent part of speech: nominal, adjectival, verbal, or adverbial. These must be memorized explicitly and affect the use of the part-of-speech suffixes. With an adjectival or verbal root, the nominal suffix \"\u2011o\" indicates an abstraction: \"parolo\" (an act of speech, one's word) from the verbal root \"paroli\" (to speak); \"belo\" (beauty) from the adjectival root \"bela\" (beautiful); whereas with a noun, the nominal suffix simply indicates the noun. Nominal or verbal roots may likewise be modified with the adjectival suffix \"\u2011a\": \"re\u011da\" (royal), from the nominal root \"re\u011do\" (a king); \"parola\" (spoken). The various verbal endings mean \"to be [__]\" when added to an adjectival root: \"beli\" (to be beautiful); and with a nominal root they mean \"to act as\" the noun, \"to use\" the noun, etc., depending on the semantics of the root: \"re\u011di\" (to reign). There are relatively few adverbial roots, so most words ending in \"-e\" are derived: \"bele\" (beautifully). Often with a nominal or verbal root, the English equivalent is a prepositional phrase: \"parole\" (by speech, orally); \"vide\" (by sight, visually); \"re\u011de\" (like a king, royally).\nThe meanings of part-of-speech affixes depend on the inherent part of speech of the root they are applied to. For example, \"brosi\" (to brush) is based on a nominal root (and therefore listed in modern dictionaries under the entry \"broso),\" whereas \"kombi\" (to comb) is based on a verbal root (and therefore listed under \"kombi).\" Change the suffix to \"-o,\" and the similar meanings of \"brosi\" and \"kombi\" diverge: \"broso\" is a brush, the name of an instrument, whereas \"kombo\" is a combing, the name of an action. That is, changing verbal \"kombi\" (to comb) to a noun simply creates the name for the action; for the name of the tool, the suffix \"-ilo\" is used, which derives words for instruments from verbal roots: \"kombilo\" (a comb). On the other hand, changing the nominal root \"broso\" (a brush) to a verb gives the action associated with that noun, \"brosi\" (to brush). For the name of the action, the suffix \"-ado\" will change a derived verb back to a noun: \"brosado\" (a brushing). Similarly, an abstraction of a nominal root (changing it to an adjective and then back to a noun) requires the suffix \"-eco,\" as in \"infaneco\" (childhood), but an abstraction of an adjectival or verbal root merely requires the nominal \"-o: belo\" (beauty). Nevertheless, redundantly affixed forms such as \"beleco\" are acceptable and widely used.\nA limited number of basic adverbs do not end with \"-e,\" but with an undefined part-of-speech ending \"-a\u016d\". Not all words ending in \"-a\u016d\" are adverbs, and most of the adverbs that end in \"-a\u016d\" have other functions, such as \"hodia\u016d\" \"today\" [noun or adverb] or \"ankora\u016d\" \"yet, still\" [conjunction or adverb]. About a dozen other adverbs are bare roots, such as \"nun\" \"now\", \"tro\" \"too, too much\", not counting the adverbs among the correlatives. (See special Esperanto adverbs.)\nOther parts of speech occur as bare roots, without special suffixes. These are the prepositions \"(al\" \"to\"), conjunctions \"(kaj\" \"and\"), interjections \"(ho\" \"oh\"), numerals \"(du\" \"two\"), and pronouns \"(mi\" \"I\"\u2014The final \"-i\" found on pronouns is not a suffix, but part of the root). There are also several grammatical \"particles\" that fit neatly into no category, and which must generally precede the words they modify, such as \"ne\" (not), \"anka\u016d\" (also), \"nur\" (only), \"e\u0109\" (even).\nThe part-of-speech endings may double up. Apart from the \"-a\u016d\" suffix, where adding a second part-of-speech ending is nearly universal, this happens only occasionally. For example, \"vivu!\" \"viva!\" (the volitive of \"vivi\" 'to live') has a nominal form \"vivuo\" (a cry of 'viva!') and a doubly verbal form \"vivui\" (to cry 'viva!').\nNouns and adjectives.\nA suffix \"-j\" following the noun or adjective suffixes \"-o\" or \"-a\" makes a word plural. Without this suffix, a countable noun is understood to be singular. Direct objects take an accusative case suffix \"-n,\" which goes after any plural suffix. (The resulting sequence \"-ojn\" rhymes with English \"coin,\" and \"-ajn\" rhymes with \"fine.)\"\nAdjectives agree with nouns. That is, they are plural if the nouns that they modify are plural, and accusative if the nouns that they modify are accusative. Compare \"bona tago; bonaj tagoj; bonan tagon; bonajn tagojn\" (good day/days). This requirement allows for free word orders of adjective-noun and noun-adjective, even when two noun phrases are adjacent in subject\u2013object\u2013verb or verb\u2013subject\u2013object clauses:\nAgreement clarifies the syntax in other ways also. Adjectives take the plural suffix when they modify more than one noun, even if those nouns are all singular:\nA predicative adjective does not take the accusative case suffix even when the noun that it modifies does:\nPronouns.\nThere are three types of pronouns in Esperanto: personal \"(vi\" \"you\"), demonstrative \"(tio\" \"that\", \"iu\" \"someone\"), and relative/interrogative \"(kio\" \"what\").\nAccording to the fifth rule of the \"Fundamento de Esperanto\":\nPersonal pronouns.\nThe Esperanto personal pronoun system is similar to that of English, but with the addition of a reflexive pronoun.\n Zamenhof introduced the singular second-person pronoun \"ci\" to be used in translations from languages where the T\u2013V distinction is important, and added it in the \"Dua Libro\" in 1888 clarifying that \"this word is only found in the dictionary; in the language itself it is hardly ever used\". It has never been widely used, even by Zamenhof himself, who didn't include it as a pronoun in the 5th rule of the \"Fundamento\" and in his 28th \"Lingva Respondo\", published in 1908, recommended to use only \"vi\". The normal usage is to use \"vi\" regardless of number or formality. However, especially in some circles, people have begun to use \"ci\" in practical speech.\nPersonal pronouns take the accusative suffix \"-n\" as nouns do: \"min\" (me), \"lin\" (him), \"\u015din\" (her). Possessive adjectives are formed with the adjectival suffix \"-a: mia\" (my), \"\u011dia\" (its), \"nia\" (our). These agree with their noun like any other adjective: \"ni salutis liajn amikojn\" (we greeted his friends). Esperanto does not have separate forms for the possessive pronouns; this sense is generally (though not always) indicated with the definite article: \"la mia\" (mine).\nThe reflexive pronoun is used, in non-subject phrases only, to refer back to the subject, usually only in the third and indefinite persons:\nThe indefinite pronoun is used when making general statements, and is often used where English would have the subject \"it\" with a passive verb,\nWith impersonal verbs, no pronoun is used:\nHere the rain is falling by itself, and that idea is conveyed by the verb, so no subject pronoun is needed.\nWhen not referring to humans, \"\u011di\" is mostly used with items that have physical bodies, with \"tiu\" or \"tio\" used otherwise. Zamenhof proposed that \"\u011di\" could also be used as an epicene (gender-neutral) third-person singular pronoun, meaning for use when the gender of an individual is unknown or for when the speaker simply doesn't wish to clarify the gender. However, this proposal is only common when referring to children:\nWhen speaking of adults or people in general, in popular usage it is much more common for the demonstrative adjective and pronoun \"tiu\" (\"that thing or person that is already known to the listener\") to be used in such situations. This mirrors languages such as Japanese, but it's not a method that can always be used. For example, in the sentence\nthe word \"tiu\" would be understood as referring to someone other than the person speaking (like English pronouns \"this\" or \"that\" but also referring to people), and so cannot be used in place of \"\u011di\", \"li\" or \"\u015di.\" See gender-neutral pronouns in Esperanto for other approaches.\nOther pronouns.\nThe demonstrative and relative pronouns form part of the correlative system, and are described in that article. The pronouns are the forms ending in \"-o\" (simple pronouns) and \"-u\" (adjectival pronouns). Their accusative case is formed in \"-n,\" but the genitive case ends in \"-es,\" which is the same for singular and plural and does not take accusative marking. Compare the nominative phases \"lia domo\" (his house) and \"ties domo\" (that one's house, those ones' house) with the plural \"liaj domoj (his houses) and \"ties domoj (that one's houses, those ones' houses), and with the accusative genitive \"lian domon\" and \"ties domon.\"\nPrepositions.\nAlthough Esperanto word order is fairly free, prepositions must come at the beginning of a noun phrase. Whereas in languages such as German, prepositions may require that a noun be in various cases (accusative, dative, \"and so on),\" in Esperanto all prepositions govern the nominative: \"por Johano\" (for John). The only exception is when there are two or more prepositions and one is \"replaced\" by the accusative.\nPrepositions should be used with a definite meaning. When no one preposition is clearly correct, the indefinite preposition \"je\" should be used:\nAlternatively, the accusative may be used without a preposition:\nNote that although \"la trian\" (the third) is in the accusative, \"de majo\" (of May) is still a prepositional phrase, and so the noun \"majo\" remains in the nominative case.\nA frequent use of the accusative is in place of \"al\" (to) to indicate the direction or goal of motion (allative construction). It is especially common when there would otherwise be a double preposition:\nThe accusative/allative may stand in for other prepositions also, especially when they have vague meanings that add not much to the clause. Adverbs, with or without the case suffix, are frequently used instead of prepositional phrases:\nBoth \"por\" and \"pro\" often translate English 'for'. However, they distinguish \"for a goal\" (looking forward in time, or causing: \"por\") and \"for a cause\" (looking back in time, or being caused by: \"pro\"): To vote \"por\" your friend means to cast a ballot with their name on it, whereas to vote \"pro\" your friend would mean to vote in their place or as they asked you to.\nThe preposition most distinct from English usage is perhaps \"de\", which corresponds to English \"of, from, off,\" and \"(done) by\":\nHowever, English \"of\" corresponds to several Esperanto prepositions also: \"de, el\" (out of, made of), and \"da\" (quantity of, unity of form and contents):\nThe last of these, \"da\", is semantically Slavic and is difficult for Western Europeans, to the extent that even many Esperanto dictionaries and grammars define it incorrectly.\nOccasionally a new preposition is coined. Because a bare root may indicate a preposition or interjection, removing the grammatical suffix from another part of speech can be used to derive a preposition or interjection. For example, from \"fari\" (to do, to make) we get the preposition \"far\" (done by).\nVerbs.\nAll verbal inflection is regular. There are three tenses, all of which are in the indicative mood. The other moods are the infinitive, conditional, and jussive. No aspectual distinctions are required by the grammar, but derivational expressions of Aktionsart are common.\nVerbs do not change form according to their subject. \"I am, we are,\" and \"he is\" are simply \"mi estas, ni estas,\" and \"li estas,\" respectively. Impersonal subjects are not used: \"pluvas\" (it is raining); \"estas muso en la domo\" (there's a mouse in the house).\nMost verbs are inherently transitive or intransitive. As with the inherent part of speech of a root, this is not apparent from the shape of the verb and must simply be memorized. Transitivity is changed with the suffixes \"-igi\" (the transitivizer/causative) and \"-i\u011di\" (the intransitivizer/middle voice):\nThe verbal paradigm.\nThe tenses have characteristic vowels. \"A\" indicates the present tense, \"i\" the past, and \"o\" the future.\nThe verbal forms may be illustrated with the root \"esper-\" (hope):\nA verb can be made emphatic with the particle \"ja\" (indeed): \"mi ja esperas\" (I do hope), \"mi ja esperis\" (I did hope).\nTense.\nAs in English, Esperanto present tense may be used for generic statements such as \"birds fly\" (\"la birdoj flugas\").\nThe Esperanto future is a true tense, used whenever future time is meant. For example, in English \"(I'll give it to you) when I see you\" the verb \"see\" is in the present tense despite the time being in the future; in Esperanto, future tense is required: \"(Mi donos \u011din al vi) kiam mi vidos vin\".\nEsperanto tense is relative. This differs from English absolute tense, where the tense is past, present, or future of the moment of speaking: In Esperanto, the tense of a subordinate verb is instead anterior or posterior to the time of the main verb. For example, \"John said that he would go\" is in Esperanto \"Johano diris, ke li iros\" (lit., \"John said that he will go\"); this does not mean that he will go at some point in the future from now (as \"John said that he will go\" means in English), but that at the time he said this, his going was still in the future.\nMood.\nThe conditional mood is used for such expressions as \"se mi povus, mi irus\" (if I could, I would go) and \"se mi estus vi, mi irus\" (if I were you, I'd go).\nThe jussive mood is used for wishing and requesting. It serves as the imperative and performs some of the functions of a subjunctive:\nAspect.\nVerbal aspect is not grammatically required in Esperanto. However, aspectual distinctions may be expressed via participles (see below), and the Slavic aspectual system survives in two aktionsart affixes, perfective (often inceptive) \"ek-\" and imperfective \"-adi.\" Compare,\nand,\nVarious prepositions may also be used as aktionsart prefixes, such as \"el\" (out of), used to indicate that an action is performed to completion or at least to a considerable degree, also as in Slavic languages, as in,\nCopula.\nThe verb \"esti\" (to be) is both the copula (\"X is Y\") and the existential (\"there is\") verb. As a copula linking two noun phrases, it causes neither to take the accusative case. Therefore, unlike the situation with other verbs, word order with \"esti\" can be semantically important: compare \"hundoj estas personoj\" (dogs are people) and \"personoj estas hundoj\" (people are dogs).\nOne sometimes sees \"esti\"-plus-adjective rendered as a verb: \"la \u0109ielo estas blua\" as \"la \u0109ielo bluas\" (the sky is blue). This is a stylistic rather than grammatical change in the language, as the more economical verbal forms were always found in poetry.\nParticiples.\nParticiples are verbal derivatives. In Esperanto, there are six forms:\ntimes\nThe participles represent aspect by retaining the vowel of the related verbal tense: i, a, o. In addition to carrying aspect, participles are the principal means of representing voice, with either nt or t following the vowel (see next section).\nAdjectival participles.\nThe basic principle of the participles may be illustrated with the verb \"fali\" (to fall). Picture a cartoon character running off a cliff. Before the character falls, they are \"falonta\" (about to fall). As they drop, they are \"falanta\" (falling). After they hit the ground, they are \"falinta\" (fallen).\nActive and passive pairs can be illustrated with the transitive verb \"haki\" (to chop). Picture a woodsman approaching a tree with an axe, intending to chop it down. He is \"hakonta\" (about to chop) and the tree is \"hakota\" (about to be chopped). While swinging the axe, he is \"hakanta\" (chopping) and the tree \"hakata\" (being chopped). After the tree has fallen, he is \"hakinta\" (having chopped) and the tree \"hakita\" (chopped).\nAdjectival participles agree with nouns in number and case, just as other adjectives do:\nCompound tense.\nCompound tenses are formed with the adjectival participles plus \"esti\" (to be) as the auxiliary verb. The participle reflects aspect and voice, while the verb carries tense:\nThese are not used as often as their English equivalents. For \"I \"am\" go\"ing\" to the store\", you would normally use the simple present \"mi iras\" in Esperanto.\nThe tense and mood of \"esti\" can be changed in these compound tenses:\nAlthough such periphrastic constructions are familiar to speakers of most European languages, the option of contracting [\"esti\" + adjective] into a verb is often seen for adjectival participles:\nThe active synthetic forms are:\nInfinitive and jussive forms are also found. There is a parallel passive paradigm. A few of these forms, notably \"-intus\" and \"-atas\", have entered common usage, but most are rare because they are more difficult to parse than periphrastic constructions.\nNominal participles.\nParticiples may be turned into adverbs or nouns by replacing the adjectival suffix \"-a\" with \"-e\" or \"-o.\" This means that, in Esperanto, some nouns may be inflected for tense.\nA nominal participle indicates \"one who participates\" in the action specified by the verbal root. For example, \"esperinto\" is a \"hoper\" (past tense), or \"one who had been hoping.\"\nAdverbial participles.\nAdverbial participles are used with subjectless clauses:\nConditional and tenseless participles (unofficial).\nOccasionally, the participle paradigm will be extended to include conditional participles, with the vowel \"u (-unt-, -ut-).\" If, for example, in our tree-chopping example, the woodsman found that the tree had been spiked and so couldn't be cut down after all, he would be \"hakunta\" and the tree \"hakuta\" (he, the one \"who would chop\", and the tree, the one that \"would be chopped\").\nThis can also be illustrated with the verb \"prezidi\" (to preside). Just after the recount of the 2000 United States presidential election:\nTense-neutral words such as \"prezidento\" and \"studento\" are officially distinct nominal roots, not derivatives of the verbs \"prezidi\" and \"studi\".\nNegation.\nA statement is made negative by using \"ne\" or one of the negative \"(neni-)\" correlatives. Ordinarily, only one negative word is allowed per clause:\nTwo negatives within a clause cancel each other out, with the result being a positive sentence.\nThe word \"ne\" comes before the word it negates:\nThe latter will frequently be reordered as \"ne tion mi skribis\" depending on the flow of information.\nQuestions.\n\"Wh\" questions are asked with one of the interrogative/relative \"(ki-\") correlatives. They are commonly placed at the beginning of the sentence, but different word orders are allowed for stress:\nYes/no questions are marked with the conjunction \"\u0109u\" (whether):\nSuch questions can be answered \"jes\" (yes) or \"ne\" (no) in the European fashion of aligning with the polarity of the answer, or \"\u011duste\" (correct) or \"mal\u011duste\" (incorrect) in the Japanese fashion of aligning with the polarity of the question:\nNote that Esperanto questions may have the same word order as statements.\nConjunctions.\nBasic Esperanto conjunctions are \"kaj\" (both/and), \"kun\" (with), \"a\u016d\" (either/or), \"nek\" (neither/nor), \"se\" (if), \"\u0109u\" (whether/or), \"sed\" (but), \"anstata\u016d\" (instead of), \"krom\" (besides, except for), \"kiel\" (like, as), \"ke\" (that). Like prepositions, they precede the phrase or clause they modify:\nHowever, unlike prepositions, they allow the accusative case, as in the following example from Don Harlow:\nInterjections.\nInterjections may be derived from bare affixes or roots: \"ek!\" (get going!), from the perfective prefix; \"um\" (um, er), from the indefinite/undefined suffix; \"fek!\" (shit!), from \"feki\" (to defecate).\nWord formation.\nEsperanto derivational morphology uses a large number of lexical and grammatical affixes (prefixes and suffixes). These, along with compounding, decrease the memory load of the language, as they allow for the expansion of a relatively small number of basic roots into a large vocabulary. For example, the Esperanto root \"vid-\" (see) regularly corresponds to several dozen English words: \"see (saw, seen), sight, blind, vision, visual, visible, nonvisual, invisible, unsightly, glance, view, vista, panorama, observant\" etc., though there are also separate Esperanto roots for a couple of these concepts.\nNumbers.\nNumerals.\nThe cardinal numerals are:\nThese are grammatically numerals, not nouns, and as such do not take the accusative case suffix. However, \"unu\" (and only \"unu\") is sometimes used adjectivally or demonstratively, meaning \"a certain\", and in such cases it may take the plural affix \"-j,\" just as the demonstrative pronoun \"tiu\" does:\nIn such use \"unu\" is irregular in that it doesn't take the accusative affix \"-n\" in the singular, but does in the plural:\nbut\nAdditionally, when counting off, the final \"u\" of \"unu\" may be dropped, as if it were a part-of-speech suffix:\nHigher numbers.\nAt numbers beyond the thousands, the international roots \"miliono\" (million) and \"miliardo\" (milliard) are used. Beyond this there are two systems: A \"billion\" in most English-speaking countries is different from a \"billion\" in most other countries (109 \"vs.\" 1012 respectively; that is, a thousand million \"vs.\" a million million). The international root \"biliono\" is likewise ambiguous in Esperanto, and is deprecated for this reason. An unambiguous system based on adding the Esperanto suffix \"-iliono\" to numerals is generally used instead, sometimes supplemented by a second suffix \"-iliardo:\"\nNote that these forms are grammatically nouns, not numerals, and therefore cannot modify a noun directly: \"mil homojn\" (a thousand people [accusative]) but \"milionon da homoj\" (a million people [accusative]).\nCompound numerals and derivatives.\nNumerals are written together as one word when their values are multiplied, and separately when their values are added (\"dudek\" 20, \"dek du\" 12, \"dudek du\" 22). Ordinals are formed with the adjectival suffix \"-a,\" quantities with the nominal suffix \"-o,\" multiples with \"-obl-,\" fractions with \"\u2011on\u2011\", collectives with \"\u2011op\u2011\", and repetitions with the root \"\u2011foj\u2011\".\nThe particle \"po\" is used to mark distributive numbers, that is, the idea of distributing a certain number of items to each member of a group. Consequently, the logogram @ is not used (except in email addresses, of course):\nNote that particle \"po\" forms a phrase with the numeral \"tri\" and is not a preposition for the noun phrase \"tri pomojn,\" so it does not prevent a grammatical object from taking the accusative case.\nComparisons.\nComparisons are made with the adverbial correlatives \"tiel ... kiel\" (as ... as), the adverbial roots \"pli\" (more) and \"plej\" (most), the antonym prefix \"mal-,\" and the preposition \"ol\" (than):\nImplied comparisons are made with \"tre\" (very) and \"tro\" (too [much]).\nPhrases like \"The more people, the smaller the portions\" and \"All the better!\" are translated using \"ju\" and \"des\" in place of \"the\":\nWord order.\nEsperanto has a fairly flexible word order. However, word order does play a role in Esperanto grammar, even if a much lesser role than it does in English. For example, the negative particle \"ne\" generally comes before the element being negated; negating the verb has the effect of negating the entire clause (or rather, there is ambiguity between negating the verb alone and negating the clause):\nHowever, when the entire clause is negated, the \"ne\" may be left till last:\nThe last order reflects a typical topic\u2013comment (or theme\u2013rheme) order: Known information, the topic under discussion, is introduced first, and what one has to say about it follows. (I went not: As for my going, there was none.) For example, yet another order, \"ne iris mi\", would suggest that the possibility of not having gone was under discussion, and \"mi\" is given as an example of one who did not go.\nCompare:\nThe noun phrase.\nWithin a noun phrase, either the order \"adjective\u2013noun\" or \"noun\u2013adjective\" may occur, though the former is somewhat more common. \nBecause of adjectival agreement, an adjective may be separated from the rest of the noun phrase without confusion, though this is only found in poetry, and then only occasionally: \nPossessive pronouns strongly favor initial position, though the opposite is well known from \"Patro nia\" 'Our Father' in the Paternoster. \nLess flexibility occurs with demonstratives and the article, with \"demonstrative\u2013noun\" being the norm, as in English:\nHowever, the article \"la\" occurs a noun phrase:\nNoun\u2013demonstrative order is used primarily for emphasis (\"plumo tiu\" 'that pen'). \"La\" occurs at the very beginning of the noun phrase except rarely in poetry.\nEven less flexibility occurs with numerals, with \"numeral\u2013noun\" being almost universal:\nand noun\u2013numeral being practically unheard of outside poetry.\nAdjective\u2013noun order is much freer. With simple adjectives, adjective\u2013noun order predominates, especially if the noun is long or complex. However, a long or complex adjective typically comes after the noun, in some cases parallel to structures in English, as in the second example below:\nAdjectives also normally occur after correlative nouns. Again, this is one of the situations where adjectives come after nouns in English:\nChanging the word order here can change the meaning, at least with the correlative \"nenio\" 'nothing':\nWith multiple words in a phrase, the order is typically demonstrative/pronoun\u2013numeral\u2013(adjective/noun):\nIn prepositional phrases, the preposition is \"required\" to come at the front of the noun phrase (that is, even before the article \"la\"), though it is commonly replaced by turning the noun into an adverb:\nConstituent order.\nConstituent order \"within\" a clause is generally free, apart from copular clauses.\nThe default order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object, though any order may occur, with subject and object distinguished by case, and other constituents distinguished by prepositions:\nThe expectation of a topic\u2013comment (theme\u2013rheme) order apply here, so the context will influence word order: in \"la katon \u0109asis la hundo\", the cat is the topic of the conversation, and the dog is the news; in \"la hundo la katon \u0109asis\", the dog is the topic of the conversation, and it is the action of chasing that is the news; and in \"\u0109asis la hundo la katon\", the action of chasing is already the topic of discussion.\nContext is required to tell whether\nmeans the dog chased a cat which was in the garden, or there, in the garden, the dog chased the cat. These may be disambiguated with\nand\nOf course, if it chases the cat in\"to\" the garden, the case of 'garden' would change:\nWithin copulative clauses, however, there are restrictions. Copulas are words such as \"esti\" 'be', \"i\u011di\" 'become', \"resti\" 'remain', and \"\u015dajni\" 'seem', for which neither noun phrase takes the accusative case. In such cases only two orders are generally found: noun-copula-predicate and, much less commonly, predicate-copula-noun.\nGenerally, if a characteristic of the noun is being described, the choice between the two orders is not important:\nHowever, \"la vento sova\u011da estas\" is unclear, at least in writing, as it could be interpreted as 'the wild wind exists.'\nWhen two noun phrases are linked by a copula, greater chance exists for ambiguity, at least in writing where prosody is not a cue. A demonstrative may help:\nBut in some cases word order is the only clue, in which case the subject comes before the predicate:\nAttributive phrases and clauses.\nIn the sentence above, \"la hundo \u0109asis la katon, kiu estis en la \u011dardeno\" 'the dog chased the cat, which was in the garden', the relative pronoun \"kiu\" 'which' is restricted to a position \"after\" the noun 'cat'. In general, relative clauses and attributive prepositional phrases follow the noun they modify.\nAttributive prepositional phrases, which are dependent on nouns, include genitives (\"la libro de Johano\" 'John's book') as well as \"la kato en la \u011dardeno\" 'the cat in the garden' in the example above. Their order cannot be reversed: neither \"*la de Johano libro\" nor \"*la en la \u011dardeno kato\" is possible. This behavior is more restrictive than prepositional phrases which are dependent on verbs, and which can be moved around: both \"\u0109asis en la \u011dardeno\" and \"en la \u011dardeno \u0109asis\" are acceptable for 'chased in the garden'.\nRelative clauses are similar, in that they are attributive and are subject to the same word-order constraint, except that rather than being linked by a preposition, the two elements are linked by a relative pronoun such as \"kiu\" 'which':\nNote that the noun and its adjacent relative pronoun do not agree in case. Rather, their cases depend on their relationships with their respective verbs. However, they do agree in number:\nOther word orders are possible, as long as the relative pronoun remains adjacent to the noun it depends on:\nClause order.\nCoordinate clauses allow flexible word order, but tend to be iconic. For example, in\nthe inference is that the cat fled after the dog started to chase it, not that the dog chased a cat which was already fleeing. For the latter reading, the clause order would be reversed:\nThis distinction is lost in subordinate clauses such as the relative clauses in the previous section:\nIn written English, a comma disambiguates the two readings, but both take a comma in Esperanto.\nNon-relative subordinate clauses are similarly restricted. They follow the conjunction \"ke\" 'that', as in,\nNon-Indo-European aspects.\nEsperanto's vocabulary, syntax, and semantics derive predominantly from Indo-European national languages. Roots are typically Romance or Germanic in origin. The semantics shows a significant Slavic influence. What aspects do not derive directly from its source languages are generally extensions of them.\nIt is often claimed that there are elements of the grammar which are not found in these language families. Frequently mentioned is Esperanto's agglutinative morphology based on invariant morphemes, and the subsequent lack of ablaut (internal inflection of its roots), which Zamenhof himself thought would prove alien to non-Indo-European language speakers. Ablaut is an element of all the source languages; an English example is \"song sing sang sung.\" However, the majority of words in all Indo-European languages inflect without ablaut, as \"cat, cats\" and \"walk, walked\" do in English. (This is the so-called strong\u2013weak dichotomy.) Historically, many Indo-European languages have expanded the range of their 'weak' inflections, and Esperanto has merely taken this development closer to its logical conclusion, with the only remaining ablaut being frozen in a few sets of semantically related roots such as \"pli\", \"plej\", \"plu\" (more, most, further), \"tre\", \"tro\" (very, too much), and in the verbal morphemes \"\u2011as\", \"\u2011anta\", \"\u2011ata\"; \"\u2011is\", \"\u2011inta\", \"\u2011ita\"; \"\u2011os\", \"\u2011onta\", \"\u2011ota\"; and \"\u2011us\".\nOther features often cited as being nonstandard for an Indo-European language, such as the dedicated suffixes for different parts of speech, or the \"-o\" suffix for singular nouns, actually do occur in Indo\u2011European languages such as Russian. More pertinent is the accusative plural in \"-jn\", which is derived through leveling of the Greek nominal\u2013adjectival paradigm: Esperanto nominative singular \"muzo (muse) vs. Greek \"mousa, nominative plural \"muzoj vs. Greek \"mousai,\" and accusative singular \"muzon vs. Greek \"mousan.\" (Latin and Lithuanian had very similar setups, with in the plural and a nasal in the accusative.) Esperanto is thus \"formally\" similar to the non\u2011Indo\u2011European languages Hungarian and Turkish\u2014that is, it is similar in its mechanics, but not in use. None of these proposed \"non-European\" elements of the original Esperanto proposal were actually taken from non-European or non-Indo-European languages, and any similarities with those languages are coincidental.\nEast Asian languages may have had some influence on the development of Esperanto grammar after its creation. The principally cited candidate is the replacement of predicate adjectives with verbs, such as \"la \u0109ielo bluas\" (the sky is blue) for \"la \u0109ielo estas blua\" and \"mia filino belu!\" (may my daughter be beautiful!) for the \"mia filino estu bela!\" mentioned above. However, this regularization of existing grammatical forms was always found in poetry; if there has been an influence of an East Asian language, it has only been in the spread of such forms, not in their origin. Such usage is not entirely unknown in Europe: Latin has an analogous \"folium viret\" for \"folium viride est\" (the leaf is green) and \"avis rubet\" for \"avis rubra est\" (the bird is red).\nPerhaps the best candidate for a \"non-Indo-European\" feature is the blurred distinction between root and affixe. Esperanto derivational affixes may be used as independent roots and inflect for part of speech like other roots. This occurs only sporadically in other languages of the world, Indo-European or not. For example, \"ismo\" has an English equivalent in \"an ism\", but English has no adjectival form equivalent to Esperanto \"isma.\" For most such affixes, natural languages familiar to Europeans must use a separate lexical root.\nSample text.\nThe Pater noster, from the first Esperanto publication in 1887, illustrates many of the grammatical points presented above:\nThe morphologically complex words (see Esperanto word formation) are:"}
{"id": "10404", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10404", "title": "Esperanto culture", "text": "Esperanto culture refers to the shared cultural experience of the Esperantujo, or Esperanto-speaking community. Despite being a constructed language, Esperanto has a history dating back to the late 19th century, and shared cultural social mores have developed among its speakers. Some of these can be traced back to the initial ideas of the language's creator, Ludwig Zamenhof, including the theory that a global second language would foster international communication. Others have developed over time, as the language has allowed different national and linguistic cultures to blend together. Some researched also the ideologies of Esperanto.\nEsperanto culture also includes art, literature, and music, as well as international celebrations and cultural exchanges such as the Pasporta Servo.\nNative speakers.\nNative Esperanto speakers are people who have acquired Esperanto as one of their native languages. As of 1996, there were 350 or so attested cases of families with native Esperanto speakers. Estimates from associations indicate that there are currently around 1,000 Esperanto-speaking families, involving perhaps 2,000 children. In all known cases, speakers are natively bilingual, or multilingual, raised in both Esperanto and either the local national language or the native language of their parents. In all but a handful of cases, it was the father who used Esperanto with the child. In the majority of such families, the parents had the same native language, though in many the parents had different native languages, and only Esperanto in common.\nGufujo.\nEsperanto speakers create a makeshift caf\u00e9 (whether in a rented space or someone's home), using Esperanto coins or voucher-like items as well as real money to pay for food and drink. Live music, poetry reading, or literature reading are usual activities. This custom arose in 1995 in order to contrast with the more usual custom of after-convention partying at a bar.\nReligion.\nEsperanto has had an influence on certain religious traditions (Oomoto, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, etc., see Esperanto and religion). While some Esperantists subscribe to these beliefs, they are not necessarily common, and are not required nor encouraged by any Esperanto groups.\nLiterature.\nBooks that are translated to Esperanto are not usually internationally famous books, because everyone can already read those in another language that they know. For example, Natsume S\u014dseki's \"Kokoro\" does not exist but several Japanese crime novels, and several Icelandic novels, that have never been translated to English (or any other language) have been translated to Esperanto. One reason for this is that people are actually translating their favourite stories instead of the famous stories, and another is that it's simply cheaper and easier to get the rights to translate a small-time book compared to a famous one.\nThe first Harry Potter book, for example, was translated and the translator enquired about how to purchase translating rights so the book could be published, but J.K. Rowling refused to allow it to be published in Esperanto (despite Harry Potter being one of the most-translated books in the whole world). In lieu of physical books, the translation now exists as a free download on the internet. \nAs Esperanto speakers were persecuted throughout WWII (Esperanto was banned in Germany and the Soviet Union), and even today might be mocked by journalists and the average person, oppression and acceptance have become strong themes in Esperanto writing and conversation.\nThere are over 25,000 Esperanto books (originals and translations) as well as over a hundred regularly distributed Esperanto magazines. This is despite that Esperanto has only existed for around 100 years. In comparison, the entire literature of Iceland (a country created in the 900s, and with a population of around 320,000 people) totals fewer than 50,000 books.\nPasporta Servo.\nMany speakers travel the world using the Pasporta Servo which is a free couchsurfing and homestay service combined, meaning that their trips are possible because they don't have to pay for lodging while at the same time they stay with people who speak a language they know fluently. Many people have commented that this is also a useful tool for actual immigrants, as Esperanto speakers are normally much friendlier and more willing to see the immigrant as a \"human\" compared to the normal natives of the country. For example, it's suggested that an English speaker in Japan should make friends with Esperanto speakers instead, because the Esperanto speakers won't \"simply use the friendship as a way to get free English lessons\".\nWriting.\nEsperanto was originally a language that one had to learn entirely through books, and even today most people live apart from each other and converse through the internet, so writing and reading are a big part of Esperanto culture. Most people have created or translated some sort of written work whether fiction or nonfiction, published or available to read online for free.\nPenpals have been popular since Esperanto's earliest days, as Esperanto was originally advertised as a language where you could \"send a letter with a message, short list of grammar rules and a dictionary to a complete stranger, and they'll be able to look up the words and write a coherent reply back\". Many people did indeed do this in order to recruit more Esperanto speakers.\nAt the time, in the early 1900s, there was no major world language that could be used \"anywhere\" and it was difficult to get accurate information about foreign countries. On top of that, things like stamp collecting were popular hobbies for children. In the modern day, most Esperanto speakers talk to each other through the internet.\n\"Monato\" (\"month\") is a general news magazine \"like a genuinely international \"Time\" or \"Newsweek\"\", written by local correspondents.\nA magazine for the blind, \"A\u016droro\", has been published since 1920 and in general, Esperanto hosts the largest Braille publications in the world \u2014 starting in the early 1900s Esperanto was taught in schools of the blind in Europe, and that is where the trend started.\n\"Esperanto\" is the magazine used by the World Esperanto Association to inform its members about everything happening in the Esperanto community.\nThere are many more magazines created by individual Esperanto clubs from towns in places such as from Japan and China.\nConventions.\nMany people wear their country's traditional clothing to Esperanto conventions, whether or not they would ever wear it in their own country. Swedish people, for example, who usually never wear their traditional clothing in their own country, may still wear traditional clothing for any meeting involving Esperanto speakers.\nEvery year, the World Congress of Esperanto (), which is held in different countries around the world according to year (though it mostly takes place in Europe). Each convention draws in an average of 1500\u20133000 attendees, and the best-attended conferences are those held in Central or Eastern Europe (generally meaning Poland, Hungary etc.), as Esperanto is an option for fulfilling mandatory foreign-language requirements in Hungarian schools, and the creator of Esperanto came from Poland (see statistics at World Congress of Esperanto).\nPopular culture.\nEsperanto music is usually done in the traditional style of a person's country, but \"international\" music (American pop music, rap music etc.) also exists. Many famous songs are translated to Esperanto as well, for example \"La vie en rose\" and \"En el frente de Gandesa\" (the links are to the Esperanto versions of the songs on YouTube).\nThere are currently radio broadcasts from China Radio International, Melbourne Ethnic Community Radio, Radio Habana Cuba, Radio Audizioni Italiane (Rai), Radio Polonia, Radio F.R.E.I. and Radio Vatican. Many more people have personal podcasts and vlogs.\nIn 1964, Jacques-Louis Mah\u00e9 produced the first full-length feature film in Esperanto, entitled \"Angoroj\". This was followed in 1965 by the first American Esperanto-production: \"Incubus\", starring William Shatner. Incubus is, however, seen as a common, joke way of first introducing a person to Esperanto as none of the actors even knew how to pronounce Esperanto in the first place, the dialogue is strange and bad due to the scriptwriter not getting a second opinion before the filming was done, and the plot is confusing in general.\nInternacia Televido, an internet television channel, began broadcasting in November 2005. Australia is the hotspot of much of the organization behind Esperanto television.\nSeveral short films have been produced, and at times plays have been recorded \"for television\". , the Esperanto-language Wikipedia 14 films and 3 short films.\nIn 2011, Academy Award-nominated director Sam Green (\"The Weather Underground\"), released a new documentary about Esperanto titled The Universal Language (La Universala Lingvo.) This 30-minute film traces the history of Esperanto. It's known for having extremely good camera quality and filming sense, as well as being a good \"absolute introduction\" to what Esperanto is, but is criticized for being too short.\nMany more films, cartoons and documentaries that aren't Esperanto originals are simply subtitled in Esperanto and put up on YouTube. Some fan-dubs exist, especially of Disney songs and short scenes, and the quality mirrors that of what would come from any small country or a country \"unused to technology\" (such as Greenland, Kazakhstan, etc.). \nFood.\nAs Esperanto speakers are from all over the world, and families whose children speak Esperanto natively usually have parents from two vastly different countries, recipes incorporating elements from different countries are naturally born. Traditional foods are also enjoyed in settings where a native wouldn't normally mix or eat them.\nOne cookbook is \"Internacie kuiri\" \u201cCooking Internationally\u201d by Maria Becker-Meisberger, published by FEL (Flemish Esperanto League), Antwerp 1989, . Another is \"Man\u011doj el sanigaj plantoj\" \u201cMeals from Healthy Vegetable Dishes\u201d by Zlata Nani\u0107, published by BIO-ZRNO, Zagreb 2002, .\nSome Esperanto periodicals, such as \"MONATO\" include recipes from time to time.\nZamenhof Day.\nOn December 15 (L. L. Zamenhof's birthday), Esperanto speakers around the world celebrate Zamenhof Day, sometimes called Book Day. It's a common goal to have a book written in Esperanto published on or by that day, as Zamenhof was a strong advocate of the idea that in order to spread Esperanto around the world, its speakers need to create a large body of literature.\nThe poem \"La Espero\" is the Esperanto anthem, and most Esperanto speakers know it by heart. It's often sung at conventions. Whether or not one enjoys the lyrics, the song is in general something that ties all Esperanto speakers together \u2014 as it's been around since Esperanto's early days, is known at least in tune to every Esperanto speaker, and is a general tradition."}
{"id": "10405", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10405", "title": "Euclidean Algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "10406", "revid": "1011457833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10406", "title": "Emotion", "text": "Emotions are biological states associated with all of the nerve systems brought on by neurophysiological changes variously associated with thoughts, feelings, behavioural responses, and a degree of pleasure or displeasure. There is currently no scientific consensus on a definition. Emotions are often intertwined with mood, temperament, personality, disposition, creativity, and motivation.\nResearch on emotion has increased significantly over the past two decades with many fields contributing including psychology, neuroscience, affective neuroscience, endocrinology, medicine, history, sociology of emotions, and computer science. The numerous theories that attempt to explain the origin, neurobiology, experience, and function of emotions have only fostered more intense research on this topic. Current areas of research in the concept of emotion include the development of materials that stimulate and elicit emotion. In addition, PET scans and fMRI scans help study the affective picture processes in the brain.\nFrom a purely mechanistic perspective, emotions can be defined as \"a positive or negative experience that is associated with a particular pattern of physiological activity.\" Emotions produce different physiological, behavioral and cognitive changes. The original role of emotions was to motivate adaptive behaviors that in the past would have contributed to the passing on of genes through survival, reproduction, and kin selection.\nIn some theories, cognition is an important aspect of emotion. For those who act primarily on emotions, they may assume that they are not thinking, but mental processes involving cognition are still essential, particularly in the interpretation of events. For example, the realization of our believing that we are in a dangerous situation and the subsequent arousal of our body's nervous system (rapid heartbeat and breathing, sweating, muscle tension) is integral to the experience of our feeling afraid. Other theories, however, claim that emotion is separate from and can precede cognition. Consciously experiencing an emotion is exhibiting a mental representation of that emotion from a past or hypothetical experience, which is linked back to a content state of pleasure or displeasure. The content states are established by verbal explanations of experiences, describing an internal state.\nEmotions are complex. According to some theories, they are states of feeling that result in physical and psychological changes that influence our behavior. The physiology of emotion is closely linked to arousal of the nervous system with various states and strengths of arousal relating, apparently, to particular emotions. Emotion is also linked to behavioral tendency. Extroverted people are more likely to be social and express their emotions, while introverted people are more likely to be more socially withdrawn and conceal their emotions. Emotion is often the driving force behind motivation, positive or negative. According to other theories, emotions are not causal forces but simply syndromes of components, which might include motivation, feeling, behavior, and physiological changes, but no one of these components is the emotion. Nor is the emotion an entity that causes these components.\nEmotions involve different components, such as subjective experience, cognitive processes, expressive behavior, psychophysiological changes, and instrumental behavior. At one time, academics attempted to identify the emotion with one of the components: William James with a subjective experience, behaviorists with instrumental behavior, psychophysiologists with physiological changes, and so on. More recently, emotion is said to consist of all the components. The different components of emotion are categorized somewhat differently depending on the academic discipline. In psychology and philosophy, emotion typically includes a subjective, conscious experience characterized primarily by psychophysiological expressions, biological reactions, and mental states. A similar multi-componential description of emotion is found in sociology. For example, Peggy Thoits described emotions as involving physiological components, cultural or emotional labels (anger, surprise, etc.), expressive body actions, and the appraisal of situations and contexts.\nHistory.\nHuman nature and the following bodily sensations have been always part of the interest of thinkers and philosophers. Far most extensively, this interest has been of great interest by both Western and Eastern societies. Emotional states have been associated with the divine and the enlightenment of the human mind and body. The ever changing actions of individuals and its mood variations have been of great importance by most of the Western philosophers (Aristotle, Plato, Descartes, Aquinas, Hobbes) that lead them to propose vast theories; often competing theories, that sought to explain emotion and the following motivators of human action and its consequences.\nIn the Age of Enlightenment Scottish thinker David Hume proposed a revolutionary argument that sought to explain the main motivators of human action and conduct. He proposed that actions are motivated by \"fears, desires, and passions\". As he wrote in his book Treatise of Human Nature (1773): \"Reason alone can never be a motive to any action of the will\u2026 it can never oppose passion in the direction of the will\u2026 Reason is, and ought to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them\". With these lines Hume pretended to explain that reason and further action will be subjected to the desires and experience of the self. Later thinkers would propose that actions and emotions are deeply interrelated to social, political, historical, and cultural aspects of reality that would be also associated with sophisticated neurological and physiological research on the brain and other parts of the physical body.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"emotion\" dates back to 1579, when it was adapted from the French word \"\u00e9mouvoir\", which means \"to stir up\". The term emotion was introduced into academic discussion as a catch-all term to passions, sentiments and affections. The word \"emotion\" was coined in the early 1800s by Thomas Brown and it is around the 1830s that the modern concept of emotion first emerged for the English language. \"No one felt emotions before about 1830. Instead they felt other things - \"passions\", \"accidents of the soul\", \"moral sentiments\" - and explained them very differently from how we understand emotions today.\"\nSome cross-cultural studies indicate that the categorization of \"emotion\" and classification of basic emotions such as \"anger\" and \"sadness\" are not universal and that the boundaries and domains of these concepts are categorized differently by all cultures. However, others argue that there are some universal bases of emotions (see Section 6.1). In psychiatry and psychology, an inability to express or perceive emotion is sometimes referred to as alexithymia.\nDefinitions.\nThe Oxford Dictionaries definition of emotion is \"A strong feeling deriving from one's circumstances, mood, or relationships with others.\" Emotions are responses to significant internal and external events.\nEmotions can be occurrences (e.g., panic) or dispositions (e.g., hostility), and short-lived (e.g., anger) or long-lived (e.g., grief). Psychotherapist Michael C. Graham describes all emotions as existing on a continuum of intensity. Thus fear might range from mild concern to terror or shame might range from simple embarrassment to toxic shame. Emotions have been described as consisting of a coordinated set of responses, which may include verbal, physiological, behavioral, and neural mechanisms.\nEmotions have been categorized, with some relationships existing between emotions and some direct opposites existing. Graham differentiates emotions as functional or dysfunctional and argues all functional emotions have benefits.\nIn some uses of the word, emotions are intense feelings that are directed at someone or something. On the other hand, emotion can be used to refer to states that are mild (as in annoyed or content) and to states that are not directed at anything (as in anxiety and depression). One line of research looks at the meaning of the word emotion in everyday language and finds that this usage is rather different from that in academic discourse.\nIn practical terms, Joseph LeDoux has defined emotions as the result of a cognitive and conscious process which occurs in response to a body system response to a trigger.\nComponents.\nAccording to Scherer's Component Process Model (CPM) of emotion, there are five crucial elements of emotion. From the component process perspective, emotional experience requires that all of these processes become coordinated and synchronized for a short period of time, driven by appraisal processes. Although the inclusion of cognitive appraisal as one of the elements is slightly controversial, since some theorists make the assumption that emotion and cognition are separate but interacting systems, the CPM provides a sequence of events that effectively describes the coordination involved during an emotional episode.\nDifferentiation.\nEmotion can be differentiated from a number of similar constructs within the field of affective neuroscience:\nPurpose and value.\nOne view is that emotions facilitate adaptive responses to environmental challenges. Emotions have been described as a result of evolution because they provided good solutions to ancient and recurring problems that faced our ancestors. Emotions can function as a way to communicate what's important to us, such as values and ethics. However some emotions, such as some forms of anxiety, are sometimes regarded as part of a mental illness and thus possibly of negative value.\nClassification.\nA distinction can be made between emotional episodes and emotional dispositions. Emotional dispositions are also comparable to character traits, where someone may be said to be generally disposed to experience certain emotions. For example, an irritable person is generally disposed to feel irritation more easily or quickly than others do. Finally, some theorists place emotions within a more general category of \"affective states\" where affective states can also include emotion-related phenomena such as pleasure and pain, motivational states (for example, hunger or curiosity), moods, dispositions and traits.\nBasic emotions.\nFor more than 40 years, Paul Ekman has supported the view that emotions are discrete, measurable, and physiologically distinct. Ekman's most influential work revolved around the finding that certain emotions appeared to be universally recognized, even in cultures that were preliterate and could not have learned associations for facial expressions through media. Another classic study found that when participants contorted their facial muscles into distinct facial expressions (for example, disgust), they reported subjective and physiological experiences that matched the distinct facial expressions. Ekman's facial-expression research examined six basic emotions: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness and surprise. Later in his career, Ekman theorized that other universal emotions may exist beyond these six. In light of this, recent cross-cultural studies led by Daniel Cordaro and Dacher Keltner, both former students of Ekman, extended the list of universal emotions. In addition to the original six, these studies provided evidence for amusement, awe, contentment, desire, embarrassment, pain, relief, and sympathy in both facial and vocal expressions. They also found evidence for boredom, confusion, interest, pride, and shame facial expressions, as well as contempt, relief, and triumph vocal expressions.\nRobert Plutchik agreed with Ekman's biologically driven perspective but developed the \"wheel of emotions\", suggesting eight primary emotions grouped on a positive or negative basis: joy versus sadness; anger versus fear; trust versus disgust; and surprise versus anticipation. Some basic emotions can be modified to form complex emotions. The complex emotions could arise from cultural conditioning or association combined with the basic emotions. Alternatively, similar to the way primary colors combine, \"primary emotions\" could blend to form the full spectrum of human emotional experience. For example, interpersonal anger and disgust could blend to form contempt. Relationships exist between basic emotions, resulting in positive or negative influences.\nMulti-dimensional analysis.\nPsychologists have used methods such as factor analysis to attempt to map emotion-related responses onto a more limited number of dimensions. Such methods attempt to boil emotions down to underlying dimensions that capture the similarities and differences between experiences. Often, the first two dimensions uncovered by factor analysis are valence (how negative or positive the experience feels) and arousal (how energized or enervated the experience feels). These two dimensions can be depicted on a 2D coordinate map. This two-dimensional map has been theorized to capture one important component of emotion called core affect. Core affect is not theorized to be the only component to emotion, but to give the emotion its hedonic and felt energy.\nUsing statistical methods to analyze emotional states elicited by short videos, Cowen and Keltner identified 27 varieties of emotional experience: admiration, adoration, aesthetic appreciation, amusement, anger, anxiety, awe, awkwardness, boredom, calmness, confusion, craving, disgust, empathic pain, entrancement, excitement, fear, horror, interest, joy, nostalgia, relief, romance, sadness, satisfaction, sexual desire and surprise.\nPre-modern history.\nIn Buddhism, emotions occur when an object is considered as attractive or repulsive. There is a felt tendency impelling people towards attractive objects and impelling them to move away from repulsive or harmful objects; a disposition to possess the object (greed), to destroy it (hatred), to flee from it (fear), to get obsessed or worried over it (anxiety), and so on.\nIn Stoic theories, normal emotions (like delight and fear) are described as irrational impulses which come from incorrect appraisals of what is 'good' or 'bad'. Alternatively, there are 'good emotions' (like joy and caution) experienced by those that are wise, which come from correct appraisals of what is 'good' and 'bad'. \nAristotle believed that emotions were an essential component of virtue. In the Aristotelian view all emotions (called passions) corresponded to appetites or capacities. During the Middle Ages, the Aristotelian view was adopted and further developed by scholasticism and Thomas Aquinas in particular.\nIn Chinese antiquity, excessive emotion was believed to cause damage to \"qi\", which in turn, damages the vital organs. The four humours theory made popular by Hippocrates contributed to the study of emotion in the same way that it did for medicine.\nIn the early 11th century, Avicenna theorized about the influence of emotions on health and behaviors, suggesting the need to manage emotions.\nEarly modern views on emotion are developed in the works of philosophers such as Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, Baruch Spinoza, Thomas Hobbes and David Hume. In the 19th century emotions were considered adaptive and were studied more frequently from an empiricist psychiatric perspective.\nWestern theological.\nChristian perspective on emotion presupposes a theistic origin to humanity. God who created humans gave humans the ability to feel emotion and interact emotionally. Biblical content expresses that God is a person who feels and expresses emotion. Though a somatic view would place the locus of emotions in the physical body, Christian theory of emotions would view the body more as a platform for the sensing and expression of emotions. Therefore emotions themselves arise from the person, or that which is \"imago-dei\" or image of God in humans. In Christian thought, emotions have the potential to be controlled through reasoned reflection. That reasoned reflection also mimics God who made mind. The purpose of emotions in human life are therefore summarized in God's call to enjoy Him and creation, humans are to enjoy emotions and benefit from them and use them to energize behavior.\nEvolutionary theories.\n19th century.\nPerspectives on emotions from evolutionary theory were initiated during the mid-late 19th century with Charles Darwin's 1872 book \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\". Surprisingly, Darwin argued that emotions served no evolved purpose for humans, neither in communication, nor in aiding survival. Darwin largely argued that emotions evolved via the inheritance of acquired characters. He pioneered various methods for studying non-verbal expressions, from which he concluded that some expressions had cross-cultural universality. Darwin also detailed homologous expressions of emotions that occur in animals. This led the way for animal research on emotions and the eventual determination of the neural underpinnings of emotion.\nContemporary.\nMore contemporary views along the evolutionary psychology spectrum posit that both basic emotions and social emotions evolved to motivate (social) behaviors that were adaptive in the ancestral environment. Emotion is an essential part of any human decision-making and planning, and the famous distinction made between reason and emotion is not as clear as it seems. Paul D. MacLean claims that emotion competes with even more instinctive responses, on one hand, and the more abstract reasoning, on the other hand. The increased potential in neuroimaging has also allowed investigation into evolutionarily ancient parts of the brain. Important neurological advances were derived from these perspectives in the 1990s by Joseph E. LeDoux and Ant\u00f3nio Dam\u00e1sio.\nResearch on social emotion also focuses on the physical displays of emotion including body language of animals and humans (see affect display). For example, spite seems to work against the individual but it can establish an individual's reputation as someone to be feared. Shame and pride can motivate behaviors that help one maintain one's standing in a community, and self-esteem is one's estimate of one's status.\nSomatic theories.\nSomatic theories of emotion claim that bodily responses, rather than cognitive interpretations, are essential to emotions. The first modern version of such theories came from William James in the 1880s. The theory lost favor in the 20th century, but has regained popularity more recently due largely to theorists such as John Cacioppo, Ant\u00f3nio Dam\u00e1sio, Joseph E. LeDoux and Robert Zajonc who are able to appeal to neurological evidence.\nJames\u2013Lange theory.\nIn his 1884 article William James argued that feelings and emotions were \"secondary\" to physiological phenomena. In his theory, James proposed that the perception of what he called an \"exciting fact\" directly led to a physiological response, known as \"emotion.\" To account for different types of emotional experiences, James proposed that stimuli trigger activity in the autonomic nervous system, which in turn produces an emotional experience in the brain. The Danish psychologist Carl Lange also proposed a similar theory at around the same time, and therefore this theory became known as the James\u2013Lange theory. As James wrote, \"the perception of bodily changes, as they occur, \"is\" the emotion.\" James further claims that \"we feel sad because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we tremble, and either we cry, strike, or tremble because we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be.\"\nAn example of this theory in action would be as follows: An emotion-evoking stimulus (snake) triggers a pattern of physiological response (increased heart rate, faster breathing, etc.), which is interpreted as a particular emotion (fear). This theory is supported by experiments in which by manipulating the bodily state induces a desired emotional state. Some people may believe that emotions give rise to emotion-specific actions, for example, \"I'm crying because I'm sad,\" or \"I ran away because I was scared.\" The issue with the James\u2013Lange theory is that of causation (bodily states causing emotions and being \"a priori\"), not that of the bodily influences on emotional experience (which can be argued and is still quite prevalent today in biofeedback studies and embodiment theory).\nAlthough mostly abandoned in its original form, Tim Dalgleish argues that most contemporary neuroscientists have embraced the components of the James-Lange theory of emotions.\nCannon\u2013Bard theory.\nWalter Bradford Cannon agreed that physiological responses played a crucial role in emotions, but did not believe that physiological responses alone could explain subjective emotional experiences. He argued that physiological responses were too slow and often imperceptible and this could not account for the relatively rapid and intense subjective awareness of emotion. He also believed that the richness, variety, and temporal course of emotional experiences could not stem from physiological reactions, that reflected fairly undifferentiated fight or flight responses. An example of this theory in action is as follows: An emotion-evoking event (snake) triggers simultaneously both a physiological response and a conscious experience of an emotion.\nPhillip Bard contributed to the theory with his work on animals. Bard found that sensory, motor, and physiological information all had to pass through the diencephalon (particularly the thalamus), before being subjected to any further processing. Therefore, Cannon also argued that it was not anatomically possible for sensory events to trigger a physiological response prior to triggering conscious awareness and emotional stimuli had to trigger both physiological and experiential aspects of emotion simultaneously.\nTwo-factor theory.\nStanley Schachter formulated his theory on the earlier work of a Spanish physician, Gregorio Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, who injected patients with epinephrine and subsequently asked them how they felt. Mara\u00f1\u00f3n found that most of these patients felt something but in the absence of an actual emotion-evoking stimulus, the patients were unable to interpret their physiological arousal as an experienced emotion. Schachter did agree that physiological reactions played a big role in emotions. He suggested that physiological reactions contributed to emotional experience by facilitating a focused cognitive appraisal of a given physiologically arousing event and that this appraisal was what defined the subjective emotional experience. Emotions were thus a result of two-stage process: general physiological arousal, and experience of emotion. For example, the physiological arousal, heart pounding, in a response to an evoking stimulus, the sight of a bear in the kitchen. The brain then quickly scans the area, to explain the pounding, and notices the bear. Consequently, the brain interprets the pounding heart as being the result of fearing the bear. With his student, Jerome Singer, Schachter demonstrated that subjects can have different emotional reactions despite being placed into the same physiological state with an injection of epinephrine. Subjects were observed to express either anger or amusement depending on whether another person in the situation (a confederate) displayed that emotion. Hence, the combination of the appraisal of the situation (cognitive) and the participants' reception of adrenaline or a placebo together determined the response. This experiment has been criticized in Jesse Prinz's (2004) \"Gut Reactions\".\nCognitive theories.\nWith the two-factor theory now incorporating cognition, several theories began to argue that cognitive activity in the form of judgments, evaluations, or thoughts were entirely necessary for an emotion to occur. One of the main proponents of this view was Richard Lazarus who argued that emotions must have some cognitive intentionality. The cognitive activity involved in the interpretation of an emotional context may be conscious or unconscious and may or may not take the form of conceptual processing.\nLazarus' theory is very influential; emotion is a disturbance that occurs in the following order:\nFor example: Jenny sees a snake.\nLazarus stressed that the quality and intensity of emotions are controlled through cognitive processes. These processes underline coping strategies that form the emotional reaction by altering the relationship between the person and the environment.\nGeorge Mandler provided an extensive theoretical and empirical discussion of emotion as influenced by cognition, consciousness, and the autonomic nervous system in two books (\"Mind and Emotion\", 1975, and \"Mind and Body: Psychology of Emotion and Stress\", 1984)\nThere are some theories on emotions arguing that cognitive activity in the form of judgments, evaluations, or thoughts are necessary in order for an emotion to occur. A prominent philosophical exponent is Robert C. Solomon (for example, \"The Passions, Emotions and the Meaning of Life\", 1993). Solomon claims that emotions are judgments. He has put forward a more nuanced view which responds to what he has called the 'standard objection' to cognitivism, the idea that a judgment that something is fearsome can occur with or without emotion, so judgment cannot be identified with emotion. The theory proposed by Nico Frijda where appraisal leads to action tendencies is another example.\nIt has also been suggested that emotions (affect heuristics, feelings and gut-feeling reactions) are often used as shortcuts to process information and influence behavior. The affect infusion model (AIM) is a theoretical model developed by Joseph Forgas in the early 1990s that attempts to explain how emotion and mood interact with one's ability to process information.\nTheories dealing with perception either use one or multiples perceptions in order to find an emotion. A recent hybrid of the somatic and cognitive theories of emotion is the perceptual theory. This theory is neo-Jamesian in arguing that bodily responses are central to emotions, yet it emphasizes the meaningfulness of emotions or the idea that emotions are about something, as is recognized by cognitive theories. The novel claim of this theory is that conceptually-based cognition is unnecessary for such meaning. Rather the bodily changes themselves \"perceive\" the meaningful content of the emotion because of being causally triggered by certain situations. In this respect, emotions are held to be analogous to faculties such as vision or touch, which provide information about the relation between the subject and the world in various ways. A sophisticated defense of this view is found in philosopher Jesse Prinz's book \"Gut Reactions\", and psychologist James Laird's book \"Feelings\".\nAffective events theory is a communication-based theory developed by Howard M. Weiss and Russell Cropanzano (1996), that looks at the causes, structures, and consequences of emotional experience (especially in work contexts). This theory suggests that emotions are influenced and caused by events which in turn influence attitudes and behaviors. This theoretical frame also emphasizes \"time\" in that human beings experience what they call emotion episodes \u2013\\ a \"series of emotional states extended over time and organized around an underlying theme.\" This theory has been utilized by numerous researchers to better understand emotion from a communicative lens, and was reviewed further by Howard M. Weiss and Daniel J. Beal in their article, \"Reflections on Affective Events Theory\", published in \"Research on Emotion in Organizations\" in 2005.\nSituated perspective on emotion.\nA situated perspective on emotion, developed by Paul E. Griffiths and Andrea Scarantino, emphasizes the importance of external factors in the development and communication of emotion, drawing upon the situationism approach in psychology. This theory is markedly different from both cognitivist and neo-Jamesian theories of emotion, both of which see emotion as a purely internal process, with the environment only acting as a stimulus to the emotion. In contrast, a situationist perspective on emotion views emotion as the product of an organism investigating its environment, and observing the responses of other organisms. Emotion stimulates the evolution of social relationships, acting as a signal to mediate the behavior of other organisms. In some contexts, the expression of emotion (both voluntary and involuntary) could be seen as strategic moves in the transactions between different organisms. The situated perspective on emotion states that conceptual thought is not an inherent part of emotion, since emotion is an action-oriented form of skillful engagement with the world. Griffiths and Scarantino suggested that this perspective on emotion could be helpful in understanding phobias, as well as the emotions of infants and animals.\nGenetics.\nEmotions can motivate social interactions and relationships and therefore are directly related with basic physiology, particularly with the stress systems. This is important because emotions are related to the anti-stress complex, with an oxytocin-attachment system, which plays a major role in bonding. Emotional phenotype temperaments affect social connectedness and fitness in complex social systems. These characteristics are shared with other species and taxa and are due to the effects of genes and their continuous transmission. Information that is encoded in the DNA sequences provides the blueprint for assembling proteins that make up our cells. Zygotes require genetic information from their parental germ cells, and at every speciation event, heritable traits that have enabled its ancestor to survive and reproduce successfully are passed down along with new traits that could be potentially beneficial to the offspring.\nIn the five million years since the lineages leading to modern humans and chimpanzees split, only about 1.2% of their genetic material has been modified. This suggests that everything that separates us from chimpanzees must be encoded in that very small amount of DNA, including our behaviors. Students that study animal behaviors have only identified intraspecific examples of gene-dependent behavioral phenotypes. In voles (Microtus spp.) minor genetic differences have been identified in a vasopressin receptor gene that corresponds to major species differences in social organization and the mating system. Another potential example with behavioral differences is the FOCP2 gene, which is involved in neural circuitry handling speech and language. Its present form in humans differed from that of the chimpanzees by only a few mutations and has been present for about 200,000 years, coinciding with the beginning of modern humans. Speech, language, and social organization are all part of the basis for emotions.\nFormation.\nNeurobiological explanation.\nBased on discoveries made through neural mapping of the limbic system, the neurobiological explanation of human emotion is that emotion is a pleasant or unpleasant mental state organized in the limbic system of the mammalian brain. If distinguished from reactive responses of reptiles, emotions would then be mammalian elaborations of general vertebrate arousal patterns, in which neurochemicals (for example, dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin) step-up or step-down the brain's activity level, as visible in body movements, gestures and postures. Emotions can likely be mediated by pheromones (see fear).\nFor example, the emotion of love is proposed to be the expression of Paleocircuits of the mammalian brain (specifically, modules of the cingulate gyrus) which facilitate the care, feeding, and grooming of offspring. Paleocircuits are neural platforms for bodily expression configured before the advent of cortical circuits for speech. They consist of pre-configured pathways or networks of nerve cells in the forebrain, brain stem and spinal cord.\nOther emotions like fear and anxiety long thought to be exclusively generated by the most primitive parts of the brain (stem) and more associated to the fight-or-flight responses of behavior, have also been associated as adaptive expressions of defensive behavior whenever a threat is encountered. Although defensive behaviors have been present in a wide variety of species, Blanchard et al. (2001) discovered a correlation of given stimuli and situation that resulted in a similar pattern of defensive behavior towards a threat in human and non-human mammals.\nWhenever, potentially dangerous stimuli is presented additional brain structures activate that previously thought (hippocampus, thalamus, etc). Thus, giving the amygdala an important role on coordinating the following behavioral input based on the presented neurotransmitters that respond to threat stimuli. These biological functions of the amygdala are not only limited to the \"fear-conditioning\" and \"processing of aversive stimuli\", but also are present on other components of the amygdala. Therefore, it can referred the amygdala as a key structure to understand the potential responses of behavior in danger like situations in human and non-human mammals.\nThe motor centers of reptiles react to sensory cues of vision, sound, touch, chemical, gravity, and motion with pre-set body movements and programmed postures. With the arrival of night-active mammals, smell replaced vision as the dominant sense, and a different way of responding arose from the olfactory sense, which is proposed to have developed into mammalian emotion and emotional memory. The mammalian brain invested heavily in olfaction to succeed at night as reptiles slept \u2013 one explanation for why olfactory lobes in mammalian brains are proportionally larger than in the reptiles. These odor pathways gradually formed the neural blueprint for what was later to become our limbic brain.\nEmotions are thought to be related to certain activities in brain areas that direct our attention, motivate our behavior, and determine the significance of what is going on around us. Pioneering work by Paul Broca (1878), James Papez (1937), and Paul D. MacLean (1952) suggested that emotion is related to a group of structures in the center of the brain called the limbic system, which includes the hypothalamus, cingulate cortex, hippocampi, and other structures. More recent research has shown that some of these limbic structures are not as directly related to emotion as others are while some non-limbic structures have been found to be of greater emotional relevance.\nPrefrontal cortex.\nThere is ample evidence that the left prefrontal cortex is activated by stimuli that cause positive approach. If attractive stimuli can selectively activate a region of the brain, then logically the converse should hold, that selective activation of that region of the brain should cause a stimulus to be judged more positively. This was demonstrated for moderately attractive visual stimuli and replicated and extended to include negative stimuli.\nTwo neurobiological models of emotion in the prefrontal cortex made opposing predictions. The valence model predicted that anger, a negative emotion, would activate the right prefrontal cortex. The direction model predicted that anger, an approach emotion, would activate the left prefrontal cortex. The second model was supported.\nThis still left open the question of whether the opposite of approach in the prefrontal cortex is better described as moving away (direction model), as unmoving but with strength and resistance (movement model), or as unmoving with passive yielding (action tendency model). Support for the action tendency model (passivity related to right prefrontal activity) comes from research on shyness and research on behavioral inhibition. Research that tested the competing hypotheses generated by all four models also supported the action tendency model.\nHomeostatic/primordial emotion.\nAnother neurological approach proposed by Bud Craig in 2003 distinguishes two classes of emotion: \"classical\" emotions such as love, anger and fear that are evoked by environmental stimuli, and \"homeostatic emotions\"\u00a0\u2013 attention-demanding feelings evoked by body states, such as pain, hunger and fatigue, that motivate behavior (withdrawal, eating or resting in these examples) aimed at maintaining the body's internal milieu at its ideal state.\nDerek Denton calls the latter \"primordial emotions\" and defines them as \"the subjective element of the instincts, which are the genetically programmed behavior patterns which contrive homeostasis. They include thirst, hunger for air, hunger for food, pain and hunger for specific minerals etc. There are two constituents of a primordial emotion--the specific sensation which when severe may be imperious, and the compelling intention for gratification by a consummatory act.\"\nEmergent explanation.\nJoseph LeDoux differentiates between the human's defense system, which has evolved over time, and emotions such as fear and anxiety. He has said that the amygdala may release hormones due to a trigger (such as an innate reaction to seeing a snake), but \"then we elaborate it through cognitive and conscious processes\".\nLisa Feldman Barrett highlights differences in emotions between different cultures, and says that emotions (such as anxiety) \"are not triggered; you create them. They emerge as a combination of the physical properties of your body, a flexible brain that wires itself to whatever environment it develops in, and your culture and upbringing, which provide that environment.\" She has termed this approach the theory of constructed emotion.\nDisciplinary approaches.\nMany different disciplines have produced work on the emotions. Human sciences study the role of emotions in mental processes, disorders, and neural mechanisms. In psychiatry, emotions are examined as part of the discipline's study and treatment of mental disorders in humans. Nursing studies emotions as part of its approach to the provision of holistic health care to humans. Psychology examines emotions from a scientific perspective by treating them as mental processes and behavior and they explore the underlying physiological and neurological processes, e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy. In neuroscience sub-fields such as social neuroscience and affective neuroscience, scientists study the neural mechanisms of emotion by combining neuroscience with the psychological study of personality, emotion, and mood. In linguistics, the expression of emotion may change to the meaning of sounds. In education, the role of emotions in relation to learning is examined.\nSocial sciences often examine emotion for the role that it plays in human culture and social interactions. In sociology, emotions are examined for the role they play in human society, social patterns and interactions, and culture. In anthropology, the study of humanity, scholars use ethnography to undertake contextual analyses and cross-cultural comparisons of a range of human activities. Some anthropology studies examine the role of emotions in human activities. In the field of communication sciences, critical organizational scholars have examined the role of emotions in organizations, from the perspectives of managers, employees, and even customers. A focus on emotions in organizations can be credited to Arlie Russell Hochschild's concept of emotional labor. The University of Queensland hosts EmoNet, an e-mail distribution list representing a network of academics that facilitates scholarly discussion of all matters relating to the study of emotion in organizational settings. The list was established in January 1997 and has over 700 members from across the globe.\nIn economics, the social science that studies the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services, emotions are analyzed in some sub-fields of microeconomics, in order to assess the role of emotions on purchase decision-making and risk perception. In criminology, a social science approach to the study of crime, scholars often draw on behavioral sciences, sociology, and psychology; emotions are examined in criminology issues such as anomie theory and studies of \"toughness,\" aggressive behavior, and hooliganism. In law, which underpins civil obedience, politics, economics and society, evidence about people's emotions is often raised in tort law claims for compensation and in criminal law prosecutions against alleged lawbreakers (as evidence of the defendant's state of mind during trials, sentencing, and parole hearings). In political science, emotions are examined in a number of sub-fields, such as the analysis of voter decision-making.\nIn philosophy, emotions are studied in sub-fields such as ethics, the philosophy of art (for example, sensory\u2013emotional values, and matters of taste and sentimentality), and the philosophy of music (see also music and emotion). In history, scholars examine documents and other sources to interpret and analyze past activities; speculation on the emotional state of the authors of historical documents is one of the tools of interpretation. In literature and film-making, the expression of emotion is the cornerstone of genres such as drama, melodrama, and romance. In communication studies, scholars study the role that emotion plays in the dissemination of ideas and messages. Emotion is also studied in non-human animals in ethology, a branch of zoology which focuses on the scientific study of animal behavior. Ethology is a combination of laboratory and field science, with strong ties to ecology and evolution. Ethologists often study one type of behavior (for example, aggression) in a number of unrelated animals.\nHistory.\nThe history of emotions has become an increasingly popular topic recently, with some scholars arguing that it is an essential category of analysis, not unlike class, race, or gender. Historians, like other social scientists, assume that emotions, feelings and their expressions are regulated in different ways by both different cultures and different historical times, and the constructivist school of history claims even that some sentiments and meta-emotions, for example schadenfreude, are learnt and not only regulated by culture. Historians of emotion trace and analyze the changing norms and rules of feeling, while examining emotional regimes, codes, and lexicons from social, cultural, or political history perspectives. Others focus on the history of medicine, science, or psychology. What somebody can and may feel (and show) in a given situation, towards certain people or things, depends on social norms and rules; thus historically variable and open to change. Several research centers have opened in the past few years in Germany, England, Spain, Sweden, and Australia.\nFurthermore, research in historical trauma suggests that some traumatic emotions can be passed on from parents to offspring to second and even third generation, presented as examples of transgenerational trauma.\nSociology.\nA common way in which emotions are conceptualized in sociology is in terms of the multidimensional characteristics including cultural or emotional labels (for example, anger, pride, fear, happiness), physiological changes (for example, increased perspiration, changes in pulse rate), expressive facial and body movements (for example, smiling, frowning, baring teeth), and appraisals of situational cues. One comprehensive theory of emotional arousal in humans has been developed by Jonathan Turner (2007: 2009). Two of the key eliciting factors for the arousal of emotions within this theory are expectations states and sanctions. When people enter a situation or encounter with certain expectations for how the encounter should unfold, they will experience different emotions depending on the extent to which expectations for Self, other and situation are met or not met. People can also provide positive or negative sanctions directed at Self or other which also trigger different emotional experiences in individuals. Turner analyzed a wide range of emotion theories across different fields of research including sociology, psychology, evolutionary science, and neuroscience. Based on this analysis, he identified four emotions that all researchers consider being founded on human neurology including assertive-anger, aversion-fear, satisfaction-happiness, and disappointment-sadness. These four categories are called primary emotions and there is some agreement amongst researchers that these primary emotions become combined to produce more elaborate and complex emotional experiences. These more elaborate emotions are called first-order elaborations in Turner's theory and they include sentiments such as pride, triumph, and awe. Emotions can also be experienced at different levels of intensity so that feelings of concern are a low-intensity variation of the primary emotion aversion-fear whereas depression is a higher intensity variant.\nAttempts are frequently made to regulate emotion according to the conventions of the society and the situation based on many (sometimes conflicting) demands and expectations which originate from various entities. The expression of anger is in many cultures discouraged in girls and women to a greater extent than in boys and men (the notion being that an angry man has a valid complaint that needs to be rectified, while an angry women is hysterical or oversensitive, and her anger is somehow invalid), while the expression of sadness or fear is discouraged in boys and men relative to girls and women (attitudes implicit in phrases like \"man up\" or \"don't be a sissy\"). Expectations attached to social roles, such as \"acting as man\" and not as a woman, and the accompanying \"feeling rules\" contribute to the differences in expression of certain emotions. Some cultures encourage or discourage happiness, sadness, or jealousy, and the free expression of the emotion of disgust is considered socially unacceptable in most cultures. Some social institutions are seen as based on certain emotion, such as love in the case of contemporary institution of marriage. In advertising, such as health campaigns and political messages, emotional appeals are commonly found. Recent examples include no-smoking health campaigns and political campaigns emphasizing the fear of terrorism.\nSociological attention to emotion has varied over time. \u00c9mile Durkheim (1915/1965) wrote about the collective effervescence or emotional energy that was experienced by members of totemic rituals in Australian aborigine society. He explained how the heightened state of emotional energy achieved during totemic rituals transported individuals above themselves giving them the sense that they were in the presence of a higher power, a force, that was embedded in the sacred objects that were worshipped. These feelings of exaltation, he argued, ultimately lead people to believe that there were forces that governed sacred objects.\nIn the 1990s, sociologists focused on different aspects of specific emotions and how these emotions were socially relevant. For Cooley (1992), pride and shame were the most important emotions that drive people to take various social actions. During every encounter, he proposed that we monitor ourselves through the \"looking glass\" that the gestures and reactions of others provide. Depending on these reactions, we either experience pride or shame and this results in particular paths of action. Retzinger (1991) conducted studies of married couples who experienced cycles of rage and shame. Drawing predominantly on Goffman and Cooley's work, Scheff (1990) developed a micro sociological theory of the social bond. The formation or disruption of social bonds is dependent on the emotions that people experience during interactions.\nSubsequent to these developments, Randall Collins (2004) formulated his interaction ritual theory by drawing on Durkheim's work on totemic rituals that was extended by Goffman (1964/2013; 1967) into everyday focused encounters. Based on interaction ritual theory, we experience different levels or intensities of emotional energy during face-to-face interactions. Emotional energy is considered to be a feeling of confidence to take action and a boldness that one experiences when they are charged up from the collective effervescence generated during group gatherings that reach high levels of intensity.\nThere is a growing body of research applying the sociology of emotion to understanding the learning experiences of students during classroom interactions with teachers and other students (for example, Milne &amp; Otieno, 2007; Olitsky, 2007; Tobin, et al., 2013; Zembylas, 2002). These studies show that learning subjects like science can be understood in terms of classroom interaction rituals that generate emotional energy and collective states of emotional arousal like emotional climate.\nApart from interaction ritual traditions of the sociology of emotion, other approaches have been classed into one of six other categories:\nThis list provides a general overview of different traditions in the sociology of emotion that sometimes conceptualise emotion in different ways and at other times in complementary ways. Many of these different approaches were synthesized by Turner (2007) in his sociological theory of human emotions in an attempt to produce one comprehensive sociological account that draws on developments from many of the above traditions.\nPsychotherapy and regulation.\nEmotion regulation refers to the cognitive and behavioral strategies people use to influence their own emotional experience. For example, a behavioral strategy in which one avoids a situation to avoid unwanted emotions (trying not to think about the situation, doing distracting activities, etc.). Depending on the particular school's general emphasis on either cognitive components of emotion, physical energy discharging, or on symbolic movement and facial expression components of emotion different schools of psychotherapy approach the regulation of emotion differently. Cognitively oriented schools approach them via their cognitive components, such as rational emotive behavior therapy. Yet others approach emotions via symbolic movement and facial expression components (like in contemporary Gestalt therapy).\nCross-cultural research.\nResearch on emotions reveals the strong presence of cross-cultural differences in emotional reactions and that emotional reactions are likely to be culture-specific. In strategic settings, cross-cultural research on emotions is required for understanding the psychological situation of a given population or specific actors. This implies the need to comprehend the current emotional state, mental disposition or other behavioral motivation of a target audience located in a different culture, basically founded on its national political, social, economic, and psychological peculiarities but also subject to the influence of circumstances and events.\nComputer science.\nIn the 2000s, research in computer science, engineering, psychology and neuroscience has been aimed at developing devices that recognize human affect display and model emotions. In computer science, affective computing is a branch of the study and development of artificial intelligence that deals with the design of systems and devices that can recognize, interpret, and process human emotions. It is an interdisciplinary field spanning computer sciences, psychology, and cognitive science. While the origins of the field may be traced as far back as to early philosophical enquiries into emotion, the more modern branch of computer science originated with Rosalind Picard's 1995 paper on affective computing. Detecting emotional information begins with passive sensors which capture data about the user's physical state or behavior without interpreting the input. The data gathered is analogous to the cues humans use to perceive emotions in others. Another area within affective computing is the design of computational devices proposed to exhibit either innate emotional capabilities or that are capable of convincingly simulating emotions. Emotional speech processing recognizes the user's emotional state by analyzing speech patterns. The detection and processing of facial expression or body gestures is achieved through detectors and sensors.\nThe effects on memory.\nEmotion affects the way autobiographical memories are encoded and retrieved. Emotional memories are reactivated more, they are remembered better and have more attention devoted to them. Through remembering our past achievements and failures, autobiographical memories affect how we perceive and feel about ourselves.\nNotable theorists.\nIn the late 19th century, the most influential theorists were William James (1842\u20131910) and Carl Lange (1834\u20131900). James was an American psychologist and philosopher who wrote about educational psychology, psychology of religious experience/mysticism, and the philosophy of pragmatism. Lange was a Danish physician and psychologist. Working independently, they developed the James\u2013Lange theory, a hypothesis on the origin and nature of emotions. The theory states that within human beings, as a response to experiences in the world, the autonomic nervous system creates physiological events such as muscular tension, a rise in heart rate, perspiration, and dryness of the mouth. Emotions, then, are feelings which come about as a result of these physiological changes, rather than being their cause.\nSilvan Tomkins (1911\u20131991) developed the affect theory and script theory. The affect theory introduced the concept of basic emotions, and was based on the idea that the dominance of the emotion, which he called the affected system, was the motivating force in human life.\nSome of the most influential deceased theorists on emotion from the 20th century include Magda B. Arnold (1903\u20132002), an American psychologist who developed the appraisal theory of emotions; Richard Lazarus (1922\u20132002), an American psychologist who specialized in emotion and stress, especially in relation to cognition; Herbert A. Simon (1916\u20132001), who included emotions into decision making and artificial intelligence; Robert Plutchik (1928\u20132006), an American psychologist who developed a psychoevolutionary theory of emotion; Robert Zajonc (1923\u20132008) a Polish\u2013American social psychologist who specialized in social and cognitive processes such as social facilitation; Robert C. Solomon (1942\u20132007), an American philosopher who contributed to the theories on the philosophy of emotions with books such as \"What Is An Emotion?: Classic and Contemporary Readings\" (2003); Peter Goldie (1946\u20132011), a British philosopher who specialized in ethics, aesthetics, emotion, mood and character; Nico Frijda (1927\u20132015), a Dutch psychologist who advanced the theory that human emotions serve to promote a tendency to undertake actions that are appropriate in the circumstances, detailed in his book \"The Emotions\" (1986); Jaak Panksepp (1943-2017), an Estonian-born American psychologist, psychobiologist, neuroscientist and pioneer in affective neuroscience.\nInfluential theorists who are still active include the following psychologists, neurologists, philosophers, and sociologists:"}
{"id": "10407", "revid": "12824384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10407", "title": "Epictetus", "text": "Epictetus (; , \"Ep\u00edkt\u0113tos\"; 50 135 AD) was a Greek Stoic philosopher. He was born a slave at Hierapolis, Phrygia (present day Pamukkale, Turkey) and lived in Rome until his banishment, when he went to Nicopolis in northwestern Greece for the rest of his life. His teachings were written down and published by his pupil Arrian in his \"Discourses\" and \"Enchiridion\".\nEpictetus taught that philosophy is a way of life and not just a theoretical discipline. To Epictetus, all external events are beyond our control; we should accept whatever happens calmly and dispassionately. However, individuals are responsible for their own actions, which they can examine and control through rigorous self-discipline.\nLife.\nEpictetus was born around AD 50, presumably at Hierapolis, Phrygia. The name his parents gave him is unknown; the word \"ep\u00edkt\u0113tos\" (\u1f10\u03c0\u03af\u03ba\u03c4\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) in Greek simply means \"gained\" or \"acquired\"; the Greek philosopher Plato, in his \"Laws\", used the term to mean property that is \"added to one's hereditary property\". He spent his youth as a slave in Rome to Epaphroditos, a wealthy freedman and secretary to Nero.\nEarly in life, Epictetus acquired a passion for philosophy and, with the permission of his wealthy owner, he studied Stoic philosophy under Musonius Rufus, Becoming more educated in this way raised his social status. At some point, he became crippled. Origen wrote that this was because his leg had been deliberately broken by his owner. Simplicius, in contrast, wrote that he had simply been lame from childhood.\nEpictetus obtained his freedom sometime after the death of Nero in AD 68, and he began to teach philosophy in Rome. Around AD 93, when Emperor Domitian banished all philosophers from the city, Epictetus moved to Nicopolis in Epirus, Greece, where he founded a school of philosophy.\nHis most famous pupil, Arrian, studied under him as a young man (around AD 108) and claimed to have written his famous \"Discourses\" based on the notes he took on Epictetus\u2019s lectures. Arrian argued that his Discourses should be considered comparable to the Socratic literature. Arrian described Epictetus as a powerful speaker who could \"induce his listener to feel just what Epictetus wanted him to feel.\" Many eminent figures sought conversations with him. Emperor Hadrian was friendly with him, and may have heard him speak at his school in Nicopolis.\nHe lived a life of great simplicity, with few possessions. He lived alone for a long time, but in his old age, he adopted a friend's child who otherwise would have been left to die and raised him with the aid of a woman. It is unclear whether Epictetus and she were married. He died sometime around AD 135. After his death, according to Lucian, his oil lamp was purchased by an admirer for 3,000 drachmae.\nThought.\nNo writings by Epictetus are known. His discourses were transcribed and compiled by his pupil Arrian (author of the \"Anabasis Alexandri\"). The main work is \"The Discourses\", four books of which have been preserved (out of the original eight). Arrian also compiled a popular digest, entitled the \"Enchiridion\", or \"Handbook.\" In a preface to the \"Discourses\" that is addressed to Lucius Gellius, Arrian states that \"whatever I heard him say I used to write down, word for word, as best I could, endeavouring to preserve it as a memorial, for my own future use, of his way of thinking and the frankness of his speech.\"\nEpictetus maintains that the foundation of all philosophy is self-knowledge; that is, the conviction of our ignorance and gullibility ought to be the first subject of our study. Logic provides valid reasoning and certainty in judgment, but it is subordinate to practical needs. The first and most necessary part of philosophy concerns the application of doctrine, for example, that people should not lie. The second concerns reasons, e.g., why people should not lie. While the third, lastly, examines and establishes the reasons. This is the logical part, which finds reasons, shows what is a reason, and that a given reason is a correct one. This last part is necessary, but only on account of the second, which again is rendered necessary by the first.\nBoth the \"Discourses\" and the \"Enchiridion\" begin by distinguishing between those things in our power (\"prohairetic\" things) and those things not in our power (\"aprohairetic\" things).\nThat alone is in our power, which is our own work; and in this class are our opinions, impulses, desires, and aversions. On the contrary, what is not in our power, are our bodies, possessions, glory, and power. Any delusion on this point leads to the greatest errors, misfortunes, and troubles, and to the slavery of the soul.\nWe have no power over external things, and the good that ought to be the object of our earnest pursuit, is to be found only within ourselves. The determination between what is good and what is not good is made by the capacity for choice (\"prohairesis\"). Prohairesis allows us to act, and gives us the kind of freedom that only rational animals have. It is determined by our reason, which of all our faculties, sees and tests itself and everything else. It is the correct use of the impressions (\"phantasia\") that bombard the mind that is in our power:\nPractice then from the start to say to every harsh impression, \"You are an impression, and not at all the thing you appear to be.\" Then examine it and test it by these rules you have, and firstly, and chiefly, by this: whether the impression has to do with the things that are up to us, or those that are not; and if it has to do with the things that are not up to us, be ready to reply, \"It is nothing to me.\"\nWe will not be troubled at any loss, but will say to ourselves on such an occasion: \"I have lost nothing that belongs to me; it was not something of mine that was torn from me, but something that was not in my power has left me.\" Nothing beyond the use of our opinion is properly ours. Every possession rests on opinion. What is to cry and to weep? An opinion. What is misfortune, or a quarrel, or a complaint? All these things are opinions; opinions founded on the delusion that what is not subject to our own choice can be either good or evil, which it cannot. By rejecting these opinions, and seeking good and evil in the power of choice alone, we may confidently achieve peace of mind in every condition of life.\nReason alone is good, the irrational is evil, and the irrational is intolerable to the rational. The good person should labour chiefly on their own reason; to perfect this is in our power. To repel evil opinions by the good is the noble contest in which humans should engage; it is not an easy task, but it promises true freedom, peace of mind (\"ataraxia\"), and a divine command over the emotions (\"apatheia\"). We should especially be on our guard against the opinion of pleasure because of its apparent sweetness and charms. The first object of philosophy, therefore, is to purify the mind.\nEpictetus teaches that the preconceptions (\"prolepsis\") of good and evil are common to all. Good alone is profitable and to be desired, and evil is hurtful and to be avoided. Different opinions arise only from the application of these preconceptions to particular cases, and it is then that the darkness of ignorance, which blindly maintains the correctness of its own opinion, must be dispelled. People entertain different and conflicting opinions of good, and in their judgment of a particular good, people frequently contradict themselves. Philosophy should provide a standard for good and evil. This process is greatly facilitated because the mind and the works of the mind are alone in our power, whereas all external things that aid life are beyond our control.\nThe essence of divinity is goodness; we have all good that could be given to us. The deities too gave us the soul and reason, which is not measured by breadth or depth, but by knowledge and sentiments, and by which we attain to greatness, and may equal even with the deities. We should, therefore, cultivate the mind with special care. If we wish for nothing, but what God wills, we shall be truly free, and all will come to pass with us according to our desire; and we shall be as little subject to restraint as Zeus himself.\nEvery individual is connected with the rest of the world, and the universe is fashioned for universal harmony. Wise people, therefore, will pursue, not merely their own will, but also will be subject to the rightful order of the world. We should conduct ourselves through life fulfilling all our duties as children, siblings, parents, and citizens.\nFor our country or friends we ought to be ready to undergo or perform the greatest difficulties. The good person, if able to foresee the future, would peacefully and contentedly help to bring about their own sickness, maiming, and even death, knowing that this is the correct order of the universe. We have all a certain part to play in the world, and we have done enough when we have performed what our nature allows. In the exercise of our powers, we may become aware of the destiny we are intended to fulfil.\nWe are like travellers at an inn or guests at a stranger's table; whatever is offered we take with thankfulness, and sometimes, when the turn comes, we may refuse; in the former case we are a worthy guest of the deities, and in the latter we appear as a sharer in their power. Anyone who finds life intolerable is free to quit it, but we should not abandon our appointed role without sufficient reason. The Stoic sage will never find life intolerable and will complain of no one, neither deity nor human. Those who go wrong we should pardon and treat with compassion, since it is from ignorance that they err, being as it were, blind.\nIt is only our opinions and principles that can render us unhappy, and it is only the ignorant person who finds fault with another. Every desire degrades us, and renders us slaves of what we desire. We ought not to forget the transitory character of all external advantages, even in the midst of our enjoyment of them; but always to bear in mind that they are not our own, and that therefore, they do not properly belong to us. Thus prepared, we shall never be carried away by opinions.\nThe final entry of the \"Enchiridion,\" or \"Handbook,\" begins: \"Upon all occasions we ought to have these maxims ready at hand\":\nConduct me, Zeus, and thou, Destiny,\nWherever thy decree has fixed my lot.\nI follow willingly; and, did I not,\nWicked and wretched would I follow still.\n(Diogenes La\u00ebrtius quoting Cleanthes; quoted also by Seneca, Epistle 107.)\"\nWhoe'er yields properly to Fate is deemed\nWise among men, and knows the laws of Heaven.\nCrito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it be.\nAnytus and Meletus may indeed kill me, but they cannot harm me.\nInfluence.\nPhilosophy.\nMarcus Aurelius.\nThe philosophy of Epictetus was an influence on the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (AD 121 to AD 180) whose reign was marked by wars with the resurgent Parthia in western Asia and against the Germanic tribes in Europe. Aurelius quotes from Epictetus repeatedly in his own work, \"Meditations\", written during his campaigns in central Europe.\nSimplicius of Cilicia.\nIn the sixth century, the Neoplatonist philosopher Simplicius, who was persecuted for his pagan beliefs during the reign of Justinian, wrote an extant commentary on the \"Enchiridion\". At the end of the commentary, Simplicius wrote: \"Nor does my writing this commentary prove beneficial to others only, for I myself have already found great advantage from it, by the agreeable diversion it has given me, in a season of trouble and public calamity.\"\nBernard Stiegler.\nWhen Bernard Stiegler (1952\u20132020) was imprisoned for five years for armed robbery in France, he assembled an \"ensemble of disciplines,\" which he called (in reference to Epictetus) his \"melete\". This ensemble amounted to a practice of reading and writing that Stiegler derived from the writings of Epictetus. This led to his transformation, and upon being released from incarceration he became a professional philosopher. Stiegler tells the story of this transformation in his book, \"Acting Out\".\nLiterature.\nThe philosophy of Epictetus plays a key role in the 1998 novel by Tom Wolfe, \"A Man in Full\". This was in part the outcome of discussions Wolfe had with James Stockdale (see below). The character Conrad, who through a series of mishaps finds himself in jail, and accidentally gets a copy of the Enchiridion of Epictetus, the Stoic\u2019s manual, finds a philosophy that strengthens him to endure the brutality of the jail environment. He experiences Joseph Campbell's 'hero's journey' call to action and becomes a strong, honorable, undefeatable protagonist. The importance of Epictetus' Stoicism for Stockdale, its role in \"A Man in Full\", and its significance in Ridley Scott's \"Gladiator\" is discussed by William O. Stephens in \"The Rebirth of Stoicism?\".\nMohun Biswas, in the novel \"A House for Mr Biswas\" (1961), by V.S. Naipaul, is pleased to think himself a follower of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius; the irony is that he never actually behaves as a Stoic.\n\"Everything has two handles, the one by which it may be carried, the other by which it cannot\" is the theme of \"Disturbances in the Field\" (1983), by Lynne Sharon Schwartz. Lydia, the central character, turns often to \"The Golden Sayings of Epictetus\"\u2014the latter being a modern selection from Epictetus's writings, compiled and translated by Hastings Crossley.\nA line from the \"Enchiridion\" is used as a title quotation in \"The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman\" by Laurence Sterne, which translates to, \"Not things, but opinions about things, trouble men.\" The quotation alludes to a theme of the novel about how the suffering of many of its characters (above all Walter Shandy) is the result of the opinions and assumptions they make about reality. This is similar to Shakespeare's \"There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.\" (Hamlet: Act 2, Scene 2), and John Milton's \"The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.\"\nEpictetus is mentioned in \"A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man\" by James Joyce: in the fifth chapter of the novel the protagonist Stephen Daedalus discusses Epictetus's famous lamp with a dean of his college. Epictetus also is mentioned briefly in \"Franny and Zooey\" by J. D. Salinger, and is referred to by Theodore Dreiser in his novel \"Sister Carrie\". Both the longevity of Epictetus's life and his philosophy are alluded to in John Berryman's poem, \"Of Suicide.\"\nEpictetus is referred to, but not mentioned by name, in Matthew Arnold's sonnet \"To a Friend\". Arnold provides three historical personalities as his inspiration and support in difficult times (Epictetus is preceded by Homer and succeeded by Sophocles):\nMuch he, whose friendship I not long since won,&lt;br&gt;\nThat halting slave, who in Nicopolis&lt;br&gt;\nTaught Arrian, when Vespasian's brutal son&lt;br&gt;\nCleared Rome of what most shamed him.\nFran\u00e7ois Rabelais.\nIn the Chapter XXX of Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais' \"Pantagruel\" (c.1532), Pantagruel's tutor Epistemon had his head cut off after a battle. After he had his head reattached and was brought back to life, he recounts his experience of the damned in hell:\nMilitary.\nJames Stockdale.\nThe philosophy of Epictetus is well known in the U.S. military through the writings and example of James Stockdale, the 1992 vice presidential candidate of Ross Perot and a fighter pilot who was shot down while serving in the Vietnam War. He was introduced to the works of Epictetus while at Stanford University. In \"Courage under Fire: Testing Epictetus's Doctrines in a Laboratory of Human Behavior\" (1993), Stockdale credits Epictetus with helping him endure his seven and a half years in captivity, which included torture and four years in solitary confinement. When he was shot down, he reportedly said to himself \"I'm leaving the world of technology and entering the world of Epictetus!\" as he bailed out.\nQuoting Epictetus, Stockdale concludes the book with: The emotions of grief, pity, and even affection are well-known disturbers of the soul. Grief is the most offensive; Epictetus considered the suffering of grief an act of evil. It is a willful act, going against the will of God to have all men share happiness. \nPsychology.\nPsychologist Albert Ellis, the founder of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, credited Epictetus with providing a foundation for his system of psychotherapy.\nReligion.\nKiyozawa Manshi, a controversial reformer within the Higashi Honganji branch of Jodo Shinshu Buddhism cited Epictetus as one of the three major influences on his spiritual development and thought.\nActing.\nEpictetus' philosophy is an influence on the acting method introduced by David Mamet and William H. Macy, known as Practical Aesthetics. The main book that describes the method, \"The Practical Handbook for the Actor\", lists the \"Enchiridion\" in the bibliography.\nNotes.\nNote 10, Origen's Contra Celcus, Book vii, add that the episode is in chapter LIII, with a secondary mention of the episode in chapter LIV."}
{"id": "10408", "revid": "20161459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10408", "title": "Edward Lear", "text": "Edward Lear (12 May 1812, Holloway \u2013 29 January 1888, Sanremo) was an English artist, illustrator, musician, author and poet, now known mostly for his literary nonsense in poetry and prose and especially his limericks, a form he popularised. His principal areas of work as an artist were threefold: as a draughtsman employed to illustrate birds and animals; making coloured drawings during his journeys, which he reworked later, sometimes as plates for his travel books; and as a (minor) illustrator of Alfred, Lord Tennyson's poems. As an author, he is known principally for his popular nonsense collections of poems, songs, short stories, botanical drawings, recipes and alphabets. He also composed and published twelve musical settings of Tennyson's poetry in poem.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nLear was born into a middle-class family at Holloway, North London, the penultimate of 21 children (and youngest to survive) of Ann Clark Skerrett and Jeremiah Lear, a stockbroker formerly working for the family sugar refining business. He was raised by his eldest sister, also named Ann, 21 years his senior. Jeremiah Lear ended up defaulting to the London Stock Exchange in the economic upheaval following the Napoleonic Wars; owing to the family's now more limited finances, Lear and his sister were required to leave the family home, Bowmans Lodge, and live together when he was aged four. Ann doted on Edward and continued to act as a mother for him until her death, when he was almost 50 years of age.\nLear suffered from lifelong health afflictions. From the age of six he suffered frequent \"grand mal\" epileptic seizures, bronchitis, asthma and, during later life, partial blindness. Lear experienced his first seizure at a fair near Highgate with his father. The event scared and embarrassed him. Lear felt lifelong guilt and shame for his epileptic condition. His adult diaries indicate that he always sensed the onset of a seizure in time to remove himself from public view. When Lear was about seven years old he began to show signs of depression, possibly due to the instability of his childhood. He suffered from periods of severe melancholia which he referred to as \"the Morbids\".\nArtist.\nLear was already drawing \"for bread and cheese\" by the time he was aged 16 and soon developed into a serious \"ornithological draughtsman\" employed by the Zoological Society and then from 1832 to 1836 by the Earl of Derby, who kept a private menagerie at his estate, Knowsley Hall. He was the first major bird artist to draw birds from real live birds, instead of skins. Lear's first publication, published when he was 19 years old, was \"Illustrations of the Family of Psittacidae, or Parrots\" in 1830. One of the greatest ornithological artists of his era, he taught Elizabeth Gould whilst also contributing to John Gould's works and was compared by some to the naturalist John James Audubon. His eyesight deteriorated too much to work with such precision on the fine drawings and etchings of plates used in lithography, thus he turned to landscape painting and travel.\nAmong other travels, he visited Greece and Egypt during 1848\u201349, and toured India during 1873\u201375, including a brief detour to Ceylon. While travelling he produced large quantities of coloured wash drawings in a distinctive style, which he converted later in his studio into oil and watercolour paintings, as well as prints for his books. His landscape style often shows views with strong sunlight, with intense contrasts of colour.\nBetween 1878 and 1883 Lear spent his summers on Monte Generoso, a mountain on the border between the Swiss canton of Ticino and the Italian region of Lombardy. His oil painting \"The Plains of Lombardy from Monte Generoso\" is in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford.\nThroughout his life, he continued to paint seriously. He had a lifelong ambition to illustrate Tennyson's poems; near the end of his life, a volume with a small number of illustrations was published.\n\"Illustrated Excursions in Italy\" (1842\u201346).\nIn 1842 Lear began a journey into the Italian peninsula, travelling through the Lazio, Rome, Abruzzo, Molise, Apulia, Basilicata, Calabria, and Sicily. In personal notes, together with drawings, Lear gathered his impressions on the Italian way of life, folk traditions, and the beauty of the ancient monuments. Of particular interest to Lear was the Abruzzo, which he visited in 1843, through the Marsica (Celano, Avezzano, Alba Fucens, Trasacco) and the plateau of Cinque Miglia (Castel di Sangro and Alfedena), by an old sheep track of the shepherds.\nLear drew a sketch of the medieval village of Albe with Mount Sirente, and described the medieval village of Celano, with the castle of Piccolomini dominating the vast plain of Lago Fucino, which was drained a few years later to promote agricultural development. At Castel di Sangro, Lear described the winter stillness of the mountains and the beautiful basilica.\nComposer and musician.\nLear primarily played the piano, but he also played the accordion, flute, and small guitar. He composed music for many Romantic and Victorian poems, but was known mostly for his many musical settings of Tennyson's poetry. He published four settings in 1853, five in 1859, and three in 1860. Lear's were the only musical settings that Tennyson approved of. Lear also composed music for many of his nonsense songs, including \"The Owl and the Pussy-cat,\" but only two of the scores have survived, the music for \"The Courtship of the Yonghy-Bonghy-B\u00f2\" and \"The Pelican Chorus\". While he never played professionally, he did perform his own nonsense songs and his settings of others' poetry at countless social gatherings, sometimes adding his own lyrics (as with the song \"The Nervous Family\"), and sometimes replacing serious lyrics with nursery rhymes.\nRelationships.\nLear's most fervent and painful friendship was with Franklin Lushington. He met the young barrister in Malta in 1849 and then toured southern Greece with him. Lear developed an infatuation for him that Lushington did not wholly reciprocate. Although they remained friends for almost forty years, until Lear's death, the disparity of their feelings constantly tormented Lear. Indeed, Lear's attempts at male companionship were not always successful; the very intensity of Lear's affections may have doomed these relationships.\nThe closest he came to marriage was two proposals, both to the same woman 46 years his junior, which were not accepted. For companions, he relied instead on friends and correspondents, and especially, during later life, on his Albanian Souliote chef, Giorgis, a faithful friend and, as Lear complained, a thoroughly unsatisfactory chef. Another trusted companion in San Remo was his cat, Foss, who died in 1886 and was buried with some ceremony in a garden at Villa Tennyson.\nSan Remo and death.\nLear travelled widely throughout his life and eventually settled in San Remo, on his beloved Mediterranean coast in the 1870s at a villa he named \"Villa Tennyson.\"\nLear was known to introduce himself with a long pseudonym: \"Mr Abebika kratoponoko Prizzikalo Kattefello Ablegorabalus Ableborinto phashyph\" or \"Chakonoton the Cozovex Dossi Fossi Sini Tomentilla Coronilla Polentilla\nBattledore &amp; Shuttlecock Derry down Derry Dumps\", which he based on \"Aldiborontiphoskyphorniostikos\".\nAfter a long decline in his health, Lear died at his villa in 1888 of heart disease, from which he had suffered since at least 1870. Lear's funeral was said to be a sad, lonely affair by the wife of Dr. Hassall, Lear's physician, none of Lear's many lifelong friends being able to attend.\nLear is buried in the Cemetery Foce in San Remo. On his headstone are inscribed these lines about Mount Tomohrit (in Albania) from Tennyson's poem \"To E.L. [Edward Lear], On His Travels in Greece\":\nThe centenary of his death was marked in Britain with a set of Royal Mail stamps in 1988 and an exhibition at the Royal Academy. Lear's birthplace area is now marked with a plaque at Bowman's Mews, Islington, in London, and his bicentenary during 2012 was celebrated with a variety of events, exhibitions and lectures in venues across the world including an International Owl and Pussycat Day on his birth anniversary.\nAuthor.\nIn 1846 Lear published \",\" a volume of limericks which went through three editions and helped popularize the form and the genre of literary nonsense. In 1871 he published \"Nonsense Songs, Stories, Botany and Alphabets\", which included his most famous nonsense song, \"The Owl and the Pussycat,\" which he wrote for the children of his patron Edward Stanley, 13th Earl of Derby. Many other works followed.\nLear's nonsense books were quite popular during his lifetime, but a rumour developed that \"Edward Lear\" was merely a pseudonym, and the books' true author was the man to whom Lear had dedicated the works, his patron the Earl of Derby. Promoters of this rumour offered as evidence that both men were named Edward, and that \"Lear\" is an anagram of \"Earl\".\nLear's nonsense works are distinguished by a facility of verbal invention and a poet's delight in the sounds of words, both real and imaginary. A stuffed rhinoceros becomes a \"diaphanous doorscraper.\" A \"blue Boss-Woss\" plunges into \"a perpendicular, spicular, orbicular, quadrangular, circular depth of soft mud.\" His heroes are Quangle-Wangles, Pobbles, and Jumblies. One of his most famous verbal inventions, the phrase \"runcible spoon,\" occurs in the closing lines of \"The Owl and the Pussycat,\" and is now found in many English dictionaries:\nThough famous for his neologisms, Lear used a number of other devices in his works in order to defy reader expectations. For example, \"Cold Are the Crabs\" conforms to the sonnet tradition until its dramatically foreshortened last line.\nToday, limericks are invariably typeset as five lines. Lear's limericks, however, were published in a variety of formats; it appears that Lear wrote them in manuscript in as many lines as there was room for beneath the picture. For the first three editions, most are typeset as, respectively, two, five, and three lines. The cover of one edition bears an entire limerick typeset in two lines:\nIn Lear's limericks, the first and last lines usually end with the same word rather than rhyming. For the most part they are truly nonsensical and devoid of any punch line or point. They are completely free of the bawdiness with which the verse form is now associated. A typical thematic element is the presence of a callous and critical \"they.\" An example of a typical Lear limerick:\nLear's self-description in verse, \"How Pleasant to know Mr. Lear,\" ends with this stanza, a reference to his own mortality:\nFive of Lear's limericks from the Book of Nonsense, in the 1946 Italian translation by Carlo Izzo, were set to music for choir a cappella by Goffredo Petrassi in 1952.\nPortrayals.\nEdward Lear has been played in radio dramas by Andrew Sachs in \"The Need for Nonsense\" by Julia Blackburn (BBC Radio 4, 9 February 2009) and by Derek Jacobi in \"By the Coast of Coromandel\" by Lavinia Murray (BBC Radio 4, 21 December 2011)."}
{"id": "10409", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10409", "title": "Eve Arden", "text": "Eve Arden (born Eunice Mary Quedens, April 30, 1908\u00a0\u2013 November 12, 1990) was an American film, radio, stage, television actress, and comedian. She performed in leading and supporting roles for nearly six decades.\nBeginning her film career in 1929 and on Broadway in the early 1930s, Arden's first major role was in the RKO Radio Pictures drama \"Stage Door\" (1937) opposite Katharine Hepburn, followed by roles in the comedies \"Having Wonderful Time\" (1938) and the Marx Brothers' \"At the Circus\" (1939). She received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her role in \"Mildred Pierce\" (1945).\nLater in her career, Arden played the sardonic but engaging high school teacher in the eponymous \"Our Miss Brooks\", for which she won the first Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series. She also played the school principal in the musicals \"Grease\" (1978) and \"Grease 2\" (1982).\nEarly life.\nEve Arden was born Eunice Mary Quedens on April 30, 1908, in Mill Valley, California, to Charles Peter Quedens, the son of Charles Henry Augustus Quedens and Meta Dierks; and Lucille Frank, the daughter of Bernard Frank and Louisa Mertens. Lucille, a milliner, divorced Charles over his gambling and went into business for herself.\nAlthough not Roman Catholic, young Eunice was sent to a Dominican convent school in San Rafael, California. She then attended Tamalpais High School, a public high school in Mill Valley, until age 16. After leaving school, she joined the stock theater company of Henry \"Terry\" Duffy.\nCareer.\nFilm.\nShe made her film debut under her real name in the backstage musical \"Song of Love\" (1929), as a wisecracking, homewrecking showgirl who becomes a rival to the film's star, singer Belle Baker. The film was one of Columbia Pictures' earliest successes. In 1933, she relocated to New York City, where she had supporting parts in multiple Broadway stage productions. In 1934, she was cast in the \"Ziegfeld Follies\" revue, the first role where she was credited as Eve Arden. When she was told to adopt a stage name for the show, Arden looked at her cosmetics and \"stole my first name from Evening in Paris, and the second from Elizabeth Arden\". Between 1934 and 1941, she appeared in Broadway productions of \"Parade\", \"Very Warm for May\", \"Two for the Show\", and \"Let's Face It!\".\nArden's film career began in earnest in 1937 when she signed a contract with RKO Radio Pictures and appeared in the films \"Oh Doctor\" and \"Stage Door\". Her \"Stage Door\" portrayal of a fast-talking, witty supporting character gained Arden considerable notice and was a template for many of Arden's future roles. In 1938, she played a supporting part in the comedy \"Having Wonderful Time\", starring Ginger Rogers and Lucille Ball. This was followed by roles in the crime film \"The Forgotten Woman\" (1939), and the Marx Brothers comedy \"At the Circus\" (1939), a role that required her to perform acrobatics.\nIn 1940, she appeared opposite Clark Gable in \"Comrade X\", followed by the drama \"Manpower\" (1941) opposite Marlene Dietrich. She also had a supporting part in the Red Skelton comedy \"Whistling in the Dark\" (1941) and the romantic comedy \"Obliging Young Lady\" (1942).\nHer many memorable screen roles include a supporting role as Joan Crawford's wise-cracking friend in \"Mildred Pierce\" (1945), for which she received an Academy Award nomination as Best Supporting Actress; and as James Stewart's wistful secretary in Otto Preminger's mystery \"Anatomy of a Murder\" (1959) (which also featured her husband, Brooks West). In 1946, exhibitors voted her the sixth-most promising \"star of tomorrow\".\nArden became familiar to a new generation of filmgoers when she played Principal McGee in \"Grease\" (1978) and \"Grease 2 (1982)\". Arden was known for her deadpan comedic delivery.\nRadio and television.\nArden's ability with witty scripts made her a natural talent for radio. She was a regular on Danny Kaye's short-lived but memorably zany comedy-variety show in 1946, which also featured swing bandleader Harry James and gravel-voiced character actor-comedian Lionel Stander.\nKaye's show lasted one season, but Arden's comic talent led to her best-known role, that of Madison High School English teacher Connie Brooks in \"Our Miss Brooks\". Arden portrayed the character on radio from 1948 to 1957, in a television version of the program from 1952 to 1956, and in a 1956 feature film. Her character clashed with the school's principal, Osgood Conklin (played by Gale Gordon) and nursed an unrequited crush on fellow teacher Philip Boynton (played originally by future film star Jeff Chandler; and later on radio and TV by Robert Rockwell). Except for Chandler, the entire radio cast of Arden, Gordon, Richard Crenna (Walter Denton), Robert Rockwell (Mr. Philip Boynton), Gloria McMillan (Harriet Conklin) and Jane Morgan (landlady Margaret Davis) played the same roles on TV.\nArden's portrayal of Miss Brooks was so popular that she was made an honorary member of the National Education Association, received a 1952 award from the Teachers College of Connecticut's Alumni Association \"for humanizing the American teacher\", and even received teaching job offers. Her wisecracking, deadpan character ultimately became her public persona as a comedienne.\nShe won a listeners' poll by \"Radio Mirror\" magazine as the top-ranking comedienne of 1948\u20131949, receiving her award at the end of an \"Our Miss Brooks\" broadcast that March. \"I'm certainly going to try in the coming months to merit the honor you've bestowed upon me, because I understand that if I win this (award) two years in a row, I get to keep Mr. Boynton,\" she joked. She was also a hit with the critics: A winter 1949 poll of newspaper and magazine radio editors by \"Motion Picture Daily\" named her the year's best radio comedienne.\nArden had a very brief guest appearance in a 1955 \"I Love Lucy\" episode titled \"L.A. at Last\", where she played herself. While awaiting their food at the Brown Derby, Lucy Ricardo (Lucille Ball) and Ethel Mertz (Vivian Vance) argue over whether a certain portrait on a nearby wall is Shelley Winters or Judy Holliday. Lucy urges Ethel to ask a lady occupying the next booth, who turns and replies, \"Neither. That's Eve Arden.\" As Ethel realizes she just spoke to Arden herself, Arden passes Lucy and Ethel's table to leave the restaurant while the pair gawk.\nDesilu Productions, jointly owned by Desi Arnaz and Ball during their marriage, was the production company for the \"Our Miss Brooks\" television show, filmed during the same years as \"I Love Lucy\". Ball and Arden met when they costarred in the film \"Stage Door\" in 1937. Ball, according to numerous radio historians, suggested Arden for \"Our Miss Brooks\" after Shirley Booth auditioned for but failed to land the role and Ball\u2014committed at the time to \"My Favorite Husband\"\u2014could not.\nArden tried another series in the fall of 1957, \"The Eve Arden Show\", but it was canceled in spring of 1958 after 26 episodes. In 1966, she played Nurse Kelton in an episode of \"Bewitched\". She later costarred with Kaye Ballard as her neighbor and in-law, Eve Hubbard, in the 1967\u20131969 situation comedy \"The Mothers-in-Law\", produced by Arnaz after the dissolution of Desilu Productions. In her later career, Arden made appearances on such television shows as \"Bewitched\", \"Alice\", \"Maude, Hart to Hart\", and \"Falcon Crest\". In 1985, she appeared as the wicked stepmother in the \"Faerie Tale Theatre\" production of \"Cinderella\".\nStage.\nArden was one of many actresses to take on the title roles in \"Hello, Dolly!\" and \"Auntie Mame\" in the 1960s; in 1967, she won the Sarah Siddons Award for her work in Chicago theatre. Arden was cast in 1983 as the leading lady in what was to be her Broadway comeback in \"Moose Murders\", but she wisely withdrew and was replaced with the much younger Holland Taylor after one preview performance, citing \"artistic differences\". The show went on to open and close on the same night, becoming known as one of the most legendary flops in Broadway history.\nArden published an autobiography, \"The Three Phases of Eve\", in 1985. In addition to her Academy Award nomination, Arden has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: Radio and Television (see List of stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for addresses). She was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in 1995.\nPersonal life.\nArden was married to Ned Bergen from 1939 to 1947, had an extended relationship with Danny Kaye through the 1940s (likely starting from their Broadway work on Let's Face It! (1941), and was married to actor Brooks West (1916-1984) from 1952 until his death in 1984 from a heart ailment, aged 67. West and she had four children; all but the youngest were adopted. All four survived their parents.\nDeath.\nOn November 12, 1990, Arden died from cardiac arrest and arteriosclerotic heart disease, aged 82, at her home, according to her death certificate. She was cremated, her ashes buried in the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Westwood, Los Angeles, California."}
{"id": "10412", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10412", "title": "Elementary function", "text": "In mathematics, an elementary function is a function of a single variable composed of particular simple functions. \nElementary functions are typically defined as a sum, product, and/or composition of finitely many polynomials, rational functions, trigonometric and exponential functions, and their inverse functions (including arcsin, log, \"x\"1/\"n\").\nElementary functions were introduced by Joseph Liouville in a series of papers from 1833 to 1841. An algebraic treatment of elementary functions was started by Joseph Fels Ritt in the 1930s.\nExamples.\nBasic examples.\nThe elementary functions (of ) include:\nSome elementary functions, such as roots, logarithms, or inverse trigonometric functions, are not entire functions and may be multivalued.\nComposite examples.\nExamples of elementary functions include:\nThe last function is equal to formula_14, the inverse cosine, in the entire complex plane.\nAll monomials, polynomials and rational functions are elementary. Also, the absolute value function, for real formula_2, is also elementary as it can be expressed as the composition of a power and root of formula_2: formula_17.\nNon-elementary functions.\nAn example of a function that is \"not\" elementary is the error function\na fact that may not be immediately obvious, but can be proven using the Risch algorithm.\nClosure.\nIt follows directly from the definition that the set of elementary functions is closed under arithmetic operations and composition. The elementary functions are closed under differentiation. They are not closed under limits and infinite sums. Importantly, the elementary functions are closed under integration, as shown by Liouville's theorem, see Nonelementary integral. The Liouvillian functions are defined as the elementary functions and, recursively, the integrals of the Liouvillian functions.\nDifferential algebra.\nThe mathematical definition of an elementary function, or a function in elementary form, is considered in the context of differential algebra. A differential algebra is an algebra with the extra operation of derivation (algebraic version of differentiation). Using the derivation operation new equations can be written and their solutions used in extensions of the algebra. By starting with the field of rational functions, two special types of transcendental extensions (the logarithm and the exponential) can be added to the field building a tower containing elementary functions.\nA differential field \"F\" is a field \"F\"0 (rational functions over the rationals Q for example) together with a derivation map \"u\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u2202\"u\". (Here \u2202\"u\" is a new function. Sometimes the notation \"u\"\u2032 is used.) The derivation captures the properties of differentiation, so that for any two elements of the base field, the derivation is linear\nand satisfies the Leibniz product rule\nAn element \"h\" is a constant if \"\u2202h\u00a0=\u00a00\". If the base field is over the rationals, care must be taken when extending the field to add the needed transcendental constants.\nA function \"u\" of a differential extension \"F\"[\"u\"] of a differential field \"F\" is an elementary function over \"F\" if the function \"u\""}
{"id": "10413", "revid": "12824384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10413", "title": "Enchiridion of Epictetus", "text": "The Enchiridion or Handbook of Epictetus (, \"Enkheir\u00eddion Epikt\u1e17tou\") is a short manual of Stoic ethical advice compiled by Arrian, a 2nd-century disciple of the Greek philosopher Epictetus. Although the content is mostly derived from the \"Discourses of Epictetus\", it is not a summary of the \"Discourses\" but rather a compilation of practical precepts. Eschewing metaphysics, Arrian focuses his attention on Epictetus's work applying philosophy to daily life. Thus, the book is a manual to show the way to achieve mental freedom and happiness in all circumstances.\nThe \"Enchiridion\" was well-known in the ancient world, and in the medieval period, it was specially adapted for use in Greek-speaking monasteries. In the 15th-century it was translated into Latin, and then, with the advent of printing, into multiple European languages. It reached the height of popularity in the 17th century, in parallel with the Neostoicism movement.\nTitle.\nThe word \"encheiridion\" () is an adjective meaning \"in the hand\" or \"ready to hand\". The word sometimes meant a handy sword, or dagger, but coupled with the word \"book\" (\"biblion\", ) it means a handy book or hand-book. Epictetus in the \"Discourses\" often speaks of principles which his pupils should have \"ready to hand\" (). Common English translations of the title are Manual or Handbook.\nWriting.\nThe work consists of fifty-three short chapters typically consisting of a paragraph or two. It was compiled some time in the early 2nd-century. The 6th-century philosopher Simplicius, in his \"Commentary\" on the work, refers to a letter written by Arrian which prefaced the text. In this letter Arrian stated that the \"Enchiridion\" was selected from the \"Discourses of Epictetus\" according to what he considered to be most useful, most necessary, and most adapted to move people's minds. Around half of the material in the \"Enchiridion\" has been shown to have been derived from the surviving four books of \"Discourses\" but variously modified. Other parts are presumed to be derived from the lost \"Discourses\". Some chapters appear to be reformulations of ideas which appear throughout the \"Discourses\".\nThere are some puzzles concerning the inclusion of two chapters. Chapter 29 is practically word for word identical with \"Discourse\" iii.\u00a015. Since it was omitted in one of the early Christian editions (\"Par\"), and not commented on by Simplicius, it may not have been in the original edition. Chapter 33 consists of a list of moral instructions, which are \"not obviously related to Epictetus' normal Stoic framework.\"\nThe current division of the work into fifty-three chapters was first adopted by Johann Schweigh\u00e4user in his 1798 edition; earlier editions tended to divide the text into more chapters (especially splitting chapter 33). Gerard Boter in his 1999 critical edition keeps Schweigh\u00e4user's fifty-three chapters but splits chapters 5, 14, 19, and 48 into two parts.\nContents.\nThe \"Enchiridion\" appears to be a loosely-structured selection of maxims. In his 6th-century \"Commentary\", Simplicius divided the text into four distinct sections suggesting a graded approach to philosophy:\nChapter 29, which was probably absent from the text used by Simplicius, is a one-page \"Discourse\" which compares the training needed to become a Stoic with the rigorous approach needed to become an Olympic victor.\nThemes.\nThe \"Enchiridion\" begins with the statement that \"Of things, some depend upon ourselves, others do not depend upon ourselves.\" So it starts with announcing that the business and concern of the real self is with matters subject to its own control, uninfluenced by external chance or change. Epictetus makes a sharp distinction between our own internal world of mental benefits and harms, and the external world beyond our control. Freedom is to wish for nothing which is not up to ourselves. When we are tried by misfortune we should never let our suffering overwhelm our sense of inward mastery and freedom.\nA constant vigilance is required, and one should never relax attention to one's reason, for it is judgements, not things, which disturb people.\nReason is the decisive principle in everything. Thus we must exercise our power of assent over impressions, and wish for nothing nor avoid anything that is up to other people.\nTo a large extent the \"Enchiridion\" suppresses many of the more amiable aspects of Epictetus which can be found in the \"Discourses\", but this reflects the nature of the compilation. Unlike the \"Discourses\" which seeks to encourage the student through argument and logic, the \"Enchiridion\" largely consists of a set of rules to follow. The work is built on the conception that the wise person, by the aid of philosophy, may reap benefit from every experience in life. With proper training the student can flourish in adverse situations as well as favourable ones. The human spirit has capacities as yet undeveloped, but which it is for our good to develop. Thus the book is a manual on how to make progress towards what is necessary and sufficient for happiness.\nEpictetus makes a vivid use of imagery, and analogies include life depicted as: a ship's voyage (Ch. 7), an inn (Ch. 11), a banquet (Chs. 15, 36), and acting in a play (Ch. 17, 37). He takes many examples from everyday life, including: a broken jug (Ch. 3), a trip to the baths (Chs. 4, 43), his own lameness (Ch. 9), the loss of a child (Ch. 11), and the price of lettuce (Ch. 25).\nSubsequent history.\nFor many centuries, the \"Enchiridion\" maintained its authority both with Pagans and Christians. Simplicius of Cilicia wrote a commentary upon it in the 6th century, and in the Byzantine era Christian writers wrote paraphrases of it. Over one hundred manuscripts of the \"Enchiridion\" survive. The oldest extant manuscripts of the authentic \"Enchiridion\" date from the 14th century, but the oldest Christianised ones date from the 10th and 11th centuries, perhaps indicating the Byzantine world's preference for the Christian versions. The \"Enchiridion\" was first translated into Latin by Niccol\u00f2 Perotti in 1450, and then by Angelo Poliziano in 1479.\nThe first printed edition (\"editio princeps\") was Poliziano's Latin translation published in 1497. The original Greek was first published (somewhat abbreviated) with Simplicius's \"Commentary\" in 1528. The edition published by Johann Schweigh\u00e4user in 1798 was the major edition for the next two-hundred years. A critical edition was produced by Gerard Boter in 1999.\nThe separate editions and translations of the \"Enchiridion\" are very many. The \"Enchiridion\" reached its height of popularity in the period 1550\u20131750. It was translated into most European languages, and there were multiple translations in English, French, and German. The first English translation was by James Sandford in 1567 (a translation of a French version) and this was followed by a translation (from the Greek) by John Healey in 1610. The \"Enchiridion\" was even partly translated into Chinese by the Jesuit missionary Matteo Ricci. The popularity of the work was assisted by the Neostoicism movement initiated by Justus Lipsius in the 16th century. Another Neostoic, Guillaume du Vair, translated the book into French in 1586 and popularised it in his \"La Philosophie morale des Stoiques\".\nIn the English-speaking world it was particularly well-known in the 17th-century: at that time it was the \"Enchiridion\" rather than the \"Discourses\" which was usually read. It was among the books John Harvard bequeathed to the newly-founded Harvard College in 1638. The work, being written in a clear distinct style, made it accessible to readers with no formal training in philosophy, and there was a wide readership among women in England. The writer Mary Wortley Montagu made her own translation of the \"Enchiridion\" in 1710 at the age of twenty-one. The \"Enchiridion\" was a common school text in Scotland during the Scottish Enlightenment\u2014Adam Smith had a 1670 edition in his library, acquired as a schoolboy. At the end of the 18th-century the \"Enchiridion\" is attested in the personal libraries of Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson.\nIn the 19th-century, Walt Whitman discovered the \"Enchiridion\" when he was about the age of sixteen. It was a book he would repeatedly return to, and late in life he called the book \"sacred, precious to me: I have had it about me so long\u2014lived with it in terms of such familiarity.\"\nThe \"Commentary\" of Simplicius.\nIn the 6th-century the Neoplatonist philosopher Simplicius wrote a huge commentary on the \"Enchiridion\", which is more than ten times the bulk of the original text. Chapter after chapter of the \"Enchiridion\" is dissected, discussed, and its lessons drawn out with a certain laboriousness. Simplicius' commentary offers a distinctly Platonist vision of the world, one which is often at odds with the Stoic content of the \"Enchiridion\". Sometimes Simplicius exceeds the scope of a commentary; thus his commentary on \"Enchiridion\" 27 (Simplicius ch. 35) becomes a refutation of Manichaeism.\nThe \"Commentary\" enjoyed its own period of popularity in the 17th and 18th centuries. An English translation by George Stanhope in 1694 ran through four editions in the early 1700s. Edward Gibbon remarked in his \"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\" that Simplicius' \"Commentary\" on Epictetus \"is preserved in the library of nations, as a classic book\" unlike the commentaries on Aristotle \"which have passed away with the fashion of the times.\"\nChristian adaptations.\nThe \"Enchiridion\" was adapted three different times by Greek Christian writers. The oldest manuscript, \"Paraphrasis Christiana\" (\"Par\"), dates to the 10th century. Another manuscript, falsely ascribed to Nilus (\"Nil\"), dates to the 11th century. A third manuscript, Vaticanus gr. 2231 (\"Vat\"), dates to the 14th century. It is not known when the original versions of these manuscripts were first made.\nThese guides served as a rule and guide for monastic life. The most obvious changes are in the use of proper names: thus the name Socrates is sometimes changed to Paul. All three texts follow the \"Enchiridion\" quite closely, although the \"Par\" manuscript is more heavily modified: adding or omitting words, abridging or expanding passages, and occasionally inventing new passages.\nIn the 17th century the German monk Matthias Mittner did something similar, compiling a guide on mental tranquillity for the Carthusian Order by taking the first thirty-five of his fifty precepts from the \"Enchiridion\".\nNotes.\na. Gerard Boter in his 1999 critical edition catalogues 59 extant manuscripts of the \"Encheiridion\" proper, and another 27 manuscripts of Simplicius' \"Commentary\" which contain the \"Encheiridion\" as \"lemmata\" (headings). He also lists 37 Christianised manuscripts, (24 \"Par\", 12 \"Nil\", 1 \"Vat\"). Cf. "}
{"id": "10415", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10415", "title": "Emperor Kinmei", "text": " was the 29th Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nHis reign is said to have spanned the years from 539 to 571. Kinmei is the first Japanese Emperor for whom contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates.\nTraditional narrative.\nKinmei's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of [[Emperor Tenmu]] and [[Empress Jit\u014d]]. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Kinmei might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nEvents of Kinmei's life.\nBecause of several chronological discrepancies in the account of Emperor Kinmei in the \"[[Nihon Shoki]]\", some believe that he was actually ruling a rival court to that of Emperors [[Emperor Ankan|Ankan]] and [[Emperor Senka|Senka]]. Nevertheless, according to the traditional account, it was not until the death of Emperor Kinmei's older brother Emperor Senka that he gained the throne.\nAccording to this account, Emperor Senka died in 539 at the age of 73; and succession passed to the third son of [[Emperor Keitai]]. This Imperial Prince was the next youngest brother of Emperor Senka. He would come to be known as Emperor Kinmei. He established his court at in [[Yamato Province|Yamato]].\nThe Emperor's chief counselors were:\nAlthough the imperial court was not moved to the [[Asuka, Nara|Asuka]] region of Japan until 592, Emperor Kinmei's rule is considered by some to be the beginning of the [[Asuka period]] of [[Yamato period|Yamato]] Japan, particularly by those who associate the Asuka period primarily with the introduction of [[Buddhism]] to Japan from [[Baekje]].\nAccording to the \"Nihon Shoki\", Emperor Kinmei received a bronze statue of [[Gautama Buddha]] as a gift from the king of [[Baekje]] King [[Seong of Baekje|Song Myong]] (\u8056\u660e\u738b, \"Seimei \u014c\") along with a significant envoy of artisans, monks, and other artifacts in 552. (However, according to the [[J\u014dg\u016b Sh\u014dtoku H\u014d\u014d Teisetsu]], Buddhism was introduced in 538.) This episode is widely regarded as the official introduction of Buddhism to the country.\nWith the introduction of a new religion to the court, a deep rift developed between the [[Mononobe clan]], who supported the worship of [[kami|Japan's traditional deities]], and the Soga clan, who supported the adoption of Buddhism.\nAccording to the \"Nihon Shoki\", Emperor Kinmei ruled until his death in 571 and was buried in the . An alternate stronger theory holds that he was actually buried in the , located in .\nThe Emperor is traditionally venerated at a [[memorial]] [[Shinto]] [[shrine]] (\"misasagi\") at Nara. The [[Imperial Household Agency]] designates the Nara location as Kinmei's [[mausoleum]]. It is formally named \"Hinokuma no saki Ai no misasagi\"; however, the actual sites of the [[grave (burial)|graves]] of the early Emperors remain problematic, according to some historians and archaeologists.\nGenealogy.\nEmperor Kinmei's father was [[Emperor Keitai]] and his mother was [[Emperor Ninken]]'s daughter, . In his lifetime, he was known by the name .\nKinmei had six Empresses and 25 Imperial children (16 sons and 9 daughters). According to Nihongi, he had six wives, but the \"Kojiki\" gives only five wives; identifying the third consort to be the same as the sixth one. The first three were his nieces, daughters of his half-brother Emperor Senka; two others were sisters, daughters of the Omi Soga no Iname.\nReferences.\n \n[[Category:509 births]]\n[[Category:571 deaths]]\n[[Category:6th-century monarchs in Asia]]\n[[Category:6th-century Japanese monarchs]]\n[[Category:Japanese emperors]]\n[[Category:People of Asuka-period Japan]]\n[[Category:Buddhism in the Asuka period]]"}
{"id": "10416", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10416", "title": "Emperor Bidatsu", "text": " was the 30th Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nThe years of reign of Bidatsu start in 572 and end in 585; however, there are no certain dates for this Emperor's life or reign. The names and sequence of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu, who was the 50th monarch of the Yamato dynasty.\nTraditional narrative.\nHistorians consider details about the life of Emperor Bidatsu to be possibly legendary, but probable. The name Bidatsu\"-tenn\u014d\" was created for him posthumously by later generations.\nIn the \"Nihon Shoki\", he is called .\nHis palace in Yamato Province was called Osada no Miya of Iware.\nEvents of Bidatsu's life.\nIn the 15th year of Kimmei's reign, Bidatsu was named Crown Prince.\nIn the , the old Emperor died, and the succession was received by his second son. Soon after, Emperor Bidatsu is said to have acceded to the throne.\nBidatsu's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Bidatsu might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nBidatsu's reign was marked by power struggles about Buddhism. The two most important men in the court of Bidatsu were Soga no Umako and Mononobe no Moriya. Soga supported the growth of Buddhism, and Moriya wanted to stop it.\nBidatsu sought to re-establish relations with Korean Kingdoms and, according to \"Nihon Shoki\", his court successfully established relations with Baekje and Silla, two of the Three Kingdoms of Korea.\nThe Emperor died from a disease which afflicted him with sores, apparently the first royal victim of smallpox in Japan.\nThe actual site of Bidatsu's grave is known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Bidatsu's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kawachi no Shinaga no naka no o no misasagi\".\nGenealogy.\nHe was the second son of Emperor Kinmei. His mother, Ishi-hime, was a daughter of Emperor Senka.\nAlthough he had many children, none of them would ever become Emperor. According to \"Gukansh\u014d\", Bidatsu had four empresses and 16 Imperial children (6 sons and 10 daughters).\nBidatsu's first empress, Hirohime, died in the fifth year of his reign. To replace her, he elevated one of his consorts, Princess Nukatabe, to the rank of empress. Nukatabe was his half-sister by their father Kinmei. Later she ascended to the throne in her own right and is today known as Empress Suiko.\nHe was succeeded first by one of his brothers, Emperor Y\u014dmei, then by another, Emperor Sushun, and then Empress Suiko, his sister and wife, before his grandson, Emperor Jomei, eventually took the throne.\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10417", "revid": "30886872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10417", "title": "Emperor Y\u014dmei", "text": " was the 31st Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nY\u014dmei's reign spanned the years from 585 until his death in 587.\nTraditional narrative.\nHe was called in the \"Kojiki\". He was also referred to as and after the palace in which he lived. He acceded to the throne after the death of his half brother, Emperor Bidatsu.\nThe influential courtiers from Emperor Bidatsu's reign, Mononobe no Moriya, also known as Mononobe Yuge no Moriya no Muraji or as \u014c-muraji Yuge no Moriya, and Soga no Umako no Sukune, both remained in their positions during the reign of Emperor Y\u014dmei. Umako was the son of Soga Iname no Sukune, and therefore, he would have been one of Emperor Y\u014dmei's cousins.\nY\u014dmei's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Y\u014dmei might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nEmperor Y\u014dmei's reign lasted only two years; and he died at the age of 46 or 47.\nBecause of the brevity of his reign, Emperor Y\u014dmei was not responsible for any radical changes in policy, but his support of Buddhism created tension with supporters of Shintoism who opposed its introduction. According to Nihon Shoki, Emperor Yomei believed both in Buddhism and Shintoism. Moriya, the most influential supporter of Shintoism, conspired with Emperor Y\u014dmei's brother, Prince Anahobe, and after Emperor Yomei's death they made an abortive attempt to seize the throne. Although Emperor Y\u014dmei is reported to have died from illness, this incident and the brevity of his reign have led some to speculate that he was actually assassinated by Moriya and Prince Anahobe.\nThe actual site of Y\u014dmei's grave is known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Y\u014dmei's mausoleum. It is formally named \"K\u014dchi no Shinaga no hara no misasagi\".\nGenealogy.\nEmperor Y\u014dmei was the fourth son of Emperor Kinmei and his mother was Soga no Kitashihime, a daughter of Soga no Iname.\nIn 586, Emperor Y\u014dmei took his half-sister , whose mother was another of Iname's daughters, Soga no Oane Hime, as his consort. Princess Hashihito no Anahobe bore him four sons.\nEmpress: , Emperor Kinmei's daughter\nConcubine: , Soga no Iname's daughter\nConsort: , Katsuragi no Atahe's daughter\nYomei had three Empresses and seven Imperial sons and daughters.\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10418", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10418", "title": "Emperor Sushun", "text": " was the 32nd Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nSushun's reign spanned the years from 587 through 592.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his \"imina\") was Hatsusebe\"-shinn\u014d\", also known as Hatsusebe no Waka-sazaki.\nHis name at birth was . He was the twelfth son of Emperor Kinmei. His mother was , a daughter of Soga no Iname, who was the chief, or \u014comi, of the Soga clan.\nHe succeeded his half-brother, Emperor Y\u014dmei in 587, and lived in the Kurahashi Palace (Kurahashi no Miya) in Yamato.\nSushun's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Sushun might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nHe came to the throne with the support of the Soga clan and Empress Suiko, his half sister and the widow of Emperor Bidatsu. Initially, the Mononobe clan, a rival clan of the Sogas, allied with Prince Anahobe, another son of Kimmei, and attempted to have him installed as Emperor. At the Battle of Shigisan, Soga no Umako, who succeeded his father as \u014comi of the Soga clan, eventually killed Mononobe no Moriya, the head of the Mononobe clan, which led to its decline. Umako then installed Emperor Sushun on the throne.\nAs time went on, Sushun eventually became resentful of Umako's power, and wanted him deposed. It is said that one day, he saw a wild boar and proclaimed, \"I want to kill Soga Umako like this wild boar\". This angered Soga no Umako and, perhaps out of fear of being struck first, Umako had Sushun assassinated by in 592.\nEmperor Sushun's reign lasted for five years before his death at the age of 72.\nThe actual site of Sushun's grave is known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Y\u014dmei's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kurahashi no oka no e no misasagi\".\nGenealogy.\nSushun had one Empress and two Imperial children.\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10419", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10419", "title": "Empress Suiko", "text": " (554 \u2013 15 April 628) was the 33rd monarch of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nSuiko reigned from 593 until her death in 628.\nIn the history of Japan, Suiko was the first of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The seven women sovereigns reigning after Suiko were K\u014dgyoku/Saimei, Jit\u014d, Genmei, Gensh\u014d, K\u014dken/Sh\u014dtoku, Meish\u014d and Go-Sakuramachi.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore her ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, her personal name (her \"imina\") was Mikekashiya-hime-no-mikoto, also called Toyomike Kashikiya hime no Mikoto.\nEmpress Suiko had several names including Princess Nukatabe and (possibly posthumous) Toyomike Kashikiya. She was the third daughter of Emperor Kinmei. Her mother was Soga no Iname's daughter, Soga no Kitashihime. Suiko was the younger sister of Emperor Y\u014dmei. They had the same mother.\nLife.\nEmpress Suiko was a consort to her half-brother, Emperor Bidatsu, but after Bidatsu's first wife died she became his official consort and was given the title \u014ckisaki (official consort of the emperor). She bore seven children.\nAfter Bidatsu's death, Suiko's brother, Emperor Y\u014dmei, came to power for about two years before dying of illness. Upon Y\u014dmei's death, another power struggle arose between the Soga clan and the Mononobe clan, with the Sogas supporting Prince Hatsusebe and the Mononobes supporting Prince Anahobe. The Sogas prevailed once again and Prince Hatsusebe acceded to the throne as Emperor Sushun in 587. However, Sushun began to resent the power of Soga no Umako, the head of the Soga clan, and Umako, perhaps out of fear that Sushun might strike first, had him assassinated by in 592. When asked to accede to the throne to fill the power vacuum that subsequently developed, Suiko became the first of what would be several examples in Japanese history where a woman was chosen to accede to the throne to avert a power struggle.\nSuiko's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably \"Sumeramikoto\" or \"Amenoshita Shiroshimesu \u014ckimi\" (\u6cbb\u5929\u4e0b\u5927\u738b), meaning \"the great Queen who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Suiko might have been referred to as (\u30e4\u30de\u30c8\u5927\u738b/\u5927\u541b) or the \"Great Queen of Yamato\".\nPrince Sh\u014dtoku was appointed regent the following year. Although political power during Suiko's reign is widely viewed as having been wielded by Prince Sh\u014dtoku and Soga no Umako, Suiko was far from powerless. The mere fact that she survived and her reign endured suggests she had significant political skills.\nIn 599, an earthquake destroyed buildings throughout Yamato Province in what is now Nara Prefecture.\nSuiko's refusal to grant Soga no Umako's request that he be granted the imperial territory known as Kazuraki no Agata in 624 is cited as evidence of her independence from his influence. Some of the many achievements under Empress Suiko's reign include the official recognition of Buddhism by the issuance of the Flourishing Three Treasures Edict in 594. Suiko was also one of the first Buddhist monarchs in Japan and had taken the vows of a nun shortly before becoming empress.\nThe reign of this empress was marked by the opening of relations with the Sui court in 600, the adoption of the Twelve Level Cap and Rank System in 603 and the adoption of the Seventeen-article constitution in 604.\nThe adoption of the Sexagenary cycle calendar (\"Jikkan J\u016bnishi\") in Japan is attributed to Empress Suiko in 604.\nAt a time when imperial succession was generally determined by clan leaders, rather than the emperor, Suiko left only vague indications of succession to two candidates while on her deathbed. One, Prince Tamura, was a grandson of Emperor Bidatsu and was supported by the main line of Sogas, including Soga no Emishi. The other, Prince Yamashiro, was a son of Prince Sh\u014dtoku and had the support of some lesser members of the Soga clan. After a brief struggle within the Soga clan in which one of Prince Yamashiro's main supporters was killed, Prince Tamura was chosen and he acceded to the throne as Emperor Jomei in 629.\nEmpress Suiko ruled for 35 years. Although there were seven other reigning empresses, their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal Imperial bloodline, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. Empress Genmei, who was followed on the throne by her daughter, Empress Gensh\u014d, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.\nThe actual site of Suiko's grave is known. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Suiko's mausoleum. It's formally named \"Shinaga no Yamada no misasagi\".\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10421", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10421", "title": "Empress K\u014dgyoku", "text": ", also known as , was the 35th and 37th monarch of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nK\u014dgyoku's reign spanned the years from 642 to 645. Her reign as Saimei encompassed 655 to 661. In other words, \nThe two reigns of this one woman spanned the years from 642 through 661.\nIn the history of Japan, K\u014dgyoku/Saimei was the second of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The sole female monarch before K\u014dgyoku/Saimei was Suiko\"-tenn\u014d\". The six women sovereigns reigning after K\u014dgyoku/Saimei were Jit\u014d, Genmei, Gensh\u014d, K\u014dken/Sh\u014dtoku, Meish\u014d, and Go-Sakuramachi.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore her ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, her personal name (\"imina\") was . As empress, her name would have been .\nPrincess Takara (\"Takara no miko\") was a great-granddaughter of Emperor Bidatsu.\nEvents in K\u014dgyoku's reign.\nDuring her first reign the Soga clan seized power. Her son Naka no \u014ce planned a coup d'\u00e9tat and slew Soga no Iruka at the court in front of her throne. The Empress, shocked by this incident, abdicated the throne.\nK\u014dgyoku's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably \"Sumeramikoto\" or \"Amenoshita Shiroshimesu \u014ckimi\" (\u6cbb\u5929\u4e0b\u5927\u738b), meaning \"the great queen who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, K\u014dgyoku might have been referred to as (\u30e4\u30de\u30c8\u5927\u738b/\u5927\u541b) or the \"Great Queen of Yamato\".\nEmpress K\u014dgyoku reigned for four years. The years of K\u014dgyoku's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or \"neng\u014d\". The Taika era innovation of naming time periods \u2013 \"neng\u014d\" \u2013 was yet to be initiated during her son's too-brief reign.\nIn this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of \"Gukansh\u014d\" offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit\u014d's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame: \nThe years of K\u014dgyoku's reign are not more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\" which was an innovation of K\u014dtoku's brief reign.\nEvents in Saimei's reign.\nWhen K\u014dtoku died, his designated heir was Naka no \u014ce. When Naka no \u014ce's mother re-ascended, he continued in the role of her heir and crown prince. In this role, he could and did remain active in the political life of Japan.\nIn the fifth year of Saimei's reign, Paekche in Korea was destroyed in 660. Japan assisted Paekche loyals in an attempt to aid the revival of Paekche dynasty. Early in 661, Saimei responded to the situation by leaving her capital in Yamato Province. Her plan was to lead a military expedition to Korea. The empress stayed in Ishiyu Temporary Palace in Iyo Province, today D\u014dgo Onsen. In May she arrived at Asakura Palace in the north part of Tsukushi province in Ky\u016bsh\u016b, today a part of Fukuoka Prefecture. The allied army of Japan and Baekje was preparing for war against Silla, but the death of the empress thwarted those plans. In 661, Saimei died in the Asakura Palace before the army departed to Korea. In October her body was brought from Ky\u016bsh\u016b by sea to Port Naniwa-zu (today Osaka city); and her state funeral was held in early November.\nEmpress Saimei ruled for seven years. The years of Saimei's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or \"neng\u014d\". The Taika era innovation of naming time periods\u00a0\u2013 \"neng\u014d\"\u00a0\u2013 languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih\u014d in 701.\nThe actual site of K\u014dgyoku/Saimei's grave is known, having been identified as the Kengoshizuka tomb in the village of Asuka, Nara Prefecture. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dgyoku/Seimei's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Ochi-no-Okanoe no misasagi\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\" (\u516c\u537f) is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During K\u014dgyoku's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nThe \"kugy\u014d\" during Saimei's reign included:\nReferences.\n \n "}
{"id": "10422", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10422", "title": "Emperor K\u014dtoku", "text": " was the 36th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nThe years of his reign lasted from 645 through 654.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore K\u014dtoku's ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was or .\nHe was a descendant of Emperor Bidatsu. He was a son of Chinu no \u014dkimi (Prince Chinu, \u8305\u6e1f\u738b) by Kibitsuhime no \u014dkimi (Princess Kibitsuhime, \u5409\u5099\u59eb\u738b). Empress K\u014dgyoku was his elder sister from the same parents. Chinu was a son of Prince Oshisaka hikohito no \u014de, whose father was the Emperor Bidatsu. He had at least three consorts including his Empress, Hashihito no Himemiko (Princess Hashihito), the daughter of Emperor Jomei and his sister Empress K\u014dgyoku. In the 3rd year of K\u014dgyoku\"-tenn\u014d\" 's reign (\u7687\u6975\u5929\u7687\u4e09\u5e74), the empress abdicated; and the succession (\"senso\") was received by her younger brother. Shortly thereafter, Emperor K\u014dtoku is said to have acceded to the throne (\"sokui\").\nK\u014dtoku ruled from July 12, 645, until his death in 654. In 645 he ascended to the throne two days after Prince Naka no \u014ce (Emperor Tenji) assassinated Soga no Iruka in the court of K\u014dgyoku. K\u014dgyoku abdicated in favor of her son and crown prince, Naka no \u014ce, but Naka no \u014ce insisted K\u014dtoku should ascend to the throne instead. K\u014dtoku's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably \"Sumeramikoto\" or \"Amenoshita Shiroshimesu \u014ckimi\" (\u6cbb\u5929\u4e0b\u5927\u738b), meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, K\u014dtoku might have been referred to as (\u30e4\u30de\u30c8\u5927\u738b/\u5927\u541b) or the \"Great King of Yamato\". According to the \"Nihonshoki\", he was of gentle personality and was in favor of Buddhism.\nIn 645 he created a new city in the area called Naniwa, and moved the capital from Yamato Province to this new city (see Nara). The new capital had a sea port and was good for foreign trade and diplomatic activities. In 653 K\u014dtoku sent an embassy to the court of the Tang dynasty in China, but some of the ships were lost \"en route\".\nNaka no \u014ce held the rank of crown prince and was the de facto leader of the government. In 653 Naka no \u014ce proposed to move the capital again to Yamato province. K\u014dtoku denied. Naka no \u014ce ignored the emperor's policy and moved to the former province. Many courtiers of the court, including Empress Hashihito, followed him. K\u014dtoku was left in the palace. In the next year he died of an illness. After his death, Naka would not ascend to the throne. Instead, his mother and the sister of K\u014dtoku, the former Empress Kogyoku, ascended to the throne under another name, Empress Saimei.\nHe enacted the Taika Reform edicts. The system of \"hassh\u014d kyakkan\" (eight ministries and a hundred offices) was first established during the reign of Emperor K\u014dtoku.\nThe actual site of K\u014dtoku's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dtoku's mausoleum. It is formally named \"\u014csaka-no-shinaga no misasagi\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\" (\u516c\u537f) is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During K\u014dtoko's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included: \nEras of K\u014dtoku's reign.\nThe years of K\u014dtoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: Princess Hashihito (\u9593\u4eba\u7687\u5973, d. 665), Emperor Jomei and Empress Kogyoku\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Abe no Otarashi-hime (\u963f\u90e8\u5c0f\u8db3\u5a9b), Abe no Kurahashi-maro's daughter\n\"Hi\": Saga no Chi-no-iratsume (\u8607\u6211\u4e73\u5a18), Soga no Kura-no-Yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro's daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10423", "revid": "146726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10423", "title": "Empress Saimei of Japan", "text": ""}
{"id": "10424", "revid": "1012701518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10424", "title": "Emperor Tenji", "text": ", also known as Emperor Tenchi, was the 38th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nTenji's reign spanned the years from 661 through 672.\nTraditional narrative.\nHe was the son of Emperor Jomei, but was preceded as ruler by his mother Empress Saimei.\nPrior to his accession, he was known as .\nEvents of Tenji's life.\nAs prince, Naka no \u014ce played a crucial role in ending the near-total control the Soga clan had over the imperial family. In 644, seeing the Soga continue to gain power, he conspired with Nakatomi no Kamatari and Soga no Kurayamada no Ishikawa no Maro to assassinate Soga no Iruka in what has come to be known as the Isshi Incident. Although the assassination did not go exactly as planned, Iruka was killed, and his father and predecessor, Soga no Emishi, committed suicide soon after. Following the Isshi Incident, Iruka's adherents dispersed largely without a fight, and Naka no \u014ce was named heir apparent. He also married the daughter of his ally Soga no Kurayamada, thus ensuring that a significant portion of the Soga clan's power was on his side.\nEvents of Tenji's reign.\nNaka no \u014ce reigned as Emperor Tenji from 661 to 672.\nTenji was particularly active in improving the military institutions which had been established during the Taika Reforms.\nDeath of the emperor.\nFollowing his death in 672, there ensued a succession dispute between his fourteen children (many by different mothers). In the end, he was succeeded by his son, Prince \u014ctomo, also known as Emperor K\u014dbun, then by Tenji's brother Prince \u014cama, also known as Emperor Tenmu. Almost one hundred years after Tenji's death, the throne passed to his grandson Emperor K\u014dnin.\nThe actual site of Tenji's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Yamashina-ku, Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Tenji's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Yamashina no misasagi\".\nPoetry.\nThe \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\" includes poems attributed to emperors and empresses; and according to Donald Keene, evolving \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\" studies have affected the interpretation of even simple narratives like \"The Three Hills.\" The poem was long considered to be about two male hills in a quarrel over a female hill, but scholars now consider that Kagu and Miminashi might be female hills in love with the same male hill, Unebi. This still-unresolved enigma in poetic form is said to have been composed by Emperor Tenji while he was still Crown Prince during the reign of Empress Saimei:\nOne of his poems was chosen by Fujiwara no Teika as the first in the popular \"Hyakunin Isshu\" anthology:\nAfter his death, his wife, Empress Yamato wrote a song of longing about her husband.\n\"Kugyo\".\nThe top during Emperor Tenji's reign included:\nPrince \u014ctomo (\u014ctomo\"-shinn\u014d\") was the favorite son of Emperor Tenji; and he was also the first to be accorded the title of \"Daij\u014d-daijin.\"\nNon\"-neng\u014d\" period.\nThe years of Tenji's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or \"neng\u014d\". The Taika era innovation of naming time periods \u2013 \"neng\u014d\" \u2013 languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih\u014d in 701.\nIn this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of \"Gukansh\u014d\" offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit\u014d's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame:\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: Yamato Hime no \u014ckimi (\u502d\u59eb\u738b), Prince Furuhito-no-\u014ce's daughter (son of Emperor Jomei).\n\"Hin\": Soga no Ochi-no-iratsume (\u8607\u6211\u9060\u667a\u5a18, d. ), Soga no Kura-no-yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro's daughter\n\"Hin\": Soga no Mei-no-iratsume (\u8607\u6211\u59ea\u5a18), Soga no Kura-no-yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro's daughter\n\"Hin\": Soga no Hitachi-no-iratsume (\u8607\u6211\u5e38\u9678\u5a18), Soga no Akae's daughter\n\"Hin\": Abe no Tachibana-no-iratsume (\u963f\u90e8\u6a58\u5a18, d. 681), Abe no Kurahashi-maro's daughter\nCourt lady: Koshi-no-michi no Iratsume (\u8d8a\u9053\u4f0a\u7f85\u90fd\u58f2)\nCourt lady (\"Uneme\"): Yakako-no-iratsume, a lower court lady from Iga (\u4f0a\u8cc0\u91c7\u5973\u5b85\u5b50\u5a18) (\"Iga no Uneme\")\nCourt lady: Oshinumi no Shikibuko-no-iratsume (\u5fcd\u6d77\u8272\u592b\u53e4\u5a18), Oshinumi Zokuryu's daughter\nCourt lady: Kurikuma no Kurohime-no-iratsume (\u6817\u9688\u9ed2\u5a9b\u5a18), Kurikuma Tokuman's daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10425", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10425", "title": "Emperor K\u014dbun", "text": " was the 39th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nK\u014dbun's reign lasted only a few months in 671\u2013672.\nTraditional narrative.\nEmperor K\u014dbun was named the 39th emperor by the Meiji government in 1870; and since the late 19th century, he is known by the posthumous name accorded to him by Meiji scholars.\nIn his lifetime, he was known as Prince \u014ctomo (\u5927\u53cb\u7687\u5b50, \"\u014ctomo no \u014dji\"). He was the favorite son of Emperor Tenji; and he was also the first to have been accorded the title of \"Daij\u014d-daijin.\"\nContemporary historians now place the reign of Emperor K\u014dbun between the reigns of Emperor Tenji and Emperor Tenmu; but the \"Nihongi\", the \"Gukansh\u014d\", and the \"Jinn\u014d Sh\u014dt\u014dki\" do not recognize this reign. Prince \u014ctomo was only given his posthumous title and name in 1870.\nThe actual site of K\u014dbun's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Shiga.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dbun's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Nagara no Yamasaki no misasagi\".\nNon\"-neng\u014d\" period.\nThe years of K\u014dbun's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or \"neng\u014d\". The Taika era innovation of naming time periods \u2013 \"neng\u014d\" \u2013 languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih\u014d in 701. \nIn this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of \"Gukansh\u014d\" offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit\u014d's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame: \n\"Kugyo\".\nThe top during Emperor K\u014dbun's reign included:\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress Consort: Princess T\u014dchi (\u5341\u5e02\u7687\u5973), Emperor Tenmu\u2019s daughter\nEmpress: Fujiwara no Mimimotoji (\u85e4\u539f\u8033\u9762\u5200\u81ea), Fujiwara no Kamatari\u2019s daughter\nEmperor K\u014dbun had another son named Prince Yota (\u8208\u591a\u738b), whose mother is unknown.\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10426", "revid": "36510957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10426", "title": "Emperor Tenmu", "text": " was the 40th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nTenmu's reign lasted from 673 until his death in 686.\nTraditional narrative.\nTenmu was the youngest son of Emperor Jomei and Empress K\u014dgyoku, and the younger brother of the Emperor Tenji. His name at birth was Prince \u014cama (\u5927\u6d77\u4eba\u7687\u5b50:\u014cama no \u014dji). He was succeeded by Empress Jit\u014d, who was both his niece and his wife. During the reign of his elder brother, Emperor Tenji, Tenmu was forced to marry several of Tenji's daughters because Tenji thought those marriages would help to strengthen political ties between the two brothers. The nieces he married included Princess Unonosarara, today known as Empress Jit\u014d, and Princess \u014cta. Tenmu also had other consorts whose fathers were influential courtiers.\nTenmu had many children, including his crown prince Kusakabe by Princess Unonosarara; Princess T\u014dchi; Prince \u014ctsu and Princess \u014cku by Princess \u014cta (whose father also was Tenji); and Prince Toneri, the editor of the \"Nihon Shoki\" and father of Emperor Junnin. Through Prince Kusakabe, Tenmu had two emperors and two empresses among his descendants. Empress K\u014dken was the last of these imperial rulers from his lineage.\nEvents of Tenmu's life.\nEmperor Tenmu is the first monarch of Japan, to whom the title \"Tenn\u014d\" (Emperor of Japan) was assigned contemporaneously\u2014not only by later generations.\nThe only document on his life was \"Nihon Shoki\". However, it was edited by his son, Prince Toneri, and the work was written during the reigns of his wife and children, causing one to suspect its accuracy and impartiality. He is also mentioned briefly in the preface to the \"Kojiki\", being hailed as the emperor to have commissioned them.\nTenmu's father died while he was young, and he grew up mainly under the guidance of Empress Saimei. He was not expected to gain the throne, because his brother Tenji was the crown prince, being the older son of their mother, the reigning empress.\nDuring the Tenji period, Tenmu was appointed his crown prince. This was because Tenji had no appropriate heir among his sons at that time, as none of their mothers was of a rank high enough to give the necessary political support. Tenji was suspicious that Tenmu might be so ambitious as to attempt to take the throne, and felt the necessity to strengthen his position through politically advantageous marriages.\nTenji was particularly active in improving the military institutions which had been established during the Taika reforms.\nIn his old age, Tenji had a son, Prince \u014ctomo, by a low-ranking consort. Since \u014ctomo had weak political support from his maternal relatives, the general wisdom of the time held that it was not a good idea for him to ascend to the throne, yet Tenji was obsessed with the idea.\nIn 671 Tenmu felt himself to be in danger and volunteered to resign the office of crown prince to become a monk. He moved to the mountains in Yoshino, Yamato Province (now Yoshino, Nara), officially for reasons of seclusion. He took with him his sons and one of his wives, Princess Unonosarara, a daughter of Tenji. However, he left all his other consorts at the capital, Omiky\u014d in \u014cmi Province (today in \u014ctsu).\nA year later, (in 672) Tenji died and Prince \u014ctomo ascended to the throne as Emperor K\u014dbun. Tenmu assembled an army and marched from Yoshino to the east, to attack the capital of Omiky\u014d in a counterclockwise movement. They marched through Yamato, Iga and Mino Provinces to threaten Omiky\u014d in the adjacent province. The army of Tenmu and the army of the young Emperor K\u014dbun fought in the northwestern part of Mino (nowadays Sekigahara, Gifu), an incident known as the Jinshin War. Tenmu's army won and K\u014dbun committed suicide.\nAs might be expected, Emperor Tenmu was no less active than former-Emperor Tenji in improving the Taika military institutions. Tenmu's reign brought many changes, such as: (1) a centralized war department was organized; (2) the defenses of the Inner Country near the Capital were strengthened; (3) forts and castles were built near Capital and in the western parts of Honsh\u016b\u2014and in Kyushu; (4) troops were reviewed; and all provincial governors were ordered to complete the collection of arms and to study tactics.\nIn 673 Tenmu moved the capital back to Yamato on the Kiymihara plain, naming his new capital Asuka. The \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\" includes a poem written after the Jinshin War ended:\nAt Asuka, Emperor Tenmu was enthroned. He elevated Unonosarara to be his empress. Events of his reign include:\nTenmu reigned from this capital until his death in 686. His wife, Empress Jito became the emperor until their son became the 42nd Emperor. The actual site of his grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shrine (\"misasagi\") in Nara Prefecture. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Tenmu's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Hinokuma no \u014cuchi no misasagi.\"\nBuddhism.\nIn 675 Emperor Tenmu banned the consumption of domesticated animal meat (horse, cattle, dogs, monkeys, birds), from April 1 to September 30 each year, due to the influence of Buddhism. Wild game meat was exempt.\nPolitics.\nIn the \"Nihon Shoki\", Tenmu is described as a great innovator, but the neutrality of this description is doubtful, since the work was written under the control of his descendants. It seems clear, however, that Tenmu strengthened the power of the emperor and appointed his sons to the highest offices of his government, reducing the traditional influence of powerful clans such as the \u014ctomo and Soga clans. He renewed the system of \"kabane\", the hereditary titles of duty and rank, but with alterations, including the abolition of some titles. Omi and Muraji, the highest kabane in the earlier period, were reduced in value in the new hierarchy, which consisted of eight kinds of kabane. Each clan received a new kabane according to its closeness to the imperial bloodline and its loyalty to Tenmu.\nTenmu attempted to keep a balance of power among his sons. Once he traveled to Yoshino together with his sons, and there had them swear to cooperate and not to make war on each other. This turned out to be ineffective: one of his sons, Prince \u014ctsu, was later executed for treason after the death of Tenmu.\nTenmu's foreign policy favored the Korean kingdom Silla, which took over the entire Korean peninsula in 676. After the unification of Korea by Silla, Tenmu decided to break diplomatic relations with the Tang dynasty of China, evidently in order to keep on good terms with Silla.\nTenmu used religious structures to increase the authority of the imperial throne. During his reign there was increased emphasis on the tie between the imperial household and Ise Grand Shrine (dedicated to the ancestor goddess of the emperors, Amaterasu) by sending his daughter Princess \u014cku as the newly established Sai\u014d of the shrine, and several festivals were financed from the national budget. He also showed favor to Buddhism, and built several large temples and monasteries. It is said that Tenmu asked that each household was encouraged to build an altar with a dais where a Buddha-image and a sutra could be placed so that family worshiping could be held, thus inventing the butsudan. On the other hand, all Buddhist priests, monks and nuns were controlled by the state, and no one was allowed to become a monk without the state's permission. This was aimed at preventing cults and stopping farmers from turning into priests.\n\"Kugy\u014d\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\" () is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Tenmu's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEra of Tenmu's reign.\nThe years of Tenmu's reign were marked by only one era name or \"neng\u014d\", which was proclaimed in the final months of the emperor's life; and \"Shuch\u014d\" ended with Tenmu's death.\nNon\"-neng\u014d\" period.\nThe early years of Tenmu's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or \"neng\u014d\". The Taika era innovation of naming time periods \u2013 \"neng\u014d\" \u2013 was discontinued during these years, but it was reestablished briefly in 686. The use of \"neng\u014d\" languished yet again after Tenmu's death until Emperor Monmu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih\u014d in 701.\nIn this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of \"Gukansh\u014d\" offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit\u014d's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taih\u014d time-frame:\nWives and children.\nEmpress: Princess Uno-no-sarara (\u9e15\u91ce\u8b83\u826f\u7687\u5973) later Empress Jit\u014d, Emperor Tenji\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Princess \u014cta (\u5927\u7530\u7687\u5973), Emperor Tenji\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Princess \u014ce (\u5927\u6c5f\u7687\u5973), Emperor Tenji\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Princess Niitabe (\u65b0\u7530\u90e8\u7687\u5973), Emperor Tenji\u2019s daughter\n\"Bunin\": Fujiwara no Hikami-no-iratsume (\u85e4\u539f\u6c37\u4e0a\u5a18, d.682), Fujiwara no Kamatari\u2019s daughter\n\"Bunin\": Fujiwara no Ioe-no-iratsume (\u85e4\u539f\u4e94\u767e\u91cd\u5a18), Fujiwara no Kamatari\u2019s daughter\n\"Bunin\": Soga no \u014cnu-no-iratsume (\u8607\u6211\u5927\u8564\u5a18), Soga no Akae\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Princess Nukata (\u984d\u7530\u738b), Prince Kagami's daughter\nCourt lady: Munakata no Amako-no-iratsume (\u80f8\u5f62\u5c3c\u5b50\u5a18), unakata-no-Kimi Tokuzen's daughter\nCourt lady: Shishihito no Kajihime-no-iratsume (\u5b8d\u4eba\u68b6\u5a9b\u5a18), Shishihito-no-Omi \u014cmaro's daughter\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10427", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10427", "title": "Empress Jit\u014d", "text": " was the 41st monarch of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nJit\u014d's reign spanned the years from 686 through 697.\nIn the history of Japan, Jit\u014d was the third of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The two female monarchs before Jit\u014d were Suiko and K\u014dgyoku/Saimei. The five women sovereigns reigning after Jit\u014d were Genmei, Gensh\u014d, K\u014dken/Sh\u014dtoku, Meish\u014d, and Go-Sakuramachi.\nTraditional narrative.\nEmpress Jit\u014d was the daughter of Emperor Tenji. Her mother was Ochi-no-Iratsume, the daughter of Minister \u014c-omi Soga no Yamada-no Ishikawa Maro. She was the wife of Tenji's full brother Emperor Tenmu, whom she succeeded on the throne.\nEmpress Jit\u014d's given name was , or alternately Uno.\nEvents of Jit\u014d's reign.\nJit\u014d took responsibility for court administration after the death of her husband, Emperor Tenmu, who was also her uncle. She acceded to the throne in 687 in order to ensure the eventual succession of her son, Kusakabe-shinn\u014d. Throughout this period, Empress Jit\u014d ruled from the Fujiwara Palace in Yamato. In 689, Jit\u014d prohibited \"Sugoroku\", in 690 at enthronement she performed special ritual then gave pardon and in 692 she travelled to Ise against the counsel of minister Miwa-no-Asono-Takechimaro.\nPrince Kusakabe was named as crown prince to succeed Jit\u014d, but he died at a young age. Kusakabe's son, Karu-no-o, was then named as Jit\u014d's successor. He eventually would become known as Emperor Monmu.\nEmpress Jit\u014d reigned for eleven years. Although there were seven other reigning empresses, their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal Imperial bloodline, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. Empress Genmei, who was followed on the throne by her daughter, Empress Gensh\u014d, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.\nIn 697, Jit\u014d abdicated in Mommu's favor; and as a retired sovereign, she took the post-reign title \"daij\u014d-tenn\u014d\". After this, her imperial successors who retired took the same title after abdication.\nJit\u014d continued to hold power as a cloistered ruler, which became a persistent trend in Japanese politics.\nThe actual site of Jit\u014d's grave is known. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Jit\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Ochi-no-Okanoe no misasagi\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\".\n\"Kugy\u014d\" (\u516c\u537f) is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Jit\u014d's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nNon\"-neng\u014d\" period.\nJit\u014d's reign is not linked by scholars to any era or neng\u014d. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods \u2013 \"neng\u014d\" \u2013 languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih\u014d in 701.\nHowever, Brown and Ishida's translation of \"Gukansh\u014d\" offers an explanation which muddies a sense of easy clarity:\nPoetry.\nThe \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\" includes poems said to have been composed by Jit\u014d. This one was composed after the death of the Emperor Tenmu:\"'\nOne of the poems attributed to Empress Jit\u014d was selected by Fujiwara no Teika for inclusion in the very popular anthology \"Hyakunin Isshu\":\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10428", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10428", "title": "Emperor Monmu", "text": " was the 42nd emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nMonmu's reign spanned the years from 697 through 707.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was Karu\"-shinn\u014d\".\nHe was a grandson of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. He was the second son of Prince Kusakabe. Monmu's mother was Princess Abe, a daughter of Emperor Tenji. Monmu's mother would later accede to the throne herself, and she would be known as Empress Genmei.\nEvents of Monmu's life.\nKaru\"-shinn\u014d\" was only six years old when his father, Crown Prince Kusakabe, died.\nEmperor Monmu ruled until his death in 707, at which point he was succeeded by his mother, Empress Genmei, who was also his first cousin once removed and his first cousin twice removed. He left a young son by Fujiwara no Miyako, a daughter of Fujiwara no Fuhito: Obito no miko (Prince Obito), who eventually became Emperor Sh\u014dmu.\nEmperor Monmu's reign lasted 10 years. He died at the age of 25.\nThe actual site of Monmu's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Monmu's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Hinokuma no Ako no oka no e no misasagi\".\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Monmu's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Monmu's reign.\nConventional modern scholarship seems to have determined that the years of Monmu's reign are encompassed within more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nNon\"-neng\u014d\" period.\nThe initial years of Monmu's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or \"neng\u014d\". The Taika era innovation of naming time periods \u2013 \"neng\u014d\" \u2013 languished until Monmu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih\u014d in 701.\nIn this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of \"Gukansh\u014d\" offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit\u014d's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame:\nConsorts and children.\n\"Bunin\": Fujiwara no Miyako (\u85e4\u539f\u5bae\u5b50, d. 754), Fujiwara no Fuhito\u2019s daughter\n\"Hin\": Ki no Kamado-no-iratsume (\u7d00\u7ac3\u9580\u5a18)\n\"Hin\": Ishikawa no Tone-no-iratsume (\u77f3\u5ddd\u5200\u5b50\u5a18)\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10430", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10430", "title": "Empress Gensh\u014d", "text": " was the 44th monarch of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Her reign spanned the years 715 through 724.\nGensh\u014d was the fifth of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant, and the only one in the history of Japan to have inherited her title from another empress regnant rather than from a male predecessor. The four female monarchs before Gensh\u014d were Suiko, K\u014dgyoku, Jit\u014d and Genmei; the three women sovereigns reigning after her were K\u014dken, Meish\u014d, and Go-Sakuramachi.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore her ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, her personal name (\"imina\") was Hidaka\"-hime\".\nGensh\u014d was an elder sister of Emperor Monmu and daughter of Prince Kusakabe and his wife who later became Empress Genmei. Therefore, she was a granddaughter of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d by her father and a granddaughter of Emperor Tenji through her mother.\nEvents of Gensh\u014d's life.\nEmpress Gensh\u014d's succession to the throne was intended as a regency until Prince Obito, the son of her deceased younger brother Monmu, was mature enough to ascend the throne. Obito would later become the Emperor Sh\u014dmu.\nObito was appointed Crown Prince in 714 by Empress Genmei. In the next year, 715, Empress Genmei, then in her fifties, abdicated in favor of her daughter Gensh\u014d. Obito was then 14 years old.\nObito remained the crown prince, heir to the new empress. Fujiwara no Fuhito, the most powerful courtier in Genmei's court, remained at his post until his death in 720. After his death, Prince Nagaya, a grandson of Tenmu and the Empress Gensh\u014d's cousin, seized power. This power shift was a background for later conflicts between Nagaya and Fuhito's four sons during the reign of Emperor Sh\u014dmu (formerly Prince Obito).\nUnder Gensh\u014d's reign, the \"Nihon Shoki\" was finished in 720. This was the first Japanese history book. Organization of the law system known as the \"ritsury\u014d\" was continued under the initiatives of Fuhito until his death. These laws and codes were edited and enacted by Fujiwara no Nakamaro, a grandson of Fuhito, and published as \"Y\u014dr\u014d ritsury\u014d\" under the name of Fuhito. The taxation system which had been introduced by Empress Jit\u014d in the late 7th century began to malfunction. To compensate for the decreased tax revenue, the \"Act of possession in three generations\", an initiative of Prince Nagaya, was enacted in 723. Under this act, people were allowed to possess a newly cultivated field once every three generations. In the fourth generation, the right of possession would revert to the national government. This act was intended to motivate new cultivation, but it only remained in effect for about 20 years.\nEmpress Gensh\u014d reigned for nine years. Although there were seven other reigning empresses, their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal Imperial bloodline, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. Empress Genmei, who was succeeded by her daughter, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.\nIn 724, Gensh\u014d abdicated in favor of her nephew, who would be known as Emperor Sh\u014dmu. Gensh\u014d lived for 25 years after she stepped down from the throne. She never married and had no children. She died at age 65.\nEmpress Gensh\u014d's grave is located in Nara. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\"), also in Nara. The Imperial Household Agency has designated this location as Monmu's mausoleum, and has been formally named \"Nahoyama no nishi no misasagi\". The Imperial tomb can be visited today in Narazaka-ch\u014d, Nara City.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Gensh\u014d's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Gensh\u014d's reign.\nThe years of Gensh\u014d's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10431", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10431", "title": "Empress K\u014dken", "text": ", also known as , was the 46th (with Empress K\u014dken name) and the 48th monarch of Japan (with Empress Sh\u014dtoku name), according to the traditional order of succession.\nEmpress K\u014dken first reigned from 749 to 758, then, following the Fujiwara no Nakamaro Rebellion, she reascended the throne as Empress Sh\u014dtoku from 765 until her death in 770. Empress K\u014dken was involved in an affair with priest D\u014dky\u014d and appointed him Grand Minister in 764. In 766, he was promoted to H\u014d\u014d (priestly emperor) and in 770 had tried to ascend the throne by himself. The death of the Empress and resistance from the aristocracy destroyed his plans. This incident was a reason for the later move of the Japanese capital from Nara (Heij\u014d).\nIn the history of Japan, K\u014dken/Sh\u014dtoku was the sixth of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The five female monarchs before K\u014dken/Sh\u014dtoku were Suiko, K\u014dgyoku/Saimei, Jit\u014d, Genmei and Gensh\u014d, and the two women sovereigns reigning after K\u014dken/Sh\u014dtoku were Meish\u014d and Go-Sakuramachi.\nTraditional narrative.\nEmpress K\u014dken's personal name (\"imina\") was . Her father was Emperor Sh\u014dmu, and her mother was Empress K\u014dmy\u014d.\nK\u014dken is traditionally venerated at her tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Nara, Nara, as the location of K\u014dken's mausoleum. The site is publicly accessible.\nEras of her reigns.\nThe years of K\u014dken's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name.\nThe years of Sh\u014dtoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name.\nLegacy.\nKoken's reign was turbulent, and she survived coup attempts by both Tachibana no Naramaro and Fujiwara no Nakamaro. Today, she is remembered chiefly for her alleged affair with a Buddhist monk named D\u014dky\u014d (\u9053\u93e1), a man she honored with titles and power. An oracle from Usa Shrine, the shrine of the kami in Usa, is said to have proclaimed that the monk should be made emperor; but when the empress sent to verify the pronouncement, Hachiman decreed that only one of imperial blood should ascend to the throne.\nAs with the seven other reigning empresses whose successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal imperial bloodline, she was followed on the throne by a male cousin, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. Empress Genmei, who was followed on the throne by her daughter, Empress Gensh\u014d, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.\nShe is also known for sponsoring the Hyakumant\u014d Darani, one of the largest productions of printed works in early Japan.\nOtagi Nenbutsu-ji, a Buddhist temple in the Arashiyama neighborhood of Kyoto, was founded by Sh\u014dtoku in the middle of the eighth century.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During K\u014dken's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nThe \"kugy\u014d\" during Sh\u014dtoku's reign included:\nSee also.\n \n "}
{"id": "10432", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10432", "title": "Emperor Junnin", "text": " was the 47th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. The seventh son of Prince Toneri and a grandson of Emperor Tenmu, his reign spanned the years 758 to 764.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore his ascension to the throne, his name (\"imina\") was \u014ci\"-shinn\u014d\" (\u014ci-no-\u014d). He was the seventh son of Prince Toneri, a son of Emperor Tenmu. And although his father died when he was three, he was not given any rank or office at the court. In the older Japanese documents, he is usually referred to as Haitai (\u5ec3\u5e1d), the dethroned emperor. The posthumous name of Emperor Junnin was given by Emperor Meiji a thousand years later.\nAscension and reign.\nIn 757 the Empress K\u014dken, his third cousin appointed him to be her crown prince instead of Prince Funado, who had been appointed to this position in the will of the Emperor Sh\u014dmu. In the tenth year of K\u014dken\"-tenn\u014d\" 's reign (), on December 7, 758 (\"Tenpy\u014d-sh\u014dh\u014d 2, 1st day of the 8th month\"), the empress abdicated and the succession (\"senso\") passed to her adopted son. Shortly afterwards, Emperor Junnin is said to have ascended to the throne (\"sokui\"). In 760 (\"Tenpy\u014d-h\u014dji 4\"), additional coins were put into circulation\u2014copper coins bearing the words \"Mannen Ten-h\u014d\", silver coins bearing the words \"Teihei Genh\u014d\", and gold coins bearing the words \"Kaiki Sh\u014dh\u014d\".\nThe years of Junnin's reign, 758\u2013765, are more specifically encompassed within a single era name or \"neng\u014d\".\"Tenpy\u014d-h\u014dji\" Junnin seemingly had very little power and was possibly a mere figurehead. In 764, six years after Empress K\u014dken had stepped down, the former empress reclaimed the throne during the Fujiwara no Nakamaro Rebellion, forcing Junnin to abdicate.\nDeath and mausoleum.\nOn November 10, 765 (\"Tenpy\u014d-jingo 1, 23rd day of the 10th month\"), the former emperor died while in exile. The site of Junnin's actual grave is unknown, and he is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Awaji. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Junnin's mausoleum: It is formally named \"Awaji no misasagi\".\nThough Junnin had, technically, been emperor, he was not featured on the official List of Japanese Emperors until the late nineteenth century. In 1870, Emperor Meiji conferred the posthumous name and title by which Emperor Junnin is now known. His place in the traditional order of succession was confirmed at the same time as announcements about Emperor K\u014dbun and Emperor Ch\u016bky\u014d were made public.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. In general, this elite group included only three or four men at a time, and they were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of their careers. During Junnin's reign, the ranks of this group of \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nConsorts and children.\nConsort: Awata no Morone (\u7c9f\u7530\u8af8\u59c9), widow of Fujiwara no Mayori, the first son of Fujiwara no Nakamaro\nBy Unknown woman:\nSee also.\n "}
{"id": "10434", "revid": "37153051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10434", "title": "Emperor Heizei", "text": ", also known as \"Heij\u014d-tenn\u014d\", was the 51st emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Heizei's reign lasted from 806 to 809.\nTraditional narrative.\nHeizei was the eldest son of the Emperor Kanmu and empress Fujiwara no Otomuro. Heizei had three Empresses and seven sons and daughters.\nHeizei is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Nara, as the location of Heizei's mausoleum. The site is publicly accessible. Although one of the largest kofun monuments in Japan, archaeological investigations in 1962\u20131963 indicate that it was constructed in the early 5th century, and that portions of it were destroyed during the construction of Heijo-ky\u014d, calling into question the designation by the Imperial Household Agency.\nEvents of Heizei's life.\nBefore he ascended to the throne, his liaison with Fujiwara no Kusuko, the mother of his one consort, caused a scandal. Because of this scandal his father considered depriving him of the rank of crown prince.\nHis title Heizei was derived from the official name of the capital in Nara, Heizei Ky\u014d.\nDuring Heizei's reign, the bodyguards were reorganized; the existing Imperial Bodyguards became the Left Imperial Bodyguards, while the Middle Bodyguards became the Right Imperial Bodyguards. Both sides were given a new Senior Commander; at this time Heizei appointed Sakanoue no Tamuramaro (758\u2013811) as Senior Commander of the Imperial Bodyguards of the Right. Under Emperor Kanmu, Tamuramaro had been appointed as \"sh\u014dgun\" of a military expedition against the Emishi.\nEra of Heizei's reign.\nThe years of Heizei's reign are encompassed within one era name (\"neng\u014d\").\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Heizei's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nWhen the daughter of a \"ch\u016bnagon\" became the favored consort of the Crown Prince Ate (later known as Heizei\"-tenn\u014d\"), her father's power and position in court was affected. Kanmu disapproved of , former wife of Fujiwara no Tadanushi; and Kanmu had her removed from his son's household. After Kanmu died, Heizei restored this one-time favorite as part of his household; and this distinction had consequences.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress (posthumously elevated \"K\u014dg\u014d\"): Fujiwara no Tarashiko/\"Taishi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u5e2f\u5b50; d.794), Fujiwara no Momokawa\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Imperial Princess Asahara (\u671d\u539f\u5185\u89aa\u738b; 779\u2013817), \nEmperor Kanmu\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Imperial Princess \u014cyake (\u5927\u5b85\u5185\u89aa\u738b; d.849), Emperor Kanmu\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Imperial Princess Kan'nabi (\u7518\u5357\u7f8e\u5185\u89aa\u738b; 800-817), Emperor Kanmu\u2019s daughter\n\"Sh\u014dshi\" Court lady (\"Naishi-no-kami\"): , former wife of \"Ch\u016bnagon\" Fujiwara no Tadanushi and Fujiwara no Tanetsugu\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Fujiwara Tadanushi\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Ise no Tsuguko (\u4f0a\u52e2\u7d99\u5b50; 772\u2013812), Ise no \u014cna\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Fujii no Fujiko/\"T\u014dshi\" (\u845b\u4e95\u85e4\u5b50), Fujii no Michiyori\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Ki no Iokazu (\u7d00\u9b5a\u54e1), Ki no Kotsuo\u2019s daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10435", "revid": "20777951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10435", "title": "Emperor Saga", "text": " was the 52nd emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Saga's reign spanned the years from 809 through 823.\nTraditional narrative.\nSaga was the second son of Emperor Kanmu and Fujiwara no Otomuro. His personal name was . Saga was an \"accomplished calligrapher\" able to compose in Chinese who held the first imperial poetry competitions (). According to legend, he was the first Japanese emperor to drink tea.\nSaga is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Uky\u014d-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Saga's mausoleum.\nEvents of Saga's life.\nSoon after his enthronement, Saga himself took ill. At the time the retired Heizei had quarreled with his brother over the ideal location of the court, the latter preferring the Heian capital, while the former was convinced that a shift back to the Nara plain was necessary, and Heizei, exploiting Saga's weakened health, seized the opportunity to foment a rebellion, known historically as the Kusuko Incident; however, forces loyal to Emperor Saga, led by \"taish\u014dgun\" Sakanoue no Tamuramaro, quickly defeated the Heizei rebels which thus limited the adverse consequences which would have followed any broader conflict. This same Tamuramaro is remembered in Aomori's annual Nebuta Matsuri which feature a number of gigantic, specially-constructed, illuminated paper floats. These great lantern-structures are colorfully painted with mythical figures; and teams of men carry them through the streets as crowds shout encouragement. This early ninth century military leader is commemorated in this way because he is said to have ordered huge illuminated lanterns to be placed at the top of hills; and when the curious Emishi approached these bright lights to investigate, they were captured and subdued by Tamuramaro's men.\nEras of Saga's reign.\nThe years of Saga's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (\"neng\u014d\").\nLegacy.\nIn ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the \"Gempeit\u014dkitsu\" (\u6e90\u5e73\u85e4\u6a58). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan are also known as Genji (\u6e90\u6c0f), and of these, the Saga Genji (\u5d6f\u5ce8\u6e90\u6c0f) are descended from 52nd emperor Saga. Saga's son, Minamoto no T\u014dru, is thought to be an inspiration for the protagonist of the novel \"The Tale of Genji\".\nIn the 9th century, Emperor Saga made a decree prohibiting meat consumption except fish and birds and abolished capital punishment in 818. This remained the dietary habit of Japanese until the introduction of European dietary customs in the 19th century.\nEmperor Saga played an important role as a stalwart supporter of the Buddhist monk K\u016bkai. The emperor helped K\u016bkai to establish the Shingon School of Buddhism by granting him T\u014d-ji Temple in the capital Heian-ky\u014d (present-day Kyoto).\nDaikaku-ji.\n is a Shingon Buddhist temple in Uky\u014d-ku in Kyoto. The site was originally a residence of the emperor, and later various emperor conducted their cloistered rule from here. The artificial lake of the temple, \u014csawa Pond, is one of the oldest Japanese garden ponds to survive from the Heian period. \nThe \"Saga Go-ry\u016b\" school of \"ikebana\" has its headquarters in the temple and is named in his honour.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Saga's reign (809\u2013823), this \"kugy\u014d\" included:\nConsorts and children.\nSaga had 49 children with at least 30 different women. Many of the children received the surname Minamoto, thereby removing them from royal succession.\nEmpress: Tachibana no Kachiko (\u6a58\u5609\u667a\u5b50), also known as , Tachibana no Kiyotomo's daughter.\n\"Hi\" (deposed): Imperial Princess Takatsu (\u9ad8\u6d25\u5185\u89aa\u738b; d. 841), Emperor Kanmu\u2019s daughter\n\"Hi\": Tajihi no Takako (\u591a\u6cbb\u6bd4\u9ad8\u5b50; 787\u2013825), Tajihi no Ujimori's daughter\n\"Bunin\": Fujiwara no Onatsu (\u85e4\u539f\u7dd2\u590f; d. 855), Fujiwara no Uchimaro's daughter\nCourt lady (\"Naishi-no-kami\"): Kudara no Kyomy\u014d (\u767e\u6e08\u738b\u6176\u547d; d. 849), Kudara no Ky\u014dshun's daughter\n\"Ny\u014dgo\": Kudara no Kimy\u014d (\u767e\u6e08\u8cb4\u547d; d. 851), Kudara no Shuntetsu's daughter\n\"Ny\u014dgo\": \u014chara no Kiyoko (\u5927\u539f\u6d44\u5b50; d. 841), \u014chara no Ietsugu's daughter\n\"Koui\": Iidaka no Yakatoji (\u98ef\u9ad8\u5b85\u5200\u81ea), Iidaka Gakuashi\n\"Koui\": Akishino no Koko (\u79cb\u7be0\u9ad8\u5b50/\u5eb7\u5b50), Akishino no Yasuhito's daughter\n\"Koui\": Yamada no Chikako (\u5c71\u7530\u8fd1\u5b50)\n\"Ny\u014dgo\": Princess Katano (\u4ea4\u91ce\u5973\u738b), Prince Yamaguchi's daughter\nCourt lady: Takashina no Kawako (\u9ad8\u968e\u6cb3\u5b50), Takashina no Kiyoshina's daughter\nCourt lady: Hiroi no Otona's daughter\nCourt lady: Fuse no Musashiko (\u5e03\u52e2\u6b66\u8535\u5b50)\nCourt lady: Kamitsukeno clan\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Abe no Yanatsu's daughter\nCourt lady: Kasa no Tsugiko (\u7b20\u7d99\u5b50), Kasa no Nakamori's daughter\nCourt lady: Awata clan's daughter\nCourt lady: \u014chara no Matako (\u5927\u539f\u5168\u5b50), \u014chara no Mamuro's daughter\nCourt lady: Ki clan's daughter\nCourt lady: Kura no Kageko (\u5185\u8535\u5f71\u5b50)\nCourt lady: Kannabi no Iseko (\u7518\u5357\u5099\u4f0a\u52e2\u5b50)\nCourt lady: Fun'ya no Fumiko (\u6587\u5c4b\u6587\u5b50), Fun'ya no Kugamaro's daughter\nCourt lady: Tanaka clan's daughter\nCourt lady: Koreyoshi no Sadamichi's daughter\nCourt lady: \u014cnakatomi no Mineko (\u5927\u4e2d\u81e3\u5cef\u5b50)\nCourt lady: Tachibana no Haruko (\u6a58\u6625\u5b50)\nCourt lady: Nagaoka no Okanari's daughter\nCourt lady (\"Nyoju\"): Taima no Osadamaro's daughter\nLady-in-waiting: Sugawara Kanshi (\u83c5\u539f\u9591\u5b50)\nReferences.\n\u5d6f\u5ce8\u5c71\u4e0a\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10436", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10436", "title": "Emperor Junna", "text": " was the 53rd emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Junna reigned from 823 to 833.\nTraditional narrative.\nJunna had six Empresses and Imperial consorts and 13 Imperial sons and daughters. His personal name (\"imina\") was .\nJunna is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Nishiky\u014d-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Junna's mausoleum.\nEras of Junna's reign.\nThe years of Junna's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (\"neng\u014d\").\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Junna's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: \"Imperial Princess Sh\u014dshi\"/Masako (\u6b63\u5b50\u5185\u89aa\u738b; 810\u2013879), Emperor Saga's daughter\n\"Hi\" (Empress as posthumous honors): Imperial Princess Koshi (\u9ad8\u5fd7\u5185\u89aa\u738b; 789\u2013809), Emperor Kanmu's daughter\nCourt lady: Princess Otsugu (\u7dd2\u7d99\u5973\u738b; 787\u2013847)\n\"Nyog\u014d\": Nagahara no Motohime (\u6c38\u539f\u539f\u59eb)\n\"Nyog\u014d\": Tachibana no Ujiko (\u6a58\u6c0f\u5b50), Tachibana no Nagana's daughter\n\"Koui\": Fujiwara no Kiyoko (\u85e4\u539f\u6f54\u5b50), Fujiwara no Nagaoka's daughter\nCourt lady: Kiyohara no Haruko (\u6e05\u539f\u6625\u5b50), Kiyohara no Natsuno's daughter\nCourt lady: \u014cnakatomi no Yasuko (\u5927\u4e2d\u81e3\u5b89\u5b50), \u014cnakatomi Fuchiio's daughter\nCourt lady: \u014cno no Takako (\u5927\u91ce\u9df9\u5b50), \u014cno no Masao's daughter\nCourt lady: Tachibana no Funeko (\u6a58\u8239\u5b50), Tachibana no Kiyono's daughter\nCourt lady: Tajihi no Ikeko (\u4e39\u7280\u6c60\u5b50), Tajihi no Kadonari's daughter\nUnknown lady\nSee also.\n "}
{"id": "10438", "revid": "27808550", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10438", "title": "K\u014dmy\u014d", "text": "Komyo may refer to:"}
{"id": "10439", "revid": "12014816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10439", "title": "Emperor Suk\u014d", "text": " (May 25, 1334 \u2013 January 31, 1398) was the third of Emperors of Northern Court during the Period of the Northern and Southern Courts in Japan. According to pre-Meiji scholars, his reign spanned the years from 1348 through 1351.\nGenealogy.\nHis personal name was originally Masuhito (\u76ca\u4ec1), but was later changed to Okihito (\u8208\u4ec1).\nHis father was Emperor K\u014dgon. His predecessor, Emperor K\u014dmy\u014d was his uncle, the younger brother of Emperor K\u014dgon.\nEvents of Suk\u014d's life.\nSuk\u014d occupied the Chrysanthemum Throne from 18 November 1348 until 22 November 1351.\nIn 1348, he became Crown Prince. In the same year, he became Northern Emperor upon the abdication of Emperor K\u014dmy\u014d. Although Emperor K\u014dgon ruled as cloistered Emperor, the rivalry between Ashikaga Takauji and Ashikaga Tadayoshi began, and in 1351, Takauji returned to the allegiance of the Southern Court, forcing Emperor Suk\u014d to abdicate. This was intended to reunify the Imperial Line.\nHowever, the peace soon fell apart, and in April 1352, the Southern Dynasty evacuated Kyoto, abducting with them Retired (Northern) Emperors Emperor K\u014dgon and Emperor K\u014dmy\u014d as well as Emperor Suk\u014d and the Crown Prince Tadahito. Because of this, Takauji made Emperor K\u014dgon's second son Imperial Prince Iyahito emperor (First Fushimi-no-miya).\nReturning to Kyoto in 1357, Emperor Suk\u014d's son Imperial Prince Yoshihito began to work with the Bakufu to be named Crown Prince, but the Bakufu instead decided to make Emperor Go-K\u014dgon's son (the future Emperor Go-En'y\u016b) Crown Prince instead.\nIn 1398, Emperor Suk\u014d died. But, 30 years after his death, in 1428, his great-grandson Hikohito (\u5f66\u4ec1), as the adopted son of Emperor Sh\u014dk\u014d, became Emperor Go-Hanazono, fulfilling Suk\u014d's dearest wish. Suk\u014d is enshrined at the \"Daik\u014dmy\u014dji no misasagi\" (\u5927\u5149\u660e\u5bfa\u9675) in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto.\nJapanese line of succession.\nIf the current line of the Japanese royal family fails to produce sons (i.e. if the 3 currently in line all fail to produce sons), then it would be Suko's line that would become the main line and most senior of the House of Yamoto in male primogeniture preference (i.e. son to son). Currently the head of this line is Fushimi Hiroaki.\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10440", "revid": "33399195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10440", "title": "Emperor Go-K\u014dgon", "text": "Emperor Go-K\u014dgon (\u5f8c\u5149\u56b4\u5929\u7687 \"Go-K\u014dgon-tenn\u014d\") (23 March 1338 \u2013 12 March 1374) was the 4th of the Emperors of Northern Court during the Period of the Northern and Southern Courts. According to pre-Meiji scholars, his reign spanned the years from 1352 through 1371.\nThis Nanboku-ch\u014d \"sovereign\" was named after his father Emperor K\u014dgon and \"go-\" (\u5f8c), translates literally as \"later;\" and thus, he may be called the \"Later Emperor K\u014dgon\", or, in some older sources, may be identified as \"Emperor K\u014dgon, the second\", or as \"Emperor K\u014dgon II.\"\nGenealogy.\nHis personal name was Iyahito (\u5f4c\u4ec1).\nHe was the second son of the Northern Pretender Emperor K\u014dgon, and brother of his predecessor, Emperor Suk\u014d. His mother was Hideko (\u79c0\u5b50), Sanj\u014d Kinhide's daughter\nEvents of Go-K\u014dgon's life.\nIn his own lifetime, Go-K\u014dgon and those around him believed that he occupied the Chrysanthemum Throne from 25 September 1352 to 9 April 1371.\nIn 1351, Ashikaga Takauji briefly returned to the allegiance of the Southern Dynasty, causing the Southern Court to briefly consolidate control of the Imperial Line. However, this peace fell apart in April 1352. On this occasion, the Southern Court abducted Retired (Northern) Emperors Emperor K\u014dgon and Emperor K\u014dmy\u014d as well as Emperor Suk\u014d and the Crown Prince Tadahito from Kyoto to Anau, the location of the Southern Court. This produced a state of affairs in which there was no Emperor in Kyoto. Because of this, Imperial Prince Iyahito became emperor in 1352 with the support of Ashikaga Yoshiakira.\nDuring this period, the Era of the Northern and Southern Courts, because of the antagonism between the two competing dynasties, public order in Kyoto was disturbed. The Southern Court repeatedly recaptured Kyoto. Emperor Go-K\u014dgon was forced to repeatedly flee from Kyoto to \u014cmi Province and other places. Around the time that Ashikaga Yoshimitsu was named \"sh\u014dgun\" (1368), the Southern Courts power weakened, and order was restored to Kyoto. Also around this time, the Emperor's authority began to show its weakness.\nOn 9 April 1371, he abdicated in favor of his son, who became Emperor Go-En'y\u016b. He continued to rule as Cloistered Emperor until he died of illness on 12 March 1374. He is enshrined with other emperors at the imperial tomb called \"Fukakusa no kita no misasagi\" (\u6df1\u8349\u5317\u9675) in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto.\nEras of Go-K\u014dgon's reign.\nThe years of Go-K\u014dgon's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10441", "revid": "940935282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10441", "title": "Emperor Go-En'y\u016b", "text": " (11 January 1359 \u2013 6 June 1393) was the \"5th\" of the Emperors of Northern Court during the period of two courts in Japan. According to pre-Meiji scholars, his reign spanned the years from 1371 through 1382.\nThis Nanboku-ch\u014d \"sovereign\" was named after the 10th century Emperor En'y\u016b and \"go-\" (\u5f8c), translates literally as \"later;\" and thus, he may be called the \"Later Emperor En'y\u016b\", or, in some older sources, may be identified as \"Emperor En'y\u016b, the second\", or as \"Emperor En'y\u016b II.\"\nGenealogy.\nHis personal name was Ohito (\u7dd2\u4ec1).\nHe was the second son of the fourth Northern Pretender Emperor Go-K\u014dgon. His mother was Fujiwara no Nakako (\u85e4\u539f\u4ef2\u5b50), Hirohashi Kanetsuna's daughter.\nEvents of Go-En'y\u016b's life.\nIn his own lifetime, Go-En'y\u016b and those around him believed that he occupied the Chrysanthemum Throne from 9 April 1371 to 24 May 1382.\nIn 1371, by Imperial Proclamation, he received the rank of \"shinn\u014d\" (\u89aa\u738b), or Imperial Prince (and potential heir). Immediately afterwards, he became emperor upon the abdication of his father, Emperor Go-K\u014dgon. There was said to be a disagreement between Go-K\u014dgon and the retired Northern Emperor Emperor Suk\u014d over the Crown Prince. With the support of Hosokawa Yoriyuki, who controlled the Bakufu, Go-K\u014dgon's son became the Northern Emperor.\nUntil 1374, Go-K\u014dgon ruled as cloistered emperor. In 1368, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu was named \"sh\u014dgun\", and with his guardianship, the Imperial Court was stabilized. In 1382, upon abdicating to Emperor Go-Komatsu, his cloistered rule began. Having no actual power, he rebelled, attempting suicide and accusing Ashikaga Yoshimitsu and his consort Itsuko of adultery.\nIn 1392, peace with the Southern Court being concluded, the Period of the Northern and Southern Courts came to an end. On 6 June 1393, Go-En'y\u016b died. He is enshrined with other emperors at the imperial tomb called \"Fukakusa no kita no misasagi\" (\u6df1\u8349\u5317\u9675) in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto.\nEras of Go-En'y\u016b's reign.\nThe years of Go-En'y\u016b's \"Nanboku-ch\u014d\" reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10442", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10442", "title": "Emperor Suizei", "text": ", also known as , was the second legendary Emperor of Japan according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. Suizei is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. A legendary account from the Kojiki states that Suizei became emperor after receiving the title of crown prince by his half brother due to his bravery regarding a murder plot. Suizei's reign started in 581 BC, he had one wife and a sole son who supposedly became the next emperor upon his death in 549 BC.\nLegendary narrative.\nWhile the \"Kojiki\" provides little information about Suizei, it does state his name, genealogy, and a record about his accession to the throne. He was born sometime in 632 BC, and was one of the sons of Emperor Jimmu and his chief wife Himetataraisuzu-hime. The account in the Kojiki states that Suizei's older brother Kamuyaimimi was originally the Crown-prince. When Jimmu died, another of his sons named Tagishimimi attempted to seize the throne by murdering those in his way. Tagishimimi was given birth to by a lesser wife named Ahiratsu-hime, and was older than Jimmu's legitimate heir. When Himetataraisuzu-hime learned of the plot she tried in vain to warn her sons by way of songs and poems. While Suizei encouraged Kamuyaimimi to slay Tagishimimi, he could not find it in him to murder his own half brother. Suizei pleaded with his older brother for the weapon he was going to use, and upon receiving it accomplished the deed for him. Kamuyawimimi ceded his rights as crown prince shortly after to Suizei as he believed his braver younger brother should be the new Emperor.\nEmperor Suizei's pre-ascension name remains unknown, but the \"Kojiki\" records that he ruled from the palace of at Katsuragi in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. While another more expansive account exists in the \"Nihon Shoki\", the section is more steeped in myth. Suizei is conventionally considered to have reigned from 581 to 549 BC. He wed at an unknown date, and the two had one son. Emperor Suizei allegedly died in 549 BC and his gravesite is formally named \"Tsukida no oka no e no misasagi\". He was succeeded by his only son, \"Prince Shikitsuhikotamatemi\" who became Emperor Annei.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. Suizei is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is ranked as the first of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name Suizei\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations, and literally means \"joyfully healthy peace\". His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Suizei, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". While the actual site of his grave is not known, an Imperial \"misasagi\" or tomb for Suizei is currently maintained in Kashihara. The first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10443", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10443", "title": "Emperor Annei", "text": ", also known as was the third legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. Annei is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. Nothing exists in the Kojiki other than his name and genealogy. Annei's reign allegedly began in 549 BC, he had one wife and three sons. After his death in 511 BC, his second or third son supposedly became the next emperor.\nLegendary narrative.\nEmperor Annei's name appears in both the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\" where only his genealogy are recorded. While the Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, no extant contemporary records have been discovered that confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. Before his accession to the throne, he was allegedly known as Prince Shikitsu-hiko Tamatemi. Shikitsu-hiko Tamatemi was either the eldest son or the only son of Emperor Suizei with Isuzuyori-hime. The \"Kojiki\" records that he ruled from the palace of at Katashiro in Kawachi in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. During Emperor Annei's alleged lifetime, he had one wife named \"Nunasoko-Nakatsu-hime\" and fathered three children with her. Annei's reign lasted from 549 BC until his death in 511 BC, his second or third son then took the throne and would later be referred to as Emperor Itoku.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. \"Annei\" is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is considered to have been the second of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name Annei\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations, and literally means \"steady tranquillity\". His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Annei, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". The name \"Annei\" is first credited to Japanese scholar and writer \u014cmi no Mifune, who allegedly came up with the name sometime in the latter half of the 8th century.\nWhile the actual site of Annei's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Kashihara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Annei's mausoleum, and is formally named \"Unebi-yama no hitsujisaru Mihodo no i no e no misasagi(The royal tomb over the mihodo at the south west of mount unebi) \". The first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and Children.\nEmpress: , Prince Kamo's daughter (Kotoshironushi's son)\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10445", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10445", "title": "Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d", "text": ", also known as was the fifth legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. K\u014dsh\u014d is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. Nothing exists in the Kojiki other than his name and genealogy. K\u014dsh\u014d's reign allegedly began in 475 BC, he had one wife and two sons. After his death in 393 BC, his second son supposedly became the next emperor.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", only his name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial \"misasagi\" or tomb for K\u014dsh\u014d is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered that confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. K\u014dsh\u014d is believed to be the oldest son of Emperor Itoku, and his wife Amanotoyototsu-hime. His mother was the daughter of Okishimimi-no-kami. The \"Kojiki\" records that he ruled from the palace of at Waki-no-kami in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. K\u014dsh\u014d allegedly had a wife named \"Yosotarashi-hime\", and fathered two children with her. His reign lasted from 475 BC until his death in 393 BC, his second son then took the throne and would later be referred to as Emperor K\u014dan.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. \"K\u014dsh\u014d\" is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is considered to have been the fourth of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name K\u014dsh\u014d\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations, and literally means \"filial manifestation\". His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to K\u014dsh\u014d, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". While the actual site of K\u014dsh\u014d's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Gose. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dsh\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Waki-no-kami no Hakata no yama no e no misasagi\". There is a possibility that this figure could have lived instead in the 1st century (AD), however more research is needed to make any further conclusions.\nThe first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10446", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10446", "title": "Emperor K\u014dan", "text": ", also known as was the sixth legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. K\u014dan is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. Nothing exists in the Kojiki other than his name and genealogy. K\u014dan's reign allegedly began in 392 BC, he had one wife and two sons and reigned for more than 100 years until his death in 291 BC at the age of 137. One of his sons then supposedly became the next emperor. Emperor K\u014dan is traditionally accepted as the final emperor of the J\u014dmon period, which ended in 300 BCE.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", only his name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial \"misasagi\" or tomb for K\u014dan is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered that confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. He is believed to be son of Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d; and his mother is believed to have been Yosotarashi-no-hime, who was the daughter of Okitsuyoso, and ancestress of the Owari. The \"Kojiki\" records K\u014dan was the second son of Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d, and that he ruled from the palace of at Muro in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. K\u014dan was allegedly an emperor who reigned for more than a hundred years, and lived to the age of 137 (according to the Kojiki). He allegedly had a wife named Yosotarashi-hime, and fathered two children with her. K\u014dan's reign lasted from 392 BC until his death in 291 BC, one of his sons then took the throne and would later be referred to as Emperor K\u014drei.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. K\u014dan is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is considered to have been the fifth of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name K\u014dan\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to K\u014dan, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". The name \"K\u014dan\" is first credited to Japanese scholar and writer \u014cmi no Mifune, who allegedly came up with the name sometime in the latter half of the 8th century.\nEmperor K\u014dan's longevity is disputed as the oldest verified humans usually go into the mid to late 110s. While historian John S. Brownlee calls K\u014dan's alleged age of 137 at the time of his death \"too long\", he also says that this isn't unusual for mythical figures. He ends his narrative by saying that nobody in Japan was bothered by the longevity of the former emperors until the modern era. Regardless of his age, the actual site of K\u014dan's grave is not known. K\u014dan is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Tamade, Gose. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dan's mausoleum, and its formal name is \"Tamate no oka no e no misasagi\".\nThe first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Prince Amatarashikunioshihito's daughter (Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d's son)\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10447", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10447", "title": "Emperor K\u014drei", "text": ", also known as was the seventh legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. K\u014drei is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. Nothing exists in the Kojiki other than his name and genealogy. K\u014drei's reign allegedly began in 290 BC. He had one wife and three consorts with whom he fathered seven children. After his death in 215 BC, one of his sons supposedly became the next emperor. K\u014drei is traditionally accepted as the first emperor of the Yayoi period, which is named after the Yayoi people who migrated to the Japanese archipelago from mainland Asia.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", only his name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial \"misasagi\" or tomb for K\u014drei is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered that confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. K\u014drei was born in 342 BC and is believed to be the eldest son of Emperor K\u014dan. His mother is believed to have been Oshihime, who was the daughter of Ametarashihiko-Kunio-shihito-no-mikoto. K\u014drei's pre-ascension name was Prince \"O-Yamato-Neko Hiko-futo-ni no Mikoto\", and the \"Kojiki\" records that he ruled from the palace of at Kuroda in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. It is noted in the Kojiki that sometime during K\u014drei's reign, Kibi was conquered by the emperor. K\u014drei was the first emperor since Jimmu to take on consorts, and fathered seven children with them along with his chief wife Empress: Kuwashi-hime. K\u014drei is recorded as having a long life, reigning from 290 BC until his death in 215 BC. His eldest son was then subsequently enthroned as the next emperor.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. K\u014drei is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is considered to have been the sixth of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name K\u014drei\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to K\u014drei, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". As with Emperor K\u014dan, K\u014drei's exceptional age of 127 is considered unlikely due to verification issues among other things. While the actual site of K\u014drei's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in \u014cji. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014drei's mausoleum, and its formal name is \"Kataoka no Umasaka no misasagi\".\nLike Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d, there is a possibility that \"K\u014drei\" could have lived instead in the 1st century (AD). Historian Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric notes this idea in his book \"Japan Encyclopedia\" where he says it is \"very likely\", but this remains disputed among other researchers. The first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Shiki no Agatanushi Oome's daughter\nConsort: \nConsort: , Wachitsumi's daughter\nConsort: , Yamato no Kunikahime's sister\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10448", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10448", "title": "Emperor K\u014dgen", "text": ", also known as was the eighth legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. K\u014dgen is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. Nothing exists in the Kojiki other than his name and genealogy. K\u014dgen's reign allegedly began in 214 BC, he had one wife and two consorts of which he fathered six children with. After his death in 158 BC, one of his sons supposedly became the next emperor.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", only K\u014dgen's name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial \"misasagi\" or tomb for K\u014dgen is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered that confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. K\u014dgen was born sometime in 273 BC, and is recorded as being the eldest son of Emperor K\u014drei. His empress mother was named \"Kuwashi-hime\", who was the daughter of Shiki no Agatanushi Oome. Before he was enthroned sometime in 214 BC, his pre-ascension name was \"Prince \u014c-yamato-neko-hiko-kuni-kuru no Mikoto\". The Kojiki records that he ruled from the palace of at Karu in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. Emperor K\u014dgen had a chief wife (empress) named \"Utsushikome\", along with two consorts. His first son was named Prince \u014chiko, and according to the Nihon Shoki was the direct ancestor of the Abe clan. One of K\u014dgen's other sons named Prince \"Hikofutsuoshinomakoto\" was also grandfather to legendary Japanese hero-statesman Takenouchi no Sukune. Emperor K\u014dgen reigned until his death in 158 BC, his second son was then enthroned as the next emperor.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. K\u014dgen is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is considered to have been the seventh of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name K\u014dgen\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to K\u014dgen, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". While the actual site of K\u014dgen's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Kashihara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dgen's mausoleum, and its formal name is \"Tsurugi no ike no shima no e no misasagi\".\nThe first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Oyakuchisukune's daughter\nConsort: , \u014chesoki's daughter\nConsort: , Kawachi-no-Aotamakake's daughter\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10449", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10449", "title": "Emperor Kaika", "text": ", also known as in the \"Kojiki\", and in the \"Nihon Shoki\" was the ninth legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Very little is known about this Emperor due to a lack of material available for further verification and study. Kaika is known as a \"legendary emperor\" among historians as his actual existence is disputed. Nothing exists in the Kojiki other than his name and genealogy. Kaika's reign allegedly began in 158 BC, he had one wife and three consorts of which he fathered five children with. After his death in 98 BC, one of his sons supposedly became the next emperor.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", only Kaika's name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial \"misasagi\" or tomb for Kaika is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered that confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. Kaika was born sometime in 208 BC, and is recorded as being the second son of Emperor K\u014dgen. His empress mother was named \"Utsushikome\", who was the daughter of \"Oyakuchisukune\". Before he was enthroned sometime in 158 BC, his pre-ascension name was \"Prince Nikohiko \u014c-hibi no Mikoto\". The Kojiki records that he ruled from the palace of at Karu in what would come to be known as Yamato Province. Emperor Kaika had a chief wife (empress) named \"Ikagashikome\", along with three consorts of which he fathered five children with. Kaika ruled until his death in 98 BC; his second son was then enthroned as the next emperor. His son/heir to the throne was posthumously named \"Sujin\" by later generations, and is the first emperor that historians say might have actually existed.\nKnown information.\nThe existence of at least the first nine Emperors is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kaika is thus regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\", and is considered to have been the eighth of eight Emperors without specific legends associated with them. The name Kaika\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations.\n His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Kaika, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". While the actual site of Kaika's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kaika's mausoleum, and its formal name is \"Kasuga no Izakawa no saka no e no misasagi\".\nLike Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d and Emperor K\u014drei, there is a possibility that \"Kaika\" could have lived instead in the 1st century (AD). Historian Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric notes this idea in his book \"Japan Encyclopedia\" where he says \"more likely early AD\", but this remains disputed among other researchers. The first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor of Japan. Outside of the Kojiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Oohesoki's daughter\nConsort: , Taniwa no Ooagatanushi Yugori's daughter\nConsort: , Prince Waninishisaihito's daughter\nConsort: , Katsuragi no Tarumi no Sukune's daughter\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10450", "revid": "7798562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10450", "title": "Emperor Sujin", "text": ", also known as in the \"Kojiki\", and or in the \"Nihon Shoki\" was the tenth Emperor of Japan. While Sujin is the first emperor that historians widely accept have actually existed, he is still referred to as a \"legendary emperor\" due to a lack of information available and that dates for his reign vary. Both the \"Kojiki\", and the \"Nihon Shoki\" (collectively known as the \"Kiki\") record events that took place during Sujin's alleged lifetime. This legendary narrative tells how he set up a new shrine outside of the Imperial palace to enshrine Amaterasu. He is also credited with initiating the worship of \u014cmononushi (equated with the deity of Mount Miwa), and expanding his empire by sending generals to four regions of Japan in what became known as the legend of \"Shid\u014d shogun\".\nThis Emperor's reign is conventionally assigned the years of 97 BC\u00a0\u2013 30 BC. During his alleged lifetime, he fathered twelve children with a chief wife (empress) and two consorts. Sujin chose his future heir based on dreams two of his sons had, in this case, his younger son became the next emperor upon his death in 30 BC. Like other emperors of this period, the location of Sujin's grave if it exists is unknown. He is traditionally venerated at the Andonyama kofun in Tenri, Nara. There is a consensus that if this figure did exist, he ruled or lived later than the dates ascribed to him.\nLegendary narrative.\nThe Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and a kofun (tumulus) for Sujin is currently maintained. There remains no conclusive evidence though that supports this historical figure actually reigning. The following information available is taken from the pseudo-historical \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", which are collectively known as or \"Japanese chronicles\". These chronicles include legends and myths, as well as potential historical facts that have since been exaggerated and/or distorted over time. The records state that Sujin was born sometime in 148 BC, and was the second son of Emperor Kaika. Sujin's mother was \"Ikagashikome no Mikoto\", who was also a concubine of Sujin's grandfather Emperor K\u014dgen. Before he was enthroned sometime in 97 BC, his pre-ascension name was either Prince.. \"Mimakiirihikoinie no Mikoto\", \"Mimakiiribikoinie no Sumeramikoto\", or \"Hatsukunishirasu Sumeramikoto\". The former name is used in the \"Kojiki\", while the latter two are present in the \"Nihon Shoki\". Sujin was enthroned sometime in 97 BC, and during the 3rd year of his reign it is the recorded that he moved the capital to , naming it the \"Palace of Mizu-gaki\" or .\nEnshrining \u014cmononushi (Miwa My\u014djin).\nThe \"Kiki\" records that pestilence struck during the 5th year of Sujin's rule, killing half the Japanese population. The following year peasants abandoned their fields and rebellion became rampant. To help relieve the suffering of his people, the Emperor turned his attention towards the gods. At the time, both the sun goddess Amaterasu and the god were enshrined at the Imperial Residence. Sujin became overwhelmed with having to cohabit with these two powerful deities and set up separate enshrinements to house them. Amaterasu was moved to in Yamato Province (Nara), where a Himorogi altar was built out of solid stone. Sujin placed his daughter in charge of the new shrine. Yamato-\u014dkunitama (the other god) was entrusted to another daughter named , but her health began to fail shortly afterward. It is recorded that Nunakiiri-hime became emaciated after losing all of her hair, which rendered her unable to perform her duties. These events still did not alieve the ongoing plague that swept the empire, so Sujin decreed a divination to be performed sometime during the 7th year of his reign. The divination involved him making a trip to the plain of Kami-asaji or , and invoking the eighty myriad deities.\nSujin's aunt (daughter of 7th Emperor Emperor K\u014drei) acted as a \"miko\", and was possessed by a god who identified himself as \u014cmononushi. This god claimed responsibility for the plague, announcing that it would not stop until he was venerated. Although the Emperor propitiated to the god, the effects were not immediate. Sujin was later given guidance in the form of a dream to seek out a man named and appoint him as head priest. When he was found and installed, the pestilence eventually subsided allowing five cereal crops to ripen. As an extra abundance of caution, the Emperor also appointed as or one who sorts the offerings to the gods. To this day the Miwa sept of the Kamo clan claim to be descents from \u014ctataneko, while Ikagashikoo was a claimed ancestor of the now extinct Mononobe clan.\nFour Cardinal Quarters (Shid\u014d shogun).\nIn his 10th year of rule, Sujin instituted four of his Generals to the \"Four Cardinal Quarters\" in what would be known as the \"Shid\u014d shogun\". These areas (west, north/northwest, northeast, and east) were all centered around the capital in Yamato Province. Sujin instructed his generals (shogun) to quell those who would not submit to their rule. One of the four shoguns who had been sent to the northern region was named , who was also Emperor K\u014dgen's first son. One day a certain maiden approached \u014chiko and sang him a cryptic song, only to disappear afterwards. Sujin's aunt , who was skilled at clairvoyance interpreted this to mean that Take-hani-yasu-hiko (\u014chiko's half brother) was plotting an insurrection. Yamatototohimomoso pieced it together from overhearing news that Take-hani-yasu-hiko's wife (Ata-bime) came to , and took a clump of earth in the corner of her neckerchief.\nEmperor Sujin gathered his generals in a meeting upon hearing the news, but the couple had already mustered troops to the west who were ready to attack the capital. The Emperor responded by sending an army under the command of general \"Isaseri-hiko no Mikoto\" to fight a battle that ended with a decisive Imperial victory. Ata-bime was killed in combat, and her husband fled back north. Sujin then sent general north to Yamashiro Province to punish the rebel prince. There was ultimately an exchange of bowshots that resulted in Take-hani-yasu-hiko's death by an arrow through the chest. Eventually the Emperor would appoint 137 governors for the provinces under his Imperial rule as the empire expanded. In his 12th year of rule, the Emperor decreed that a census be taken of the populace \"with grades of seniority, and the order of forced labour\". The tax system meanwhile was set up so taxes imposed were in the form of mandatory labor. These taxes were known as for men and for women. During this period peace and prosperity ensued, and the Emperor received the title .\nChoosing an heir and Divine treasures.\nDuring the 48th year of Sujin's reign (50 BC), he summoned two of his sons saying that he loved them equally and could not make up his mind which to make his heir. He then asked his sons to describe the dreams they had recently, so he could divine their lot by interpreting them. The elder son's name was , and explained to his father that he dreamt of climbing Mt. Mimoro (Mount Miwa). While facing east, he said that he thrust his spear eight times and then waved his sword eight times skywards. The younger prince, whose name was dreamt of climbing Mimoro and spanning ropes on four sides. He went on to say how he chased the sparrows that ate the millet. Sujin accordingly chose his younger son Ikume to become the next Crown prince, while his older son Toyoki was chosen to govern the east. Toyoki ultimately became the ancestor of the Kamitsuke and Shimotsuke clans.\nIn the 60th year of Sujin's reign (38 BC), Sujin told his ministers that he wanted to look at divine treasures brought from the heavens by which were housed in the Izumo Shrine. was the keeper of the treasures, but at the time was away on business in Tsukushi Province. Furune's younger brother , accommodated the Imperial Edict on his behalf by sending his two younger brothers as carriers of these treasures to show the Emperor. When Furune returned, he was furious at Iiirine for parting with the treasures. He invited his younger brother to wade in a pool (named Yamuya) with him, where he used a sword-swapping intrigue. Furune exchanged his own wooden sword with his brother's real sword and commenced a battle which ended with Iiirine's death. When the Imperial court received news of the event, they dispatched two generals to slay Izumo Furune.\nLater reign and death.\nTowards the end of his reign in (36 BC), both the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\" records indicate that Sujin started to encourage the building of artificial ponds and canals. During this time, was built near in Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka. Sujin is also credited with building which was said to be located in \"Karu\" (Kashihara, Nara). During his alleged lifetime, Sujin fathered twelve children with a chief wife (empress) and two consorts. When he died in 30 BC, his son \"Prince Ikumeirihikoisachi\" became the next emperor per Sujin's choice. The actual burial site of Emperor Sujin is unknown, but is said to be at Mount Miwa.\nHistorical figure.\nWhile Emperor Sujin is the first emperor that historians state might have actually existed, he is still regarded as a \"legendary Emperor\". Like his predecessors, his reign is disputed due to insufficient material available for further verification and study. Sujin's possible lifespan has been suggested to be as early as the 1st century AD, to as late as the fourth century AD, this is well past his conventionally assigned reign of 97 BC\u00a0\u2013 30 BC. Like Emperor K\u014dsh\u014d, Emperor K\u014drei, and Emperor Kaika, historian Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric notes an idea in his book \"Japan Encyclopedia\" that Sujin could have lived in the 1st century (AD). This remains disputed though among other researchers who have been critical of his book. Other researchers have stated that his lifespan was in the third or fourth century. If this emperor did exist, then he may have been the first to perform a census and establish and regularize a system of taxation.\nIn either case (fictional or not), the name Sujin\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Sujin, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". Sujin's longevity was also written down by later compilers, who may have unrealistically extended his age to fill in time gaps. While the actual site of Sujin's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at the \"Andonyama kofun\" in Tenri, Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as the kofun (tumulus), and its formal name is \"\"Yamanobe no michi no Magari no oka no e no misasagi\". Sujin's kofun is one of six that are present in the area, these mounds are thought to have built sometime between 250 and 350 AD.\nOutside of the Kiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD. The lineal ancestor of the current reigning emperor can be traced back to Emperor K\u014dkaku, who lived a thousand years later.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Prince \u014chiko's daughter\nConsort: , Kii no Arakahatobe's daughter\nConsort: , Prince Tatehiroshinabi's daughter\nFurther reading.\n\u2192See under \"Nihon Shoki\" for fuller bibliography.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10451", "revid": "37532160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10451", "title": "Emperor Suinin", "text": ", also known as was the 11th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. There is less known about \"Suinin\" than his father, and likewise is also considered to be a \"legendary emperor\". Both the \"Kojiki\", and the \"Nihon Shoki\" (collectively known as the \"Kiki\") record events that took place during Suinin's alleged lifetime. This legendary narrative tells how he ordered his daughter Yamatohime-no-mikoto to establish a new permanent shrine for Amaterasu (the Sun Goddess), which eventually became known as the Ise Grand Shrine. Other events that were recorded concurrently with his reign include the origins of Sumo wrestling in the form of a wrestling match involving Nomi no Sukune.\nSuinin's reign is conventionally considered to have been from 29 BC to AD 70. During his alleged lifetime, he fathered seventeen children with two chief wives (empress) and six consorts. One of his sons became the next emperor upon his death in 70 AD, but the location of his father's grave (if any) is unknown. Suinin is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto tomb (\"misasagi\") at Nishi-machi, Amagatsuji, Nara City.\nLegendary narrative.\nThe Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and a mausoleum (misasagi) for Suinin is currently maintained. There remains no conclusive evidence though that supports this historical figure actually reigning. The following information available is taken from the pseudo-historical \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", which are collectively known as or \"Japanese chronicles\". These chronicles include legends and myths, as well as potential historical facts that have since been exaggerated and/or distorted over time. The records state that Suinin was born sometime in 69 BC, and was the third son of Emperor Sujin. Suinin's empress mother was named \"Mimaki-hime\", who is also former Emperor K\u014dgen's daughter. Before he was enthroned sometime in 29 BC, his pre-ascension name was Prince \"Ikumeiribikoisachi no Sumeramikoto\". He appears to have ascended the throne a year before his father's death in 30 BC, and ruled from the palace of at Makimuku in what later became Yamato Province.\nSuinin is best known for events that surround the founding of the Ise Grand Shrine. The \"Nihon Shoki\" states that around 2,000 years ago the Emperor ordered his daughter Yamatohime-no-mikoto, to find a permanent location to worship the goddess Amaterasu-\u014dmikami (the Sun Goddess). Yamatohime searched for 20 years before settling on a location in Ise, where she established Naiku, the Inner Shrine. She is said to have chosen the location after she heard the voice of Amaterasu say; \"(Ise) is a secluded and pleasant land. In this land I wish to dwell.\" Amaterasu had previously been enshrined and worshipped in Kasanui, which was set up by Suinin's father in an attempt to alleviate a devastating plaque. The \"Kojiki\" records that during the reign of Emperor Suinin, the first \"Sai\u014d\" (High Priestess) was appointed for Ise Grand Shrine. This recording is also noted by \"Jien\", who was a 13th-century historian and poet. This remains disputed though, as the Man'y\u014dsh\u016b (The Anthology of Ten Thousand Leaves) states that the first Sai\u014d to serve at Ise was Princess \u014cku. If the latter is true then it would date the Sai\u014d appointments to the reign of Emperor Tenmu (\u00a0\u2013 686 AD).\nThere were other events during Suinin's reign as well that include an Asama Shrine tradition regarding Mount Fuji. The earliest veneration of Konohanasakuya-hime at the base of the mountain was said to be during the 3rd year of Emperor Suinin's reign. The \"Nihon Shoki\" also records a wrestling match in which \"Nomi no Sukune\" and \"Taima no Kehaya\" held during his era, as the origin of \"Sumai\" (Sumo wrestling). Meanwhile, Emperor Suinin's family grew to consist of 17 children with eight variously ranked wives. One of his consorts named \"Kaguya-him-no-Mikoto\", is mentioned in the \"Kojiki\" as a possible basis for the legend of Kaguya-hime regarding the couple's love story. Emperor Suinin died in 70 AD at the age of 138, and his son Prince \"Ootarashihikoosirowake\" was enthroned as the next emperor the following year.\nKnown information.\nEmperor Suinin is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" as there is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Unlike Emperor Sujin, there is less known about Suinin to possibly support his existence. In either case (fictional or not), the name Suinin\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Suinin, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". Suinin's longevity was also written down by later compilers, who may have unrealistically extended his age to fill in time gaps. While the actual site of Suinin's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nishi-machi, Amagatsuji, Nara City. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Suinin's mausoleum, and is formally named \"Sugawara no Fushimi no higashi no misasagi\".\nWhile the Ise Grand Shrine is traditionally said to have been established in the 1st century BC, other dates in the 3rd and 4th centuries have also been put forward for the establishment of Naik\u016b and Gek\u016b respectively. The first shrine building at Naik\u016b was allegedly erected by Emperor Tenmu (678-686), with the first ceremonial rebuilding being carried out by his wife, Empress Jit\u014d, in 692. Outside of the Kiki, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography has been able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmperor Suinin had two chief wives (aka Empress), it is recorded in the Kiki that the first empress was named Saho. Not much is known about her other than that her father was Emperor Kaika's son and she allegedly died sometime in 34 AD. As with the first empress there is also not much known about Suinin's second chief wife Hibasu. She was the daughter Prince Tanba-no-Michinoushi, who was Prince Hikoimasu's son and Emperor Kaika's grandson. Hibasu's third son later became known as Emperor Keik\u014d (the next emperor), she allegedly died sometime in 61 AD. Suinin also had six named consorts with an additional one remaining unknown. Prince Tanba-no-Michinoushi (previously mentioned), was also the father to three of Suinin's consorts. In all the Emperor's family consisted of 17 children with these variously ranked wives.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10452", "revid": "7798562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10452", "title": "Emperor Keik\u014d", "text": ", also known as was the 12th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Both the \"Kojiki\", and the \"Nihon Shoki\" (collectively known as the \"Kiki\") record events that took place during Keik\u014d's alleged lifetime. Keik\u014d was recorded as being an exceptionally tall emperor who had a very large family. During his reign he sought to expand territorial control through conquest of local tribes. He had a very important son named \"Prince \u014csu\" (Yamato Takeru), who was in possession of the Kusanagi when he died. This treasure was later moved to Atsuta Shrine, and is now a part of the Imperial Regalia of Japan. There is a possibility that Keik\u014d actually lived or reigned in the 4th century AD rather than the 1st, but more information is needed to confirm this view.\nKeik\u014d's reign is conventionally considered to have been from 71 to 130 AD. During his alleged lifetime, he fathered at least 80 children with two chief wives (empress) and nine consorts. One of his sons became the next emperor upon his death in 130 AD, but the location of Keik\u014d's grave (if any) is unknown. Keik\u014d is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto tomb (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nLegendary narrative.\nThe Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and a mausoleum (misasagi) for Keiko is currently maintained. The following information available is taken from the pseudo-historical \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", which are collectively known as or \"Japanese chronicles\". These chronicles include legends and myths, as well as potential historical facts that have since been exaggerated and/or distorted over time. The records state that Keik\u014d was born sometime in 13 BC, and was given the name \"Otarashihiko-no-mikoto\". He was the 3rd son of Emperor Suinin, and his second empress wife \"Hibasu-hime\". Otarashihiko-no-mikoto was allegedly chosen as crown prince over his elder brother based on a casual question on what they both had wished for. In the former's case he said \"The Empire\" while his elder brother said \"Bow and arrows\". Otarashihiko-no-mikoto later ascended to the throne in 71 AD, coming a year after his father's death.\nAccounts in the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\" are split when it comes to initial territorial expansion during Emperor Keik\u014d's reign. In the \"Kojiki\", the Emperor is said to have sent his son \"Prince \u014csu\" (Yamato Takeru) to Ky\u016bsh\u016b to conquer local tribes. Alternatively, the \"Nihon Shoki\" records that he went there himself and won battles against local tribes. Both sources agree that Keik\u014d later sent Yamato Takeru to Izumo Province, and eastern provinces to conquer the area and spread his territory. According to traditional sources, Yamato Takeru died in the . The possessions of the dead prince were gathered together along with the sword Kusanagi; and his widow venerated his memory in a shrine at her home. Sometime later, these relics and the sacred sword were moved to the current location of the Atsuta Shrine.\nEmperor Keik\u014d was recorded as 10 feet 2 inches tall (310.9\u00a0cm), who had at least 80 children from multiple wives. This claim would put him into the category of Gigantism if verified, although as with other aspects it was more than likely exaggerated. Other than Yamato Takeru, at least three of Keik\u014d's children were ancestors of notable clans. Emperor Keik\u014d died in 130 AD at the age of 143, and his son Prince \"Wakatarashihiko\" was enthroned as the next emperor the following year.\nKnown information.\nEmperor Keik\u014d is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" as there is insufficient material available for further verification and study. The name Keik\u014d\"-tenn\u014d\" was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Keik\u014d, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". There is a possibility that Keik\u014d's era was in the 4th century AD rather than the 1st. This period is concurrent with the Kentoshi having an audience with the Tang Emperor, more evidence is needed though to make any conclusions. Like his father before him, Keik\u014d is also known to have an exaggerated lifespan which is unlikely to be factual. The consecutive reigns of the emperors began to be compiled in the 8th century, and it is thought that age gaps were \"filled up\" as many lacunae were present. For comparison, verified ages in the 110s have since been documented and recorded as the \"oldest in the world\".\nWhile the actual site of Keik\u014d's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Keik\u014d's mausoleum, and is formally named \"Yamanobe no michi no e no misasagi\". Outside of the \"Kiki\", the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography has been able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmperor Keik\u014d allegedly had a very large family which consisted of 2 wives, 9 concubines, and more than 80 children (51 of which are listed here). It is now questionable and open to debate though, if these numbers are genuine or not. Some of his listed children might actually be duplicates of the same person. The size of Keik\u014d's family also could have been exaggerated over time through legends and word of mouth stories.\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10453", "revid": "7798562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10453", "title": "Emperor Seimu", "text": ", also known as , was the 13th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Both the \"Kojiki\", and the \"Nihon Shoki\" (collectively known as the \"Kiki\") record events that took place during Seimu's alleged lifetime. This legendary Emperor is best known for organizing his local governments by making the first appointments of their kind to provinces under his rule. Seimu had only one recorded wife who bore him a single child, he also had a concubine but she had no children. This is in stark contrast to his father, who is said to have had at least 80 children with multiple wives.\nSeimu's reign is conventionally considered to have been from 131 to 190 AD though, an issue ultimately occurred when his only son allegedly died at a young age. Seimu appointed one of his nephews to be crown prince before his death in 190 AD, marking the first of later generations which would cede the throne to a non-direct successor. While the location of Seimu's grave (if any) is unknown, he is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto tomb. Modern historians have come to the conclusion that the title of \"Emperor\" and the name \"Seimu\" was used by later generations to describe this legendary Emperor. It has also been proposed that Seimu actually reigned much later than he is attested.\nLegendary narrative.\nThe Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and a mausoleum (misasagi) for Seimu is currently maintained. The following information available is taken from the pseudo-historical \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", which are collectively known as or \"Japanese chronicles\". These chronicles include legends and myths, as well as potential historical facts that have since been exaggerated and/or distorted over time. The records state that Seimu was born to \"Yasakairi-hime\" sometime in 84 AD, and was given the name . It is unknown how he was chosen as crown prince, but Wakatarashihiko later ascended to the throne in 131 AD. Seimu is best known for organizing his local governments by appointing the first provincial governors and district officials. While the details of his system of governing remain elusive, at the time Imperial princes were sent to important places in the provinces. These members are designated as \"wake\", which represented their status as a branch of the Imperial family. It has been theorized by Brinkley and Kikuchi that these appointments of local governors were designed to extend the \"prestige of the Court\". Those that were eligible included \"men of merit\", Imperial princes, or chiefs of aboriginal tribes.\nThe records state that Seimu had a wife named , who was the daughter of \"Take-oshiyama-tari-ne\". Oho-takara bore the Emperor one child, named . Seimu's only son appears to have died at a young age as the Emperor appointed Yamato Takeru's son as Crown Prince, before his own death in 190 AD at the age 107 years old. His nephew \"Tarashinakatsuhiko\" was later enthroned as the next emperor in 192 AD. Seimu's death marked an end of direct lineage from legendary Emperor Jimmu, and was the first split branch of others that later followed.\nKnown information.\nEmperor Seimu is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" as there is insufficient material available for further verification and study. His existence is open to debate given this lack of information. If Seimu did exist, there is no evidence to suggest that the title \"tenn\u014d\" was used during the time period to which his reign has been assigned. It is much more likely that he was a chieftain, or local clan leader, and the polity he ruled would have only encompassed a small portion of modern-day Japan. The name Seimu\"-tenn\u014d\" was more than likely assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Seimu, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\". There is a possibility that Seimu ruled during the first half of the 4th century when Japan became a unified state ruled from Yamato, making these accounts \"not improbable\".\nWhile the actual site of Seimu's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seimu's mausoleum, and is formally named \"Saki no Tatanami no misasagi\". Outside of the \"Kiki\", the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography has been able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10454", "revid": "7798562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10454", "title": "Emperor Ch\u016bai", "text": ", also known as was the 14th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Both the \"Kojiki\", and the \"Nihon Shoki\" (collectively known as the \"Kiki\") record events that took place during Ch\u016bai's alleged lifetime. Ch\u016bai is the first monarch to ascend the throne who was not a son of the previous Emperor as the latter's only child died young. He is also noted for having his capital in Kyushu, rather than Yamato like his predecessors. The records state that Ch\u016bai had a wife named \"Okinagatarashihime-no-Mikoto\" (later Jing\u016b), and 2 consorts that all bore him 4 children.\nCh\u016bai's reign is conventionally considered to have been from 192 to 200 AD. The events leading up to the Emperor's death have been subject to interpretation as they involve a vengeful Kami (spirit) indirectly killing Ch\u016bai. This event allegedly occurred after the Emperor disrespectfully scoffed at the Kami's request. His wife Jing\u016b carried out the Kami's request which was to invade Korea, but this has since been considered legendary rather than factual. While the location of Ch\u016bai's grave (if any) is unknown, he is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto tomb, and at a Hachiman shrine.\nModern historians have come to the conclusion that the title of \"Emperor\" and the name \"Ch\u016bai\" were used by later generations to describe this legendary Emperor. It has also been proposed that Ch\u016bai actually reigned much later than he is attested. Emperor Ch\u016bai is traditionally listed as the last Emperor of the Yayoi period.\nLegendary narrative.\nThe Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and a mausoleum (misasagi) for Ch\u016bai is currently maintained. The following information available is taken from the pseudo-historical \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", which are collectively known as or \"Japanese chronicles\". These chronicles include legends and myths, as well as potential historical facts that have since been exaggerated and/or distorted over time. The records state that Ch\u016bai was born to Futaji no Iri Hime sometime in 149 AD, and was given the name . Ch\u016bai's father was allegedly the legendary prince, Yamato Takeru. He was the first Emperor who was not the child of the previous Emperor, being instead the nephew of his predecessor Emperor Seimu. The title of \"Crown Prince\" was given to him by his uncle before his death in 170 AD, two years later Ch\u016bai became the next Emperor. Unlike his predecessors who had maintained their capitals in Yamato Province, the records state his palace was first located on the northern shores of Shimonoseki Strait, then south of that in Kyushu.\nEmperor Ch\u016bai is described in the \"Kiki\" as having been ten feet tall, with \"a countenance of perfect beauty\". He had one wife who was named \" Okinagatarashi\" (aka Jing\u016b), and two consorts who all bore him four children. During the start of his reign he made progress to modern day Tsuruga, and led an expedition to Kii where he heard news of a revolt. Jing\u016b accompanied him to the west to fight against a tribe in Tsukushi (located in modern-day Fukuoka Prefecture) called \"Kumaso\". On the eve of battle though, his wife was suddenly possessed by some unknown kami who advised Ch\u016bai to invade and conquer Korea. The Kami gave the reasoning that the \"Kumaso\" were not worthy of \"his steel\". Ch\u016bai refused with scorn for a number of reasons which included giving up a military campaign, and doubting that such a land even existed. It is said that the Kami was so enraged by this disrespect, that Emperor Ch\u016bai was later killed in a battle that beat down his troops.\nThe death of the Emperor was kept quiet by Jing\u016b, who vanquished the \"Kumaso\" soon afterwards in a fit of revenge. Jing\u016b then respected the wishes of the Kami by invading Korea, and subjugated the eastern Korean kingdom of Shiragi. The other two Korean kingdoms at the time voluntarily submitted, and Jing\u016b ascended to the throne as Empress. Jing\u016b's occupation of the Korean Peninsula, and reign as Empress are now considered to be legendary rather than factual. The modern traditional view is that Ch\u016bai's son (\"Homutawake\") became the next Emperor after Jing\u016b acted as a regent. She would have been de facto ruler in the interim.\nKnown information.\nEmperor Ch\u016bai is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" as there is insufficient material available for further verification and study. The lack of this information has made his very existence open to debate. There is no evidence to suggest that the title \"tenn\u014d\" was used during the time to which Ch\u016bai's reign has been assigned. It is certainly possible that he was a chieftain or local clan leader, and that the polity he ruled would have only encompassed a small portion of modern-day Japan. The name Ch\u016bai\"-tenn\u014d\" was more than likely assigned to him posthumously by later generations. His name might have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Ch\u016bai, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the \"Kojiki\".\nThe manner in which Ch\u016bai died has since been broken down to at least two theories. In his book \"Confucianism O - Z\", professor Xinzhong Yao notes that it is possible the late Emperor could have succumbed to illness rather than death on the battlefield. Sources which include Yao, Francis Brinkley, and Kikuchi Dairoku also cite the enemy arrow scenario. While the actual site of Ch\u016bai's grave is not known, the Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ch\u016bai's mausoleum, and is formally named \"Ega no Naganu no nishi no misasagi\". The Kami (spirit) of Ch\u016bai is also enshrined at the Tamukeyama Hachiman Shrine in Nara. Ch\u016bai is traditionally listed as the last Emperor of the Yayoi period, who could have in reality ruled in the 4th century. The next era is known as the Kofun period, where more is known about the Emperors based on modern day archaeological evidence.\nOutside of the \"Kiki\", the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography has been able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nConsorts and children.\nEmperor Chuai and Empress Jingu are both great-great-great-grandchildren of Emperor Kaika, the ninth Emperor of Japan.\nEmpress: , later Empress Jingu, Prince Okinaga no sukune's daughter\nConsort: , Prince Hikohito\u014de's daughter (Emperor Keiko's son)\nConsort: , \u014csakanushi's daughter\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10455", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10455", "title": "Emperor \u014cjin", "text": ", also known as or , was the 15th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 270 to 310. According to the Shinto religion and Buddhism in Japan, Emperor \u014cjin is the divine spirit of the deity Hachiman (\u516b\u5e61\u795e).\nLegendary narrative.\nThe Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and a mausoleum (misasagi) for \u014cjin is currently maintained. The following information available is taken from the pseudo-historical \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", which are collectively known as or \"Japanese chronicles\". These chronicles include legends and myths, as well as potential historical facts that have since been exaggerated and/or distorted over time. The circumstances surrounding the future emperor's birth are controversial as they allegedly involve the invasion of the Korean Peninsula. It is said by the Kiki that \u014cjin was conceived but unborn when his father Emperor Ch\u016bai died. Empress Jing\u016b then became a de facto ruler who allegedly invaded a \"promised land\" (Korea) out of revenge, then returned three years later to the Japanese mainland to give birth. The records state that \u014cjin was born to Empress Jing\u016b in Tsukushi Province sometime in 201 AD, and was given the name . He became the crown prince at the age of four, but was not crowned Emperor until 270 AD at the age of 70. Emperor \u014cjin supposedly lived in two palaces which are now located in present-day Osaka. His reign lasted 40 years until his death in 310 AD, in all he fathered 28 children with one spouse and ten consorts. His fourth son \" \u014cosazaki\" was later enthroned as the next emperor in 313 AD.\nKnown information.\nWhile the historical existence of Emperor \u014cjin is debated among historians, there is a general consensus that he was \"probably real\". There is also an agreement that Ojin's three year conception period is mythical and symbolic, rather than realistic. William George Aston has suggested that this can be interpreted as a period of less than nine months containing three \"years\" (some seasons), e.g. three harvests. If \u014cjin was an actual historical figure then historians have proposed that he ruled later than attested. Dates of his actual reign have been proposed to be as early as 370 to 390 AD, to as late as the early 5th century AD. At least one Japanese historian has cast doubt on this theory though, by revising a supporting statement given in 1972. In this new narrative Louis Perez states: \"only kings and emperors after the reign of Ojin... ...are seen as historical figures\". In either case there is also no evidence to suggest that the title \"tenn\u014d\" was used during the time to which \u014cjin's reign has been assigned. It is certainly possible that he was a chieftain or local clan leader, and that the polity he ruled would have only encompassed a small portion of modern-day Japan. The name \u014cjin\"-tenn\u014d\" was more than likely assigned to him posthumously by later generations.\nWhile the actual site of \u014cjin's grave is not known, this regent is traditionally venerated at a \"kofun\"-type Imperial tomb in Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as \u014cjin's mausoleum, and is formally named \"Eega no Mofushi no oka no misasagi\". At some point \u014cjin was made a guardian Kami of the Hata clan, and is now also deified as Hachiman Daimy\u014djin. Outside of the \"Kiki\", the reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD) is the first for which contemporary historiography has been able to assign verifiable dates. The conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not confirmed as \"traditional\" though, until the reign of Emperor Kanmu between 737 and 806 AD.\nFamily.\nEmperor \u014cjin's family allegedly consisted of 28 children, which include 2 unnamed princesses from a previous marriage. He had one spouse who bore him a son that would become the next Emperor, as well as 10 consorts.\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "10456", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10456", "title": "Emperor Nintoku", "text": ", also known as was the 16th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 313 to 399.\nLegendary narrative.\nNintoku is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" of the 5th century. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (A.D. \u00a0\u2013 571), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nAccording to the \"Nihon Shoki\", he was the fourth son of Emperor \u014cjin and his mother was Nakatsuhime no Mikoto, a great-granddaughter of Emperor Keik\u014d. He was also the father of Emperors Rich\u016b, Hanzei, and Ingy\u014d. His name was .\nNintoku's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Nintoku might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nEvents of Nintoku's life.\nAlthough the \"Nihon Shoki\" states that Nintoku ruled from 313 to 399, modern research suggests those dates are likely inaccurate.\nThe achievements of Nintoku's reign which are noted in the \"Nihon Shoki\" include:\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress (first): , poet and daughter of \nEmpress (second): , Emperor \u014cjin's daughter\nConsort: , Morokata no Kimi Ushimoroi's daughter\nConsort: , daughter of Emperor \u014cjin\nConsort: , daughter of \nNintoku's tomb.\nDaisen Kofun (the largest tomb in Japan) in Sakai, Osaka, is considered to be his final resting place. The actual site of Nintoku's grave is not known.\nThe Nintoku-ryo tumulus is one of almost 50 tumuli collectively known as \"Mozu Kofungun\" clustered around the city, and covers the largest area of any tomb in the world. Built in the middle of the 5th century by an estimated 2,000 men working daily for almost 16 years, the Nintoku tumulus, at 486 meters long and with a mound 35 meters high, is twice as long as the base of the famous Great Pyramid of Pharaoh Khufu (Cheops) in Giza.\nThe Imperial tomb of Nintoku's consort, Iwa-no hime no Mikoto, is said to be located in Saki-cho, Nara City. Both \"kofun\"-type Imperial tombs are characterized by a keyhole-shaped island located within a wide, water-filled moat.\nImperial tombs and mausolea are cultural properties; but they are guarded and administered by the Imperial Household Agency (IHA), which is the government department responsible for all matters relating to the Emperor and his family. According to the IHA, the tombs are more than a mere repository for historical artifacts; they are sacred religious sites. IHA construes each of the Imperial grave sites as sanctuaries for the spirits of the ancestors of the Imperial House.\nNintoku is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as his mausoleum. It is formally named \"Mozu no Mimihara no naka no misasagi\".\nReferences.\nSpecific\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10457", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10457", "title": "Emperor Rich\u016b", "text": ", also known as was the 17th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 400 to 405.\nLegendary narrative.\nRich\u016b is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" of the 5th century. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nAccording to \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", Rich\u016b was the eldest son of Emperor Nintoku and Iwanohime, his name was .\nRich\u016b's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Hanzei might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nSome scholars identify him with King San in the \"Book of Song\". King San sent messengers to the Liu Song dynasty at least twice in 421 and 425.\nRich\u016b escaped from Naniwa Place to Isonokami Shrine because of arson. Rich\u016b succumbed to disease in his sixth year of reign. His tomb is in Kawachi province, in the middle of present-day Osaka Prefecture. He was succeeded by his younger brother Emperor Hanzei. None of his sons succeeded to the throne, although two grandsons would eventually ascend as Emperor Kenz\u014d and as Emperor Ninken.\nThe site of Rich\u016b's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Sakai, Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Rich\u016b's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Mozu no mimihara no minami no misasagi.\" It is also identified as the kofun.\nConsorts and children.\nImperial Consort: , Katsuragi no Ashita no Sukune's daughter\nEmpress: , Emperor \u014cjin's daughter\nConcubine: , Prince Funashiwake's daughter\nConcubine: , Prince Funashiwake's daughter\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10458", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10458", "title": "Emperor Hanzei", "text": " was the 18th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 406 CE to 410 CE.\nLegendary narrative.\nHanzei is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" of the 5th century. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nHanzei was the son of Emperor Nintoku and Princess Iwano-hime, his name was . He was the brother of Emperor Rich\u016b; and this succession effectively by-passed Rich\u016b's two sons. No other details have survived.\nHanzei's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Hanzei might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nThe \"Nihongi\" records that the country enjoyed peace during this Emperor's reign.\nThe description of Hanzei in the \"Kojiki\" is daunting as he is described as standing over nine feet tall and have enormous teeth all the same size. He is said to have ruled from the palace of Shibagaki at Tajihi in Kawachi (present-day Matsubara, Osaka); and he is said to have died peacefully in his palace.\nThe actual site of Hanzei's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Sakai, Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates the in Sakai as Hanzei's official mausoleum. It is formally named .\nConsorts and children.\nConsort: , 's daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10459", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10459", "title": "Emperor Ingy\u014d", "text": " was the 19th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 410 to 453.\nLegendary narrative.\nIngy\u014d is regarded by historians as a \"legendary Emperor\" of the 5th century. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nAccording to \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", he was the fourth son of Emperor Nintoku and his consort Princess Iwa, and therefore a younger brother of his predecessor Emperor Hanzei. He sat on the throne after Hanzei died and ruled for 41 years. His name was .\nIngy\u014d's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Ingy\u014d might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nHis consort was Oshisaka no \u014cnakatsu no Hime. They had five sons and four daughters, including Emperor Ank\u014d and Emperor Y\u016bryaku. He reformed the system of family and clan names, because many named themselves false names using higher ranked clan or family names.\nEvents of Ingy\u014d's reign.\nThe earliest documented earthquake in Japan occurred during Ingy\u014d's reign, in 416, when the Imperial Palace at Kyoto was leveled by the severity of the Earth's tremors.\nSome scholars identify Ingy\u014d with King Sai in the \"Book of Song\". This would have been a king of Japan (referred to as \"Wa\" by contemporary Chinese scholars) who is said to have sent messengers to the Liu Song dynasty at least twice, in 443 and 451.\nAccording to \"Nihon Shoki\", the king of the Korean Silla Kingdom grieved very much when Ingy\u014d died. To comfort the soul of Ingyo, he presented Japan 80 musicians.\nThe actual site of Ingy\u014d's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine near Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ingy\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally known as , in Fujiidera city near Osaka.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Prince Wakanuke-Futamata's daughter (Emperor Ojin's son)\nConsort: , Prince Wakanuke-Futamata's daughter (Emperor Ojin's son)\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10460", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10460", "title": "Emperor Ank\u014d", "text": " was the 20th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Emperor Ank\u014d is the earliest generally agreed upon historical ruler of all or a part of Japan.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 453 to 456.\nLegendary narrative.\nAnk\u014d was a 5th-century monarch and the first generally agreed upon historical ruler of Japan. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nAccording to \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", Ank\u014d was the second son of Emperor Ingy\u014d, his birth name was . His elder brother Prince Kinashi no Karu was the Crown prince, but due to an incestuous relationship with his sister, Karu no \u014ciratsume, Kinashikaru lost favour with the court. After an aborted attempt to rally troops against Ank\u014d, Kinashi no Karu (and his sister-lover) were exiled and committed suicide.\nAnk\u014d's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reign of Emperor Tenmu. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Ank\u014d might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nAnk\u014d was assassinated in his third year of reign by Mayowa no \u014ckimi (Prince Mayowa), in retaliation for the execution of Mayowa's father.\nThe actual site of Ank\u014d's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine at Nara Prefecture.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ank\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Sugawara no Fushimi no nishi misasagi\".\nHis Empress was , Emperor Richu\u2019s daughter. He did not have other consorts and any children.\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Emperor Richu's daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10461", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10461", "title": "Emperor Y\u016bryaku", "text": " was the 21st legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. He is remembered as a patron of sericulture.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 456 to 479.\nLegendary narrative.\nY\u016bryaku was a 5th-century monarch. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nAccording to the \"Kojiki\", this Emperor is said to have ruled from the Thirteenth Day of the Eleventh Month of 456 (Heishin) until his death on the Seventh Day of the Eight Month of 479 (Kibi).\nAccording to \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", Y\u016bryaku was named at birth. Y\u016bryaku is a name posthumously assigned to him by a much later era. He was the fifth and youngest son of Emperor Ingy\u014d. After his elder brother Emperor Ank\u014d was murdered, he won the struggle against his other brothers and became the new Emperor.\nY\u016bryaku's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Hanzei might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\". He had three wives (including his consort Kusahahatahi). His successor, Prince Shiraka (Emperor Seinei), was his son by his wife Kazuraki no Karahime.\nIn 463, Y\u016bryaku Tenn\u014d invited the thunder god of the Mimuro hill to come to the Imperial Palace, and ordered Chiisakobe no muraji Sugaru to fetch the deity. He obliged, thinking the supernatural being would have no reason to refuse the invitation, and rode carrying a halberd with a red banner, symbolising his office of royal messenger. Soon enough, the thunder stroke, and Sugaru enlisted the help of priests to enshrine the kami into a portable carriage, to be brought in the Emperor's presence, as a great serpent. But, said Emperor neglected to practice proper ritual purification and religious abstinence. The thunder kami then showed his displeasure through thundering and threatening fiery eyeballs, and Emperor Y\u016bryaku fled into the interior of the Palace while covering his eyes. The great serpent was returned to Mimuro, and the Emperor made many offerings to appease the angry deity. This story is recorded in Nihongi and mentioned by William George Aston, in \"Shinto, the Ancient Religion of Japan\" as well as several other books.\nAccording to the Nihongi, Y\u016bryaku was of ungovernable and suspicious temperament, and committed many acts of arbitrary cruelty.\nThe actual site of Y\u016bryaku's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") in Habikino, Osaka, which is designated by the Imperial Household Agency as Y\u016bryaku's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Tajihi no Takawashi-no-hara no misasagi\".\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Emperor Nintoku's daughter\nConsort: , Katsuragi no Tsubura no \u014comi's daughter\nConsort: , Kibi no Kamitsumichi no omi's daughter\nConsort: , Kasuga no Wani no omi Fukame's daughter\nKing Bu.\nAccording to the Book of Song, a King Bu (\u6b66) from Japan dispatched envoys to the Emperor of Liu Song, a minor Chinese dynasty, in both 477 and 478. Communications included a notice that the previous ruler, an older brother, had died, and that Bu had ascended to the throne. The King 'Bu' in this document is believed to refer to Emperor Y\u016bryaku, due to the fact that the character used to write the name (\u6b66) is found in the name by which Emperor Y\u016bryaku was called during his lifetime: .\nThe inscriptions on the Inariyama and Eta Funayama Sword, also supports the idea that Bu is an equivalent of Emperor Y\u016bryaku.\nThe Chinese historical records state that Bu began his rule before 477, was recognized as the ruler of Japan by the Liu Song, Southern Qi, and Liang dynasties, and continued his rule through to 502.\nPoetry.\nThe Emperor's interest in poetry is amongst the more well-documented aspects of his character and reign. Poems attributed to him are included in the \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\", and a number of his verses are preserved in the \"Kojiki\" and the \"Nihonshoki\".\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10462", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10462", "title": "Emperor Seinei", "text": " was the 22nd legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 480 to 484.\nLegendary narrative.\nSeinei was a 5th-century monarch. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (\u00a0\u2013 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as \"traditional\" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.\nAccording to \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihonshoki\", he was a son of Emperor Y\u016bryaku and his consort Katsuragi no Karahime. Seinei's full sister was Princess Takuhatahime. His name in birth was . It is said that the color of his hair was white since birth. After the death of his father, Seinei won the fight against Prince Hoshikawa, his brother, for the throne and so succeeded his father.\nSeinei's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Seinei might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nSeinei fathered no children; however, two grandsons of the 17th Emperor, Emperor Rich\u016b, were found\u2014later to ascend as Prince Woke and Prince Oke. Seinei adopted them as his heirs.\nThe actual site of Seinei's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seinei's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kawachi no Sakado no hara no misasagi\".\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10463", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10463", "title": "Emperor Kenz\u014d", "text": " was the 23rd legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 485 to 487.\nLegendary narrative.\n, later to become Emperor Kenz\u014d, is said to have been the grandson of Emperor Rich\u016b, and the son of Ichinobe-no Oshiwa. He would have been quite young when Emperor Y\u016bryaku shot the arrow which killed his father during a hunting expedition; and this caused both Prince Woke and his older brother, Prince Oke, to flee for their lives. They found refuge at Akashi in Harima Province where they hid by living in obscurity. Histories from that period explained that the two brothers sought to blend into this rural community by posing as common herdsmen.\nIt is said that the Oke came by chance to Akashi; and at that time, Prince Oke revealed his true identity. This intermediary re-introduced the lost cousins to Emperor Seinei, who had by this time ascended to the throne after the death of his father, the former Emperor Y\u016bryaku. Seinei invited both brothers to return the court; and he adopted both of them as sons and heirs.\nAt Seinei's death, he had no other heirs than Prince Oke and Prince Woke, whose father had been killed by Y\u016braku. At this point, Woke wanted his elder brother to become Emperor; but Oke refused. The two could not reach an agreement. The great men of the court insisted that one or the other of the brothers must accept the throne; but in the end, Woke proved to be more adamant. Prince Woke agreed to accept the throne; and Kenz\u014d was ultimately proclaimed as the new Emperor\u2014which created a sense of relief for all the people who had endured this period of uncertainty.\nKenz\u014d is considered to have ruled the country during the late-5th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.\nKenz\u014d's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Kenz\u014d might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nKenz\u014d's reign.\nIt is recorded that his capital was at in Yamato Province. The location of the palace is thought to have been in present-day Osaka Prefecture or Nara Prefecture.\nMurray reports that the only event of major consequence during Kenz\u014d's reign had to do with the filial respect he showed for his murdered father. Kenz\u014d arranged to have his father's remains retrieved and re-interred in a mausoleum appropriate for the son of an Emperor and the father of another.\nKenz\u014d died at age 37, reigning only three years. He too had no other heirs; so his brother would follow him on the throne. His Empress was , Prince Oka-no-Wakugo's daughter (also Prince Iwaki's granddaughter and Emperor Yuryaku's great granddaughter).\nThe actual site of Kenz\u014d's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kenz\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kataoka no Iwatsuki no oka no kita no misasagi\".\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Prince Oka-no-Wakugo's daughter (also Prince Iwaki's granddaughter and Emperor Yuryaku's great granddaughter)\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10464", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10464", "title": "Emperor Ninken", "text": " was the 24th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. No firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 488 to 498.\nLegendary narrative.\nNinken is considered to have ruled the country during the late-5th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.\nIn his youth, he was known as . Along with his younger brother, Prince Woke, Oke was raised to greater prominence when Emperor Seinei died without an heir. The two young princes were said to be grandsons of Emperor Rich\u016b. Each of these brothers would ascend the throne as adopted heirs of Seinei, although it is unclear whether they had been \"found\" in Seinei's lifetime or only after that.\nOke's younger brother, who would become posthumously known as Emperor Kenz\u014d, ascended before his elder brother. This unconventional sequence was in accordance with an agreement made by the two brothers.\nNinken's reign.\nWhen Emperor Kenzo died without heirs, Prince Oke succeeded him as Emperor Ninken.\nNinken's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Ninken might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nNinken married to Emperor Y\u016bryaku's daughter Kasuga no \u014ciratsume no Himemiko, a second cousin of him. Their daughter Tashiraka was later married to Emperor Keitai, successor or possibly usurper after her brother, and became mother of Emperor Kinmei, a future monarch and lineal ancestor of all future monarchs of Japan. There apparently was also another daughter, Princess Tachibana, who in turn is recorded to have become a wife of Senka and mother of Princess Iwahime, who herself became a consort of Kimmei and bore Emperor Bidatsu, a future monarch and lineal ancestor of current monarchs of Japan.\nNinken was succeeded by his son, who would accede as Emperor Buretsu.\nThe actual site of Ninken's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ninken's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Hany\u016b no Sakamoto no misasagi\".\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10465", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10465", "title": "Emperor Buretsu", "text": " was the 25th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 498 to 506.\nLegendary narrative.\nBuretsu is considered to have ruled the country during the late-fifth century and early-sixth century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.\nBuretsu was a son of Emperor Ninken and his mother is . His name was . He had no children.\nBuretsu's reign.\nBuretsu's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Buretsu might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nBuretsu is described as an essentially wicked historical figure. \"Nihonshoki\" likened him to Di Xin of the Shang dynasty, but the record in \"Kojiki\" has no such indication. There are several theories on this difference. Some believe that this was to justify and praise his successor Emperor Keitai, who took over under questionable circumstances. In history textbooks available before and during World War II, part of Buretsu's record was intentionally omitted.\nIf Emperor Keitai began a new dynasty as some historians believe, then Buretsu is the last Emperor of the first recorded dynasty of Japan.\nThe actual site of Buretsu's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Buretsu's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kataoka no Iwatsuki no oka no kita no misasagi\".\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10466", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10466", "title": "Emperor Keitai", "text": " was the 26th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 507 to 531.\nLegendary narrative.\nKeitai is considered to have ruled the country during the early-6th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Significant differences exist in the records of the \"Kojiki\" and the \"Nihon Shoki\".\nThe \"Kojiki\" puts this Emperor's birth year at 485; and his date of death is said to have been April 9, 527. In the extant account, he is called .\nThe \"Nihon Shoki\" gives his birth year at 450; and he is said to have died on February 7, 531 or 534. In this historical record, he is said to have been called and .\nIn other historical records, he is said to have originally been King of Koshi, a smaller tribal entity, apparently in northern parts of central Japan, perhaps as far as the coast of Sea of Japan. Some modern reference works of history call Keitai simply \"King Ohodo of Koshi\".\nKeitai's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Keitai might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nGenealogy.\nKeitai was not the son of the immediate previous monarch. According to the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", Buretsu died without a successor, at which time a fifth generation grandson of Emperor \u014cjin, Keitai, came and ascended the throne.\nIf Emperor Keitai began a new dynasty as some historians believe, then Emperor Buretsu would have been the last monarch of the first recorded dynasty of Japan.\nAccording to the \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", his father was and his mother was . When Buretsu died, Kanamura recommended Keitai (at the age of 58) as a possible heir to the Yamato throne. His mother, Furihime, was a seventh generation descendant of Emperor Suinin by his son, Prince Iwatsukuwake. His father was a fourth generation descendant of Emperor \u014cjin by his son, Prince Wakanuke no Futamata.\nGenealogy information is supplemented in \"Shaku Nihongi\" which quotes from the now lost text \"J\u014dg\u016bki\" (7th century). It says he was a son of Ushi no \u014ckimi (believed to be equivalent to Hikoushi no \u014ckimi), a grandson of Ohi no \u014ckimi, a great-grandson of Ohohoto no \u014ckimi (brother to Emperor Ingy\u014d's consort), a great-great-grandson of Prince Wakanuke no Futamata, and a great-great-great-grandson of Emperor \u014cjin.\nThe genealogical trees of the \"Nihon Shoki\" have been lost, and the accuracy of its account of events remains unknown. This uncertainty raises arguable doubts about this Emperor's genealogy.\nAlthough genealogical information in the \"Shaku Nihongi\" leaves room for discussion, many scholars acknowledge the blood relationship with the Okinaga clan, a powerful local ruling family or the collateral line of the Imperial family-governed \u014cmi region (a part of present-day Shiga Prefecture). This family produced many empresses and consorts throughout history. According to the \"Nihon Shoki\", Ohohoto no \u014ckimi, the great-grandfather of Emperor Keitai, married into the Okinaga clan. Keitai's mother, Furihime, was from a local ruling family in Koshi (Echizen Province), so his mother brought him to her home after his father's death. Abundant traditions relating to the family have been passed down by shrines and old-established families in both regions.\nRegardless of speculation about Keitai's genealogy, it is well settled that there was an extended period of disputes over the succession which developed after Keitai's death. A confrontation arose between adherents of two branches of the Yamato, pitting the supporters of sons who would become known as Emperor Ankan and Emperor Senka against those who were backers of the son who would become known as Emperor Kinmei.\nKeitai's reign.\nKeitai declared his ascension in Kusuba, in the northern part of Kawachi Province (present day Shijonawate, Osaka), and married a younger sister of Emperor Buretsu, Princess Tashiraka. It is supposed that his succession was not welcomed by everyone, and it took about 20 years for Keitai to enter Yamato Province, near Kawachi and the political center of Japan at the time.\nIn Keitai's later years, 527 or 528, the Iwai Rebellion broke out in Tsukushi province, Ky\u016bsh\u016b. Keitai assigned Mononobe no Arakabi as Sh\u014dgun and sent him to Ky\u016bsh\u016b to put down the rebellion.\nAmong his sons, Emperor Ankan, Emperor Senka and Emperor Kinmei ascended to the throne.\nThe actual site of Keitai's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at the Ooda Chausuyama kofun in Ibaraki, Osaka.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Keitai's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Mishima no Aikinu no misasagi\".\nConsorts and children.\nEmpress: , Emperor Ninken's daughter\nConsort: , Owari no Muraji Kusaka's daughter\nConsort: , Mio no Tsunoori no Kimi's younger sister\nConsort: , Prince Sakata no \u014cmata's daughter\nConsort: , daughter of \nConsort: , daughter of \nConsort: , daughter of \nConsort: , daughter of \nConsort: , daughter of \nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10467", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10467", "title": "Emperor Ankan", "text": " was the 27th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 531 to 536.\nLegendary narrative.\nAccording to the \"Kojiki\", , later Emperor Ankan, was the elder son of Emperor Keitai, who is considered to have ruled the country during the early-6th century, though there is a paucity of information about him. When Ankan was 66 years old, Keitai abdicated in favor of him.\nAnkan's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Ankan might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nThe most noteworthy event recorded during his reign was the construction of state granaries in large numbers throughout Japan, indicating the broad reach of imperial power at the time.\nAnkan's grave is traditionally associated with the Takayatsukiyama kofun in Habikino, Osaka.\nGenealogy.\nEmpress: , Emperor Ninken's daughter\nConsort: , Kose no Ohito no \u014comi's daughter\nConsort: , Kose no Ohito no \u014comi's daughter\nConsort: , Mononobe no Itabi no \u014comuraji's daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10468", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10468", "title": "Emperor Senka", "text": " was the 28th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nNo firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 536\u2013539.\nLegendary narrative.\nSenka is considered to have ruled the country during the early-6th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.\nWhen Emperor Ankan died, he had no offspring; and succession passed to his youngest brother , who will come to be known as Emperor Senka. Emperor Senka was elderly at the time of his enthronement; and his reign is said to have endured for only three years.\nSenka's contemporary title would not have been \"tenn\u014d\", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. Rather, it was presumably , meaning \"the great king who rules all under heaven\". Alternatively, Senka might have been referred to as or the \"Great King of Yamato\".\nDuring this reign, Soga no Iname is believed to have been the first verifiable \"Omi\" (also \"\u014comi\", \"Great Minister\").\nThe Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Senka's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Musa no Tsukisaka no e no misasagi\"; however, the actual sites of the graves of the early Emperors remain problematic, according to some historians and archaeologists.\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10469", "revid": "23520465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10469", "title": "Empress", "text": ""}
{"id": "10470", "revid": "30303413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10470", "title": "Eastmoreland, Portland, Oregon", "text": "Eastmoreland is an early-twentieth century, tree-filled neighborhood in inner southeast Portland, Oregon, United States. The neighborhood is bounded on the north by SE Woodstock Boulevard. The western boundary is a combination of SE McLoughlin Boulevard, SE Reedway Street, and SE 26th Avenue. The Johnson Creek serves as most of the neighborhood's southern boundary which meets its eastern boundary in between SE Tenino Street and SE Crystal Springs Boulevard., SE C\u00e9sar E. Ch\u00e1vez Boulevard. Its northern border winds around the Reed College campus and continues on SE Steele Street until meeting its western boundary. \nEastmoreland is filled with trees and lush landscaping. Public parks in Eastmoreland include Crystal Springs Rhododendron Garden (1923), Eastmoreland Golf Course (1916), Eastmoreland Garden (2004), Eastmoreland Playground Park (1916), and Berkeley Park (1941). There is also a median on Reed College Place which is owned by Portland Department of Transportation and maintained by Portland Parks &amp; Recreation. \nEastmoreland is home to two schools, Duniway Elementary School (constructed in 1926 and named for Abigail Scott Duniway) and Holy Family Catholic School. \nEastmoreland was named for a local real estate developer, Judge J.C. Moreland."}
{"id": "10471", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10471", "title": "EMACS", "text": ""}
{"id": "10472", "revid": "332841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10472", "title": "Elyssa Davalos", "text": "Elyssa Davalos (born May 30, 1959) is a former American television and movie actress. Her father was actor Richard Davalos and her sister is musician Dominique Davalos. She is the mother of actress Alexa Davalos, from her marriage to photographer Jeff Dunas. She is of Spanish and Finnish descent on her father's side. Her family name would be spelled originally \"D\u00e1valos\" in Spanish, with an accent on the first \"a\"."}
{"id": "10473", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10473", "title": "Emil Theodor Kocher", "text": "Emil Theodor Kocher (25 August 1841 \u2013 27 July 1917) was a Swiss physician and medical researcher who received the 1909 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work in the physiology, pathology and surgery of the thyroid. Among his many accomplishments are the introduction and promotion of aseptic surgery and scientific methods in surgery, specifically reducing the mortality of thyroidectomies below 1% in his operations.\nHe was the first Swiss citizen and first surgeon to ever receive a Nobel Prize. He was considered a pioneer and leader in the field of surgery in his time.\nEarly life and personal life.\nChildhood.\nKocher's father was Jakob Alexander Kocher (1814\u20131893), the sixth of seven children to Samuel Kocher (1771\u20131842), a carpenter, and Barbara Sutter (1772\u20131849). Jakob Alexander Kocher was a railway engineer and he moved in 1845 to Burgdorf, Switzerland (near Bern), because of his job as regional engineer of Emmental (\"Bezirksingenieur\"). He was named chief engineer for street and water in the canton of Bern at the age of 34 years and he moved with his family to the capital, the city of Bern. In 1858 he left the states service and managed several engineering projects around Bern.\nTheodor Kocher's mother was Maria Kocher (n\u00e9e Wermuth) living from 1820 to 1900. She was a very religious woman and part of the Moravian Church; together with Jakob Alexander, she raised a family of five sons and one daughter (Theodor Kocher was the second son).\nTheodor Kocher was born on 25 August 1841 in Bern and baptized in the local Bern Minster on 16 September 1841. Together with the family, he moved to Burgdorf in 1845 where he started school. Later his family moved back to Bern where he went to middle and high school (\"Realschule\" and \"Literaturgymnasium\") where he was the first of his class. During high school, Theodor was interested in many subjects and was specifically drawn to art and classical philology but finally decided to become a doctor.\nStudies.\nHe started his studies after obtaining the Swiss Matura in 1858 at the University of Bern where Anton Biermer and Hermann Askan Demme were teaching, two professors that impressed him most. He was a studious and dedicated student but still became a member of the Schweizerischer Zofingerverein, a Swiss fraternity.\nHe obtained his doctorate in Bern in 1865 (March 1865) or 1866 with his dissertation about \"Behandlung der croup\u00f6sen Pneumonie mit Veratrum-Pr\u00e4paraten\" (literal English translation: \"The treatment of croupous pneumonia with Veratrum preparations.\") under professor Biermer with the predicate \"summa cum laude unamimiter\".\nIn spring 1865, Kocher followed his teacher Biermer to Z\u00fcrich, where Theodor Billroth was director of the hospital and influenced Kocher significantly. Kocher then proceeded to start a journey through Europe to meet several of the most famous surgeons of the time. It is not clear how Kocher financed his trip but according to Bonjour (1981) he received money from an unknown female Suisse romande philanthropist who also supported his friend Marc Dufour and was probably a member of the Moravian Church. In October 1865, he traveled to Berlin, passing through Leipzig and visiting an old friend from high school, Hans Blum. In Berlin, he studied under Bernhard von Langenbeck and applied for an assistant position with Langenbeck and Rudolf Virchow. Since there was no position available, in April 1867 Kocher moved on to London where he first met Jonathan Hutchinson and then worked for Henry Thompson and John Erichsen. Furthermore, he was interested in the work of Isaac Baker Brown and Thomas Spencer Wells, who also invited Kocher to go to the opera with his family. In July 1867, he traveled on to Paris to meet Auguste N\u00e9laton, Auguste Verneuil and Louis Pasteur. During his travels, he did not only learn novel techniques but also got to know leading surgeons in person and learned to speak English fluently which allowed him later on to follow the scientific progress in the English speaking world with ease.\nOnce returned to Bern, Kocher prepared for his habilitation and on 12 October 1867, he wrote a petition to the ministry of education to award him the \"venia docendi\" (Latin: \"to instruct\") which was granted to him. He became assistant to Georg L\u00fccke who left Bern in 1872 to become professor in Strasbourg. Kocher was hoping to get his position, but at the time it was customary to appoint German professors to positions at Swiss universities. Accordingly, the faculty suggested Franz K\u00f6nig before Kocher to follow L\u00fccke. However, the students and assistants as well as many doctors preferred Kocher and started a petition to the Bernese government to choose Kocher. Also the press was in favor of Kocher and several famous foreign surgeons, such as Langenbeck from Berlin and Billroth from Vienna, wrote letters in support of Kocher. Under this public pressure, the Bernese government (\"Regierungsrat\") chose Kocher as the successor of L\u00fccke as Ordinary Professor of Surgery and Director of the University Surgical Clinic at the \"Inselspital\" on 16 March 1872, despite a different proposal by the faculty.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1869, he married Marie Witschi-Courant (1841\u20131921) or (1850\u20131925). She was the daughter of Johannes Witschi, who was a merchant, and she had three sons together with Kocher. The Kochers first lived at the Marktgasse in Bern and moved in 1875 to a bigger house in the Villette. The house became a place for friends, colleagues and guests to gather and many patients from Kocher's clinic were invited to dine at the Villette.\nLike his mother, Kocher was a deeply religious man and also part of the Moravian Church. This was an uncommon trait that not many colleagues and co-workers shared and until his death, Kocher attributed all his successes and failures to God. He thought that the rise of materialism (especially in science) was a great evil, and he attributed the outbreak of the First World War.\nKocher was involved in the education of his three sons and played tennis with them and went horseback riding with them. The eldest son Albert (1872\u20131941) would follow him to the surgical clinic in Bern and become Assistant Professor of Surgery.\nOn the evening of 23 July 1917, he was called into the Inselspital for an emergency. Kocher executed the surgery but afterwards felt unwell and went to bed, working on scientific notes. He then fell unconscious and died on 27 July 1917.\nCareer.\nThe call for an ordinary professorship at the University of Bern at the age of 30 was the first big career step for Theodor Kocher. In the 45 years he served as professor at the university, he oversaw the re-building of the famous Bernese Inselspital, published 249 scholarly articles and books, trained numerous medical doctors and treated thousands of patients. He made major contributions to the fields of applied surgery, neurosurgery and, especially, thyroid surgery and endocrinology. For his work he received, among other honors, the 1909 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. According to Asher, the field of surgery has transformed radically during the time of Theodore Kocher and later generations will build on the foundations created by Kocher \u2013 if a future historian wanted to describe the state of surgery at the beginning of the 20th century, he only need mention Kocher's \"Text-Book of Operative Surgery\". \nThree main factors contributed to Kocher's success as a surgeon, according to Bonjour (1981). The first factor was his consequent implementation of antiseptic wound treatment which prevented infection and later death of the patients. The second factor, according to Erich Hintzsche, was his monitoring of the anesthesia where he used special masks and later used local anesthesia for goitre surgery which decreased or removed the dangers of anesthesia. As a third factor, Hintzsche mentions the minimal blood loss which Kocher achieved. Even the smallest source of blood during surgery was precisely controlled and inhibited by Kocher, initially because he thought that decomposing blood would constitute an infection risk for the patient. \nEarly career.\nKocher first attained international recognition with his method to reset a dislocated shoulder published in 1870. The new procedure was much less painful and safer than the traditionally used procedure and could be performed by a single physician. Kocher developed the procedure through his knowledge of anatomy. In the same period, Kocher also studied the phenomena of bullet wounds and how they can cause bone fractures. From these studies resulted one public lecture in 1874 \"Die Verbesserung der Geschosse vom Standpunkt der Humanitaet\" (English: \"The improvement of the bullets from the standpoint of humanity.\") and an 1875 manuscript \"Ueber die Sprengwirkung der modernen Kriegsgewehrgeschosse\" (English: \"Over the explosive effect of modern war rifle bullets.\") He showed that small caliber bullets were less harmful and recommended to use bullets with slower speed.\nRelocation of Inselspital and call to Prague.\nAs soon as Kocher became professor, he wanted to modernize the practices at the Bernese Inselspital. He noticed that the old building did not suffice the modern standards and was too small \u2013 half of the patients seeking medical attention had to be turned away. In spring 1878, he visited several institutions around Europe to evaluate novel innovations for hospitals and implement them if possible in Bern. He wrote down his observations in a lengthy report for the Bernese government, giving instructions even for architectonic details. In a speech on 15 November 1878, he informed the general public about the pressing needs of a new hospital building. Finally, he used his call to Prague to pressure the government: He would only stay in Bern if he was either granted 75 beds in the new building or would get money to increase his facilities in the old building. Finally, in the winter of 1884/1885 the new building was finished and the Inselspital could be moved.\nAt the time, Prague had the third largest university clinic in the German speaking world and it was a great honor for Kocher when he received a call as a professor to Prague in spring 1880. Many colleagues, especially international ones, urged Kocher to accept while Bernese doctors and colleagues begged him to stay. Kocher used this call, to demand certain improvements for the university clinic from the Bernese government. They accepted all his demands, the government promised him to begin building the new Inselspital building the next year, increased his credit for surgical equipment and books to 1000 franks and increased the number of beds for Kocher in the new Inselspital. Thus, Kocher decided to stay and many Bernese and Swiss students and professionals thanked him for it. He cited the affection of his students as one of his main reasons for staying. The university students organized a torchlight procession on 8 June 1880 in his honor.\nAseptic surgery.\nIt is unclear whether Kocher directly knew Joseph Lister, who pioneered the antiseptic (using chemical means to kill bacteria) method, but Kocher was in correspondence with him. Kocher had recognized the importance of aseptic techniques early on, introducing them to his peers at a time when this was considered revolutionary. In a hospital report from 1868, he attributed the lower mortality directly to the \"antiseptic Lister's wound bandaging method\" and he could later as director of the clinic order strict adherence to the antiseptic method. Bonjour (1981) describes how his assistants were worried about wound infection for fear of having to explain their failure to Kocher himself. Kocher made it a matter of principle to investigate the cause of every wound infection and remove every potential source of infection, he also banned visitors from his surgeries for this reason.\nHe published multiple works on aseptic treatment and surgery.\nContributions to Neurosurgery.\nKocher also contributed significantly to the field of neurology and neurosurgery. In this area, his research was pioneering and covered the areas of concussion, neurosurgery and intracranial pressure (ICP). Furthermore, he investigated the surgical treatment of epilepsy and spinal and cranial trauma. He found that in some cases, the epilepsy patients had a brain tumor which could be surgically removed. He hypothesized that epilepsy was caused by an increase in ICP and believed that drainage of cerebrospinal fluid could cure epilepsy.\nThe Japanese surgeon Hayazo Ito came to Bern in 1896 in order to perform experimental research on epilepsy. Kocher was especially interested in the ICP during experimentally induced epilepsy and after Ito returned to Japan, he performed over 100 surgeries in epilepsy patients.\nThe American surgeon Harvey Cushing spent several months in the lab of Kocher in 1900, performing cerebral surgery and first encountering the Cushing reflex which describes the relationship between blood pressure and intracranial pressure. Kocher later also found that decompressive craniectomy was an effective method to lower ICP.\nIn his surgery textbook \"Chirurgische Operationslehre\", Kocher dedicated 141 pages of 1060 pages to surgery of the nervous system. It included methods of exploration and decompression of the brain.\nContributions to Thyroid surgery.\nThyroid surgery, which was mostly performed as treatment of goitre with a complete thyroidectomy when possible, was considered a risky procedure when Kocher started his work. Some estimates put the mortality of thyroidectomy as high as 75% in 1872. Indeed, the operation was believed to be one of the most dangerous operations and in France it was prohibited by the Academy of Medicine at the time. Through application of modern surgical methods, such as antiseptic wound treatment and minimizing blood loss, and the famous slow and precise style of Kocher, he managed to reduce the mortality of this operation from an already low 18% (compared to contemporary standards) to less than 0.5% by 1912. By then, Kocher had performed over 5000 thyroid excisions. The success of Kocher's methods, especially when compared to operations performed by Theodor Billroth who was also performing thyroidectomies at that time, was described by William Stewart Halsted as follows:\nKocher and others later discovered that the complete removal of the thyroid could lead to cretinism (termed \"cachexia strumipriva\" by Kocher) caused by a deficiency of thyroid hormones. The phenomena was reported to Kocher first in 1874 by the general practitioner August Fetscherin and later in 1882 by Jacques-Louis Reverdin together with his assistant Auguste Reverdin (1848\u20131908). Reverdin met Kocher on 7 September in Geneva at the international hygienic congress (\"internationaler Hygienekongress\") and expressed his concerns about complete removal of the thyroid to Kocher. Kocher then tried to contact 77 of his 102 former patients and found signs of a physical and mental decay in those cases where he had removed the thyroid gland completely. Ironically, it was his precise surgery that allowed Kocher to remove the thyroid gland almost completely and led to the severe side effects of cretinism.\nKocher came to the conclusion that a complete removal of the thyroid (as it was common to perform at the time because the function of the thyroid was not yet clear) was not advisable, a finding that he made public on 4 April 1883 in a lecture to the German Society of Surgery and also published in 1883 under the title \"Ueber Kropfexstirpation und ihre Folgen\" (English: \"About Thyroidectomies and their consequences\"). Reverdin had already made his findings public on 13 September 1882 and published further articles on this topic in 1883; yet still Kocher never acknowledged Reverdin's priority in this discovery. At the time, the reactions to Kocher's lecture were mixed, some people asserted that goitre and cretinism were different stages of same disease and that cretinism would have occurred independently of the removal of the thyroid in the cases which Kocher described. In the long run however, these observations contributed to a more complete understanding of thyroid function and were one of the early hints of a connection between the thyroid and congenital cretinism. These findings finally enabled thyroid hormone replacement therapies for a variety of thyroid related diseases.\nFurther contributions to science.\nKocher published works on a number of subjects other than the thyroid gland, including hemostasis, antiseptic treatments, surgical infectious diseases, on gunshot wounds, acute osteomyelitis, the theory of strangulated hernia, and abdominal surgery. The prize money, from the Nobel prize he received, helped him to establish the Kocher Institute in Bern. \nA number of instruments (for example the craniometer) and surgical techniques (for example, the Kocher manoeuvre, and kocher incision) are named after him, as well as the Kocher-Debre-Semelaigne syndrome. The Kocher manoeuvre is still a standard practice in orthopaedics. Kocher is also credited for the invention in 1882 of the Kocher's Surgical Clamp, which he used to prevent blood loss during surgery.\nOne of his main works, \"Chirurgische Operationslehre\" (Text-Book of Operative Surgery ), was published through six editions and translated into many languages.\nDuring his life, Kocher published 249 articles and books and supervised more than 130 doctoral candidates. He was rector of the university in 1878 and 1903. He was president of the Bernese and the Swiss physicians association and co-founded the Swiss society for surgery in 1913 and became its first president.\nIn 1904 or 1905 he built a private clinic called \"Ulmenhof\" which had space for 25 patients. Here Kocher catered to the wealthier patients, which in many cases were international. He also treated the wife of Lenin, Nadezhda Krupskaya and operated on her in Bern (in 1913).\nLegacy.\nKocher was also a famous and loved teacher. During nearly 100 semesters he taught his knowledge to about 10 000 students of the University of Bern. He was able to inspire students and taught them to think clearly and logically. Specifically, Kocher also taught a generation of Jewish-Russian students who could not study in Russia. This association with Russia has also led the Russian Geographical Society to name a volcano after him (in the area of Ujun-Choldongi in Manchuria ).\nAmong his many local and international students were\nCarl Arend (Bern),\nOscar Bernhard (St. Moritz), \nAndrea Crotti (Ohio),\nGustave Dardel (Bern),\nCarl Garr\u00e9 (Bonn),\nGottlieb and Max Feurer (St. Gallen),\nAnton Fonio (Langnau), \nWalter Gr\u00f6bly (Arbon),\nCarl Kaufmann (Z\u00fcrich),\nAlbert Kocher (Bern),\nJoseph Kopp (Luzern),\nErnst Kummer (Geneva),\nOtto Lanz (Amsterdam), \nEdmond Lardy (Geneva) \nJakob Lauper (Interlaken),\nAlbert L\u00fcthi (Thun),\nHermann Matti (Bern),\nCharles Pettavel (Neuenburg),\nPaul Pf\u00e4hler (Olten),\nFritz de Quervain (La Chaux de Fonds / Basel / Bern),\nAugust Rickli (Langenthal),\nErnst Rieben (Interlaken),\nAugust Rollier (Leysin), \nC\u00e9sar Roux (Lausanne),\nKarl Schuler (Rorschach), \nFritz Steinmann (Bern),\nAlbert Vogel (Luzern),\nHans Wildbolz (Bern) as well as \nthe American neurosurgeon Harvey Cushing. Other notable students of his include Hayazo Ito (1865\u20131929) and S. Berezowsky which also spread his techniques in their respective home-countries (Japan and Russia).\nKocher's name is living on with the Theodor Kocher Institute, the Kochergasse and the Kocher Park in Bern. In the Inselspital, there is a bust of Kocher, created by in 1927. In the Kocher Park there is another bust, created by .\nIn 1950, the Swiss historian Edgar Bonjour (1898\u20131991) who was married to Dora Kocher wrote a 136-page monograph on Kocher's life that was extended again in 1981.\nWorks.\nDuring his life, Kocher published 249 articles and books and supervised more than 130 doctoral candidates. The following is an incomplete list of his most important works:"}
{"id": "10474", "revid": "1012418410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10474", "title": "Eight queens puzzle", "text": "The eight queens puzzle is the problem of placing eight chess queens on an 8\u00d78 chessboard so that no two queens threaten each other; thus, a solution requires that no two queens share the same row, column, or diagonal. The eight queens puzzle is an example of the more general \"n\" queens problem of placing \"n\" non-attacking queens on an \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" chessboard, for which solutions exist for all natural numbers \"n\" with the exception of \"n\" = 2 and \"n\" = 3.\nHistory.\nChess composer Max Bezzel published the eight queens puzzle in 1848. Franz Nauck published the first solutions in 1850. Nauck also extended the puzzle to the \"n\" queens problem, with \"n\" queens on a chessboard of \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" squares.\nSince then, many mathematicians, including Carl Friedrich Gauss, have worked on both the eight queens puzzle and its generalized \"n\"-queens version. In 1874, S. Gunther proposed a method using determinants to find solutions. J.W.L. Glaisher refined Gunther's approach.\nIn 1972, Edsger Dijkstra used this problem to illustrate the power of what he called structured programming. He published a highly detailed description of a depth-first backtracking algorithm.2\nConstructing and counting solutions.\nThe problem of finding all solutions to the 8-queens problem can be quite computationally expensive, as there are 4,426,165,368 (i.e., 64C8) possible arrangements of eight queens on an 8\u00d78 board, but only 92 solutions. It is possible to use shortcuts that reduce computational requirements or rules of thumb that avoids brute-force computational techniques. For example, by applying a simple rule that constrains each queen to a single column (or row), though still considered brute force, it is possible to reduce the number of possibilities to 16,777,216 (that is, 88) possible combinations. Generating permutations further reduces the possibilities to just 40,320 (that is, 8!), which are then checked for diagonal attacks.\nSolutions.\nThe eight queens puzzle has 92 distinct solutions. If solutions that differ only by the symmetry operations of rotation and reflection of the board are counted as one, the puzzle has 12 solutions. These are called \"fundamental\" solutions; representatives of each are shown below.\nA fundamental solution usually has eight variants (including its original form) obtained by rotating 90, 180, or 270\u00b0 and then reflecting each of the four rotational variants in a mirror in a fixed position. However, should a solution be equivalent to its own 90\u00b0 rotation (as happens to one solution with five queens on a 5\u00d75 board), that fundamental solution will have only two variants (itself and its reflection). Should a solution be equivalent to its own 180\u00b0 rotation (but not to its 90\u00b0 rotation), it will have four variants (itself and its reflection, its 90\u00b0 rotation and the reflection of that). If \"n\" &gt; 1, it is not possible for a solution to be equivalent to its own reflection because that would require two queens to be facing each other. Of the 12 fundamental solutions to the problem with eight queens on an 8\u00d78 board, exactly one (solution 12 below) is equal to its own 180\u00b0 rotation, and none is equal to its 90\u00b0 rotation; thus, the number of distinct solutions is 11\u00d78 + 1\u00d74 = 92.\nAll fundamental solutions are presented below:\nSolution 10 has the additional property that no three queens are in a straight line.\nExistence of solutions.\nThese brute-force algorithms to count the number of solutions are computationally manageable for , but would be intractable for problems of , as 20! = 2.433 \u00d7 1018. If the goal is to find a single solution, one can show solutions exist for all \"n\" \u2265 4 with no search whatsoever.\nThese solutions exhibit stair-stepped patterns, as in the following examples for \"n\" = 8, 9 and 10:\nThe examples above can be obtained with the following formulas. Let (\"i\", \"j\") be the square in column \"i\" and row \"j\" on the \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" chessboard, \"k\" an integer.\nOne approach is\nFor this results in fundamental solution 1 above. A few more examples follow.\nCounting solutions.\nThe following tables give the number of solutions for placing \"n\" queens on an board, both fundamental and all .\nThe six queens puzzle has fewer solutions than the five queens puzzle.\nThere is no known formula for the exact number of solutions, or even for its asymptotic behaviour. The 27\u00d727 board is the highest-order board that has been completely enumerated.\nExercise in algorithm design.\nFinding all solutions to the eight queens puzzle is a good example of a simple but nontrivial problem. For this reason, it is often used as an example problem for various programming techniques, including nontraditional approaches such as constraint programming, logic programming or genetic algorithms. Most often, it is used as an example of a problem that can be solved with a recursive algorithm, by phrasing the \"n\" queens problem inductively in terms of adding a single queen to any solution to the problem of placing \"n\"\u22121 queens on an \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" chessboard. The induction bottoms out with the solution to the 'problem' of placing 0 queens on the chessboard, which is the empty chessboard.\nThis technique can be used in a way that is much more efficient than the na\u00efve brute-force search algorithm, which considers all 648\u00a0=\u00a0248\u00a0= 281,474,976,710,656 possible blind placements of eight queens, and then filters these to remove all placements that place two queens either on the same square (leaving only 64!/56!\u00a0= 178,462,987,637,760 possible placements) or in mutually attacking positions. This very poor algorithm will, among other things, produce the same results over and over again in all the different permutations of the assignments of the eight queens, as well as repeating the same computations over and over again for the different sub-sets of each solution. A better brute-force algorithm places a single queen on each row, leading to only 88\u00a0=\u00a0224\u00a0= 16,777,216 blind placements.\nIt is possible to do much better than this.\nOne algorithm solves the eight rooks puzzle by generating the permutations of the numbers 1 through 8 (of which there are 8! = 40,320), and uses the elements of each permutation as indices to place a queen on each row.\nThen it rejects those boards with diagonal attacking positions.\nThe backtracking depth-first search program, a slight improvement on the permutation method, constructs the search tree by considering one row of the board at a time, eliminating most nonsolution board positions at a very early stage in their construction.\nBecause it rejects rook and diagonal attacks even on incomplete boards, it examines only 15,720 possible queen placements.\nA further improvement, which examines only 5,508 possible queen\nplacements, is to combine the permutation based method with the early\npruning method: the permutations are generated depth-first, and\nthe search space is pruned if the partial permutation produces a\ndiagonal attack.\nConstraint programming can also be very effective on this problem.\nAn alternative to exhaustive search is an 'iterative repair' algorithm, which typically starts with all queens on the board, for example with one queen per column. It then counts the number of conflicts (attacks), and uses a heuristic to determine how to improve the placement of the queens. The 'minimum-conflicts' heuristic \u2013 moving the piece with the largest number of conflicts to the square in the same column where the number of conflicts is smallest \u2013 is particularly effective: it finds a solution to the 1,000,000 queen problem in less than 50 steps on average. This assumes that the initial configuration is 'reasonably good' \u2013 if a million queens all start in the same row, it will take at least 999,999 steps to fix it. A 'reasonably good' starting point can for instance be found by putting each queen in its own row and column so that it conflicts with the smallest number of queens already on the board.\nUnlike the backtracking search outlined above, iterative repair does not guarantee a solution: like all greedy procedures, it may get stuck on a local optimum. (In such a case, the algorithm may be restarted with a different initial configuration.) On the other hand, it can solve problem sizes that are several orders of magnitude beyond the scope of a depth-first search.\nThis animation illustrates backtracking to solve the problem. A queen is placed in a column that is known not to cause conflict. If a column is not found the program returns to the last good state and then tries a different column.\nAs an alternative to backtracking, solutions can be counted by recursively enumerating valid partial solutions, one row at a time. Rather than constructing entire board positions, blocked diagonals and columns are tracked with bitwise operations. This does not allow the recovery of individual solutions.\nSample program.\nThe following is a Pascal program by Niklaus Wirth in 1976. It finds one solution to the eight queens problem.\nprogram eightqueen1(output);\nvar i : integer; q : boolean;\n a : array[ 1 .. 8] of boolean;\n b : array[ 2 .. 16] of boolean;\n c : array[ \u22127 .. 7] of boolean;\n x : array[ 1 .. 8] of integer;\nprocedure try( i : integer; var q : boolean);\n var j : integer;\n begin \n j := 0;\n repeat \n j := j + 1; \n q := false;\n if a[ j] and b[ i + j] and c[ i \u2212 j] then\n begin \n x[ i ] := j;\n a[ j ] := false; \n b[ i + j] := false; \n c[ i \u2212 j] := false;\n if i &lt; 8 then\n begin\n try( i + 1, q);\n if not q then\n begin \n a[ j] := true; \n b[ i + j] := true; \n c[ i \u2212 j] := true;\n end\n end \n else \n q := true\n end\n until q or (j = 8);\n end;\nbegin\nfor i := 1 to 8 do a[ i] := true;\nfor i := 2 to 16 do b[ i] := true;\nfor i := \u22127 to 7 do c[ i] := true;\ntry( 1, q);\nif q then\n for i := 1 to 8 do write( x[ i]:4);\nwriteln\nend."}
{"id": "10475", "revid": "35584293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10475", "title": "Enrico Bombieri", "text": "Enrico Bombieri (born 26 November 1940) is an Italian mathematician, known for his work in analytic number theory, Diophantine geometry, complex analysis, and group theory. He won a Fields Medal in 1974. Bombieri is currently Professor Emeritus in the School of Mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey.\nCareer.\nBombieri published his first mathematical paper in 1957 when he was 16 years old. In 1963 at age 22 he earned his first degree (Laurea) in mathematics from the Universit\u00e0 degli Studi di Milano under the supervision of Giovanni Ricci and then studied at Trinity College, Cambridge with Harold Davenport.\nBombieri was an assistant professor (1963\u20131965) and then a full professor (1965\u20131966) at the Universit\u00e0 di Cagliari, at the Universit\u00e0 di Pisa in 1966\u20131974, and then at the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa in 1974\u20131977. From Pisa he emigrated in 1977 to the USA, where he became a professor at the School of Mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. In 2011 he became professor emeritus.\nBombieri is also known for his pro bono service on behalf of the mathematics profession, e.g. for serving on external review boards and for peer-reviewing extraordinarily complicated manuscripts (like the paper of Per Enflo on the invariant subspace problem).\nResearch.\nThe Bombieri\u2013Vinogradov theorem is one of the major applications of the large sieve method. It improves Dirichlet's theorem on prime numbers in arithmetic progressions, by showing that by averaging over the modulus over a range, the mean error is much less than can be proved in a given case. This result can sometimes substitute for the still-unproved generalized Riemann hypothesis.\nIn 1969 Bombieri, De Giorgi, and Giusti solved Bernstein's problem.\nIn 1976, Bombieri developed the technique known as the \"asymptotic sieve\". In 1980 he supplied the completion of the proof of the uniqueness of finite groups of Ree type in characteristic 3; at the time of its publication it was one of the missing steps in the classification of finite simple groups.\nAwards.\nBombieri's research in number theory, algebraic geometry, and mathematical analysis have earned him many international prizes \u2014 a Fields Medal in 1974 and the Balzan Prize in 1980. He was a plenary speaker at the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1974 at Vancouver. He is a member, or foreign member, of several learned academies, including the French Academy of Sciences (elected 1984), the United States National Academy of Sciences (elected 1996), and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (elected 1976).\nIn 2002 he was made \"Cavaliere di Gran Croce al Merito della Repubblica Italiana\". In 2010 he received the King Faisal International Prize (jointly with Terence Tao). and in 2020 he was awarded the Crafoord Prize in Mathematics.\nOther interests.\nBombieri, accomplished also in the arts, explored for wild orchids and other plants as a hobby in the Alps when a young man."}
{"id": "10477", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10477", "title": "Eos", "text": "In Greek mythology, Eos (; Ionic and Homeric Greek \"\u0112\u1e53s\", Attic \"H\u00e9\u014ds\", \"dawn\", or ; Aeolic \"A\u00fa\u014ds\", Doric \"\u0100\u1e53s\") is a Titaness and the goddess of the dawn, who rose each morning from her home at the edge of the Oceanus. \nLike Roman \"Aurora\" and Rigvedic \"Ushas\", \"\u0112\u1e53s\" continues the name of an earlier Indo-European dawn goddess, \"Hausos\".\nEtymology.\nThe Proto-Greek form of \"\u1f28\u03ce\u03c2\" / \"\u0112\u1e53s\" has been reconstructed as \"*\u1f00\u03c5h\u03ce\u03c2 / auh\u1e53s\", and in Mycenaean Greek as \"*h\u0101w\u014ds\". According to Robert S. P. Beekes, the loss of the initial aspiration could be due to metathesis. It is cognate to the Vedic goddess \"Ushas\", Lithuanian goddess \"Au\u0161rin\u0117\", and Roman goddess \"Aurora\" (Old Latin \"Ausosa\"), all three of whom are also goddesses of the dawn.\nAll four are considered derivatives of the Proto-Indo-European stem \"*h\u2082ews\u1e53s\" (later \"*Aus\u1e53s\"), \"dawn\". The root also gave rise to Proto-Germanic \"*Austr\u014d\", Old High German \"*\u014cstara\" and Old English \"\u0112ostre / \u0112astre\". These cognates led to the reconstruction of a Proto-Indo-European dawn goddess, Hausos (\"*H\u2082\u00e9ws\u014ds\").\nFamily.\nEos was the daughter of the Titans Hyperion and Theia: Hyperion, a bringer of light, the \"One Above, Who Travels High Above the Earth\" and Theia, \"The Divine,\" also called Euryphaessa, \"wide-shining\" and Aethra, \"bright sky\". Eos was the sister of Helios, god of the sun, and Selene, goddess of the moon, \"who shine upon all that are on earth and upon the deathless gods who live in the wide heaven\". The generation of Titans preceded all the familiar deities of Olympus who largely supplanted them. In some accounts, Eos' father was called Pallas.\nEos married the Titan Astraeus (\"of the Stars\") and became the mother of the Anemoi (\"winds\") namely Zephyrus, Boreas, Notus and Eurus; of the Morning Star, Eosphoros (Venus); the Astra (\"stars\") and of the virgin goddess of justice, Astrae (\"starry one\"). Her other notable offspring were Memnon and Emathion by the Trojan prince, Tithonus. Sometimes, Hesperus, Phaethon and Tithonus (different from the lover) were called the children of Eos by the Athenian prince, Cephalus.\nMythology.\nGoddess of the dawn.\nThe dawn goddess Eos was almost always described with rosy fingers or rosy forearms as she opened the gates of heaven for the Sun to rise. In Homer, her saffron-colored robe is embroidered or woven with flowers; rosy-fingered and with golden arms, she is pictured on Attic vases as a beautiful woman, crowned with a tiara or diadem and with the large white-feathered wings of a bird.\nHomer.\nFrom \"The Iliad\":\nShe is most often associated with her Homeric epithet \"rosy-fingered\" Eos Rhododactylos (), but Homer also calls her Eos Erigeneia:\nNear the end of the \"Odyssey\", Athena, wanting to buy Odysseus some time with his wife Penelope after they have reunited with each other, orders Eos not to yoke her two horses, thus delaying the coming of the new day:\nHesiod.\nThus Eos, preceded by the Morning Star, is seen as the genetrix of all the stars and planets; her tears are considered to have created the morning dew, personified as Ersa or Herse.\nRole in the Gigantomachy.\nEos played a small role in the battle of the giants against the gods; when the earth goddess Gaia learned of a prophecy that the giants would perish at the hand of a mortal, Gaia sought to find a herb that would protect them; thus Zeus ordered Eos, as well as her siblings Selene (Moon) and Helios (Sun) not to shine, and harvested all of the plant for himself, denying Gaia the chance to make the giants indestructible.\nOrion.\nEos is presented as a goddess who fell in love several times. According to Pseudo-Apollodorus, it was the jealous Aphrodite who cursed her to be perpetually in love and have an insatiable sexual desire because once had Eos lain with Aphrodite's sweetheart Ares, the god of war. This caused her to abduct a number of handsome young men. \nIn the Odyssey, Calypso complains to Hermes about the male gods taking many mortal women as lovers, but not allowing goddesses to do the same. She brings up as example Eos\u2019s love for the hunter Orion, who was killed by Artemis in Ortygia. Apollodorus also mentions Eos\u2019 love for Orion, and adds that she brought him to Delos, where he met Artemis.\nCleitus.\nThe good-looking Cleitus was snatched and made immortal by her.\nTithonus.\nEos fell in love with and abducted Tithonus, a handsome prince from Troy. She went with a request to Zeus, asking him to make Tithonus immortal for her sake. Zeus agreed and granted her wish, but Eos forgot to ask for eternal youth as well for her beloved. For a while, they two lived happily, until Tithonus\u2019 hair started turning grey, and Eos ceased to visit him in bed. But he kept aging, and was soon unable to even move. In the end, Eos locked him up in a chamber, where he withered away, forever a helpless old man. Out of pity, she turned him into a cicada.\nCephalus.\nThe abduction of Cephalus had special appeal for an Athenian audience because Cephalus was a local boy, and so this myth element appeared frequently in Attic vase-paintings and was exported with them. In the literary myths, Eos snatched Cephalus against his will when he was hunting and took him to Syria. Although Cephalus was already married to Procris, Eos bore him three sons, including Phaethon and Hesperus, but he then began pining for Procris, causing a disgruntled Eos to return him to Procris, but not before sowing the seeds of doubt in his mind, telling him that it was highly unlikely that Procris had stayed faithful to him this entire time. Cephalus, troubled by her words, asked Eos to change his form into that of a stranger, in order to secretly test Procris\u2019s love for him. Cephalus, disguised, propositioned Procris, who at first declined but eventually gave in. He was hurt by her betrayal, and she left him in shame, but eventually they got back together. This time however it was Procris\u2019s turn to doubt her husband\u2019s fidelity; while hunting, he would often call upon the breeze ('Aura' in Latin, sounding similar to Eos\u2019s Roman equivalent Aurora) to refresh the body. Upon hearing that, Procris followed and spied on him. Cephalus, mistaking her for some wild animal, threw his spear at her, killing his wife.\nThe second-century CE traveller Pausanias knew of the story of Cephalus\u2019s abduction too, though he calls Eos by the name of Hemera, goddess of day.\nTrojan War.\nAccording to Hesiod, by her lover Tithonus, Eos had two sons, Memnon and Emathion. Memnon fought among the Trojans in the Trojan War and fought against Achilles. Pausanias mentions images of Thetis, the mother of Achilles, and Eos begging Zeus on behalf of their sons. In the end, it was Achilles who triumphed and slew Memnon in battle. Mourning greatly over the death of her son, Eos made the light of her brother, Helios the god of the sun, to fade, and begged Nyx, the goddess of the night, to come out earlier, so she could be able to freely steal her son's body undetected by the armies. After his death, Eos asked Zeus to make her son immortal, and he granted her wish. Her image with the dead Memnon across her knees, like Thetis with the dead Achilles are icons that inspired the Christian Piet\u00e0. \nDivine horses.\nEos' team of horses pull her chariot across the sky and are named in the \"Odyssey\" as \"Firebright\" and \"Daybright\". Quintus described her exulting in her heart over the radiant horses (Lampus and Pha\u00ebton) that drew her chariot, amidst the bright-haired Horae, the feminine Hours, climbing the arc of heaven and scattering sparks of fire.\nCult and temples.\nThere are no known temples, shrines, or altars to Eos. However, Ovid seems to allude to the existence of at least two shrines of Eos, as he describes them in plural, albeit few, in the lines: \nOvid may therefore have known of at least two such shrines.\nInterpretations.\nEtruscan.\nAmong the Etruscans, the generative dawn-goddess was Thesan. Depictions of the dawn-goddess with a young lover became popular in Etruria in the fifth century, probably inspired by imported Greek vase-painting. Though Etruscans preferred to show the goddess as a nurturer (\"Kourotrophos\") rather than an abductor of young men, the late Archaic sculptural acroterion from Etruscan C\u00e6re, now in Berlin, showing the goddess in archaic running pose adapted from the Greeks, and bearing a boy in her arms, has commonly been identified as Eos and Cephalus. On an Etruscan mirror Thesan is shown carrying off a young man, whose name is inscribed as Tinthu.\nRoman.\nThe Roman equivalent of Eos is Aurora, also a cognate showing the characteristic Latin rhotacism. Dawn became associated in Roman cult with Matuta, later known as Mater Matuta. She was also associated with the sea harbors and ports, and had a temple on the Forum Boarium. On June 11, the Matralia was celebrated at that temple in honor of Mater Matuta; this festival was only for women during their first marriage."}
{"id": "10478", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10478", "title": "Eduardo Blasco Ferrer", "text": "Eduardo Blasco Ferrer (Barcelona, 1956 \u2013 Bastia, 12 January 2017) was a Spanish-Italian linguist and a professor at the University of Cagliari, Sardinia. He is best known as the author of several studies about the Paleo-Sardinian and Sardinian language."}
{"id": "10479", "revid": "38015801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10479", "title": "Elba", "text": "Elba (, ; ; Ancient Greek: \u0391\u1f30\u03b8\u03b1\u03bb\u03af\u03b1, \"Aithalia\") is a Mediterranean island in Tuscany, Italy, from the coastal town of Piombino on the Italian mainland, and the largest island of the Tuscan Archipelago. It is also part of the Arcipelago Toscano National Park, and the third largest island in Italy, after Sicily and Sardinia. It is located in the Tyrrhenian Sea about east of the French island of Corsica.\nThe island is part of the province of Livorno and is divided into seven municipalities, with a total population of about 30,000 inhabitants which increases considerably during the summer. The municipalities are Portoferraio (which is also the island's principal town), Campo nell'Elba, Capoliveri, Marciana, Marciana Marina, Porto Azzurro, and Rio.\nElba is famous as the site of Napoleon's first exile, in 1814\u201315.\nGeography.\nElba is the largest remaining stretch of land from the ancient tract that once connected the Italian peninsula to Corsica. The northern coast faces the Ligurian Sea, the eastern coast the Piombino Channel, the southern coast the Tyrrhenian Sea, and the Corsica Channel divides the western tip of the island from neighbouring Corsica.\nGeology.\nThe island itself is made up of slices of rocks which once formed part of the ancient Tethyan seafloor. These rocks have been through at least two orogenies, the Alpine orogeny and the Apennine orogeny. The second of these two events was associated with subduction of the Tethyan oceanic crust underneath Italy and the obduction of parts of the ancient seafloor onto the continents. Later extension within the stretched inner part of the Apennine mountains caused adiabatic melting and the intrusion of the Mount Capanne and the La Serra-Porto Azzuro granitoids. These igneous bodies brought with them skarn fluids which dissolved and replaced some of the carbonate units, precipitating iron-rich minerals in their place. One of the iron-rich minerals, ilvaite, was first identified on the island and takes its name from the Latin word for Elba. More recently, high-angle faults formed within the tectonic pile, allowing for the migration of iron-rich fluids through the crust. The deposits left behind by these fluids formed the island's rich seams of iron ore.\nThe terrain is quite varied and is thus divided into several areas based on geomorphology. The mountainous and most recent part of the island can be found to the west, the centre of which is dominated by Mount Capanne (at a height of 1,018 metres, or 3,340 feet), also called the \"roof of the Tuscan Archipelago\". The mountain is home to many animal species including the mouflon and wild boar, two species that flourish despite the continuous influx of tourists. The central part of the island is a mostly flat section with the width being reduced to just four kilometres (). It is where the major centres can be found: Portoferraio, Campo nell'Elba. To the east is the oldest part of the island, formed over 3 million years ago. In the hilly area, dominated by Monte Calamita, are the deposits of iron that made Elba famous.\nHydrography.\nRivers rarely exceed in length, and it is common for the shorter ones to dry up during the summer. The largest rivers, sorted by length, are:\nBetween Poggio and Marciana, at the foot of Mount Capanne, is a spring called Fonte Napoleone, known for its quality.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the island is predominantly Mediterranean, except for Mount Capanne, where winters tend to be moderately cold. Precipitation is concentrated in autumn and comprises a normal rainfall. The island lies in the rain shadow of the large and mountainous island of Corsica, so precipitation totals are somewhat reduced from the mainland (most of the island receives less than 750\u00a0mm (30 inches) annually). Snowfall in winter is rare in the lowlands and melts quickly. The table below shows the average temperatures for the islands by month.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe island was originally inhabited by Ligures Ilvates, who gave it the ancient name Ilva. It was well known from very ancient times for its iron resources and valued mines. The Greeks called it Aethalia (\u0391\u03b9\u03b8\u03b1\u03bb\u03af\u03b1, \"fume\"), after the fumes of the metal producing furnaces.\nApollonius of Rhodes mentions it in his epic poem \"Argonautica\", describing that the Argonauts rested here during their travels. He writes that signs of their visit were still visible in his day, including skin-coloured pebbles that they dried their hands on and large stones which they used at discus. Strabo (5.2.6) presents a slightly different account: \"because the scrapings, which the Argonauts formed when they used their strigils, became congealed, the pebbles on the shore remain variegated still to this day.\"\nThe island was then settled by the Etruscans, who started mining iron at Elba, and later (after 480 BC) by the Romans, who christened the island with the name of Ilva.\nMiddle Ages and early modern.\nIn the early medieval period, Elba was invaded by the Ostrogoths and the Lombards, and then it became a possession of the Republic of Pisa. After the battle of Meloria, the Republic of Genova took possession of Elba, but it was regained by Pisa in 1292. The island was retained for two centuries by the Appiani family, Lords of Piombino, when they sold Pisa to the house of Visconti of Milan in 1399.\nIn 1544, the Barbary pirates from North Africa devastated Elba and the coasts of Tuscany. In 1546, part of the island was handed over to Cosimo I de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, who fortified Portoferraio and renamed it \"Cosmopoli\", while the rest of the island was returned to the Appiani in 1577. In 1596, Philip II of Spain captured Porto Longone and had two fortresses built there. This part of Elba came into the direct power of Spain through the State of the Presidi, including Porto Longone. In 1736, the sovereignty of this part of Elba was claimed by the Kingdom of Naples but remained abandoned.\nLate modern and contemporary.\nThe British landed on the Island of Elba in 1796, after the occupation of Livorno by the French Republican troops, to protect the 4,000 French royalists who had found asylum in Portoferraio two years earlier. In 1801, the Peace of Luneville gave Elba to the Kingdom of Etruria, and it was transferred to France in 1802 by the Peace of Amiens.\nThe French Emperor Napoleon was exiled to Elba, after his forced abdication following the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and conveyed to the island on HMS \"Undaunted\" by Captain Thomas Ussher; he arrived at Portoferraio on 4 May 1814. He was allowed to keep a personal guard of 600 men and was nominally sovereign of Elba, although the nearby sea was patrolled by the French and British navies. During the months that he stayed on the island, Napoleon carried out a series of economic and social reforms to improve the quality of life. After staying on for almost ten months he escaped to France on 26 February 1815. At the Congress of Vienna, Elba was restored to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany. In 1860, it became part of the new unified Kingdom of Italy.\nDuring the Second World War, the island was liberated from German occupation by the French \"1er Corps d'Arm\u00e9e\" supported by British forces including Royal Naval Commandos on 17 June 1944, in \"Op\u00e9ration Brassard\". Faulty intelligence and strong defences made the battle more difficult than expected.\nIn recent decades, thanks to its rich cultural heritage, cuisine and nature, the island has become an important international tourist destination.\nTransportation.\nThe island is connected to the mainland via the four ferry companies, Toremar, Moby Lines, Blunavy and Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries, all offering routes between Piombino and Portoferraio, the capital located in the north, Cavo, Rio Marina and Porto Azzurro, on the east coast of the island.\nThere is an airport on the island, Marina di Campo Airport. It is served by Silver Air with flights to the Italian mainland.\nCycling.\nThe island has a network of trails for road racers looking for more technical routes for their training, trails and dirt roads for bikers to have fun on, and accessible routes for families with children who need safe and relaxing routes. On the road from Rio nell'Elba going to Porto Azzurro is the \"Fonte di Coppi\". Towards the end of his career Fausto Coppi, the \"campionissimo\", came here to train on the roads of Elba. He still retained a celebrity status but was no longer at the peak of his career that ended with his death a few years later. The plaque on the fountain reads: \"1960\u20132010, here the champion quenched his thirst, since fifty years on the run\"."}
{"id": "10480", "revid": "46366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10480", "title": "Etna", "text": "Mount Etna is an active volcano on the east coast of Sicily.\nEtna or ETNA may also refer to:"}
{"id": "10481", "revid": "8921173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10481", "title": "Enki", "text": "Enki () is the Sumerian god of water, knowledge (\"gest\u00fa\"), mischief, crafts (\"ga\u0161am\"), and creation (\"nudimmud\"), and one of the Anunnaki. He was later known as Ea in Akkadian (Assyrian and Babylonian) mythology. He was originally patron god of the city of Eridu, but later the influence of his cult spread throughout Mesopotamia and to the Canaanites, Hittites and Hurrians. He was associated with the southern band of constellations called \"stars of Ea\", but also with the constellation A\u0160-IKU, \"the Field\" (Square of Pegasus). Beginning around the second millennium BCE, he was sometimes referred to in writing by the numeric ideogram for \"40\", occasionally referred to as his \"sacred number\". The planet Mercury, associated with Babylonian \"Nabu\" (the son of Marduk) was, in Sumerian times, identified with Enki.\nMany myths about Enki have been collected from various sites, stretching from Southern Iraq to the Levantine coast. He is mentioned in the earliest extant cuneiform inscriptions throughout the region and was prominent from the third millennium down to Hellenistic times.\nThe exact meaning of his name is uncertain: the common translation is \"Lord of the Earth\". The Sumerian \"En\" is translated as a title equivalent to \"lord\" and was originally a title given to the High Priest. \"Ki\" means \"earth\", but there are theories that \"ki\" in this name has another origin, possibly \"kig\" of unknown meaning, or \"kur\" meaning \"mound\".\nThe name Ea is allegedly Hurrian in origin while others claim that his name 'Ea' is possibly of Semitic origin and may be a derivation from the West-Semitic root *hyy meaning \"life\" in this case used for \"spring\", \"running water\". In Sumerian E-A means \"the house of water\", and it has been suggested that this was originally the name for the shrine to the god at Eridu. It has also been suggested that the original non-anthropomorphic divinity at Eridu was not Enki but Abzu. The emergence of Enki as the divine lover of Ninhursag, and the divine battle between the younger Igigi divinities and Abzu, saw the Abzu, the underground waters of the Aquifer, becoming the place in which the foundations of the temple were built. With some Sumerian deity names as Enlil there are variations like Elil. En means \"Lord\" and E means \"temple\". It is likely that E-A is the Sumerian short form for \"Lord of Water\", as Enki is a god of water. Ab in Abzu also means water.\nWorship.\nThe main temple to Enki was called \"E-abzu\", meaning \"abzu temple\" (also \"E-en-gur-a\", meaning \"house of the subterranean waters\"), a ziggurat temple surrounded by Euphratean marshlands near the ancient Persian Gulf coastline at Eridu. It was the first temple known to have been built in Southern Iraq. Four separate excavations at the site of Eridu have demonstrated the existence of a shrine dating back to the earliest Ubaid period, more than 6,500 years ago. Over the following 4,500 years, the temple was expanded 18 times, until it was abandoned during the Persian period. On this basis Thorkild Jacobsen has hypothesized that the original deity of the temple was Abzu, with his attributes later being taken by Enki over time. P. Steinkeller believes that, during the earliest period, Enki had a subordinate position to a goddess (possibly Ninhursag), taking the role of divine consort or high priest, later taking priority. The Enki temple had at its entrance a pool of fresh water, and excavation has found numerous carp bones, suggesting collective feasts. Carp are shown in the twin water flows running into the later God Enki, suggesting continuity of these features over a very long period. These features were found at all subsequent Sumerian temples, suggesting that this temple established the pattern for all subsequent Sumerian temples. \"All rules laid down at Eridu were faithfully observed\".\nIconography.\nEnki was the keeper of the divine powers called \"Me\", the gifts of civilization. He is often shown with the horned crown of divinity.\nOn the Adda Seal, Enki is depicted with two streams of water flowing into each of his shoulders: one the Tigris, the other the Euphrates. Alongside him are two trees, symbolizing the male and female aspects of nature. He is shown wearing a flounced skirt and a cone-shaped hat. An eagle descends from above to land upon his outstretched right arm. This portrayal reflects Enki's role as the god of water, life, and replenishment.\nConsidered the master shaper of the world, god of wisdom and of all magic, Enki was characterized as the lord of the Abzu (Apsu in Akkadian), the freshwater sea or groundwater located within the earth. In the later Babylonian epic \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\", Abzu, the \"begetter of the gods\", is inert and sleepy but finds his peace disturbed by the younger gods, so sets out to destroy them. His grandson Enki, chosen to represent the younger gods, puts a spell on Abzu \"casting him into a deep sleep\", thereby confining him deep underground. Enki subsequently sets up his home \"\"in the depths of the Abzu\".\" Enki thus takes on all of the functions of the Abzu, including his fertilising powers as lord of the waters and lord of semen.\nEarly royal inscriptions from the third millennium BCE mention \"the reeds of Enki\". Reeds were an important local building material, used for baskets and containers, and collected outside the city walls, where the dead or sick were often carried. This links Enki to the \"Kur\" or underworld of Sumerian mythology. In another even older tradition, Nammu, the goddess of the primeval creative matter and the mother-goddess portrayed as having \"given birth to the great gods,\" was the mother of Enki, and as the watery creative force, was said to preexist Ea-Enki. Benito states \"With Enki it is an interesting change of gender symbolism, the fertilising agent is also water, Sumerian \"a\" or \"Ab\" which also means \"semen\". In one evocative passage in a Sumerian hymn, Enki stands at the empty riverbeds and fills them with his 'water'\".\nMythology.\nThe creation of life and sickness.\nThe cosmogenic myth common in Sumer was that of the hieros gamos, a sacred marriage where divine principles in the form of dualistic opposites came together as male and female to give birth to the cosmos. In the epic \"Enki and Ninhursag\", Enki, as lord of \"Ab\" or fresh water (also the Sumerian word for semen), is living with his wife in the paradise of Dilmun where\nDespite being a place where \"the raven uttered no cries\" and \"the lion killed not, the wolf snatched not the lamb, unknown was the kid-killing dog, unknown was the grain devouring boar\", Dilmun had no water and Enki heard the cries of its goddess, Ninsikil, and orders the sun-god Utu to bring fresh water from the Earth for Dilmun. As a result,\nDilmun was identified with Bahrain, whose name in Arabic means \"two seas\", where the fresh waters of the Arabian aquifer mingle with the salt waters of the Persian Gulf. This mingling of waters was known in Sumerian as Nammu, and was identified as the mother of Enki.\nThe subsequent tale, with similarities to the Biblical story of the forbidden fruit, repeats the story of how fresh water brings life to a barren land. Enki, the Water-Lord then \"caused to flow the 'water of the heart\" and having fertilised his consort Ninhursag, also known as Ki or Earth, after \"Nine days being her nine months, the months of 'womanhood'... like good butter, Nintu, the mother of the land, ...like good butter, gave birth to Ninsar, (Lady Greenery)\". When Ninhursag left him, as Water-Lord he came upon Ninsar (Lady Greenery). Not knowing her to be his daughter, and because she reminds him of his absent consort, Enki then seduces and has intercourse with her. Ninsar then gave birth to Ninkurra (Lady Fruitfulness or Lady Pasture), and leaves Enki alone again. A second time, Enki, in his loneliness finds and seduces Ninkurra, and from the union Ninkurra gave birth to Uttu (weaver or spider, the weaver of the web of life).\nA third time Enki succumbs to temptation, and attempts seduction of Uttu. Upset about Enki's reputation, Uttu consults Ninhursag, who, upset at the promiscuous wayward nature of her spouse, advises Uttu to avoid the riverbanks, the places likely to be affected by flooding, the home of Enki. In another version of this myth Ninhursag takes Enki's semen from Uttu's womb and plants it in the earth where eight plants rapidly germinate. With his two-faced servant and steward Isimud, \"Enki, in the swampland, in the swampland lies stretched out, 'What is this (plant), what is this (plant).' His messenger Isimud, answers him; 'My king, this is the tree-plant', he says to him. He cuts it off for him and he (Enki) eats it\". And so, despite warnings, Enki consumes the other seven fruit. Consuming his own semen, he falls pregnant (ill with swellings) in his jaw, his teeth, his mouth, his hip, his throat, his limbs, his side and his rib. The gods are at a loss to know what to do; chagrined they \"sit in the dust\". As Enki lacks a birth canal through which to give birth, he seems to be dying with swellings. The fox then asks Enlil, King of the Gods, \"If I bring Ninhursag before thee, what shall be my reward?\" Ninhursag's sacred fox then fetches the goddess.\nNinhursag relents and takes Enki's Ab (water, or semen) into her body, and gives birth to gods of healing of each part of the body: Abu for the jaw, Nanshe for the throat, Nintul for the hip, Ninsutu for the tooth, Ninkasi for the mouth, Dazimua for the side, Enshagag for the limbs. The last one, Ninti (Lady Rib), is also a pun on Lady Life, a title of Ninhursag herself. The story thus symbolically reflects the way in which life is brought forth through the addition of water to the land, and once it grows, water is required to bring plants to fruit. It also counsels balance and responsibility, nothing to excess.\nNinti, the title of Ninhursag, also means \"the mother of all living\", and was a title later given to the Hurrian goddess Kheba. This is also the title given in the Bible to Eve, the Hebrew and Aramaic \"\u1e24awwah\" (\u05d7\u05d5\u05d4), who was made from the rib of Adam, in a strange reflection of the Sumerian myth, in which Adam \u2013 not Enki \u2013 walks in the Garden of Paradise.\nThe making of man.\nAfter six generations of gods, in the Babylonian \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\", in the seventh generation, (Akkadian \"shapattu\" or sabath), the younger Igigi gods, the sons and daughters of Enlil and Ninlil, go on strike and refuse their duties of keeping creation working. Abzu, god of fresh water, co-creator of the cosmos, threatens to destroy the world with his waters, and the gods gather in terror. Enki promises to help and puts Abzu to sleep, confining him in irrigation canals and places him in the Kur, beneath his city of Eridu. But the universe is still threatened, as Tiamat, angry at the imprisonment of Abzu and at the prompting of her son and vizier Kingu, decides to take back creation herself. The gods gather again in terror and turn to Enki for help, but Enki \u2013 who harnessed Abzu, Tiamat's consort, for irrigation \u2013 refuses to get involved. The gods then seek help elsewhere, and the patriarchal Enlil, their father, god of Nippur, promises to solve the problem if they make him King of the Gods. In the Babylonian tale, Enlil's role is taken by Marduk, Enki's son, and in the Assyrian version it is Asshur. After dispatching Tiamat with the \"arrows of his winds\" down her throat and constructing the heavens with the arch of her ribs, Enlil places her tail in the sky as the Milky Way, and her crying eyes become the source of the Tigris and Euphrates. But there is still the problem of \"who will keep the cosmos working\". Enki, who might have otherwise come to their aid, is lying in a deep sleep and fails to hear their cries. His mother Nammu (creatrix also of Abzu and Tiamat) \"brings the tears of the gods\" before Enki and says\nEnki then advises that they create a servant of the gods, humankind, out of clay and blood. Against Enki's wish, the gods decide to slay Kingu, and Enki finally consents to use Kingu's blood to make the first human, with whom Enki always later has a close relationship, the first of the seven sages, seven wise men or \"Abgallu\" (\"ab\" = water, \"gal\" = great, \"lu\" = man), also known as Adapa. Enki assembles a team of divinities to help him, creating a host of \"good and princely fashioners\". He tells his mother:\nAdapa, the first man fashioned, later goes and acts as the advisor to the King of Eridu, when in the Sumerian King-List, the \"me\" of \"kingship descends on Eridu\".\nSamuel Noah Kramer believes that behind this myth of Enki's confinement of Abzu lies an older one of the struggle between Enki and the Dragon Kur (the underworld).\nThe Atrahasis-Epos has it that Enlil requested from Nammu the creation of humans. And Nammu told him that with the help of Enki (her son) she can create humans in the image of gods.\nUniter of languages.\nIn the Sumerian epic entitled \"Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta\", in a speech of Enmerkar, an introductory spell appears, recounting Enki having had mankind communicate in one language (following Jay Crisostomo 2019); or, in other accounts, it is a hymn imploring Enki to do so. \nIn either case, Enki \"facilitated the debates between [the two kings] by allowing the world to speak one language,\" the presumed superior language of the tablet, i.e. Sumerian.\nJay Crisostomo's 2019 translation, based on the recent work of C. Mittermayer is:\nS.N. Kramer's 1940 translation is as follows:\nThe deluge.\nIn the Sumerian version of the flood myth, the causes of the flood and the reasons for the hero's survival are unknown due to the fact that the beginning of the tablet describing the story has been destroyed. Nonetheless, Kramer has stated that it can probably be reasonably inferred that the hero Ziusudra survives due to Enki's aid because that is what happens in the later Akkadian and Babylonian versions of the story.\nIn the later Legend of Atrahasis, Enlil, the King of the Gods, sets out to eliminate humanity, whose noise is disturbing his rest. He successively sends drought, famine and plague to eliminate humanity, but Enki thwarts his half-brother's plans by teaching Atrahasis how to counter these threats. Each time, Atrahasis asks the population to abandon worship of all gods except the one responsible for the calamity, and this seems to shame them into relenting. Humans, however, proliferate a fourth time. Enraged, Enlil convenes a Council of Deities and gets them to promise not to tell humankind that he plans their total annihilation. Enki does not tell Atrahasis directly, but speaks to him in secret via a reed wall. He instructs Atrahasis to build a boat in order to rescue his family and other living creatures from the coming deluge. After the seven-day deluge, the flood hero frees a swallow, a raven and a dove in an effort to find if the flood waters have receded. Upon landing, a sacrifice is made to the gods. Enlil is angry his will has been thwarted yet again, and Enki is named as the culprit. Enki explains that Enlil is unfair to punish the guiltless, and the gods institute measures to ensure that humanity does not become too populous in the future. This is one of the oldest of the surviving Middle Eastern deluge myths.\nEnki and Inanna.\nThe myth \"Enki and Inanna\" tells the story of how the young goddess of the \u00c9-anna temple of Uruk feasts with her father Enki. The two deities participate in a drinking competition; then, Enki, thoroughly inebriated, gives Inanna all of the \"mes\". The next morning, when Enki awakes with a hangover, he asks his servant Isimud for the \"mes\", only to be informed that he has given them to Inanna. Upset, he sends \"Galla\" to recover them. Inanna sails away in the boat of heaven and arrives safely back at the quay of Uruk. Eventually, Enki admits his defeat and accepts a peace treaty with Uruk.\nPolitically, this myth would seem to indicate events of an early period when political authority passed from Enki's city of Eridu to Inanna's city of Uruk.\nIn the myth of \"Inanna's Descent\", Inanna, in order to console her grieving sister Ereshkigal, who is mourning the death of her husband Gugalana (\"gu\" 'bull', \"gal\" 'big', \"ana\" 'sky/heaven'), slain by Gilgamesh and Enkidu, sets out to visit her sister. Inanna tells her servant Ninshubur ('Lady Evening', a reference to Inanna's role as the evening star) to get help from Anu, Enlil or Enki if she does not return in three days. After Inanna has not come back, Ninshubur approaches Anu, only to be told that he knows the goddess's strength and her ability to take care of herself. While Enlil tells Ninshubur he is busy running the cosmos, Enki immediately expresses concern and dispatches his Galla (Galaturra or Kurgarra, sexless beings created from the dirt from beneath the god's finger-nails) to recover the young goddess.\nThese beings may be the origin of the Greco-Roman \"Galli\", androgynous beings of the third sex, similar to the Native American Two-Spirit, who played an important part in early religious ritual.\nIn the story \"Inanna and Shukaletuda\", Shukaletuda, the gardener, set by Enki to care for the date palm he had created, finds Inanna sleeping under the palm tree and rapes the goddess in her sleep. Awaking, she discovers that she has been violated and seeks to punish the miscreant. Shukaletuda seeks protection from Enki, whom Bott\u00e9ro believes to be his father. In classic Enkian fashion, the father advises Shukaletuda to hide in the city where Inanna will not be able to find him. Enki, as the protector of whoever comes to seek his help, and as the empowerer of Inanna, here challenges the young impetuous goddess to control her anger so as to be better able to function as a great judge.\nEventually, after cooling her anger, she too seeks the help of Enki, as spokesperson of the \"assembly of the gods\", the Igigi and the Anunnaki. After she presents her case, Enki sees that justice needs to be done and promises help, delivering knowledge of where the miscreant is hiding.\nEnki and the Kur.\nIn the earliest surviving version of the myth of the slaying of the Kur, Enki is the hero responsible for the Kur being slain. Unfortunately, this myth is highly fragmentary and what little that is known about it comes solely from the prologue at the beginning of the epic poem \"Gilgamesh, Enkidu, and the Nether World\". In later versions of this myth, the hero is either Ninurta or Inanna.\nBased on what little has survived of the account, it seems that the legend begins with the Kur abducting the goddess Ereshkigal and dragging her down to the Netherworld. Enki sets out in a boat to attack the Kur and avenge the abduction of Ereshkigal. The Kur is described as defending itself using a storm of hailstones of all sizes and by attacking Enki using the waters beneath the boat. The account never actually tells who the winner of the fight is, but it can probably be assumed that Enki is the ultimate victor.\nInfluence.\nEnki and later Ea were apparently depicted, sometimes, as a man covered with the skin of a fish, and this representation, as likewise the name of his temple E-apsu, \"house of the watery deep\", points decidedly to his original character as a god of the waters (see Oannes). Around the excavation of the 18 shrines found on the spot, thousands of carp bones were found, consumed possibly in feasts to the god. Of his cult at Eridu, which goes back to the oldest period of Mesopotamian history, nothing definite is known except that his temple was also associated with Ninhursag's temple which was called \"Esaggila\", \"the lofty head house\" (\"E\", house, \"sag\", head, \"ila\", high; or Akkadian goddess = Ila), a name shared with Marduk's temple in Babylon, pointing to a staged tower or ziggurat (as with the temple of Enlil at Nippur, which was known as \"E-kur\" (\"kur\", hill)), and that incantations, involving ceremonial rites in which water as a sacred element played a prominent part, formed a feature of his worship. This seems also implicated in the epic of the hieros gamos or sacred marriage of Enki and Ninhursag (above), which seems an etiological myth of the fertilisation of the dry ground by the coming of irrigation water (from Sumerian \"a\", \"ab\", water or semen). The early inscriptions of Urukagina in fact go so far as to suggest that the divine pair, Enki and Ninki, were the progenitors of seven pairs of gods, including Enki as god of Eridu, Enlil of Nippur, and Su'en (or Sin) of Ur, and were themselves the children of An (sky, heaven) and Ki (earth). The pool of the Abzu at the front of his temple was adopted also at the temple to Nanna (Akkadian Sin) the Moon, at Ur, and spread from there throughout the Middle East. It is believed to remain today as the sacred pool at Mosques, or as the holy water font in Catholic or Eastern Orthodox churches.\nWhether Eridu at one time also played an important political role in Sumerian affairs is not certain, though not improbable. At all events the prominence of \"Ea\" led, as in the case of Nippur, to the survival of Eridu as a sacred city, long after it had ceased to have any significance as a political center. Myths in which Ea figures prominently have been found in Assurbanipal's library, and in the Hattusas archive in Hittite Anatolia. As Ea, Enki had a wide influence outside of Sumer, being equated with El (at Ugarit) and possibly Yah (at Ebla) in the Canaanite 'ilhm pantheon. He is also found in Hurrian and Hittite mythology as a god of contracts, and is particularly favourable to humankind. It has been suggested that etymologically the name Ea comes from the term \"*hyy\" (life), referring to Enki's waters as life-giving. Enki/Ea is essentially a god of civilization, wisdom, and culture. He was also the creator and protector of man, and of the world in general. Traces of this version of Ea appear in the Marduk epic celebrating the achievements of this god and the close connection between the Ea cult at Eridu and that of Marduk. The correlation between the two rises from two other important connections: (1) that the name of Marduk's sanctuary at Babylon bears the same name, \"Esaggila\", as that of a temple in Eridu, and (2) that Marduk is generally termed the son of Ea, who derives his powers from the voluntary abdication of the father in favour of his son. Accordingly, the incantations originally composed for the Ea cult were re-edited by the priests of Babylon and adapted to the worship of Marduk, and, similarly, the hymns to Marduk betray traces of the transfer to Marduk of attributes which originally belonged to Ea.\nIt is, however, as the third figure in the triad (the two other members of which were Anu and Enlil) that Ea acquires his permanent place in the pantheon. To him was assigned the control of the watery element, and in this capacity he becomes the \"shar apsi\"; i.e. king of the Apsu or \"the abyss\". The Apsu was figured as the abyss of water beneath the earth, and since the gathering place of the dead, known as Aralu, was situated near the confines of the Apsu, he was also designated as En -Ki; i.e. \"lord of that which is below\", in contrast to Anu, who was the lord of the \"above\" or the heavens. The cult of Ea extended throughout Babylonia and Assyria. We find temples and shrines erected in his honour, e.g. at Nippur, Girsu, Ur, Babylon, Sippar, and Nineveh, and the numerous epithets given to him, as well as the various forms under which the god appears, alike bear witness to the popularity which he enjoyed from the earliest to the latest period of Babylonian-Assyrian history. The consort of Ea, known as Ninhursag, Ki, Uriash Damkina, \"lady of that which is below\", or Damgalnunna, \"big lady of the waters\", originally was fully equal with Ea, but in more patriarchal Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian times plays a part merely in association with her lord. Generally, however, Enki seems to be a reflection of pre-patriarchal times, in which relations between the sexes were characterised by a situation of greater gender equality. In his character, he prefers persuasion to conflict, which he seeks to avoid if possible.\nEa and West Semitic deities.\nIn 1964, a team of Italian archaeologists under the direction of Paolo Matthiae of the University of Rome La Sapienza performed a series of excavations of material from the third-millennium BCE city of Ebla. Much of the written material found in these digs was later translated by Giovanni Pettinato.\nAmong other conclusions, he found a tendency among the inhabitants of Ebla, after the reign of Sargon of Akkad, to replace the name of El, king of the gods of the Canaanite pantheon (found in names such as Mikael and Ishmael), with \"Ia\" (Mikaia, Ishmaia).\nJean Bott\u00e9ro (1952) and others suggested that Ia in this case is a West Semitic (Canaanite) way of saying Ea, Enki's Akkadian name, associating the Canaanite theonym Yahu, and ultimately Hebrew YHWH. Some scholars remain skeptical of the theory while explaining how it might have been misinterpreted.\n\"Ia\" has also been compared by William Hallo with the Ugaritic Yamm (sea), (also called Judge Nahar, or Judge River) whose earlier name in at least one ancient source was Yaw, or Ya'a.\nExternal links.\nI checked out the Aquarius constellation wikipedia article.\nIt said:\nAquarius is identified as GU.LA \"The Great One\" in the Babylonian star catalogues and represents the god Ea himself, who is commonly depicted holding an overflowing vase. The Babylonian star-figure appears on entitlement stones and cylinder seals from the second millennium. It contained the winter solstice in the Early Bronze Age.\nThe citation used was Thurston, Hugh (1996), Early Astronomy, Springer, "}
{"id": "10482", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10482", "title": "Eli Wallach", "text": "Eli Herschel Wallach (; December 7, 1915 \u2013 June 24, 2014) was an American film, television and stage actor whose career spanned more than seven decades, beginning in the late 1940s. Trained in stage acting, which he enjoyed doing most, he became \"one of the greatest 'character actors' ever to appear on stage and screen\", with over 90 film credits. He and his wife Anne Jackson often appeared together on stage, and were one of the best-known acting couples in American theater. As a stage and screen character actor, Wallach had one of the longest-ever careers in show business, spanning 62 years from his Broadway debut to his last two major Hollywood studio movies (which were released in the same year).\nWallach initially studied method acting under Sanford Meisner, and later became a founding member of the Actors Studio, where he studied under Lee Strasberg. He played a wide variety of roles throughout his career, primarily as a supporting actor.\nFor his debut screen performance in \"Baby Doll\" (1956), he won a BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer and a Golden Globe Award nomination. Among his other most famous roles are Calvera in \"The Magnificent Seven\" (1960), Guido in \"The Misfits\" (1961), and Tuco (\"The Ugly\") in \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" (1966). Other notable portrayals include outlaw Charlie Gant in \"How the West Was Won\" (1962), Hitman Leon B. Little in \"Tough Guys\" (1986), Don Altobello in \"The Godfather Part III\", Cotton Weinberger in \"The Two Jakes\" (both 1990), Donald Fallon in \"The Associate\" (1996), and Arthur Abbott in \"The Holiday\" (2006). One of America's most prolific screen actors, Wallach remained active well into his nineties, with roles as recently as 2010 in \"\" and \"The Ghost Writer\".\nIn 1988, Wallach was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame. He received BAFTA Awards, Tony Awards and Emmy Awards, and an Academy Honorary Award at the second annual Governors Awards on November 13, 2010.\nIn March 2017, the Harry Ransom Center announced the acquisition of Wallach's papers, along with those of his wife, which will be made public when cataloging is complete.\nEarly life.\nEli Herschel Wallach was born on December 7, 1915, at 156 Union Street in Red Hook, Brooklyn, a son of Jewish immigrants Abraham and Bertha (Schorr) Wallach from Przemy\u015bl (now Poland). He had a brother and two sisters. He and his family were the only Jews in an otherwise Italian American neighborhood. His parents owned Bertha's Candy Store. Wallach graduated in 1936 from the University of Texas with a degree in history. While there, he performed in a play with fellow students Ann Sheridan and Walter Cronkite. In a later interview, Wallach said that he learned to ride horses while in Texas, explaining that he liked Texas because \"It opened my eyes to the word \"friendship...\" You could rely on people. If they gave you their word, that was it\u00a0... It was an education.\"\nTwo years later he received a master of arts degree in education from the City College of New York. He gained his first method acting experience at the Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre in New York City, where he studied under Sanford Meisner. There, according to Wallach, actors were forced to \"unlearn\" all their physical and vocal mannerisms, while traditional stage etiquette and \"singsong\" deliveries were \"utterly excised\" from his classroom.\nWallach's education was cut short when he was drafted into the United States Army in January 1942. He served as staff sergeant in a military hospital in Hawaii and later was sent to Officer Candidate School (OCS) in Abilene, Texas, to train as a medical administrative officer. Commissioned a second lieutenant, he was ordered to Casablanca. Later, when he was serving in France, a senior officer noticed his acting career and asked him to create a show for the patients. He and his unit wrote a play called \"Is This the Army?\", which was inspired by Irving Berlin's \"This Is the Army\". In the comedy, Wallach and the other actors mocked Axis dictators, with Wallach portraying Adolf Hitler.\nCareer.\nStage actor.\nWallach took classes in acting at the Dramatic Workshop of the New School in New York City with the influential German director Erwin Piscator. He later became a founding member of the Actors Studio, taught by Lee Strasberg. There, he studied more method acting technique with founding member Robert Lewis, and with other students including Marlon Brando, Montgomery Clift, Herbert Berghof, Sidney Lumet, and his soon-to-be wife, Anne Jackson. Wallach became Marilyn Monroe's first new friend when she became a student at the Actors Studio, once insisting on watching him perform in \"The Teahouse of the August Moon\" from the backstage wings, simply to see up close how experienced actors perform a two-hour play. She also became friends with his wife, Anne Jackson, also studying at the Studio, and would visit the couple at their home and sometimes babysit their new child.\nIn 1945 Wallach made his Broadway debut and he won a Tony Award in 1951 for his performance alongside Maureen Stapleton in the Tennessee Williams play \"The Rose Tattoo\". His other theater credits include \"Mister Roberts\", \"The Teahouse of the August Moon\", \"Camino Real\", \"Major Barbara\" (in which director Charles Laughton discouraged Wallach's established method acting style), \"Luv\", and \"Staircase\", co-starring Milo O'Shea, which was a serious depiction of an aging homosexual couple. He also played a role in a tour of \"Antony and Cleopatra,\" produced by the actress Katharine Cornell in 1946. He exposed Americans to the work of playwright Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco in plays like \"The Chairs\" and \"The Lesson\" in 1958, and in 1961 \"Rhinoceros\" opposite Zero Mostel. He last starred on stage as the title character in \"Visiting Mr. Green\".\nThe stage was where Wallach focused his early career. From 1945 to 1950 he and his wife, Anne Jackson, worked together acting in various plays by Tennessee Williams. The five years following, he continued only working on stage, not becoming involved in film work until 1956. During those years, however, they were generally having a hard time making ends meet. He recalls they were getting along on unemployment insurance and living in a one-room, $35 a month apartment on lower Fifth Avenue in the Village. When he did get offered early movie parts, he turned them down with no regrets, and very early in his career he explained his reasoning:\nHe said that the stage was what attracted him most and what he \"needed\" to do. \"Acting is the most alive thing I can do, and the most joyous,\" he stated.\nWallach and Jackson became one of the best-known acting couples in the American theater, as iconic as Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne, and Jessica Tandy and Hume Cronyn, and they looked for opportunities to work together. During an interview, he said of Jackson, \"I have tremendous respect and admiration for her as an actress. . . we have a terrific working compatibility when we're in the same play, especially when the play means something important to us.\" When he did gravitate toward accepting parts in films, he did so to \"help pay the bills,\" he said, adding, \"for actors, movies are a means to an end.\"\nDespite the fact that he eventually acted in over 90 films and almost as many television dramas, he continued to accept stage parts throughout his career, often with Jackson. They played in comedies like \"The Typists\" and \"The Tiger\" in 1963, and acted together in \"Waltz of the Toreadors\" in 1973. In 1978 they played in a revival of \"The Diary of Anne Frank\", along with their daughters, and in 1984 they acted in \"Nest of the Wood Grouse,\" directed by Joseph Papp. Four years later, in 1988, they acted in a revival of \"Cafe Crown\", a portrait of the Yiddish theatre scene during its prime. They continued acting together as late as 2000, while he also took on roles alone throughout all those years.\nFilm and television roles.\nWallach's film debut was in Elia Kazan's controversial 1956 \"Baby Doll\", for which he won the British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA) as \"Most Promising Newcomer.\" \"Baby Doll\" was controversial because of its underlying sexual theme. Director Elia Kazan however, set explicit limits on Wallach's scenes, telling him not to actually seduce Carroll Baker, but instead to create an unfulfilled erotic tension. Kazan later explained his reasoning:\nWallach went on to a prolific career as \"one of the greatest 'character actors' ever to appear on stage and screen,\" notes Turner Classic Movies, acting in over 90 films. Having grown up on the \"mean streets\" of an Italian American neighborhood, and his versatility as a method actor, Wallach developed the ability to play a wide variety of different roles, although he tried to not get pinned down to any single type of character. \"Right now I'm playing an old man,\" he said at age 84. But \"I've been through all the ethnic groups, from Mexican bandits to Italian Mafia heads to Okinawans to half-breeds, and now I'm playing old Jews. Who knows?\"\nNoting this versatility as a character actor, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences called him \"the quintessential chameleon,\" with the ability to play different characters \"effortlessly,\" and \"L.A. Times\" theater critic Charles McNulty saw Wallach's \"power to illuminate\" his various screen or stage personas as being \"radioactive.\" \"The Guardian\" newspaper has written that \"Wallach was made for character acting,\" and includes movie clips from some of his most memorable roles in a tribute to him.\nIn 1961, Wallach co-starred with Marilyn Monroe, Montgomery Clift and Clark Gable in \"The Misfits\", Monroe's and Gable's last film before their deaths. Wallach never learned why he was cast in the film, although he suspected that Monroe had something to do with it. Its screenwriter, Arthur Miller, who was married to Monroe at the time, said that \"Eli Wallach is the happiest good actor I've ever known. He really enjoys the work.\"\nSome of his other films included \"The Lineup\" (1958), \"Lord Jim\" (1965) with Peter O'Toole, a comic role in \"How to Steal a Million\" (1966), again with O'Toole, and Audrey Hepburn, and as Tuco (the 'Ugly') in Sergio Leone's \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" (1966) with Clint Eastwood, followed by other Spaghetti Westerns, such as \"Ace High\". At one point, Henry Fonda had asked Wallach whether he himself should accept a part offered to him to act in a similar Western, \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" (1968), which would also be directed by Leone. Wallach said \"Yes, you'll enjoy the challenge,\" and Fonda later thanked Wallach for that advice.\nWallach and Eastwood became friends during the filming of \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" and he recalled their off-work time together: \"Clint was the tall, silent type. He's the kind where you open up and do all the talking. He smiles and nods and stores it all away in that wonderful calculator of a brain.\" In 2003 Wallach acted in \"Mystic River\", produced and directed by Eastwood, who once said \"working with Eli Wallach has been one of the great pleasures of my life.\"\nA pivotal moment in Wallach's career came in 1953, when he, along with Frank Sinatra and Harvey Lembeck, tried out for the role of Maggio in the film \"From Here to Eternity\". Sinatra biographer Kitty Kelly notes that while Sinatra's test was good, it had none of the \"consummate acting ability\" of Wallach. Producer Harry Cohn and director Fred Zinnemann were \"dazzled\" by Wallach's screen test and wanted him to play the part. However, Wallach had previously been offered an important role in another Tennessee Williams play, \"Camino Real\", to be directed by Elia Kazan, and turned down the movie role. Wallach said that when he learned that the play had finally received financing, he \"grabbed\" the opportunity: \"It was a remarkable piece of writing by the leading playwright in America and it was going to be directed by the country's best. There really wasn't much of a choice for me.\" The film, however, went on to win eight Academy Awards, including one for Sinatra, which revived his career. Wallach recalled afterwards, \"Whenever Sinatra saw me, he\u2019d say, 'Hello, you crazy actor!'\" Wallach, however, claimed to have no regrets.\nFilm historian James Welsh states that during Wallach's career, he appeared in most of the \"prestige\" television dramas during the \"Golden Age\" of the 1950s, including \"Studio One, The Philco Television Playhouse, The Armstrong Circle Theatre, Playhouse 90,\" and \"The Hallmark Hall of Fame,\" among others. He won the 1966\u20131967 Emmy Award for his role in the telefilm \"The Poppy is Also a Flower.\" In 2006 Wallach appeared on NBC's \"Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip\", playing a former writer who was blacklisted in the 1950s. His character was a writer on \"The Philco Comedy Hour\", a show that aired on a fictional NBS network. This is a reference to \"The Philco Television Playhouse\", in several episodes of which Wallach actually appeared in 1955. Wallach earned a 2007 Emmy nomination for his work on the show.\nDuring the filming of \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\", Wallach nearly died three times. Once, he accidentally drank a bottle of acid which was placed next to his pop bottle; another time was in a scene where he was about to be hanged, someone fired a pistol which caused the horse underneath him to bolt and run a mile while Wallach's hands were still tied behind his back; in a different scene with him lying on a railroad track, he was close to being decapitated by steps jutting out from the train.\nWallach appeared as DC Comics' supervillain Mr. Freeze in the 1960s \"Batman\" television series. He said that he received more fan mail about his role as Mr. Freeze than about all of his other roles combined. He played Gus Farber in the television miniseries \"Seventh Avenue\" in 1977, and 10 years later, at the age of 71, he starred alongside Michael Landon in \"Highway to Heaven\" episode \"A Father's Faith\". Three years later, he played aging mob boss Don Altobello in the Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Godfather Part III\".\nOn November 13, 2010, at the age of 94, Wallach received an Academy Honorary Award for his contribution to the film industry from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. A few years prior to that event, Kate Winslet told another audience that Wallach, with whom she acted in \"The Holiday\" in 2006, was one of the \"most charismatic men\" she'd met, and her \"very own sexiest man alive.\"\nWallach's final performance was in the short film \"The Train\" (2015). Wallach plays a Holocaust survivor who, in a meeting, teaches a self-consumed and preoccupied young man that life can change in a moment. The short was shot in early 2014 and premiered on August 6, 2015, at the Rhode Island International Film Festival.\nBetween 1984 and 1997, he also performed voiceovers in a series of television commercials for the Toyota Pickup.\nPersonal life.\nEli Wallach was married to stage actress Anne Jackson for 66 years from March 5, 1948, until his death. They had three children: Peter, Roberta, and Katherine. Roberta played an epileptic teenager in Paul Zindel's \"The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds\" and appeared in several other movies.\nWallach was a strict teetotaler and once asked the director John Huston for advice on how to play a \"drunk\" scene during the filming of \"The Misfits\".\nA few years before 2005, Wallach lost sight in his left eye as the result of a stroke.\nHis niece is the historian Joan Wallach Scott (the daughter of his brother, Sam Wallach). A. O. Scott, a film critic for \"The New York Times\", is his great-nephew.\nDeath.\nWallach died on June 24, 2014, of natural causes at the age of 98. He was survived by his wife of 66 years, three children, three grandchildren and a great-grandchild. His body was cremated.\nKatherine Wallach told \"The New York Times\" that Anne Jackson died on April 12, 2016, aged 90, at her home in Manhattan.\nFilmography.\nSelected filmography: "}
{"id": "10484", "revid": "11241628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10484", "title": "Electric Light Orchestra", "text": "The Electric Light Orchestra (ELO) are an English rock band formed in Birmingham in 1970 by songwriters-multi-instrumentalists Jeff Lynne and Roy Wood with drummer Bev Bevan. Their music is characterised by a fusion of Beatlesque pop, classical arrangements and futuristic iconography. After Wood's departure in 1972, Lynne became the band's sole leader, arranging and producing every album while writing nearly all of their original material. For their initial tenure, Lynne, Bevan and keyboardist Richard Tandy were the group's only consistent members.\nELO was formed out of Lynne's and Wood's desire to create modern rock and pop songs with classical overtones. It derived as an offshoot of Wood's previous band, the Move, of which Lynne and Bevan were also members. During the 1970s and 1980s, ELO released a string of top 10 albums and singles, including two LPs that reached the top of British charts: the disco-inspired \"Discovery\" (1979) and the science-fiction-themed concept album \"Time\" (1981). In 1986 Lynne lost interest in the band and disbanded the group. Bevan responded by forming his own band, ELO Part II, which later became the Orchestra. After a brief reunion from 2000\u201301, ELO remained largely inactive until 2014, when Lynne re-formed the band again with Tandy as Jeff Lynne's ELO.\nDuring ELO's original 13-year period of active recording and touring, they sold over 50 million records worldwide, and collected 19 CRIA, 21 RIAA, and 38 BPI awards. From 1972 to 1986, ELO accumulated 27 top 40 songs on the UK Singles Chart, and fifteen top 20 songs on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The band also holds the record for having the most \"Billboard\" Hot 100 top 40 hits (20) without a number one single of any band in US chart history. In 2017, the key members of ELO (Wood, Lynne, Bevan and Tandy) were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nHistory.\n1970\u20131973: Formation and early albums.\nIn 1968, Roy Wood \u2014 guitarist, vocalist and songwriter of the Move \u2014 had an idea to form a new band that would use violins, cellos, string basses, horns and woodwinds to give their music a classical sound, taking rock music in the direction to \"pick up where the Beatles left off\". The orchestral instruments would be the main focus, rather than the guitars. Jeff Lynne, frontman of fellow Birmingham group the Idle Race, was excited by the concept. When Trevor Burton left the Move in February 1969, Lynne was asked by Wood to join, only to say no, as he was still focused on finding success with his band. But in January 1970, when Carl Wayne quit the band, Lynne accepted Wood's second invitation to join, on the condition that they focus their energy on the new project.\nOn 12 July 1970, when Wood added multiple cellos to a Lynne-penned song intended to be a Move B-side, the new concept became a reality and \"10538 Overture\" became the first Electric Light Orchestra song. The original plan was to end The Move following the release of the \"Looking On\" album at the end of 1970, crossing over to the new unit in the new year, but to help finance the fledgling band, one further Move album, \"Message from the Country\", was also recorded during the lengthy ELO recordings and released in mid-1971. The resulting debut album \"The Electric Light Orchestra\" was released in December 1971. Only the trio of Wood, Lynne and Bevan played on all songs, with Bill Hunt supplying the French Horn parts and Steve Woolam playing violin. It was released in the United States in March 1972 as \"No Answer\". The name was chosen after a record company secretary had tried to ring the UK company to get the name of the album. They were unavailable so she left a note reading \"No answer\". \"10538 Overture\" became a UK top-ten hit. With both band's albums in the stores simultaneously, the Move and ELO both appeared on television during this period.\nELO's debut concert took place on 16 April 1972 at the Greyhound Pub in Croydon, Surrey, with a line-up of Wood, Lynne, Bevan, Bill Hunt (keyboards/French horn), Andy Craig (cello), Mike Edwards (cello), Wilfred Gibson (violin), Hugh McDowell (cello), and Richard Tandy (bass). However, this line-up did not last for long. First Craig departed, and then Wood, during the recordings for the band's second LP. Taking Hunt and McDowell with him, Wood left the band to form Wizzard. Both cited problems with their manager, Don Arden, who Wood felt failed in his role, and an unsatisfactory tour of Italy, where the cellos and violins could not be heard over the electric instruments. However, Arden would manage Wizzard, despite Wood's negative comments towards Arden. Despite predictions from the music press that the band would fold without Wood, who had been the driving force behind the creation of ELO, Lynne stepped up to lead the band, with Bevan, Edwards, Gibson and Tandy (who had switched from bass to keyboards to replace Hunt) remaining from the previous line-up, and new recruits Mike de Albuquerque and Colin Walker joining the band on bass and cello, respectively.\nThe new line-up performed at the 1972 Reading Festival on 12 August 1972. Barcus Berry instrument pick-ups, now sported by the band's string trio, allowed them to have proper amplification on stage for their instruments, which had previously been all but drowned out by the electrified instruments. The band released their second album \"ELO 2\" in early 1973, which produced their second UK top 10 and their first US chart single, an elaborate version of the Chuck Berry classic \"Roll Over Beethoven\" (which also incorporated the first movement of Beethoven's own Fifth Symphony). ELO also made their first appearance on \"American Bandstand\". During the recording of the third album, Gibson was let go after a dispute over money, Mik Kaminski joined as violinist, and Walker left since touring was keeping him away from his family too much. Remaining cellist Edwards finished the cello parts for the album. The resulting album, \"On the Third Day\", was released in late 1973, with the American version featuring the popular single \"Showdown\". After leaving Wizzard, Hugh McDowell returned as the group's second cellist, also in late 1973.\n1974\u20131982: Global success and concept albums.\nFor the band's fourth album, \"Eldorado\", a concept album about a daydreamer, Lynne stopped multi-tracking strings and hired Louis Clark as string arranger with an orchestra and choir. The first single off the album, \"Can't Get It Out of My Head\", became their first US top 10 hit, and \"Eldorado, A Symphony\" became ELO's first gold album. Mike de Albuquerque departed the band during the recording sessions as he wished to spend more time with his family, and consequently much of the bass on the album was performed by Lynne.\nFollowing the release of \"Eldorado\", Kelly Groucutt was recruited as bassist and in early 1975, Melvyn Gale replaced Edwards on cello. The line-up stabilised as the band took to a decidedly more accessible sound. ELO had become successful in the US at this point and the group was a star attraction on the stadium and arena circuit, and regularly appeared on \"The Midnight Special\" more than any other band in that show's history with four appearances (in 1973, 1975, 1976 and 1977).\n\"Face the Music\" was released in 1975, producing the hit singles \"Evil Woman\", their third UK top 10, and \"Strange Magic\". The opening instrumental \"Fire on High\", with its mix of strings and acoustic guitars, saw heavy exposure as the theme music for the American television programme \"CBS Sports Spectacular\" in the mid-1970s. The group toured extensively from 3 February to 13 April 1976, playing 68 shows in 76 days in the US.\nTheir sixth album, the platinum selling \"A New World Record\", became their first UK top 10 album when it was released in 1976. It contained the hit singles \"Livin' Thing\", \"Telephone Line\", \"Rockaria!\" and \"Do Ya\", the last a re-recording of a Move song recorded for that group's final single. The band toured in support in the US only from September 1976 to April 1977 with a break in December, then an \"American Music Awards\" show appearance on 31 January 1977, plus a one-off gig in San Diego in August 1977. Casey Kasem said that the Electric Light Orchestra is the \"World's first touring rock 'n' roll chamber group\" before he played \"Livin' Thing\" at #28.\n\"A New World Record\" was followed by a multi-platinum selling album, the double-LP \"Out of the Blue\", in 1977. \"Out of the Blue\" featured the singles \"Turn to Stone\", \"Sweet Talkin' Woman\", \"Mr. Blue Sky\", and \"Wild West Hero\", each becoming a hit in the United Kingdom. The band then set out on a nine-month, 92-date world tour, with an enormous set and a hugely expensive space ship stage with fog machines and a laser display. In the United States the concerts were billed as \"The Big Night\" and were their largest to date, with 62,000 people seeing them at Cleveland Stadium. \"The Big Night\" went on to become the highest-grossing live concert tour in music history up to that point (1978). The band played at London's Wembley Arena for eight straight sold-out nights during the tour, another record at that time.\nIn 1979 the multi-platinum album \"Discovery\" was released, reaching number one on the UK Albums Chart. Although the biggest hit on the album (and ELO's biggest hit overall) was the rock song \"Don't Bring Me Down\", the album was noted for its heavy disco influence. \"Discovery\" also produced the hits \"Shine a Little Love\", their first and only no. 1 hit from 1972 to the present with any of the four major or minor US singles charts on \"Radio &amp; Records (R&amp;R)\", \"Last Train to London\", \"Confusion\" and \"The Diary of Horace Wimp\". Another song, \"Midnight Blue\", was released as a single in southeast Asia. The band recorded promotional videos for all the songs on the album.\nBy the end of 1979, ELO had reached the peak of their stardom, selling millions of albums and singles, and even inspiring a parody/tribute song on the Randy Newman album \"Born Again\", titled \"The Story of a Rock and Roll Band\". During 1979 Jeff Lynne also turned down an invitation for ELO to headline the August 1979 Knebworth Festival concerts. That allowed Led Zeppelin the chance to headline instead.\nIn 1980 Jeff Lynne was asked to write for the soundtrack of the musical film \"Xanadu\" and provided half of the songs, with the other half written by John Farrar and performed by the film's star Olivia Newton-John. The movie performed poorly at the box office, but the soundtrack did exceptionally well, eventually going double platinum. The album spawned hit singles from both Newton-John (\"Magic\", a no. 1 hit in the United States, and \"Suddenly\" with Cliff Richard) and ELO (\"I'm Alive\", which went gold, \"All Over the World\" and \"Don't Walk Away\"). The title track, performed by both Newton-John and ELO, is ELO's only song to top the singles chart in the United Kingdom. More than a quarter of a century later, \"Xanadu\", a Broadway musical based on the film, opened on 10 July 2007 at the Helen Hayes Theatre to uniformly good reviews. It received four Tony Award nominations. The musical received its UK premiere in London in October 2015. Casey Kasem called The Electric Light Orchestra a \"seven-man supergroup\" and \"amazing\" for hitting The Top 40 a remarkable six times in a one-year period from August 1979 to August 1980 before playing \"All Over the World\" at #23.\nIn 1981 ELO's sound changed again with the science fiction concept album \"Time\", a throwback to earlier, more progressive rock albums like \"Eldorado\". With the string section now departed, synthesisers took a dominating role, as was the trend in the larger music scene of the time; although studio strings were present on some of the tracks conducted by Rainer Pietsch, the overall soundscape had a more electronic feel in keeping with the futuristic nature of the album. \"Time\" topped the UK charts for two weeks and was the last ELO studio album to be certified platinum in the United Kingdom until \"Alone in the Universe\" in 2015. Singles from the album included \"Hold On Tight\", \"Twilight\", \"The Way Life's Meant to Be\", \"Here Is the News\" and \"Ticket to the Moon\". However, the release of the single for \"Rain Is Falling\" in 1982 was the band's first single in the US to fail to reach the \"Billboard\" Top 200 since 1975, and the release of \"The Way Life's Meant to Be\" similarly was their first single in the UK to fail to chart since 1976. The band embarked on their last world tour to promote the LP. For the tour, Kaminski returned to the line-up on violin, whilst Louis Clark (synthesizers) and Dave Morgan (guitar, keyboards, synthesizers, vocals) also joined the on stage lineup. Clark had previously handled string arrangements for the band.\n1983\u20131986: \"Secret Messages\", \"Balance of Power\", disbanding.\nJeff Lynne wanted to follow \"Time\" with a double album, but CBS blocked his plan on the grounds that a double vinyl album would be too expensive in the oil crisis and not sell as well as a single record, so as a result, the new album was edited down from double album to a single disc and released as \"Secret Messages\" in 1983 (many of the out-takes were later released on \"Afterglow\" or as b-sides of singles). The album was a hit in the UK reaching the top 5; but its release was undermined by a string of bad news that there would be no tour to promote the LP. Lynne, discouraged by the dwindling crowds on the \"Time\" tour, CBS's order to cut \"Secret Messages\" down to one disc, and his falling out with manager Don Arden (he would eventually leave Arden and Jet by 1985), decided to end ELO in late 1983. Drummer Bevan moved on to play drums for Black Sabbath and bassist Groucutt, unhappy with no touring income that year, decided to sue Lynne and Jet Records in November 1983, eventually resulting in a settlement for the sum of \u00a3300,000 (equivalent to \u00a3994,300 in 2018). \"Secret Messages\" debuted at number four in the United Kingdom, but it fell off the charts, failing to catch fire with a lack of hit singles in the UK (though \"Rock 'n' Roll Is King\" was a sizeable hit in UK, the US and Australia) and a lukewarm media response.\nThat same year, Lynne moved into production work, having already produced two tracks for Dave Edmunds' album \"Information\", and he would go on to produce six cuts from his next one, \"Riff Raff\", in 1984 and one cut on the Everly Brothers reunion album \"EB 84\". He also composed a track for former ABBA member Agnetha F\u00e4ltskog's 1985 album \"Eyes of a Woman\".\nLynne and Tandy went on to record tracks for the 1984 \"Electric Dreams\" soundtrack under Lynne's name; however, Lynne was contractually obliged to make one more ELO album. So Lynne, Bevan and Tandy returned to the studio in 1984 and 1985 as a three-piece (with Christian Schneider playing saxophone on some tracks and Lynne again doubling on bass in addition to his usual guitar in the absence of an official bass player) to record \"Balance of Power\", released early in 1986 after some delays. Though the single \"Calling America\" placed in the Top 30 in the United Kingdom (number 28) and Top 20 in the States, subsequent singles failed to chart. The album lacked actual classical strings, which were replaced once again by synthesizers, played by Tandy.\nThe band was then rejoined by Kaminski, Clark and Morgan, adding Martin Smith on bass guitar, and proceeded to perform a small number of live ELO performances in 1986, including shows in England and Germany along with US appearances on \"American Bandstand\", \"Solid Gold\", then at Disneyland that summer. The Birmingham Heart Beat Charity Concert 1986 was a charity concert organised by Bevan in ELO's hometown of Birmingham on 15 March 1986, and ELO performed. A hint of Lynne's future was seen when George Harrison appeared onstage during the encore at Heartbeat, joining in the all-star jam of \"Johnny B. Goode\". ELO's last performance for several years occurred on 13 July 1986 in Stuttgart, Germany playing as opening act to Rod Stewart. With Lynne no longer under contractual obligation to attend further scheduled performances, ELO effectively disbanded after that final show in Stuttgart in 1986, but there was no announcement made of it for the next two years, during which George Harrison's Lynne-produced album \"Cloud Nine\" and the pair's follow-up (with Roy Orbison, Bob Dylan and Tom Petty as Traveling Wilburys) \"Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1\" were released.\n1989\u20131999: ELO Part II.\nBev Bevan (under an agreement with Lynne, who co-owned the ELO name with him) continued on in 1989 as ELO Part II, initially with no other former ELO members, but with ELO's main orchestra conductor, Louis Clark. Bevan also recruited Eric Troyer, Pete Haycock, and Neil Lockwood. ELO Part II released their debut album \"Electric Light Orchestra Part Two\" in May 1991. Mik Kaminski, Kelly Groucutt and Hugh McDowell, at the time working in a group called OrKestra, joined the group for their first tour in 1991. While McDowell did not stay, Groucutt and Kaminski became fully-fledged members. In 1994, after the departure of Haycock and Lockwood, the remaining five recorded \"Moment of Truth\" with their newest member, Phil Bates. This lineup toured extensively up to 1999. Bevan retired from the lineup in 1999 and sold his share of the ELO name to Jeff Lynne in 2000, after Lynne had expressed his dismay that in certain areas the band were billed as 'ELO', rather than with '...Part II' added, suggesting it was the original outfit. After Bevan left, the band continued after they changed its name to The Orchestra. In 2001 The Orchestra would release their debut album \"No Rewind\".\n2000\u20132001: Reformation.\nLynne's comeback with ELO began in 2000 with the release of a retrospective box set, \"Flashback\", containing three CDs of remastered tracks and a handful of out-takes and unfinished works, most notably a new version of ELO's only UK number one hit \"Xanadu\". In 2001 \"Zoom,\" ELO's first album since 1986, was released. Though billed and marketed as an ELO album, the only returning member other than Lynne was Tandy, who performed on one track. Guest musicians included former Beatles Ringo Starr and George Harrison. Upon completion of the album, Lynne reformed the band with completely new members, including his then-girlfriend Rosie Vela (who had released her own album, \"Zazu\", in 1986) and announced that ELO would tour again. Former ELO member Tandy rejoined the band a short time afterwards for two television live performances: \"VH1 Storytellers\" and a PBS concert shot at CBS Television City, later titled \"Zoom Tour Live\" and released on DVD. Besides Lynne, Tandy and Vela, the new live ELO lineup included Gregg Bissonette (drums, backing vocals), Matt Bissonette (bass guitar, backing vocals), Marc Mann (guitars, keyboards, backing vocals), Peggy Baldwin (cello), and Sarah O'Brien (cello). However, the planned tour was cancelled, reportedly due to poor ticket sales.\n2001\u20132013: Non-performing work, reissues and miniature reunions.\nFrom 2001 to 2007, Harvest and Epic/Legacy reissued ELO's back catalogue. Included amongst the remastered album tracks were unreleased songs and outtakes, including two new singles. The first was \"Surrender\" which registered on the lower end of the UK Singles Chart at number 81, some 30 years after it was written in 1976. The other single was \"Latitude 88 North\".\nOn 9 August 2010, Eagle Rock Entertainment released \"Live \u2013 The Early Years\" in the UK as a DVD compilation that included \"Fusion \u2013 Live in London\" (1976) along with never before released live performances at \"Brunel University\" (1973) and on a German TV show \"Rockpalast\" (1974). The US had a slightly edited release on 24 August 2010. \"The Essential Electric Light Orchestra\" artwork was re-jigged to feature two different covers. The US and Australian releases shared one design, while the rest of the world featured the other for a new double album release in October 2011.\n\"\" was released on 8 October 2012. It is an album of re-recordings of ELO's greatest hits, performed by Lynne exclusively, along with a new song titled \"Point of No Return\". Released to coincide with Lynne's second solo album release \"Long Wave,\" these new albums contained advertisement cards, announcing the re-release of expanded and remastered versions of both the 2001 album \"Zoom\" and Lynne's debut solo album \"Armchair Theatre\", originally released in 1990. Both albums were re-released in April 2013 with various bonus tracks. Also released was the live album, \"Electric Light Orchestra Live\", showcasing songs from the Zoom tour. All three releases also featured new studio recordings as bonus tracks.\nLynne and Tandy reunited again on 12 November 2013 to perform, under the name Jeff Lynne and Friends, \"Livin' Thing\" and \"Mr. Blue Sky\" at the Children in Need Rocks concert at Hammersmith Eventim Apollo, London. The backing orchestra was the BBC Concert Orchestra, with Chereene Allen on lead violin.\n2014\u2013present: Jeff Lynne's ELO.\nThe success of the Children in Need performance was followed by support from BBC Radio 2 DJ Chris Evans, who had Lynne as his on-air guest and asked his listeners if they wanted to see ELO perform. The 50,000 tickets for the resulting BBC Radio 2's \"Festival in a Day\" in Hyde Park on 14 September 2014 sold out in 15 minutes. Billed as \"Jeff Lynne's ELO\", Lynne and Tandy were backed by the Take That/Gary Barlow band from the Children in Need concert, led by Mike Stevens and the BBC Concert Orchestra. Lynne chose to use the name as a response to ELO offshoot, tribute and imitation bands, (ELO Part II, The Orchestra, OrKestra and the Music of ELO) who repeatedly used the ELO name for promoting their own tours, justified or not. Chereene Allen was again the lead violinist for the band. The development of modern digital processing added a smoother finish to the work, which led Lynne to reconsider his preference for studio work, hinting at a UK tour in 2015.\nOn 8 February 2015, Jeff Lynne's ELO played at the Grammy Awards for the first time. They performed a medley of \"Evil Woman\" and \"Mr. Blue Sky\" with Ed Sheeran, who introduced them as \"A man and a band who I love\".\nOn 10 September 2015, it was announced that a new ELO album would be released. The album was to be under the moniker of Jeff Lynne's ELO, with the band signed to Columbia Records. \"Alone in the Universe\" was released on 13 November 2015. The album was ELO's first album of new material since 2001's \"Zoom\". The first track, and single, \"When I Was a Boy\" was made available for streaming on the same day and a music video for the song was also released. A small promotional tour followed the album's release which saw Jeff Lynne's ELO perform a full concert for \"BBC Radio 2\" along with their first two shows in the United States in 30 years, both which sold out very quickly. Jeff Lynne's ELO also made rare US television appearances on \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\", \"Jimmy Kimmel Live\" and \"CBS This Morning\". A 19-date European tour was announced for 2016, with the band playing the Pyramid Stage at Glastonbury Festival on 26 June 2016.\nIn 2017 they played their \"Alone in the Universe\" tour. That same year, on 7 April, they played at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as they were inducted during the 32nd Annual Induction Ceremony.\nThe band continued to tour in 2018 in North America and Europe. A video was created for the City of Birmingham which used the original recording of \"Mr. Blue Sky\" as its music; this was played at the Gold Coast 2018 Commonwealth Games Closing Ceremony during the handover presentation of Birmingham 2022.\nOn 3 August 2018, \"Secret Messages\" was reissued \"as originally conceived\" as a double album. It included several cut tracks, such as the CD exclusive bonus track \"Time After Time\", B-side exclusives \"Buildings Have Eyes\" and \"After All\", the \"Afterglow\" exclusives \"Mandalay\" and \"Hello My Old Friend\", and the 2001 reissue exclusives \"Endless Lies\" and \"No Way Out\".\nOn 22 October 2018 Lynne announced that Jeff Lynne's ELO would embark on a 2019 North American tour from June to August 2019.\nELO released their 14th album, \"From Out of Nowhere\", on 1 November 2019. While a tour from the album was announced to begin in October 2020, the official Jeff Lynne's ELO Twitter page then later announced that the tour was cancelled due to the COVID-19 outbreak.\nLegacy and influence.\nAccording to music journalist Simon Price, ELO was \"arguably the most uncool, even defiantly anti-cool, of the lot and have been the slowest to be rehabilitated since ... They've been sampled by dozens upon dozens of acts, from Company Flow to the Pussycat Dolls, if you go looking. Every now and then in my journalistic career, it's been possible to coax a contemporary band to admit to an ELO influence, the Flaming Lips and Super Furry Animals being two examples. But the band with arguably, the greatest amount of ELO DNA are outside the rock genre altogether: Daft Punk.\"\nIn November 2016, Jeff Lynne's ELO won Band of the Year at the Classic Rock Roll of Honour Awards. In October 2016, ELO were nominated for the 2017 class of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame for the first time. It was the first time the Hall had announced in advance the members of bands who would be inducted; the members of ELO listed were Jeff Lynne, Roy Wood, Bev Bevan and Richard Tandy. On 20 December 2016, it was announced ELO had been elected to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Class of 2017.\nPersonnel.\nPrincipal members"}
{"id": "10486", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10486", "title": "Elo", "text": "Elo or ELO may refer to:"}
{"id": "10487", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10487", "title": "Evil Dead II", "text": "Evil Dead II (also known in publicity materials as Evil Dead 2: Dead by Dawn) is a 1987 American supernatural horror film directed by Sam Raimi, and a parody sequel to the 1981 horror film \"The Evil Dead\". Written by Raimi and Scott Spiegel, \"Evil Dead II\" was produced by Robert Tapert and stars Bruce Campbell as Ash Williams, who vacations with his girlfriend to a remote cabin in the woods. He discovers an audio tape of recitations from a book of ancient texts, and when the recording is played, it unleashes a number of demons which possess and torment him.\nAfter the critical and commercial failure of \"Crimewave\" (1985), Raimi, Tapert, and Campbell began work on a sequel to \"The Evil Dead\" at the insistence of their publicist Irvin Shapiro. Having endorsed the original film, author Stephen King brought the project to the attention of producer Dino De Laurentiis, with whom he had been making his directorial debut \"Maximum Overdrive\" (1986); De Laurentiis agreed to provide financial backing, and assigned the filmmakers a considerably larger budget than they had worked with on the original film. Although Raimi had devised a premise set in the Middle Ages and involving time travel, De Laurentiis requested that the film be similar to its predecessor.\n\"Evil Dead II\" was shot in Wadesboro, North Carolina and Detroit, Michigan in 1986, and featured extensive stop-motion animation and prosthetic makeup effects created by a team of artists that included Mark Shostrom, Greg Nicotero, Robert Kurtzman and Tom Sullivan, the latter of whom returned from the original film. The finished film was released in the United States on March 13, 1987; due to its high level of violence, it was released through a pseudonymous distributor to curb an anticipated X rating from the Motion Picture Association of America. Like \"The Evil Dead\", it was widely acclaimed by critics, with praise being reserved for its humor, Raimi's direction and Campbell's performance. Despite being given a somewhat limited release, it was a minor box office success, grossing just under $6 million in the US alone.\nAs with the first film, \"Evil Dead II\" has accumulated a large, international cult following. A direct sequel utilizing Raimi's original premise, \"Army of Darkness\", followed in 1992. It was later followed by a soft reboot and continuation, \"Evil Dead\", which was released in 2013, and a television series, \"Ash vs Evil Dead\", which aired from 2015 to 2018.\nPlot.\nAsh Williams and his girlfriend, Linda, take a romantic vacation to a seemingly abandoned cabin in the woods. While in the cabin, Ash plays a tape of archaeologist Raymond Knowby, the cabin's previous inhabitant, reciting passages from the Book of the Dead, \"Necronomicon Ex-Mortis\", which he has discovered during an archaeological dig. The recorded incantation unleashes an evil force (also known as the Kandarian Demon) that kills and later possesses Linda, turning her into a \"deadite\". Ash is then forced to decapitate his girlfriend with a shovel and bury her near the cabin.\nAt dawn, the evil force throws Ash through the woods. Ash briefly becomes possessed by the demon, but when day breaks the force is gone, and Ash returns to normal. Ash attempts to flee the area, but finds that the bridge leading to the cabin has been destroyed. The spirit chases Ash back to the cabin where Linda's revived head attacks him, biting his hand. Ash brings Linda's severed head to the shed, where her headless body attacks him with a chainsaw. Ash gains the upper hand and slashes the deadite Linda to death, killing her a second and final time. Ash's right hand becomes possessed and tries to kill him, and Ash severs it with his chainsaw. Ash then attempts to shoot the severed hand with a shotgun. The hand mocks him and ultimately gets away.\nMeanwhile, Knowby's daughter, Annie, and her research partner, Ed Getley, return from the dig with the missing pages of the \"Necronomicon\" in tow, only to find the destroyed bridge. They enlist the help of locals Jake and Bobby Joe to guide them along an alternate trail to the cabin. The four of them find an embattled Ash at the cabin. Mistakenly concluding that Ash murdered the Knowbys, they lock him in the cabin's cellar.\nThe four new arrivals listen to a recording of Knowby detailing that his wife Henrietta was possessed by the Kandarian Demon, and that he killed her and buried her in the cellar. Henrietta, now a deadite, possesses Ed; Ash dismembers him with an axe. Bobby Joe tries to escape but is attacked by the demon trees and dragged to her death. Annie translates two of the \"Necronomicon\"s pages before Jake turns on them and throws the pages into the cellar, forcing them at gunpoint to go look for Bobby Joe. Ash becomes possessed once again and incapacitates Jake. Annie retreats to the cabin and accidentally stabs Jake (mistaking him for the possessed Ash) and drags him to the cellar door, where he is killed by Henrietta. Deadite Ash tries to kill Annie, but returns to his normal self when he sees Linda's necklace.\nWith Annie's help, Ash modifies the chainsaw and attaches it to the stump where his right hand had been. After finding the missing pages of the \"Necronomicon\" in the cellar, Ash kills Henrietta. The trees outside begin to unleash destruction on the cabin. Annie reveals that she has only read the first half of the incantation. The woods attack the house as Annie starts to read the second half. As she reads it, she is stabbed in the back by Ash's severed hand with the Kandarian dagger. She falls to the floor and manages to complete the incantation before succumbing to her wound. The incantation opens up a whirling temporal vortex/portal which not only draws in the demon, but nearby trees, Ash's Oldsmobile Delta 88, and Ash himself.\nAsh and his Oldsmobile land in the year 1300 AD. He is then confronted by a group of knights who initially mistake him for a deadite, but they are quickly distracted when a real deadite appears. Ash blasts the harpy-like deadite with his shotgun and is hailed as a hero who has come to save them, at which point he breaks down and screams in anguish.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe concept of a sequel to \"The Evil Dead\" was discussed during location shooting on the first film; Irvin Shapiro, the film's publicist, pushed writer/director Sam Raimi to devise a premise for such a film. Working with screenwriter Sheldon Lettich, Raimi settled on a story in which Ash was sucked through a time portal to the Middle Ages, where he would encounter more deadites. Shapiro loved the concept, and in May 1984 took out advertisements in trade magazines to promote the project, then titled \"Evil Dead II: Evil Dead and the Army of Darkness\". After Universal Pictures and 20th Century Fox passed on it, the sequel was shelved in favor of Raimi's next film, \"Crimewave\" (1985), a comedy/crime film co-written with Joel and Ethan Coen.\nAfter \"Crimewave\" was released to critical and audience disinterest, Raimi and his partners at Renaissance Pictures, producer Robert Tapert and actor/co-producer Bruce Campbell, took Shapiro up on his sequel offer, knowing that another flop would further stall their already-lagging careers. Development of \"Evil Dead II\" initially began in collaboration with Embassy Pictures, which had co-financed and distributed \"Crimewave\", but the filmmakers eventually felt that they were being stalled after five months' pre-production work, and began conducting interviews with prospective cast and crew members. Around this time, producer Dino De Laurentiis, the owner of production and distribution company De Laurentiis Entertainment Group (DEG), asked Raimi if he would be interested in directing an adaptation of the Stephen King novel \"Thinner\". Raimi turned down the offer, but De Laurentiis remained in touch with the young filmmaker.\nThe \"Thinner\" adaptation was part of a deal between De Laurentiis and King to produce several adaptations of King's successful horror novels and short stories. At the time, King was directing the first such adaptation, \"Maximum Overdrive\" (1986), based on his short story \"Trucks\". He had dinner with a crew member who had been among those interviewed by Raimi and his colleagues about \"Evil Dead II\", and told King that the film was having trouble attracting funding. Upon hearing this, King, who had written a glowing review of the first film that helped it become an audience favorite at Cannes, called De Laurentiis and asked him to fund the film. Although initially skeptical, De Laurentiis met with Renaissance, who highlighted the first film's extremely high revenue in the Italian market. Within twenty minutes, De Laurentiis agreed to finance \"Evil Dead II\" for $3.6 million. Raimi and Tapert had desired $4 million for the production, but De Laurentiis requested a film that was similar to its predecessor instead of their original medieval-themed proposal, which was instead used for the second sequel, \"Army of Darkness\" (1992).\nScript.\nThough they had only recently received the funding necessary to produce the film, the script had been written for some time, having been composed largely during the production of \"Crimewave\". Raimi contacted his old friend Scott Spiegel, who had collaborated with Campbell and others on the Super 8 mm films they had produced during their childhood in Michigan. Most of these films had been comedies, and Spiegel felt that \"Evil Dead II\" should be less straight horror than the first. Initially, the opening sequence included all five of the original film's characters; however, in an effort to save time and money, all but Ash and Linda were cut from the final draft. The film went through several other drafts, including a group of escaped convicts holding Ash captive in the cabin while searching for buried treasure.\nSpiegel and Raimi wrote most of the film in their house in Silver Lake, Los Angeles, California, where they were living with the aforementioned Coen brothers, as well as actors Frances McDormand, Kathy Bates, and Holly Hunter (Hunter was the primary inspiration for the Bobby Jo character). Due both to the distractions of their house guests and the films they were involved with, \"Crimewave\" and Josh Becker's \"Thou Shalt Not Kill... Except\", the script took a long time to finish.\nAmong the film's many inspirations include The Three Stooges and other slapstick comedy films; Ash's fights with his disembodied hand come from a film made by Spiegel as a teenager, entitled \"Attack of the Helping Hand\", which was itself inspired by television commercials advertising Hamburger Helper. The \"laughing room\" scene, where all the objects in the room seemingly come to life and begin to cackle maniacally along with Ash, came about after Spiegel jokingly used a gooseneck lamp to visually demonstrate a Popeye-esque laugh. Spiegel's humorous influence can be seen throughout the film, perhaps most prominently in certain visual jokes; for instance, when Ash traps his rogue hand under a pile of books, on top is \"A Farewell to Arms\".\nWhile Raimi and Campbell have stated that \"Evil Dead 2\" was intended as a direct sequel, there are differences between the first movie and the recap at the beginning of the second: for example, the Necronomicon is destroyed in a fire by Ash during the conclusion of \"The Evil Dead\" yet remains intact in \"Evil Dead 2\". The corpses of Ash's friends from the first movie are absent, and they are never mentioned. The cabin itself remains perfectly intact until the events of this film despite much of it having been destroyed in the original film.\nFilming.\nWith the script completed, and a production company secured, principal photography began. The production commenced in Wadesboro, North Carolina, not far from De Laurentiis' offices in Wilmington. De Laurentiis had wanted them to film in his elaborate Wilmington studio, but the production team felt uneasy being so close to the producer, so they moved to Wadesboro, approximately three hours away. Steven Spielberg had previously filmed \"The Color Purple\" in Wadesboro, and the large white farmhouse used as an exterior location in that film became the production office for \"Evil Dead II\". Most of the film was shot in the woods near that farmhouse, or J.R. Faison Junior High School, which is where the interior cabin set was located.\nThe film's production was not nearly as chaotic or strange as the original film's production, largely because of Raimi, Tapert and Campbell's additional film making experience. However, there are nevertheless numerous stories about the strange happenings on the set. For instance, the rat seen in the cellar was nicknamed \"Se\u00f1or Cojones\" by the crew (\"cojones\" is Spanish slang for \"testicles\").\nEven so, there were hardships, mostly involving Ted Raimi's costume. Ted, director Sam's younger brother, had been briefly involved in the first film, acting as a fake Shemp, but in \"Evil Dead II\" he gets the larger role of the historian's demonically-possessed wife, Henrietta. Raimi was forced to wear a full-body, latex costume, crouch in a small hole in the floor acting as a \"cellar\", or on one day, both. Raimi became extremely overheated, to the point that his costume was literally filled with liters of sweat; special effects artist Gregory Nicotero describes pouring the fluid into several Dixie cups so as to get it out of the costume. The sweat is also visible on-screen, dripping out of the costume's ear, in the scene where Henrietta spins around over Annie's head.\nThe crew sneaked various in-jokes into the film itself, such as the clawed glove of Freddy Krueger (the primary antagonist of Wes Craven's \"A Nightmare on Elm Street\" series of slasher films) which hangs in the cabin's basement and tool shed. This was, at least partially, a reference to a scene in the original \"A Nightmare on Elm Street\" where the character Nancy Thompson (portrayed by Heather Langenkamp), dozes off watching the original \"Evil Dead\" on a television set in her room. In turn, that scene was a reference to the torn \"The Hills Have Eyes\" poster seen in the original \"Evil Dead\" film, which was itself a reference to a torn \"Jaws\" poster in \"The Hills Have Eyes\". The real life clawed glove appearing in \"Evil Dead II\" has been attributed to Mark Shostrom, who was also working on \"\" at around the same time as \"Evil Dead II\", suggesting he borrowed it from the \"Dream Warriors\" set for a day.\nAt the film's wrap party, the crew held a talent contest, where Raimi and Campbell sang The Byrds' \"Eight Miles High\", with Nicotero on guitar.\nMusic.\nThe score was composed by Joseph LoDuca who also composed the other two scores in the Evil Dead trilogy. Waxwork Records released the soundtrack on vinyl in 2017 for the film's 30th anniversary.\nRelease and reception.\nPre-release.\nLike the original film, \"Evil Dead II\" had censorship difficulties due to its high level of violence. As DEG was a signatory to the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), Raimi was contractually obliged to shoot the film with the intention of it earning an R rating. Upon reviewing the completed film, DEG's executives felt that \"Evil Dead II\" would almost certainly receive an X rating, thereby limiting its commercial prospects. Lawrence Gleason, the company's president of marketing and distribution, felt that if it were to be cut for an R, the film \"would have been about 62 minutes long\" and that both Raimi's vision and the audience's enjoyment would have been sabotaged as a result.\nUltimately, DEG decided not to submit \"Evil Dead II\" to the MPAA for review or be credited onscreen for their involvement in it. Instead, a shell company run by De Laurentiis' son-in-law Alex De Benedetti, Rosebud Releasing Corporation, was set up to handle the film's US release, allowing it to be shown unrated. Although Rosebud technically did not have a distribution network, DEG had already booked the film in 340 cinemas across the country, and had created and paid for the film's advertising campaign. Rosebud's logo, a rose blooming in time-lapse photography against a painted sky backdrop, was designed and shot by Raimi himself.\nBox office.\n\"Evil Dead II\" opened on March 13, 1987 to an unimpressive weekend gross of $807,260, due to its limited release in 310 cinemas at the time. However, after spending a little over a month in theatres, the film ultimately grossed $5,923,044 domestically and $10.9 million worldwide. The premier showing of the movie was the midnight showing on March 13, 1987 at the Mann Westwood 4 (now a Whole Foods Market), where some of the cast signed autographs before the show and many of the viewers dressed up in costumes. There was an early screening for the Academy of Sci-Fi, Fantasy and Horror that took place at USC before the movie was released.\nCritical response.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 95% based on 60, with an average rating of 7.75/10. The site's consensus reads: \"\"Evil Dead 2\"s increased special effects and slapstick-gore makes it as good \u2013 if not better \u2013 than the original.\" On the similar website Metacritic, it holds a score of 69 out of 100, based on 12 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". \"Empire\" magazine praised the film, saying \"the gaudily gory, virtuoso, hyper-kinetic horror sequel uses every trick in the cinematic book\" and confirms that \"Bruce Campbell and Raimi are gods\". Caryn James of \"The New York Times\" called it \"genuine, if bizarre, proof of Sam Raimi's talent and developing skill.\" Leonard Maltin originally rated the film with two stars, but later increased the rating to three stars.\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film three stars out of four, describing it as \"a fairly sophisticated satire, that makes you want to get up and shuffle.\" He praised the film's sense of surrealism, comedic timing, and \"grubby, low-budget intensity.\" Ebert states that \"if you know it's all special effects, and if you've seen a lot of other movies and have a sense of humor, you might have a great time at \"Evil Dead 2\".\" Richard Harrington of the \"Washington Post\" wrapped up his review stating that \"the acting is straight out of '50s B-movies. The exposition is clumsy, the sound track corny, the denouement silly. Then again, who said bad taste was easy?\" Conversely, Pat Graham of \"Chicago Reader\" disliked the mix of horror and comedy, writing in his review that \"The pop-up humor and smirkiness suggest Raimi's aspiring to the fashionable company of the brothers Coen, though on the basis of this strained effort I'd say he's overshot the mark.\"\n\"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked the film #19 on their list of the \"Top 50 Cult Films\".\n\"Sight and Sound\" ranked it #34 on their 50 Funniest Films of All Time list. In 2008, \"Empire\" magazine included \"Evil Dead II\" on their list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\", ranked #49.\nJ.C. Ma\u00e7ek III of \"PopMatters\" wrote, \"Equal parts remake and sequel, the second film brought back Bruce Campbell as Ash and was every bit as gory and horrific as the first film with more tree rape and dismemberment and blood splatters than ever. On the other hand, \"Evil Dead II\" is also an absolutely hilarious and uproarious intentional comedy.\"\nIn 2016, James Charisma of \"Playboy\" ranked the film #12 on a list of \"15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals\".\nHome media.\nThe film was released on VHS by Vestron Video in 1987. Another VHS release came from Anchor Bay Entertainment on February 17, 1998. In a similar fashion to the first \"Evil Dead\" film and \"Army of Darkness\", there have been numerous DVD releases of \"Evil Dead II\". The film was released on DVD by Anchor Bay on August 29, 2000 in the form of a Limited Edition Tin, and was re-released by Anchor Bay on September 27, 2005, designed to look like the \"Necronomicon\". On October 2, 2007, the film was released on Blu-ray, and on November 15, 2011, it was re-released on Blu-ray and DVD by Lionsgate Home Entertainment in the form of a 25th Anniversary Edition. On September 13, 2016, the film was re-released on Blu-ray by Lionsgate. A 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray version of the film was released on December 11, 2018.\nThe film was released on DVD in the United Kingdom in 2003 as part of a region 2 \"Evil Dead\" trilogy box set. In 2013, the trilogy saw another UK release on Blu-ray, released by StudioCanal. A 25th Anniversary Wood Edition was released in Germany by StudioCanal in 2007. The film was released on Blu-ray in Australia in 2014 alongside \"The Evil Dead\", \"Army of Darkness\", and the 2013 reboot, as part of an \"Evil Dead\" Anthology box set. The film has been released together with the first \"Evil Dead\" film by Green Nara Media in South Korea in region A."}
{"id": "10489", "revid": "32206216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10489", "title": "Edwin Hubble", "text": "Edwin Powell Hubble (November 20, 1889 \u2013 September 28, 1953) was an American astronomer. He played a crucial role in establishing the fields of extragalactic astronomy and observational cosmology.\nHubble proved that many objects previously thought to be clouds of dust and gas and classified as \"nebulae\" were actually galaxies beyond the Milky Way. He used the strong direct relationship between a classical Cepheid variable's luminosity and pulsation period (discovered in 1908 by Henrietta Swan Leavitt) for scaling galactic and extragalactic distances.\nHubble provided evidence that the recessional velocity of a galaxy increases with its distance from the Earth, a property now known as \"Hubble's law\", despite the fact that it had been both proposed and demonstrated observationally two years earlier by Georges Lema\u00eetre. The Hubble\u2013Lema\u00eetre law implies that the universe is expanding. A decade before, the American astronomer Vesto Slipher had provided the first evidence that the light from many of these nebulae was strongly red-shifted, indicative of high recession velocities.\nHubble's name is most widely recognized for the Hubble Space Telescope, which was named in his honor, with a model prominently displayed in his hometown of Marshfield, Missouri.\nEarly life and education.\nEdwin Hubble was born to Virginia Lee Hubble (n\u00e9e James) (1864\u20131934) and John Powell Hubble, an insurance executive, in Marshfield, Missouri, and moved to Wheaton, Illinois, in\u00a01900. In his younger days, he was noted more for his athletic prowess than his intellectual abilities, although he did earn good grades in every subject except spelling. Edwin was a gifted athlete, playing baseball, football, and running track in both high school and college. He played a variety of positions on the basketball court from center to shooting guard. In fact, Hubble even led the University of Chicago's basketball team to their first conference title in 1907. He won seven first places and a third place in a single high school track and field meet in 1906.\nUndergraduate studies.\nHubble's studies at the University of Chicago were concentrated on law, which resulted in a bachelor of science degree by 1910. Hubble also became a member of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity. He spent the three years at The Queen's College, Oxford after earning his bachelor's as one of the university's first Rhodes Scholars, initially studying jurisprudence instead of science (as a promise to his dying father), and later added literature and Spanish, eventually earning his master's degree.\nIn 1909, Hubble's father moved his family from Chicago to Shelbyville, Kentucky, so that the family could live in a small town, ultimately settling in nearby Louisville. His father died in the winter of\u00a01913, while Edwin was still in England. In the following summer, Edwin returned home to care for his mother, two sisters, and younger brother, along with his brother William. The family moved once more to Everett Avenue, in Louisville's Highlands neighborhood, to accommodate Edwin and William.\nHubble was also a dutiful son, who despite his intense interest in astronomy since boyhood, acquiesced to his father's request to study law, first at the University of Chicago and later at Oxford. In this time, he also took some math and science courses. After the death of his father in 1913, Edwin returned to the Midwest from Oxford but did not have the motivation to practice law. Instead, he proceeded to teach Spanish, physics and mathematics at New Albany High School in New Albany, Indiana, where he also coached the boys' basketball team. After a year of high-school teaching, he entered graduate school with the help of his former professor from the University of Chicago to study astronomy at the university's Yerkes Observatory, where he received his Ph.D. in 1917. His dissertation was titled \"Photographic Investigations of Faint Nebulae\". In Yerkes, he had access to one of the most powerful telescopes in the world at the time, which had an innovative 24 inch (61\u00a0cm) reflector.\nDoctoral studies.\nAfter the United States declared war on Germany in 1917, Hubble rushed to complete his Ph.D. dissertation so he could join the military. Hubble volunteered for the United States Army and was assigned to the newly created 86th Division, where he served in 2nd Battalion, 343 Infantry Regiment. He rose to the rank of Major, and was found fit for overseas duty on July 9, 1918, but the 86th Division never saw combat. After the end of World War I, Hubble spent a year at Cambridge University, where he renewed his studies of astronomy.\nCareer.\nIn 1919, Hubble was offered a staff position at the Carnegie Institution for Science's Mount Wilson Observatory, near Pasadena, California, by George Ellery Hale, the founder and director of the observatory. Hubble remained on staff at Mount Wilson until his death in 1953. Shortly before his death, Hubble became the first astronomer to use the newly completed giant reflector Hale Telescope at the Palomar Observatory near San Diego, California.\nHubble also worked as a civilian for U.S. Army at Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland during World War II as the Chief of the External Ballistics Branch of the Ballistics Research Laboratory during which he directed a large volume of research in exterior ballistics which increased the effective firepower of bombs and projectiles. His work was facilitated by his personal development of several items of equipment for the instrumentation used in exterior ballistics, the most outstanding development being the high-speed clock camera, which made possible the study of the characteristics of bombs and low-velocity projectiles in flight. The results of his studies were credited with greatly improving design, performance, and military effectiveness of bombs and rockets. For his work there, he received the Legion of Merit award.\nDiscoveries.\nUniverse goes beyond the Milky Way galaxy.\nEdwin Hubble's arrival at Mount Wilson Observatory, California in 1919 coincided roughly with the completion of the Hooker Telescope, then the world's largest. At that time, the prevailing view of the cosmos was that the universe consisted entirely of the Milky Way Galaxy. Using the Hooker Telescope at Mt. Wilson, Hubble identified Cepheid variables (a kind of star that is used as a means to determine the distance from the galaxy \u2013 see also standard candle) in several spiral nebulae, including the Andromeda Nebula and Triangulum. His observations, made in 1924, proved conclusively that these nebulae were much too distant to be part of the Milky Way and were, in fact, entire galaxies outside our own, suspected by researchers at least as early as 1755 when Immanuel Kant's General History of Nature and Theory of the Heavens appeared. This idea had been opposed by many in the astronomy establishment of the time, in particular by Harvard University-based Harlow Shapley. Despite the opposition, Hubble, then a thirty-five-year-old scientist, had his findings first published in \"The New York Times\" on , 1924, then presented them to other astronomers at the January 1, 1925 meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Hubble's results for Andromeda were not formally published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal until 1929.\nHubble's findings fundamentally changed the scientific view of the universe. Supporters state that Hubble's discovery of nebulae outside of our galaxy helped pave the way for future astronomers. Although some of his more renowned colleagues simply scoffed at his results, Hubble ended up publishing his findings on nebulae. This published work earned him an award titled the American Association Prize and five hundred dollars from Burton E. Livingston of the Committee on Awards.\nHubble also devised the most commonly used system for classifying galaxies, grouping them according to their appearance in photographic images. He arranged the different groups of galaxies in what became known as the Hubble sequence.\nRedshift increases with distance.\nHubble went on to estimate the distances to 24 extra-galactic nebulae, using a variety of methods. In 1929 Hubble examined the relation between these distances and their radial velocities as determined from their redshifts. His estimated distances are now known to all be too small, by up to a factor of about 7. This was due to factors such as the fact that there are two kinds of Cepheid variables or confusing bright gas clouds with bright stars. However, his distances were more or less proportional to the true distances, and combining his distances with measurements of the redshifts of the galaxies by Vesto Slipher, and by his assistant Milton\u00a0L. Humason, he found a roughly linear relationship between the distances of the galaxies and their radial velocities (corrected for solar motion), a discovery that later became known as Hubble's law.\nThis meant that the greater the distance between any two galaxies, the greater their relative speed of separation. If interpreted that way, Hubble's measurements on 46 galaxies lead to a value for the Hubble constant of 500\u00a0km/s/Mpc, which is much higher than the currently accepted values of 74\u00a0km/s/Mpc (cosmic distance ladder method) or 68\u00a0km/s/Mpc (CMB method) due to errors in their distance calibrations.\nYet the reason for the redshift remained unclear. Georges Lema\u00eetre, a Belgian Catholic priest and physicist, predicted on theoretical grounds based on Einstein's equations for general relativity the redshift-distance relation, and published observational support for it, two years before the discovery of Hubble's law. However, many cosmologists and astronomers (including Hubble himself) failed to recognize the work of Lema\u00eetre; Hubble remained doubtful about Lema\u00eetre's interpretation for his entire life. Although he used the term \"velocities\" in his paper (and \"apparent radial velocities\" in the introduction), he later expressed doubt about interpreting these as real velocities. In 1931 he wrote a letter to the Dutch cosmologist Willem de Sitter expressing his opinion on the theoretical interpretation of the redshift-distance relation:\nToday, the \"apparent velocities\" in question are usually thought of as an increase in proper distance that occurs due to the expansion of the universe. Light travelling through an expanding metric will experience a Hubble-type redshift, a mechanism somewhat different from the Doppler effect (although the two mechanisms become equivalent descriptions related by a coordinate transformation for nearby galaxies).\nIn the 1930s, Hubble was involved in determining the distribution of galaxies and spatial curvature. These data seemed to indicate that the universe was flat and homogeneous, but there was a deviation from flatness at large redshifts. According to Allan Sandage,\nThere were methodological problems with Hubble's survey technique that showed a deviation from flatness at large redshifts. In particular, the technique did not account for changes in luminosity of galaxies due to galaxy evolution.\nEarlier, in\u00a01917, Albert Einstein had found that his newly developed theory of general relativity indicated that the universe must be either expanding or contracting. Unable to believe what his own equations were telling him, Einstein introduced a cosmological constant (a\u00a0\"\") to the equations to avoid this \"problem\". When Einstein learned of Hubble's redshifts, he immediately realized that the expansion predicted by general relativity must be real, and in later life, he said that changing his equations was \"the biggest blunder of [his] life.\" In fact, Einstein apparently once visited Hubble and tried to convince him that the universe was expanding.\nHubble also discovered the asteroid 1373 Cincinnati on August 30, 1935. In 1936 he wrote \"The Observational Approach to Cosmology\" and \"The Realm of the Nebulae\" which explained his approaches to extra-galactic astronomy and his view of the subject's history.\nIn December 1941, Hubble reported to the American Association for the Advancement of Science that results from a six-year survey with the Mt. Wilson telescope did not support the expanding universe theory. According to a \"Los Angeles Times\" article reporting on Hubble's remarks, \"The nebulae could not be uniformly distributed, as the telescope shows they are, and still fit the explosion idea. Explanations which try to get around what the great telescope sees, he said, fail to stand up. The explosion, for example, would have had to start long after the earth was created, and possibly even after the first life appeared here.\" (Hubble's estimate of what we now call the Hubble constant would put the Big Bang only 2 billion years ago.)\nPersonal life.\nHubble married Grace Lillian (Burke) Leib (1889\u20131980), daughter of John Patrick and Luella (Kepford) Burke, on February 26, 1924.\nHubble was raised as a Christian but some of his later statements suggest uncertainty.\nHealth issues and death.\nHubble had a heart attack in July 1949 while on vacation in Colorado. He was cared for by his wife and continued on a modified diet and work schedule. He died of cerebral thrombosis (a spontaneous blood clot in his brain) on September 28, 1953, in San Marino, California. No funeral was held for him, and his wife never revealed his burial site.\nControversies.\nAccusations concerning Lema\u00eetre's priority.\nIn 2011, the journal \"Nature\" reported claims that Hubble had played a role in the redaction of key parts of the translation of Lema\u00eetre's 1927 paper, which stated what is now called Hubble's law and also gave observational evidence for it. Historians quoted in the article were skeptical that the redactions were part of a campaign to ensure Hubble retained priority. However, the observational astronomer Sidney van den Bergh published a paper suggesting that while the omissions may have been made by a translator, they may still have been deliberate.\nIn November 2011, the astronomer Mario Livio reported in \"Nature\" that documents in the Lema\u00eetre archive demonstrated that the redaction had indeed been carried out by Lema\u00eetre himself, who apparently saw little point in including scientific content which had already been reported by Hubble. This, however, does not detract from the fact that Lema\u00eetre published in French, without such omissions, two years (1927) prior to Hubble (1929).\nAttempt at obtaining the Nobel Prize.\nAt the time, the Nobel Prize in Physics did not recognize work done in astronomy. Hubble spent much of the later part of his career attempting to have astronomy considered an area of physics, instead of being its own science. He did this largely so that astronomers\u2014including himself\u2014could be recognized by the Nobel Prize Committee for their valuable contributions to astrophysics. This campaign was unsuccessful in Hubble's lifetime, but shortly after his death, the Nobel Prize Committee decided that astronomical work would be eligible for the physics prize. However, the prize is not one that can be awarded posthumously.\nHonors.\nStamp.\nOn March 6, 2008, the United States Postal Service released a 41-cent stamp honoring Hubble on a sheet titled \"American Scientists\" designed by artist Victor Stabin. His citation reads:\nThe other scientists on the \"American Scientists\" sheet include Gerty Cori, biochemist; Linus Pauling, chemist, and John Bardeen, physicist.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1980 documentary \"\" by astronomer Carl Sagan, Hubble's life and work are portrayed on screen in episode 10: \"The Edge of Forever\".\nThe play \"Creation's Birthday\", written by Cornell physicist Hasan Padamsee, tells Hubble's life story."}
{"id": "10490", "revid": "8761060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10490", "title": "Emperor Ninmy\u014d", "text": " was the 54th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Ninmy\u014d's reign lasted from 833 to 850.\nTraditional narrative.\nNinmy\u014d was the second son of Emperor Saga and the Empress Tachibana no Kachiko. His personal name (\"imina\") was . After his death, he was given the title .\nNinmy\u014d had nine Empresses, Imperial consorts, and concubines (\"k\u014di\"); and the emperor had 24 Imperial sons and daughters.\nEmperor Ninmy\u014d is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Ninmy\u014d's mausoleum.\nEvents of Ninmy\u014d's life.\nNinmy\u014d ascended to the throne following the abdication of his uncle, Emperor Junna.\nShortly after Ninmyo was enthroned, he designated an heir. He named Prince Tsunesada, a son of former Emperor Junna, as the crown prince.\nIn his lifetime, Ninmy\u014d could not have anticipated that his third son, Prince Tokiyasu, would eventually ascend the throne in 884 as Emperor K\u014dk\u014d.\nEras of Ninmy\u014d's reign.\nThe years of Ninmy\u014d's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (\"neng\u014d\").\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Ninmy\u014d's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (\"Ny\u014dgo\") later Empress Dowager (\"Tai-K\u014dtaig\u014d\"): Fujiwara no \"Junshi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u9806\u5b50; 809\u2013871), Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu\u2019s daughter\nConsort (\"Ny\u014dgo\"): Fujiwara no \"Takushi\"/Sawako (\u85e4\u539f\u6ca2\u5b50; d.839), Fujiwara no Fusatsugu\u2019s daughter\nConsort (\"Ny\u014dgo\"): Fujiwara no \"Teishi\"/Sadako (\u85e4\u539f\u8c9e\u5b50; d.864), Fujiwara no Tadamori\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Shigeno no Tsunako (\u6ecb\u91ce\u7e04\u5b50), Shigeno no Sadanushi\u2019s daughter\nConsort (\"Ny\u014dgo\"): Tachibana no Kageko (\u6a58\u5f71\u5b50; d. 864), Tachibana no Ujikimi\u2019s daughter\nConsort (\"Ny\u014dgo\"): Fujiwara Musuko (\u85e4\u539f\u606f\u5b50)\nCourt Attendant (\"Koui\"): Ki no Taneko (\u7d00\u7a2e\u5b50; d. 869), Ki no Natora\u2019s daughter\nCourt Attendant (\"Koui\") (deposed in 845): Mikuni-machi (\u4e09\u56fd\u753a), daughter of Mikuni clan\nCourt lady: Fujiwara no Katoko (\u85e4\u539f\u8cc0\u767b\u5b50), Fujiwara no Fukutomaro\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Fujiwara no Warawako (\u85e4\u539f\u5c0f\u7ae5\u5b50), Fujiwara no Michit\u014d\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: Princess Takamune (\u9ad8\u5b97\u5973\u738b), Prince Okaya\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: daughter of Yamaguchi clan (\u5c71\u53e3\u6c0f\u306e\u5a18)\n\"Nyoju\": Kudara\u014d Toyofuku\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady (\"Nyoju\"): Kudara no Y\u014dky\u014d (\u767e\u6e08\u6c38\u6176), Kudara no Ky\u014dfuku\u2019s daughter\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10491", "revid": "1006866090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10491", "title": "Emperor Montoku", "text": " (August 827 \u2013 7 October 858) was the 55th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nMontoku's reign lasted from 850 to 858.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore Montoku's ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was . He was also known as \"Tamura-no-mikado\" or \"Tamura-tei\".\nHe was the eldest son of Emperor Ninmy\u014d. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Junshi (also called the Goj\u014d empress \u4e94\u6761\u540e), daughter of the minister of the left, Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu.\nMontoku had six Imperial consorts and 29 Imperial children.\nEvents of Montoku's life.\nEvents during his reign included the repression of insurrections among the Ebisu people in Mutsu Province in 855, and among the people of the island of Tsushima two years later.\nThe actual site of Montoku's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Montoku's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Tamura no misasagi\".\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\u2013 \"kugy\u014d\" of Montoku-tenn\u014d (in French)\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Montoku's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Montoku's reign.\nThe years of Montoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo) (Tai-Kotaig\u014d): Fujiwara no Akirakeiko (\u85e4\u539f\u660e\u5b50; 829\u2013899), also known as Somedono-no-Kisaki, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa\u2019s daughter.\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Koshi\"/Furuko (\u85e4\u539f\u53e4\u5b50), Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Takakiko (\u85e4\u539f\u591a\u8cc0\u5e7e\u5b50; d. 858), Fujiwara no Yoshimi's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Princess Azumako (\u6771\u5b50\u5973\u738b; d. 865)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Nenshi\"/Toshiko (\u85e4\u539f\u5e74\u5b50)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Koreko (\u85e4\u539f\u662f\u5b50)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Tachibana no Fusako (\u6a58\u623f\u5b50), Tachibana no Ujikimi's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Tachibana no \"Chushi\" (\u6a58\u5fe0\u5b50), Tachibana no Ujikimi's daughter\nConsort (Koui): Ki no Shizuko (\u7d00\u9759\u5b50; d. 866), Ki no Natora's daughter\nCourt lady: Shigeno no Okuko (\u6ecb\u91ce\u5965\u5b50), Shigeno no Sadanushi's daughter\nCourt lady: Fujiwara no \"Konshi\"/Imako (\u85e4\u539f\u4eca\u5b50), Fujiwara no Sadamori's daughter\nCourt lady: Fujiwara no \"Retsushi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u5217\u5b50), Fujiwara no Koreo's daughter\nCourt lady: Shigeno no Mineko (\u6ecb\u91ce\u5c91\u5b50), Shigeno no Sadao's daughter\nCourt lady: Tomo clan's daughter\nCourt lady: Fuse clan's daughter\nCourt lady: Tajihi clan's daughter\nCourt lady: Kiyohara clan's daughter\nCourt lady: Sugawara clan's daughter\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10492", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10492", "title": "Emperor Seiwa", "text": " was the 56th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nSeiwa's reign spanned the years from 858 through 876.\nTraditional narrative.\nSeiwa was the fourth son of Emperor Montoku. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Akirakeiko (\u660e\u5b50), also called the Somedono empress \u67d3\u6bbf\u540e). Seiwa's mother was the daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshifusa (\u85e4\u539f\u826f\u623f), who was regent and great minister of the council of state.\nHe was the younger half-brother of Imperial Prince Koretaka (\u60df\u55ac\u89aa\u738b; 844\u2013897)\nImina.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his \"imina\") was , the first member of the Imperial house to be personally named \"-hito\" \u4ec1. One meaning of the character \u4ec1 is the Confucian concept of \"ren\". Later it has been a tradition to name the personal name of all male members of the Imperial family this way.\nHe was also known as emperor as \"Mizunoo-no-mikado\" or \"Minoo-tei\".\nEvents of Seiwa's life.\nOriginally under the guardianship of his maternal grandfather Fujiwara no Yoshifusa, he displaced Imperial Prince Koretaka (\u60df\u55ac\u89aa\u738b) as Crown Prince. Upon the death of his father in 858, Emperor Montoku, he became Emperor at the age of 9, but the real power was held by his grandfather, Yoshifusa.\nMausoleum.\nThe actual site of Seiwa's grave is known. The emperor is traditionally venerated at the \"misasagi\" memorial shrine in the Uky\u014d-ku ward of Kyoto. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seiwa's mausoleum. It is formally named the or Seiwa Tenn\u014d Ry\u014d. From the site of his tomb the Emperor Seiwa is sometimes referred to as the . The \"kami\" of Emperor Seiwa is venerated at the Seiwatenn\u014d-sha in close proximity to the mausoleum.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Seiwa's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Seiwa's reign.\nThe years of Seiwa's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo) later \"K\u014dtaig\u014d\": Fujiwara no Takako (\u85e4\u539f\u9ad8\u5b50; 842\u2013910) later Nijo-kisaki (\u4e8c\u6761\u540e), Fujiwara no Nagara's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Tamiko (\u85e4\u539f\u591a\u7f8e\u5b50; d. 886), Fujiwara no Yoshimi's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Taira no \"Kanshi\" (\u5e73\u5bdb\u5b50)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Princess \"Kashi\" (\u5609\u5b50\u5973\u738b)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Minamoto no Sadako (\u6e90\u8c9e\u5b50; d. 873)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Princess \"Ry\u016bshi\" (\u9686\u5b50\u5973\u738b)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Princess \"Kenshi\" (\u517c\u5b50\u5973\u738b)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Princess \"Ch\u016bshi\"/Tadako (\u5fe0\u5b50\u5973\u738b; 854\u2013904), Emperor K\u014dk\u014d's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Yoriko (\u85e4\u539f\u983c\u5b50; d. 936), Fujiwara no Mototsune's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Kazuko (\u85e4\u539f\u4f73\u73e0\u5b50; b. 856), Fujiwara no Mototsune's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Minamoto no Takeko/Izuko (\u6e90\u53b3\u5b50; d. 879), Minamoto no Yoshiari's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Minamoto no \"Seishi\" (\u6e90\u6e08\u5b50), Emperor Montoku's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Minamoto no \"Kenshi\"/Atsuko (\u6e90\u55a7\u5b50)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Minamoto no \"Gishi\"/Yoshiko (\u6e90\u5b9c\u5b50), Minamoto no Okimoto's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Ariwara no Fumiko (\u5728\u539f\u6587\u5b50), Ariwara no Yukihira's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Yoshichika's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Tachibana no Yasukage's daughter (d. 924)\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Nakamune's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Prince Munesada's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Sadamune's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Morofuji's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Morokazu's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Saeki no Sanefusa's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Ben-no-miyasundokoro (\u5f01\u306e\u5fa1\u606f\u6240), \u014ce no Otondo's daughter\nCourt lady: Kamo no Mineo's daughter\nCourt lady: \u014cno no Takatori's daughter\nSee also.\n "}
{"id": "10493", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10493", "title": "Emperor Y\u014dzei", "text": " was the 57th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nY\u014dzei's reign spanned the years from 876 through 884.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his \"imina\") was Sadaakira \"Shinn\u014d\" (\u8c9e\u660e\u89aa\u738b).\nY\u014dzei was the oldest son of Emperor Seiwa. His mother was the Empress Fujiwara no Takaiko, who was also known after Seiwa's abdication as the Nij\u014d empress. Y\u014dzei's mother was the sister of Fujiwara no Mototsune, who would figure prominently in the young emperor's life.\nIn ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the \"Gempeit\u014dkitsu\" (\u6e90\u5e73\u85e4\u6a58). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan (\u6e90\u6c0f) are also known as Genji, and of these, the \"Y\u014dzei Genji\" (\u967d\u6210\u6e90\u6c0f) are descended from the 57th emperor Y\u014dzei.\nY\u014dzei had nine Imperial children, born after he had abdicated.\nEvents of Y\u014dzei's life.\nY\u014dzei was made emperor when he was an immature, unformed young boy.\nAccording to very scanty information from the Imperial archives, including sources such as \"Rikkokushi,\" and \"Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku,\" Emperor Y\u014dzei murdered one of his retainers, an action that caused massive scandal in the Heian court. Japanese society during the Heian era was very sensitive to issues of \"pollution,\" both spiritual and personal. Deaths (especially killing animals or people) were the worst acts of pollution possible, and warranted days of seclusion in order to purify oneself. Since the Emperor was seen as a divine figure and linked to the deities, pollution of such extreme degree committed by the highest source was seen as extremely ruinous. Many of the high court officials construed Emperor Y\u014dzei's actions as exceeding the bounds of acceptable behavior, and as justifiable cause for the emperor to be forcibly deposed.\nIn Kitabatake Chikafusa's 14th-century account of Emperor Y\u014dzei's reign, the emperor is described as possessing a \"violent disposition\" and unfit to be a ruler. In the end, when Fujiwara no Mototsune, who was \"Sessh\u014d\" (regent for the child-emperor, 876\u2013880), \"Kampaku\" (chief advisor or first secretary for the emperor, 880\u2013890), and \"Daij\u014d Daijin\" (Great Minister of the Council of State), decided that Y\u014dzei should be removed from the throne, he discovered that there was general agreement amongst the \"kuge\" that this was a correct and necessary decision.\nY\u014dzei was succeeded by his father's uncle, Emperor K\u014dk\u014d; and in the reign of K\u014dk\u014d's son, Emperor Uda, the madness re-visited the tormented former emperor:\nY\u014dzei lived in retirement until the age of 80.\nThe actual site of Y\u014dzei's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Y\u014dzei's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi\".\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Yozei's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Y\u014dzei's reign.\nThe years of Y\u014dzei's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\". During this time, the tradition of naming eras because of good omens changed. Instead, the name of an era might be chosen to limit the effects of something bad.\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (Hi): Imperial Princess Kanshin (\u7c21\u5b50\u5185\u89aa\u738b) (d. 914), Emperor K\u014dk\u014d's second daughter\nConsort (Hi): Imperial Princess Yasuko (\u7d8f\u5b50\u5185\u89aa\u738b) (d. 925), Emperor K\u014dk\u014d's third daughter\nConsort (Hi): Princess \"Kyoko\" (\u59e3\u5b50\u5973\u738b; d. 914), Imperial Prince Koretada's daughter\nCourt lady: Fujiwara no T\u014dnaga's daughter\nCourt lady: daughter of Ki clan\nCourt lady: Tomo Yasuhira's daughter\nCourt lady: daughter of Saeki clan\nSee also.\n "}
{"id": "10494", "revid": "31895758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10494", "title": "Emperor K\u014dk\u014d", "text": " was the 58th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nK\u014dk\u014d reigned from 884 to 887.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore the emperor's ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his name (\"imina\") was or \"Komatsu-tei\". He would later be identified sometimes as \"the Emperor of Komatsu\". This resulted in the later Emperor Go-Komatsu adopting this name (\"go-\" meaning \"later\", so \"Later Emperor Komatsu\" or \"Emperor Komatsu II\").\nTokiyatsu \"Shinn\u014d\" was the third son of Emperor Ninmy\u014d. His mother was Fujiwara no Sawako.\nK\u014dk\u014d had Four Imperial consorts and 41 Imperial sons and daughters.\nEvents of K\u014dk\u014d's life.\nThe first \"kampaku\" Fujiwara no Mototsune was influential in the process by which K\u014dk\u014d became an emperor. At the time Emperor Y\u014dzei was deposed, Prince Tokiaytsu was already Governor of Hitachi and Chief Minister of Ceremonies (\"Jibu-ky\u014d\", \u6cbb\u90e8\u537f)\nAccording to Kitabatake Chikafusa's 14th-century account, Mototsune resolved the problem of succession by simply going to visit Tokiyatsu\"-shinn\u014d\", where the kampaku addressed the prince as a sovereign and assigned imperial guards. The prince signaled his acceptance by going into the imperial palanquin, which then conducted him to the emperor's residence within the palace. Curiously, he was still wearing the robes of a prince when he decided to take this ride into an entirely unanticipated future.\nDuring his reign, K\u014dk\u014d revived many ancient court rituals and ceremonies, and one example is the imperial hawking excursion to Serikawa, which had been initiated in 796 by Emperor Kanmu. This ritual event was revived by K\u014dk\u014d after a lapse of 50 years.\nThe actual site of K\u014dk\u014d's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as K\u014dk\u014d's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi\".\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During K\u014dk\u014d's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of K\u014dk\u014d's reign.\nThe years of K\u014dk\u014d's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (later \"K\u014dtaig\u014d\"): Princess \"Hanshi\" (\u73ed\u5b50\u5973\u738b; 833\u2013900) later Toin-Kisaki (\u6d1e\u9662\u540e), Imperial Prince Nakano's daughter (son of Emperor Kanmu)\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Kamiko (\u85e4\u539f\u4f73\u7f8e\u5b50; d. 898), Fujiwara no Mototsune's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no Genjiko (\u85e4\u539f\u5143\u5584\u5b50), Fujiwara no Yamakage's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Taira no Motoko/\"T\u014dshi\" (\u5e73\u7b49\u5b50), Taira no Yoshikaze's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Shigeno no Naoko (\u6ecb\u91ce\u76f4\u5b50; d. 915)\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Sanuki no Naganao's daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara Motoko (\u85e4\u539f\u5143\u5b50)\nCourt lady: Sugawara no \"Ruishi\" (\u83c5\u539f\u985e\u5b50), Sugawara no Koreyoshi's daughter\nCourt lady: Princess Keishin (\u6842\u5fc3\u5973\u738b), Prince Masami's daughter\nCourt lady: daughter of Tajihi clan (\u591a\u6cbb\u6c0f\u306e\u5a18)\nCourt lady: A daughter of Fuse clan (\u5e03\u52e2\u6c0f\u306e\u5a18)\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Kadomune's daughter, later married Minamoto no Noboru\nPoetry.\nEmperor K\u014dk\u014d is well-remembered for his poetry, and one of his \"waka\" appeared in the \"Ogura Hyakunin Isshu\":\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "10495", "revid": "1187538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10495", "title": "Emperor Uda", "text": " was the 59th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nUda's reign spanned the years from 887 through 897.\nTraditional narrative.\nName and legacy.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was or \"Ch\u014djiin-tei\".\nEmperor Uda was the third son of Emperor K\u014dk\u014d. His mother was Empress Dowager Hanshi, a daughter of Prince Nakano (who was himself a son of Emperor Kanmu). Uda had five Imperial consorts and 20 Imperial children. Particularly important sons include:\nHistorical background.\nIn ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the \"Gempeit\u014dkitsu\" (\u6e90\u5e73\u85e4\u6a58). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan (\u6e90\u6c0f), is also known as Genji. Some of Uda's grandchildren were granted the surname \"Minamoto\" (Minamoto is the most used surname for former Japanese royalty.). In order to distinguish Uda's descendants from other Minamoto clan families (\u6e90\u6c0f) or Genji, they became known as the Uda Genji (\u5b87\u591a\u6e90\u6c0f). Some of the Uda Genji moved to \u014cmi Province and known as Sasaki clan (\u4f50\u3005\u6728\u6c0f) or (\u8fd1\u6c5f\u6e90\u6c0f).\nAmong the Uda Genji, Minamoto no Masazane (\u6e90\u96c5\u4fe1), a son of (\u6566\u5b9f\u89aa\u738b) succeeded in the court. Masazane became \"sadaijin\" (Minister of the Left). One of Masazane's daughters, Minamoto no Rinshi (\u6e90\u502b\u5b50) married Fujiwara no Michinaga and from this marriage three empresses dowagers and two regents (\"sessh\u014d\") were born.\nFrom Masanobu, several kuge families originated including the Niwata, Ayanok\u014dji, Itsutsuji, \u014chara and Jik\u014dji. From his fourth son Sukeyosi, the Sasaki clan originated, and thus Ky\u014dgoku clan originated. These descendants are known as \u014cmi Genji today. From this line, Sasaki Takauji made a success at the Muromachi shogunate and the Amago clan originated from his brother.\nEvents of Uda's life.\nUda's father, Emperor K\u014dk\u014d, demoted his sons from the rank of imperial royals to that of subjects in order to reduce the state expenses, as well as their political influence. Sadami was given the clan name of Minamoto and named Minamoto no Sadami. Later, in 887, when K\u014dk\u014d needed to appoint his successor, Sadami was once again promoted to the Imperial Prince rank with support of \"kampaku\" Fujiwara no Mototsune, since Sadami was adopted by a half-sister of Mototsune. After the death of his father in November of that year, Sadami\"-shinn\u014d\" ascended to the throne.\nIn the beginning of Uda's reign, Mototsune held the office of \"kampaku\" (or chancellor). Emperor Uda's reign is marked by a prolonged struggle to reassert power by the Imperial Family away from the increasing influence of the Fujiwara, beginning with the death of Mototsune in 891. Records show that shortly thereafter, Emperor Uda assigned scholars Sukeyo and Kiyoyuki, supporters of Mototsune, to provincial posts in the remote provinces of Mutsu and Higo respectively. Meanwhile, non-Fujiwara officials mainly from the Minamoto family were promoted to prominent ranks, while his trusted counselor, Sugawara no Michizane rapidly rose in rank within five years to reach the third rank in the court, and supervision of the Crown Prince's household. Meanwhile, Mototsune's son and heir, Fujiwara no Tokihira, rose in rank, but only just enough to prevent an open power struggle.\nMeanwhile, Emperor Uda attempted to return Court politics to the original spirit envisioned in the Ritsury\u014d Codes, while reviving intellectual interest in Confucian doctrine and culture. In the seventh month of 896, Emperor Uda dispatched Sugawara no Michizane to review prisoners in the capitol and provide a general amnesty for the wrongfully accused, in keeping with Chinese practices. Emperor Uda also issued edicts reinforcing peasant land rights from encroachment by powerful families in the capital or monastic institutions, while auditing tax collections made in the provinces.\nEmperor Uda stopped the practice of sending ambassadors to China (\"ken-toh-shi\" \u9063\u5510\u4f7f). The emperor's decision was informed by what he understood as persuasive counsel from Sugawara Michizane.\nThe Special Festival of the Kamo Shrine was first held during Uda's reign.\nIn 897, Uda abdicated in favor of his eldest son, Prince Atsuhito, who would later come to be known as Emperor Daigo. Uda left behind an hortatory will or testament which offered general admonitions or precepts for his son's guidance (\"see excerpt at right\"). The document praises Fujiwara no Tokihira as an advisor but cautions against his womanizing; and Sugawara no Michizane is praised as Uda's mentor. Both were assigned by Emperor Uda to look after his son until the latter reach maturity.\nThree years later, he entered the Buddhist priesthood at age 34 in 900. Having founded the temple at Ninna-ji, Uda made it his new home after his abdication.\n His Buddhist name was Kong\u014d Kaku. He was sometimes called \"the Cloistered Emperor of Teiji(\u4ead\u5b50\u306e\u5e1d),\" because the name of the Buddhist hall where he resided after becoming a priest was called Teijiin.\nUda died in 931 (\"Sh\u014dhei 1, 19th day of the 7th month\") at the age of 65.\nThe actual site of Uda's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Uda's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi\".\nThe former emperor is buried amongst the \"Seven Imperial Tombs\" at Ry\u014dan-ji Temple in Kyoto. The mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Uda is today named \"O-uchiyama\". The emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Uda died. These tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers which were ordered by Emperor Meiji.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career.\nDuring Uda's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Uda's reign.\nThe years of Uda's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Onshi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u6e29\u5b50; 872\u2013907), Fujiwara no Mototsune\u2019s daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Inshi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u80e4\u5b50; d.896), Fujiwara no Takafuji\u2019s daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Tachibana no Yoshiko/\"Gishi\" (\u6a58\u7fa9\u5b50), Tachibana no Hiromi\u2019s daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Sugawara no Hiroko/\"Enshi\" (\u83c5\u539f\u884d\u5b50), Sugawara no Michizane\u2019s daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Tachibana no Fusako (\u6a58\u623f\u5b50; d.893)\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Minamoto no Sadako (\u6e90\u8c9e\u5b50), Minamoto no Noboru\u2019s daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Princess \"Norihime\" (\u5fb3\u59eb\u5973\u738b), Prince T\u014dyo\u2019s daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Yasuko (\u85e4\u539f\u4fdd\u5b50), Fujiwara no Arizane\u2019s daughter\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Minamoto no Hisako (\u6e90\u4e45\u5b50)\nCourt Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Shizuko (\u85e4\u539f\u9759\u5b50)\nLady-in-waiting: Fujiwara no \"H\u014dshi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u8912\u5b50), Fujiwara no Tokihira\u2019s daughter\nCourt lady: A daughter of Fujiwara no Tsugukage, \"Ise\" (\u4f0a\u52e2; 875/7\u2013ca. 939)\nSee also.\n "}
{"id": "10496", "revid": "14119537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10496", "title": "Daigo", "text": "Daigo may refer to:"}
{"id": "10497", "revid": "968919009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10497", "title": "Suzaku", "text": "Suzaku, Su-zaku, or Su-Zaku may refer to:"}
{"id": "10498", "revid": "16567817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10498", "title": "Murakami", "text": "Murakami may refer to:"}
{"id": "10500", "revid": "9929111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10500", "title": "Earless seal", "text": "The earless seals, phocids or true seals are one of the three main groups of mammals within the seal lineage, Pinnipedia. All true seals are members of the family Phocidae (). They are sometimes called crawling seals to distinguish them from the fur seals and sea lions of the family Otariidae. Seals live in the oceans of both hemispheres and, with the exception of the more tropical monk seals, are mostly confined to polar, subpolar, and temperate climates. The Baikal seal is the only species of exclusively freshwater seal.\nSystematics.\nEvolution.\nThe earliest known fossil earless seal is \"Noriphoca gaudini\" from the late Oligocene or earliest Miocene (Aquitanian) of Italy. Other early fossil phocids date from the mid-Miocene, 15 million years ago in the north Atlantic. Until recently, many researchers believed that phocids evolved separately from otariids and odobenids; and that they evolved from otter-like animals, such as \"Potamotherium\", which inhabited European freshwater lakes. Recent evidence strongly suggests a monophyletic origin for all pinnipeds from a single ancestor, possibly \"Enaliarctos\", most closely related to the mustelids and bears.\nMonk seals and elephant seals were previously believed to have first entered the Pacific through the open straits between North and South America, with the Antarctic true seals either using the same route or travelled down the west coast of Africa. It is now thought that the monk seals, elephant seals, and Antarctic seals all evolved in the southern hemisphere, and likely dispersed to their current distributions from more southern latitudes.\nTaxonomy.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, morphological phylogenetic analysis of the phocids led to new conclusions about the interrelatedness of the various genera. More recent molecular phylogenetic analyses have confirmed the monophyly of the two phocid subfamilies (Phocinae and Monachinae). The Monachinae (known as the \"southern\" seals), is composed of three tribes; the Lobodontini, Miroungini, and Monachini. The four Antarctic genera \"Hydrurga\", \"Leptonychotes\", \"Lobodon\", and \"Ommatophoca\" are part of the tribe Lobodontini. Tribe Miroungini is composed of the elephant seals. The Monk seals (\"Monachus\" and \"Neomonachus\") are all part of the tribe Monachini. Likewise, subfamily Phocinae (the \"northern\" seals) also includes three tribes; Erignathini (\"Erignathus)\", Cystophorini (\"Cystophora)\", and Phocini (all other phocines). More recently, five species have been split off from \"Phoca\", forming three additional genera.\nAlternatively the three monachine tribes have been evaluated to familiar status, which elephant seals and the Antarctic seals are more closely related to the phocines.\nBiology.\nExternal anatomy.\nAdult phocids vary from in length and in weight in the ringed seal to and in land-based members of the Carnivora, although they retain powerful canines. Some species lack molars altogether. The dental formula is:\nWhile otariids are known for speed and maneuverability, phocids are known for efficient, economical movement. This allows most phocids to forage far from land to exploit prey resources, while otariids are tied to rich upwelling zones close to breeding sites. Phocids swim by sideways movements of their bodies, using their hind flippers to fullest effect. Their fore flippers are used primarily for steering, while their hind flippers are bound to the pelvis in such a way that they cannot bring them under their bodies to walk on them. They are more streamlined than fur seals and sea lions, so they can swim more effectively over long distances. However, because they cannot turn their hind flippers downward, they are very clumsy on land, having to wriggle with their front flippers and abdominal muscles.\nPhocid respiratory and circulatory systems are adapted to allow diving to considerable depths, and they can spend a long time underwater between breaths. Air is forced from the lungs during a dive and into the upper respiratory passages, where gases cannot easily be absorbed into the bloodstream. This helps protect the seal from the bends. The middle ear is also lined with blood sinuses that inflate during diving, helping to maintain a constant pressure.\nPhocids are more specialized for aquatic life than otariids. They lack external ears and have sleek, streamlined bodies. Retractable nipples, internal testicles, and an internal penile sheath provide further streamlining. A smooth layer of blubber lies underneath the skin. Phocids are able to divert blood flow to this layer to help control their temperatures.\nCommunication.\nUnlike otariids, true seals do not communicate by 'barking'. Instead, they communicate by slapping the water and grunting.\nReproduction.\nPhocids spend most of their time at sea, although they return to land or pack ice to breed and give birth. Pregnant females spend long periods foraging at sea, building up fat reserves, and then return to the breeding site to use their stored energy to nurse pups. However, the common seal displays a reproductive strategy similar to that used by otariids, in which the mother makes short foraging trips between nursing bouts.\nBecause a phocid mother's feeding grounds are often hundreds of kilometers from the breeding site, she must fast while lactating. This combination of fasting with lactation requires the mother to provide large amounts of energy to her pup at a time when she is not eating (and often, not drinking). Mothers must supply their own metabolic needs while nursing. This is a miniature version of the humpback whales' strategy, which involves fasting during their months-long migration from arctic feeding areas to tropical breeding/nursing areas and back.\nPhocids produce thick, fat-rich milk that allows them to provide their pups with large amounts of energy in a short period. This allows the mother to return to the sea in time to replenish her reserves. Lactation ranges from five to seven weeks in the monk seal to just three to five days in the hooded seal. The mother ends nursing by leaving her pup at the breeding site to search for food (pups continue to nurse if given the opportunity). \"Milk stealers\" that suckle from unrelated, sleeping females are not uncommon; this often results in the death of the mother's pup, since a female can only feed one pup.\nGrowth and maturation.\nThe pup's diet is so high in calories, it builds up a fat store. Before the pup is ready to forage, the mother abandons it, and the pup consumes its own fat for weeks or even months while it matures. Seals, like all marine mammals, need time to develop the oxygen stores, swimming muscles, and neural pathways necessary for effective diving and foraging. Seal pups typically eat no food and drink no water during the period, although some polar species eat snow. The postweaning fast ranges from two weeks in the hooded seal to 9\u201312 weeks in the northern elephant seal. The physiological and behavioral adaptations that allow phocid pups to endure these remarkable fasts, which are among the longest for any mammal, remain an area of active study and research.\nFeeding strategy.\nPhocids make use of at least four different feeding strategies: suction feeding, grip, and tear feeding, filter feeding, and pierce feeding. Each of these feeding strategies is aided by a specialized skull, mandible, and tooth morphology. However, despite morphological specialization, most phocids are opportunistic and employ multiple strategies to capture and eat prey. For example, the leopard seal, \"Hydrurga leptonyx\", uses grip and tear feeding to prey on penguins, suction feeding to consume small fish, and filter feeding to catch krill."}
{"id": "10501", "revid": "1012992278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10501", "title": "Espionage", "text": "Espionage or spying is the act of obtaining secret or confidential information or divulging of the same without the permission of the holder of the information. A person who commits espionage is called an \"espionage agent\" or \"spy\". Spies help agencies uncover secret information. Any individual or spy ring (a cooperating group of spies), in the service of a government, company or independent operation, can commit espionage. The practice is clandestine, as it is by definition unwelcome. In some circumstances, it may be a legal tool of law enforcement and in others, it may be illegal and punishable by law. Espionage is a method of gathering which includes information gathering from non-disclosed sources.\nEspionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern. However, the term tends to be associated with state spying on potential or actual enemies for military purposes. Spying involving corporations is known as industrial espionage.\nOne of the most effective ways to gather data and information about a targeted organization is by infiltrating its ranks. This is the job of the spy (espionage agent). Spies can then return information such as the size and strength of enemy forces. They can also find dissidents within the organization and influence them to provide further information or to defect. In times of crisis, spies steal technology and sabotage the enemy in various ways. Counterintelligence is the practice of thwarting enemy espionage and intelligence-gathering. Almost all nations have strict laws concerning espionage and the penalty for being caught is often severe. However, the benefits gained through espionage are often so great that most governments and many large corporations make use of it.\nHistory.\nEspionage has been recognized as an importance in military affairs since ancient times.\nThe oldest known classified document was a report made by a spy disguised as a diplomatic envoy in the court of King Hammurabi, who died in around 1750 B.C. The Ancient Egyptians had a developed secret service and espionage is mentioned in the \"Iliad\" and the Bible as well as its recordings in the story of the Old Testament, \"The Twelve Spies\". Espionage was also prevalent in the Greco-Roman world, when spies employed illiterate subjects in civil services.\nThe ancient Chinese treatise, \"The Art of War\", by Sun Tzu devotes its attention to the intelligence gathering network, which argues that war is based on deception. Political espionage became important during the Middle Ages. Joan of Arc was betrayed by Pierre Cauchon, the bishop of Beauvais and English spy. During the rule of Elizabeth I, Francis Walsingham developed an efficient political spy system. With the growth of the modern national state, systematized espionage became a fundamental part of government in most countries. Joseph Fouch\u00e9 is credited with developing the first modern political espionage system, and Frederick the Great, the king of Prussia was regarded as the founder of modern military espionage. During the American Revolution, Nathan Hale and Benedict Arnold achieved their fame as spies, and there was considerable use of spies on both sides during the American Civil War.\nIn the 20th century, at the height of World War I, all great powers except the United States had elaborate civilian espionage systems and all national military establishments had intelligence units. In order to protect the country against foreign agents, the U.S. Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917. Mata Hari, who obtained information for Germany by seducing French officials, was the most noted espionage agent of World War I. Prior to World War II, Germany and Imperial Japan established elaborate espionage nets. In 1942 the Office of Strategic Services was founded by Gen. William J. Donovan. However, the British system was the keystone of Allied intelligence. Numerous resistance groups such as the Austrian Maier-Messner Group, the French Resistance, the Witte Brigade, Milorg and the Polish Home Army worked against Nazi Germany and provided the Allied secret services with information that was very important for the war effort.\nSince the end of World War II, the activity of espionage has enlarged, much of it growing out of the Cold War between the United States and the former USSR. The Russian Empire and its successor, the Soviet Union have had a long tradition of espionage ranging from the Okhrana to the KGB (Committee for State Security), which also acted as a secret police force. In the United States, the 1947 National Security Act created the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to coordinate intelligence and the National Security Agency for research into codes and electronic communication. In addition to these, the United States has 13 other intelligence gathering agencies; most of the U.S. expenditures for intelligence gathering are budgeted to various Defense Dept. agencies and their programs. Under the intelligence reorganization of 2004, the director of national intelligence is responsible for overseeing and coordinating the activities and budgets of the U.S. intelligence agencies.\nIn the Cold War, espionage cases included Alger Hiss and Whittaker Chambers and the Rosenberg Case. In 1952 the Communist Chinese captured two CIA agents, and in 1960 Francis Gary Powers, flying a U-2 reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union for the CIA, was shot down and captured. During the cold war, many Soviet intelligence officials defected to the West, including Gen. Walter Krivitsky, Victor Kravchenko, Vladimir Petrov, Peter Deriabin Pawel Monat, and Oleg Penkovsky, of the GRU (Soviet military intelligence). Among Western officials who defected to the Soviet Union are Guy F. Burgess and Donald D. Maclean of Great Britain in 1951, Otto John of West Germany in 1954, William H. Martin and Bernon F. Mitchell, U.S. cryptographers, in 1960, and Harold (Kim) Philby of Great Britain in 1962. U.S. acknowledgment of its U-2 flights and the exchange of Francis Gary Powers for Rudolf Abel in 1962 implied the legitimacy of some espionage as an arm of foreign policy.\nChina has a very cost-effective intelligence program that is especially effective in monitoring neighboring countries such as Mongolia, Russia, and India. Smaller countries can also mount effective and focused espionage efforts. For instance, the Vietnamese Communists had consistently superior intelligence during the Vietnam War. Some Islamic countries, including Libya, Iran, and Syria, have highly developed operations as well. SAVAK, the secret police of the Pahlavi dynasty, was particularly feared by Iranian dissidents before the 1979 Iranian Revolution.\nToday.\nToday, spy agencies target the illegal drug trade and terrorists as well as state actors. Between 2008 and 2011, the United States charged at least 57 defendants for attempting to spy for China.\nIntelligence services value certain intelligence collection techniques over others. The former Soviet Union, for example, preferred human sources over research in open sources, while the United States has tended to emphasize technological methods such as SIGINT and IMINT. In the Soviet Union, both political (KGB) and military intelligence (GRU) officers were judged by the number of agents they recruited.\nThe espionage efforts and knowledge of a nation are often used by other countries by hiring their intelligence employees. The United Arab Emirates is one of the major countries relying on the technique, where they have hired the former employees of the US\u2019 National Security Agency and the White House veterans. Some of the agents were hired to hack the Emirates\u2019 former rival nation Qatar, its royals and even FIFA officials. Others were asked to conduct surveillance on other governments, human rights activists, social media critics, and even militants. However, the spying efforts of the UAE by using the Americans were also used to target the US itself, including former first lady Michelle Obama. \nTargets of espionage.\nEspionage agents are usually trained experts in a targeted field so they can differentiate mundane information from targets of value to their own organizational development. Correct identification of the target at its execution is the sole purpose of the espionage operation.\nBroad areas of espionage targeting expertise include:\nMethods and terminology.\nAlthough the news media may speak of \"spy satellites\" and the like, espionage is not a synonym for all intelligence-gathering disciplines. It is a specific form of human source intelligence (HUMINT). Codebreaking (cryptanalysis or COMINT), aircraft or satellite photography, (IMINT) and analysis of publicly available data sources (OSINT) are all intelligence gathering disciplines, but none of them is considered espionage. Many HUMINT activities, such as prisoner interrogation, reports from military reconnaissance patrols and from diplomats, etc., are not considered espionage. Espionage is the disclosure of sensitive information (classified) to people who are not cleared for that information or access to that sensitive information.\nUnlike other forms of intelligence collection disciplines, espionage usually involves accessing the place where the desired information is stored or accessing the people who know the information and will divulge it through some kind of subterfuge. There are exceptions to physical meetings, such as the Oslo Report, or the insistence of Robert Hanssen in never meeting the people who bought his information.\nThe US defines espionage towards itself as \"The act of obtaining, delivering, transmitting, communicating, or receiving information about the national defence with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation\". \"Black's Law Dictionary\" (1990) defines espionage as: \"...\u00a0gathering, transmitting, or losing\u00a0... information related to the national defense\". Espionage is a violation of United States law, and Article 106a of the Uniform Code of Military Justice\". The United States, like most nations, conducts espionage against other nations, under the control of the National Clandestine Service. Britain's espionage activities are controlled by the Secret Intelligence Service.\nOrganization.\nA spy is a person employed to seek out top secret information from a source. Within the United States Intelligence Community, \"asset\" is more common usage. A case officer or Special Agent, who may have diplomatic status (i.e., official cover or non-official cover), supports and directs the human collector. Cutouts are couriers who do not know the agent or case officer but transfer messages. A safe house is a refuge for spies. Spies often seek to obtain secret information from another source.\nIn larger networks, the organization can be complex with many methods to avoid detection, including clandestine cell systems. Often the players have never met. Case officers are stationed in foreign countries to recruit and to supervise intelligence agents, who in turn spy on targets in their countries where they are assigned. A spy need not be a citizen of the target country\u2014hence does not automatically commit treason when operating within it. While the more common practice is to recruit a person already trusted with access to sensitive information, sometimes a person with a well-prepared synthetic identity (cover background), called a \"legend\" in tradecraft, may attempt to infiltrate a target organization.\nThese agents can be moles (who are recruited before they get access to secrets), defectors (who are recruited after they get access to secrets and leave their country) or defectors in place (who get access but do not leave).\nA \"legend\" is also employed for an individual who \"is not\" an illegal agent, but is an ordinary citizen who is \"relocated\", for example, a \"protected witness\". Nevertheless, such a non-agent very likely will also have a case officer who will act as a controller. As in most, if not all synthetic identity schemes, for whatever purpose (illegal or legal), the assistance of a controller is required.\nSpies may also be used to spread disinformation in the organization in which they are planted, such as giving false reports about their country's military movements, or about a competing company's ability to bring a product to market. Spies may be given other roles that also require infiltration, such as sabotage.\nMany governments spy on their allies as well as their enemies, although they typically maintain a policy of not commenting on this. Governments also employ private companies to collect information on their behalf such as SCG International Risk, International Intelligence Limited and others.\nMany organizations, both national and non-national, conduct espionage operations. It should not be assumed that espionage is always directed at the most secret operations of a target country. National and terrorist organizations and other groups are also targeted. This is because governments want to retrieve information that they can use to be proactive in protecting their nation from potential terrorist attacks.\nCommunications both are necessary to espionage and clandestine operations, and also a great vulnerability when the adversary has sophisticated SIGINT detection and interception capability. Agents must also transfer money securely.\nIndustrial espionage.\nReportedly Canada is losing $12 billion and German companies are estimated to be losing about \u20ac50 billion ($87 billion) and 30,000 jobs to industrial espionage every year.\nAgents in espionage.\nIn espionage jargon, an \"agent\" is the person who does the spying. They may be a citizen of a country recruited by that country to spy on another; a citizen of a country recruited by that country to carry out false flag assignments disrupting his own country; a citizen of one country who is recruited by a second country to spy on or work against his own country or a third country, and more. \nIn popular usage, this term is sometimes confused with an \"intelligence officer\", \"intelligence operative\" or \"case officer\" who recruits and handles agents. \nAmong the most common forms of agent are:\nLess common or lesser known forms of agent include:\nLaw.\nEspionage against a nation is a crime under the legal code of many nations. In the United States, it is covered by the Espionage Act of 1917. The risks of espionage vary. A spy violating the host country's laws may be deported, imprisoned, or even executed. A spy violating its own country's laws can be imprisoned for espionage or/and treason (which in the United States and some other jurisdictions can only occur if they take up arms or aids the enemy against their own country during wartime), or even executed, as the Rosenbergs were. For example, when Aldrich Ames handed a stack of dossiers of U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) agents in the Eastern Bloc to his KGB-officer \"handler\", the KGB \"rolled up\" several networks, and at least ten people were secretly shot. When Ames was arrested by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), he faced life in prison; his contact, who had diplomatic immunity, was declared \"persona non grata\" and taken to the airport. Ames' wife was threatened with life imprisonment if her husband did not cooperate; he did, and she was given a five-year sentence. Hugh Francis Redmond, a CIA officer in China, spent nineteen years in a Chinese prison for espionage\u2014and died there\u2014as he was operating without diplomatic cover and immunity.\nIn United States law, treason, espionage, and spying are separate crimes. Treason and espionage have graduated punishment levels.\nThe United States in World War I passed the Espionage Act of 1917. Over the years, many spies, such as the Soble spy ring, Robert Lee Johnson, the Rosenberg ring, Aldrich Hazen Ames, Robert Philip Hanssen, Jonathan Pollard, John Anthony Walker, James Hall III, and others have been prosecuted under this law.\nHistory of espionage laws.\nFrom ancient times, the penalty for espionage in many countries was execution. This was true right up until the era of World War II; for example, Josef Jakobs was a Nazi spy who parachuted into Great Britain in 1941 and was executed for espionage.\nIn modern times, many people convicted of espionage have been given penal sentences rather than execution. For example, Aldrich Hazen Ames is an American CIA analyst, turned KGB mole, who was convicted of espionage in 1994; he is serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole in the high-security Allenwood U.S. Penitentiary. Ames was formerly a 31-year CIA counterintelligence officer and analyst who committed espionage against his country by spying for the Soviet Union and Russia. So far as it is known, Ames compromised the second-largest number of CIA agents, second only to Robert Hanssen, who is also serving a prison sentence.\nUse against non-spies.\nEspionage laws are also used to prosecute non-spies. In the United States, the Espionage Act of 1917 was used against socialist politician Eugene V. Debs (at that time the Act had much stricter guidelines and amongst other things banned speech against military recruiting). The law was later used to suppress publication of periodicals, for example of Father Coughlin in World War II. In the early 21st century, the act was used to prosecute whistleblowers such as Thomas Andrews Drake, John Kiriakou, and Edward Snowden, as well as officials who communicated with journalists for innocuous reasons, such as Stephen Jin-Woo Kim.\n, India and Pakistan were holding several hundred prisoners of each other's country for minor violations like trespass or visa overstay, often with accusations of espionage attached. Some of these include cases where Pakistan and India both deny citizenship to these people, leaving them stateless. The BBC reported in 2012 on one such case, that of Mohammed Idrees, who was held under Indian police control for approximately 13 years for overstaying his 15-day visa by 2\u20133 days after seeing his ill parents in 1999. Much of the 13 years were spent in prison waiting for a hearing, and more time was spent homeless or living with generous families. The Indian People's Union for Civil Liberties and Human Rights Law Network both decried his treatment. The BBC attributed some of the problems to tensions caused by the Kashmir conflict.\nEspionage laws in the UK.\nEspionage is illegal in the UK under the Official Secrets Acts of 1911 and 1920. The UK law under this legislation considers espionage as \"concerning those who intend to help an enemy and deliberately harm the security of the nation\". According to MI5, a person commits the offence of 'spying' if they, \"for any purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State\": approaches, enters or inspects a prohibited area; makes documents such as plans that are intended, calculated, or could directly or indirectly be of use to an enemy; or \"obtains, collects, records, or publishes, or communicates to any other person any secret official code word, or password, or any sketch, plan, model, article, or note, or other document which is calculated to be or might be or is intended to be directly or indirectly useful to an enemy\". The illegality of espionage also includes any action which may be considered 'preparatory to' spying, or encouraging or aiding another to spy.\nUnder the penal codes of the UK, those found guilty of espionage are liable to imprisonment for a term of up to 14 years, although multiple sentences can be issued.\nGovernment intelligence laws and its distinction from espionage.\nGovernment intelligence is very much distinct from espionage, and is not illegal in the UK, providing that the organisations of individuals are registered, often with the ICO, and are acting within the restrictions of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA). 'Intelligence' is considered legally as \"information of all sorts gathered by a government or organisation to guide its decisions. It includes information that may be both public and private, obtained from much different public or secret sources. It could consist entirely of information from either publicly available or secret sources, or be a combination of the two.\"\nHowever, espionage and intelligence can be linked. According to the MI5 website, \"foreign intelligence officers acting in the UK under diplomatic cover may enjoy immunity from prosecution. Such persons can only be tried for spying (or, indeed, any criminal offence) if diplomatic immunity is waived beforehand. Those officers operating without diplomatic cover have no such immunity from prosecution\".\nThere are also laws surrounding government and organisational intelligence and surveillance. Generally, the body involved should be issued with some form of warrant or permission from the government and should be enacting their procedures in the interest of protecting national security or the safety of public citizens. Those carrying out intelligence missions should act within not only RIPA but also the Data Protection Act and Human Rights Act. However, there are spy equipment laws and legal requirements around intelligence methods that vary for each form of intelligence enacted.\nWar.\nIn war, espionage is considered permissible as many nations recognize the inevitability of opposing sides seeking intelligence each about the dispositions of the other. To make the mission easier and successful, combatants wear disguises to conceal their true identity from the enemy while penetrating enemy lines for intelligence gathering. However, if they are caught behind enemy lines in disguises, they are not entitled to prisoner-of-war status and subject to prosecution and punishment\u2014including execution.\nThe Hague Convention of 1907 addresses the status of wartime spies, specifically within \"Laws and Customs of War on Land\" (Hague IV); October 18, 1907: CHAPTER II Spies\". Article 29 states that a person is considered a spy who, acts clandestinely or on false pretences, infiltrates enemy lines with the intention of acquiring intelligence about the enemy and communicate it to the belligerent during times of war. Soldiers who penetrate enemy lines in proper uniforms for the purpose of acquiring intelligence are not considered spies but are lawful combatants entitled to be treated as prisoners of war upon capture by the enemy. Article 30 states that a spy captured behind enemy lines may only be punished following a trial. However, Article 31 provides that if a spy successfully rejoined his own military and is then captured by the enemy as a lawful combatant, he cannot be punished for his previous acts of espionage and must be treated as a prisoner of war. Note that this provision does not apply to citizens who committed treason against their own country or co-belligerents of that country and may be captured and prosecuted at any place or any time regardless whether he rejoined the military to which he belongs or not or during or after the war.\nThe ones that are excluded from being treated as spies while behind enemy lines are escaping prisoners of war and downed airmen as international law distinguishes between a disguised spy and a disguised escaper. It is permissible for these groups to wear enemy uniforms or civilian clothes in order to facilitate their escape back to friendly lines so long as they do not attack enemy forces, collect military intelligence, or engage in similar military operations while so disguised. Soldiers who are wearing enemy uniforms or civilian clothes simply for the sake of warmth along with other purposes rather than engaging in espionage or similar military operations while so attired are also excluded from being treated as unlawful combatants.\nSaboteurs are treated as spies as they too wear disguises behind enemy lines for the purpose of waging destruction on an enemy's vital targets in addition to intelligence gathering. For example, during World War II, eight German agents entered the U.S. in June 1942 as part of Operation Pastorius, a sabotage mission against U.S. economic targets. Two weeks later, all were arrested in civilian clothes by the FBI thanks to two German agents betraying the mission to the U.S. Under the Hague Convention of 1907, these Germans were classified as spies and tried by a military tribunal in Washington D.C. On August 3, 1942, all eight were found guilty and sentenced to death. Five days later, six were executed by electric chair at the District of Columbia jail. Two who had given evidence against the others had their sentences reduced by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to prison terms. In 1948, they were released by President Harry S. Truman and deported to the American Zone of occupied Germany.\nThe U.S. codification of enemy spies is Article 106 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. This provides a mandatory death sentence if a person captured in the act is proven to be \"lurking as a spy or acting as a spy in or about any place, vessel, or aircraft, within the control or jurisdiction of any of the armed forces, or in or about any shipyard, any manufacturing or industrial plant, or any other place or institution engaged in work in aid of the prosecution of the war by the United States, or elsewhere\".\nSpy fiction.\nSpies have long been favourite topics for novelists and filmmakers. An early example of espionage literature is \"Kim\" by the English novelist Rudyard Kipling, with a description of the training of an intelligence agent in the Great Game between the UK and Russia in 19th century Central Asia. An even earlier work was James Fenimore Cooper's classic novel, \"The Spy,\" written in 1821, about an American spy in New York during the Revolutionary War.\nDuring the many 20th-century spy scandals, much information became publicly known about national spy agencies and dozens of real-life secret agents. These sensational stories piqued public interest in a profession largely off-limits to human interest news reporting, a natural consequence of the secrecy inherent in their work. To fill in the blanks, the popular conception of the secret agent has been formed largely by 20th and 21st-century fiction and film. Attractive and sociable real-life agents such as Valerie Plame find little employment in serious fiction, however. The fictional secret agent is more often a loner, sometimes amoral\u2014an existential hero operating outside the everyday constraints of society. Loner spy personalities may have been a stereotype of convenience for authors who already knew how to write loner private investigator characters that sold well from the 1920s to the present.\nJohnny Fedora achieved popularity as a fictional agent of early Cold War espionage, but James Bond is the most commercially successful of the many spy characters created by intelligence insiders during that struggle. His less fantastic rivals include Le Carre's George Smiley and Harry Palmer as played by Michael Caine.\nJumping on the spy bandwagon, other writers also started writing about spy fiction featuring female spies as protagonists, such as \"The Baroness\", which has more graphic action and sex, as compared to other novels featuring male protagonists.\nSpy fiction has also permeated the video game world, in such games as \"Perfect Dark\", \"GoldenEye 007\", \"\" and \", and the \"Metal Gear\" series.\nEspionage has also made its way into comedy depictions. The 1960s TV series \"Get Smart\", the 1983 Finnish film \"Agent 000 and the Deadly Curves\", and \"Johnny English\" film trilogy portrays an inept spy, while the 1985 movie \"Spies Like Us\" depicts a pair of none-too-bright men sent to the Soviet Union to investigate a missile.\nThe historical novel \"The Emperor and the Spy\" highlights the adventurous life of U.S. Colonel Sidney Forrester Mashbir, who during the 1920s and 1930s attempted to prevent war with Japan, and when war did erupt, he became General MacArthur's top advisor in the Pacific Theater of World War Two."}
{"id": "10503", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10503", "title": "Exile (1995 video game series)", "text": "Exile is a series of role-playing video games created by Jeff Vogel of Spiderweb Software. They were released as shareware titles for Macintosh and Windows systems. \"Exile III\" was also ported to Linux by a third party. There were four games released in the series. All of the games were later revived in the \"Avernum\" series. Common to all games in the \"Exile\" series are 2D graphics and basic sound. The graphics in the first versions of Exile I and II had simple textures, colours and outlines, which were then replaced in later versions with Exile III's graphics. The games are designed to be non-linear and long in gameplay length.\nGameplay.\nIn each game, the player is required to create six characters to form a party of adventurers or may instead use a default party. The characters' general, combat, magic and miscellaneous skills can be customized along with the character names and graphics. From Exile II onward, characters can have their traits and race configured.\nThe games have three modes including Outdoor Mode, Town Mode and Combat Mode. In Outdoor Mode, the party can enter a town, engage a group of enemies in Combat Mode and rest (if the party has food). In Town Mode, the party can talk to people, purchase from shops (provided they have enough gold), train the characters (provided they have sufficient gold and skill points), find sub-quests, pick up items (From Exile 2 onward, items can be stolen) and enter Combat Mode. In Combat Mode, the party can attack enemies, defend themselves and pick up adjacent items. Combat Mode can be ended at any time in towns, but can only end outdoors when all enemies are killed.\nMagic is divided into Mage and Priest spell types. Spells for attacking can be only be cast in Combat Mode. Some spells, such as Light spells, can be cast at any time. Other spells can only be cast outdoors or in town when not in Combat Mode. Players can create a character equipped with spells up to level 3, but higher level or certain spells must be purchased or found in special encounters.\nGames.\n\"Exile I: Escape from the Pit\".\nThe first game of the \"Exile\" trilogy released in January 1995 sees a party of newly created characters thrown from the world above into the subterranean world known as Exile. Once here, the party discovers a civilization formed from the outcasts of the Empire above, a culture beset by constant warfare and monsters galore. The party meets with many of those who wish to get revenge on the Empire for the wrongs it has done to the peoples of Exile.\nThe characters become a rallying point around which the people of Exile who desire vengeance gather to focus their energies into finding a way to strike back against the cruel Emperor of the surface. Together, the party manages to assassinate Emperor Hawthorne in his throne room, banish the demon king Grah-hoth who was becoming a significant threat to the citizens of Exile, and secure an escape route to the surface..\n\"Exile II: Crystal Souls\".\nThe second \"Exile\" game follows directly from the first, released in November 1996. The Empire has begun to recognise the threat the Exiles pose and begin sending their army down into Exile in huge numbers. To make matters worse, unknown barriers of energy are sprouting up around the world \u2013 sometimes aiding the Exiles, sometimes helping the Empire who can afford the losses much more easily than the Exiles.\nA new party of characters meets one of the creatures causing the barriers sprouting up in Exile and go to meet with the unknown race to negotiate. In the end, the party is more successful - and the Vahnatai join with the Exiles to drive out the Empire. With the support of the Vahnatai the Exiles turn the tables on the Empire and successfully repulse their invasion.\n\"Exile III: Ruined World\".\nThe final release in the \"Exile\" trilogy takes place some time after \"Exile II\", released in January 1997. The Linux version was ported by Boutell.com in Summer, 2000. A lot of preparation has taken place and now the Exiles are ready to send a selected few back into the light of the surface. However, while the members of the expedition are at first stunned by the sheer beauty of the land around them, they begin to notice that things are not as perfect as they seem. The slimes the party encounters are only the first part of what becomes a series of monsters and terrible occurrences that are blighting the Empire and laying it to waste.\nWhile scouting the land, as were the expedition members' orders from the nation of Exile, the members are asked by the Empire to help save the surface from its blight. They bring the Exiles and the Empire together as allies trying to find the cause of the destruction.\n\"Blades of Exile\".\n\"Blades of Exile\" released in December 1997, consists of three short scenarios set after the main trilogy as well as an editor that allows players to create their own scenarios, which need not be set in the Exile game world at all. Several hundred custom-made scenarios have been designed since the release of the game in 1997. The most prominent meeting places on the web of the Blades of Exile community are the official company-hosted internet forum. These forums offer support for beginning designers and players, reviews of new scenarios and general discussions about the use of the scenario editor. In June 2007, Jeff Vogel released the source code and game content for \"Blades of Exile\", which is currently under version 2 of the GNU General Public License.\nRelease.\nOn December 1, 1998, the first three Exile games also came packaged on a CD called the \"Exile Trilogy CD\". As of July 8, 2013, these games are freeware on Spiderweb Software's website.\nReception.\nThe \"Exile\" trilogy was very well received. \"PC Gamer\" wrote that \"Exile: Escape from the Pit\" \"offers an easygoing point-and-click interface; pleasant, if unambitious, graphics; ... literate prose; and a vast scope.\" \"Exile II: Crystal Souls\" won the 1995 Eddy Award Honorable Mention for Best Shareware Game of the Year, and received a 5 out of 5 star rating from ZiffNet. \"Exile III: Ruined World\" received the Shareware Game of the Year award from \"Computer Gaming World\" and Ziff-Davis Publishing.\nInside Mac Games nominated the first \"Exile\" as its pick for the best role-playing game of 1996, but ultimately gave the award to \"\".\n\"Exile II\" was a finalist for \"MacUser\"s award for the best shareware game of 1996.\n\"Avernum\".\nMore recently the \"Exile\" games have been remade as the \"Avernum\" series, which replaced the two-dimensional tile-based graphics system with an isometric one and made numerous changes to the RPG system and some changes to the content. Fifth and sixth titles in the series are available under the Avernum moniker and engine.\nEngine and Interface.\nWhile the game engine itself remained relatively similar between all games in the series, the interface went through many changes. Each iteration sported a new layout and color scheme, as well the individual elements, like the inventory and character roster boxes, were also changed to display information differently. Between \"Exile I\" and \"Exile II\" the most notable difference is a background color change as well as a change to the border of the play window. Between \"Exile II\" and \"Exile III\" the interface was changed significantly in that the colors and window styles were changed again but the player roster was overhauled and an inventory window was added. The changes between \"Exile III\" and \"Blades of Exile\" were more subtle and were again of the color and style nature."}
{"id": "10504", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10504", "title": "Reizei", "text": "Reizei can refer to:"}
{"id": "10505", "revid": "95594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10505", "title": "Emperor Enyu of Japan", "text": ""}
{"id": "10506", "revid": "1187538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10506", "title": "Emperor Kazan", "text": " was the 65th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.\nKazan's reign spanned the years from 984 through 986.\nBiography.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") was Morosada\"-shinn\u014d\" (\u5e2b\u8c9e\u89aa\u738b).\nMorasada was the eldest son of Emperor Reizei. The prince's mother was Fujiwara no Kaneko/\"Kaishi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u61d0\u5b50), who was a daughter of \"sessh\u014d\" Fujiwara no Koretada. Morasada was also the brother of Emperor Sanj\u014d.\nEvents of Kazan's life.\nPrince Morasada was seventeen years of age at the time of the succession.\nHe commissioned the Sh\u016bi Wakash\u016b.\nHe faced a tough political struggle from the Fujiwara family; and at the age of nineteen, he was manipulated into abandoning the throne by Fujiwara no Kaneie. Kaneie told him that Ichijo (Kaneie's maternal grandson) already held the Regalia, and that there was no purpose in Kazan continuing to rule. Under some pressure, Kazan acquiesced, and went to the Gang\u014d-ji monastery. He was accompanied by Kaneie's second son, Michikane, who was also to enter religion. When they arrived, however, Michikane said he would like to see his parents one final time while he was still a layman. Michikane never came back.\nNy\u016bkaku went on various pilgrimages and 're-founded' the Kannon pilgrimage, as a monk to the name of Tokudo Shonin (Some scholars doubt that Kazan, in his unstable mental condition at the time was involved with the founding of the pilgrimage, thereby leaving all of the credit to Shonin) had supposedly already created it. This pilgrimage involved travelling to 33 locations across the eight provinces of the Bando area.\nHe was told to visit these 33 sites, in order to bring release from suffering, by Kannon Bosatsu in a vision.\nIt is said that the first site of the pilgrimage was the Sugimoto-dera in Kamakura. This site is also the first site on the Kamakura pilgrimage.\nIt is suggested by many scholars that the mental health of Kazan, particularly in later life, was not stable; and therefore, living as a monk may have caused deteriorating behavior.\n\"Daij\u014d-tenn\u014d\" Kazan died at the age of 41 on the 8th day of the 2nd month of the fifth year of \"Kank\u014d\" (1008).\nThe actual site of Kazan's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Kyoto.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kazan's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Kamiya no hotori no misasagi\".\nHe is buried amongst the \"Seven Imperial Tombs\" at Ry\u014dan-ji Temple in Kyoto. The mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Kazan is today named \"Kinugasa-yama.\" The emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Kazan died. These tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers (\"misasagi\") which were ordered by Emperor Meiji.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kazan's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included: \nEras of Kazan's reign.\nThe years of Kazan's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nConsorts and children.\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Shishi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u5fef\u5b50; 969\u2013985), Fujiwara no Tamemitsu\u2019s daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Teishi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u8adf\u5b50; d.1035), Fujiwara no Yoritada\u2019s daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Fujiwara no \"Ch\u014dshi\" (\u85e4\u539f\u59da\u5b50; 971\u2013989), Fujiwara no Asateru's daughter\nConsort (Ny\u014dgo): Princess Enshi (\u5a49\u5b50\u5973\u738b; 972-998), Imperial Prince Tamehira's daughter\nNakatsukasa (\u4e2d\u52d9), Taira no Sukeyuki's daughter, \u2013 Nurse of Emperor Kazan\nNakatsukasa (\u4e2d\u52d9), Taira no \"Heishi\" (\u5e73\u5e73\u5b50), Taira no Suketada's daughter \nSee also.\n "}
{"id": "10507", "revid": "15041831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10507", "title": "Ichij\u014d", "text": " literally means \"first street\" in Japanese. It can refer to:"}
{"id": "10508", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10508", "title": "Sanj\u014d", "text": "In Japanese, may refer to:"}
{"id": "10509", "revid": "1526960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10509", "title": "Elements", "text": ""}
