{"id": "5020", "revid": "4733282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5020", "title": "Banda Islands", "text": "The Banda Islands () are a volcanic group of ten small volcanic islands in the Banda Sea, about south of Seram Island and about east of Java, and constitute an administrative district (\"kecamatan\") within the Central Maluku Regency in the Indonesian province of Maluku. The main town and administrative centre is Bandanaira, located on the island of the same name. They rise out of deep ocean and have a total land area of approximately . They had a population of 18,544 at the 2010 Census. Until the mid-19th century the Banda Islands were the world's only source of the spices nutmeg and mace, produced from the nutmeg tree. The islands are also popular destinations for scuba diving and snorkeling.\nHistory.\nPre-European history.\nThe first documented human presence in the Banda Islands comes from a rockshelter site on Pulau Ay that was in use at least 8,000 years ago.\nThe earliest mention of the Banda Islands are found in Chinese records dating as far back as 200 BCE though there's speculation that it's mentioned in earlier Indian sources. The Srivijaya kingdom had extensive trade contacts with the Banda Islands. Also during this period (from the late 13th century and onwards) Islam arrived in the region. It soon became established in the area.\nBefore the arrival of Europeans, Banda had an oligarchic form of government led by \"orang kaya\" ('rich men') and the Bandanese had an active and independent role in trade throughout the archipelago. Banda was the world's only source of nutmeg and mace, spices used as flavourings, medicines, and preserving agents that were at the time highly valued in European markets. They were sold by Arab traders to the Venetians for exorbitant prices. The traders did not divulge the exact location of their source and no European was able to deduce their location.\nThe first written accounts of Banda are in \"Suma Oriental\", a book written by the Portuguese apothecary Tom\u00e9 Pires who was based in Malacca from 1512 to 1515 but visited Banda several times. On his first visit, he interviewed the Portuguese and the far more knowledgeable Malay sailors in Malacca. He estimated the early sixteenth century population to be 2500\u20133000. He reported the Bandanese as being part of an Indonesia-wide trading network and the only native Malukan long-range traders taking cargo to Malacca, although shipments from Banda were also being made by Javanese traders.\nIn addition to the production of nutmeg and mace, Banda maintained significant entrep\u00f4t trade; goods that moved through Banda included cloves from Ternate and Tidore in the north, bird-of-paradise feathers from the Aru Islands and Western New Guinea, \"massoi\" bark for traditional medicines and salves. In exchange, Banda predominantly received rice and cloth; namely light cotton \"batik\" from Java, \"calicoes\" from India and \"ikat\" from the Lesser Sundas. In 1603, an average quality \"sarong\"-sized cloth traded for eighteen kilograms of nutmeg. Some of these textiles were then on-sold, ending up in Halmahera and New Guinea. Coarser \"ikat\" from the Lesser Sundas was traded for sago from the Kei Islands, Aru and Seram.\nPortuguese.\nIn August 1511 on behalf of the king of Portugal, Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Malacca, which at the time was the hub of Asian trade. In November of that year, after having secured Malacca and learning of the Bandas' location, Albuquerque sent an expedition of three ships led by his good friend Ant\u00f3nio de Abreu to find them. Malay pilots, either recruited or forcibly conscripted, guided them via Java, the Lesser Sundas and Ambon to Banda, arriving in early 1512. The first Europeans to reach the Bandas, the expedition remained in Banda for about one month, purchasing and filling their ships with Banda's nutmeg and mace, and with cloves in which Banda had a thriving entrep\u00f4t trade. D'Abreu sailed through Ambon and Seram while his second in command Francisco Serr\u00e3o went ahead towards the Maluku islands, was shipwrecked and ended up in Ternate. Distracted by hostilities elsewhere in the archipelago, such as Ambon and Ternate, the Portuguese did not return until 1529; a Portuguese trader Captain Garcia Henriques landed troops in the Bandas. Five of the Banda islands were within gunshot of each other and he realised that a fort on the main island Neira would give him full control of the group. The Bandanese were, however, hostile to such a plan, and their warlike antics were both costly and tiresome to Garcia whose men were attacked when they attempted to build a fort. From then on, the Portuguese were infrequent visitors to the islands preferring to buy their nutmeg from traders in Malacca.\nUnlike other eastern Indonesian islands, such as Ambon, Solor, Ternate and Morotai, the Bandanese displayed no enthusiasm for Christianity or the Europeans who brought it in the sixteenth century, and no serious attempt was made to Christianise the Bandanese. Maintaining their independence, the Bandanese never allowed the Portuguese to build a fort or a permanent post in the islands. Ironically though, it was this lack of ports which brought the Dutch to trade at Banda instead of the clove islands of Ternate and Tidore.\nDutch Control.\nThe Dutch followed the Portuguese to Banda but were to have a much more dominating and lasting presence. Dutch-Bandanese relations were mutually resentful from the outset, with Holland's first merchants complaining of Bandanese reneging on agreed deliveries and price, and cheating on quantity and quality. For the Bandanese, on the other hand, although they welcomed another competitor purchaser for their spices, the items of trade offered by the Dutch\u2014heavy woolens, and damasks, unwanted manufactured goods, for example\u2014were usually unsuitable in comparison to traditional trade products. The Javanese, Arab and Indian, and Portuguese traders for example brought indispensable items along with steel knives, copper, medicines and prized Chinese porcelain.\nAs much as the Dutch disliked dealing with the Bandanese, the trade was a highly profitable one with spices selling for 300 times the purchase price in Banda. This amply justified the expense and risk in shipping them to Europe. The allure of such profits saw an increasing number of Dutch expeditions; it was soon seen that in trade with the East Indies, competition from each would eat into all their profits. Thus the competitors united to form the \"Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie (VOC)\" (the \u2018Dutch East Indies Company) in 1602.\nUntil the early seventeenth century the Bandas were ruled by a group of leading citizens, the \"orang kaya\" (literally 'rich men'); each of these was head of a district. At the time nutmeg was one of the \"fine spices\" kept expensive in Europe by disciplined manipulation of the market, but a desirable commodity for Dutch traders in the ports of India as well; economic historian Fernand Braudel notes that India consumed twice as much as Europe. A number of Banda's \"orang kaya\" were persuaded by the Dutch to sign a treaty granting the Dutch a monopoly on spice purchases. Even though the Bandanese had little understanding of the significance of the treaty known as 'The Eternal Compact', or that not all Bandanese leaders had signed, it would later be used to justify Dutch troops being brought in to defend their monopoly.\nIn April 1609, Admiral Pieter Willemsz. Verhoeff arrived at Banda Neira with a request by Maurice, Prince of Orange to build a fort on the island (the eventual Fort Nassau). The Bandanese were not excited about this idea. On 22 May, before building of the fort had started, the \"orang kaya\" called a meeting with the Dutch admiral, purportedly to negotiate prices. Instead, they led Verhoeff and two high-ranked men into an ambush and decapitated them and subsequently killed 46 of the Dutch visitors. Jan Pietersz Coen, who was a lower-ranked merchant on the expedition, managed to escape, but the traumatic event likely influenced his future attitude towards the Bandanese.\nEnglish-Dutch rivalry.\nWhile Portuguese and Spanish activity in the region had weakened, the English had built fortified trading posts on tiny Ai and Run islands, ten to twenty kilometres from the main Banda Islands. With the English paying higher prices, they were significantly undermining Dutch aims for a monopoly. As Anglo-Dutch tensions increased in 1611 the Dutch built the larger and more strategic Fort Belgica above Fort Nassau.\nIn 1615, the Dutch invaded Ai with 900 men whereupon the English retreated to Run where they regrouped. Japanese mercenaries served in the Dutch forces. That same night, the English launched a surprise counter-attack on Ai, retaking the island and killing 200 Dutchmen. A year later, a much stronger Dutch force attacked Ai. This time the defenders were able to hold off the attack with cannon fire, but after a month of siege they ran out of ammunition. The Dutch slaughtered the defenders, and afterwards strengthened the fort, renaming it 'Fort Revenge'.\nMassacre of the Bandanese.\nNewly appointed VOC governor-general Jan Pieterszoon Coen set about enforcing Dutch monopoly over the Banda's spice trade. In 1621 well-armed soldiers were landed on Bandaneira Island and within a few days they had also occupied neighbouring and larger Lontar. The \"orang kaya\" were forced at gunpoint to sign an unfeasibly arduous treaty, one that was in fact impossible to keep, thus providing Coen an excuse to use superior Dutch force against the Bandanese. The Dutch quickly noted a number of alleged violations of the new treaty, in response to which Coen launched a punitive massacre. Japanese mercenaries were hired to deal with the \"orang kaya\", forty of whom were beheaded with their heads impaled and displayed on bamboo spears. The butchering and beheadings were carried out by the Japanese for the Dutch.\nThe islanders were tortured and their villages destroyed by the Dutch. The Bandanese chiefs were also tortured by the Dutch and Japanese.\nThe Dutch carved 68 parcels out of the islands after the enslavement and slaughter of the natives.\nThe population of the Banda Islands prior to Dutch conquest is generally estimated to have been around 13,000\u201315,000 people, some of whom were Malay and Javanese traders, as well as Chinese and Arabs. The actual numbers of Bandanese who were killed, forcibly expelled or fled the islands in 1621 remain uncertain. But readings of historical sources suggest around one thousand Bandanese likely survived in the islands, and were spread throughout the nutmeg groves as forced labourers. The Dutch subsequently re-settled the islands with imported slaves, convicts and indentured labourers (to work the nutmeg plantations), as well as immigrants from elsewhere in Indonesia. Most survivors fled as refugees to the islands of their trading partners, in particular Keffing and Guli Guli in the Seram Laut chain and Kei Besar. Shipments of surviving Bandanese were also sent to Batavia (Jakarta) to work as slaves in developing the city and its fortress. Some 530 of these individuals were later returned to the islands because of their much-needed expertise in nutmeg cultivation (something sorely lacking among newly arrived Dutch settlers).\nWhereas up until this point the Dutch presence had been simply as traders, that was sometimes treaty-based, the Banda conquest marked the start of the first overt colonial rule in Indonesia, albeit under the auspices of the VOC.\nVOC Monopoly.\nHaving nearly eradicated the islands' native population, Coen divided the productive land of approximately half a million nutmeg trees into sixty-eight 1.2-hectare \"perken\". These land parcels were then handed to Dutch planters known as \"perkeniers\" of which 34 were on Lontar, 31 on Ai and 3 on Neira. With few Bandanese left to work them, slaves from elsewhere were brought in. Now enjoying control of the nutmeg production, the VOC paid the \"perkeniers\" 1/122nd of the Dutch market price for nutmeg; however, the \"perkeniers\" still profited immensely building substantial villas with opulent imported European decorations.\nThe outlying island of Run was harder for the VOC to control and they exterminated all nutmeg trees there. The production and export of nutmeg was a VOC monopoly for almost two hundred years. Fort Belgica, one of many forts built by the Dutch East India Company, is one of the largest remaining European forts in Indonesia.\nEnglish-Dutch rivalry continues.\nThough not physically present at the Banda Islands, the English claimed the small island of Run until 1667 when, under the Treaty of Breda (1667), the Dutch and English agreed to maintain the colonial status quo and relinquish their respective claims.\nIn 1810, the Kingdom of Holland was a vassal of Napoleonic France and hence in conflict with Britain. The French and British were each seeking to control lucrative Indian Ocean trade routes. On 10 May 1810, a squadron consisting of the 36-gun frigate , HMS \"Piedmontaise\", formerly a French frigate, 18-gun sloop , and the 12-gun transport left Madras with money, supplies and troops to support the garrison at Amboyna, recently captured from the Dutch. The frigates and sloop carried a hundred officers and men of the Madras European Regiment, while the \"Mandarin\" carried supplies. The squadron was commanded by Captain Christopher Cole, with Captain Charles Foote on the \"Piedmontaise\" and Captain Richard Kenah aboard the \"Barracouta\". After departing from Madras, Cole informed Foote and Kenah of Cole's plan to capture the Bandas; Foote and Kenah agreed. In Singapore, Captain Spencer informed Cole that over 700 regular Dutch troops may be located in the Bandas.\nThe squadron took a circuitous route to avoid alerting the Dutch. On 9 August 1810, the British appeared at Banda Neira. They quickly stormed the island and attacked Belgica Castle at sunrise. The battle was over within hours, with the Dutch surrendering Fort Nassau \u2013 after some subterfuge \u2013 and within days the remainder of the Banda Islands. After the Dutch surrender, Captain Charles Foote (of the \"Piedmontaise\") was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the Banda Islands. This action was a prelude to Britain's invasion of Java in 1811.\nBefore the Dutch retook control of the islands, the British removed many nutmeg trees and transplanted them to Ceylon and other British colonies. The competition largely destroyed the value of the Banda Islands to the Dutch.\nRecent history.\nIn the late 1990s, violence between Christians and Muslims spilled over from intercommunal conflict in Ambon. The disturbance and resulting deaths damaged the previously prosperous tourism industry.\nGeography.\nThere are seven inhabited islands and several that are uninhabited. The inhabited islands are:\nMain group:\nSome distance to the west:\nTo the east:\nTo the southeast:\nOthers, possibly small and/or uninhabited, are:\nThe islands are part of the Banda Sea Islands moist deciduous forests ecoregion.\nBandanese culture.\nMost of the present-day inhabitants of the Banda Islands are descended from migrants and plantation labourers from various parts of Indonesia, as well as from indigenous Bandanese. They have inherited aspects of pre-colonial ritual practices in the Bandas that are highly valued and still performed, giving them a distinct and very local cultural identity.\nIn addition, Bandanese speak a distinct dialect of Malay language which has several features distinguishing it from Ambonese Malay, the better-known and more widespread dialect that forms a lingua franca in central and southeast Maluku. Bandanese Malay is famous in the region for its unique, lilting accent, but it also has a number of locally identifying words in its lexicon, many of them borrowings or loanwords from Dutch.\nExamples:\nBanda Malay shares many Portuguese loanwords with Ambonese Malay not appearing in the national language, Indonesian. But it has comparatively fewer, and they differ in pronunciation.\nExamples :\nFinally, and most noticeably, Banda Malay uses some distinct pronouns. The most immediately distinguishing is that of the second person singular familiar form of address: pan\u00e9.\nThe descendants of some of the Bandanese who fled Dutch conquest in the seventeenth century live in the Kai Islands (Kepulauan Kei) to the east of the Banda group, where a version of the original Banda language is still spoken in the villages of Banda Eli and Banda Elat on Kai Besar Island. While long integrated into Kei Island society, residents of these settlements continue to value the historical origins of their ancestors."}
{"id": "5022", "revid": "1811786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5022", "title": "B.F. Skinner", "text": ""}
{"id": "5025", "revid": "1233313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5025", "title": "Brisbane Broncos", "text": "The Brisbane Broncos Rugby League Football Club Ltd., commonly referred to as the Broncos, are an Australian professional rugby league football club based in the city of Brisbane, the capital of the state of Queensland. Founded in April 1988, the Broncos play in Australia's elite competition, the National Rugby League (NRL) premiership. They have won six premierships, including two NSWRL titles, a Super League premiership and three NRL premierships. They also have two World Club Challenges. The Broncos have achieved four minor premierships during their 29 years in multiple competitions, making them Rugby League's most successful club over the past three decades. Until 2015, Brisbane had never been defeated in a grand final, and since 1991, have only failed to qualify for the finals three times. They are one of the most successful clubs in the National Rugby League since it began in 1998, winning three premierships (second only to the Sydney Roosters' four). It is also one of the most successful clubs in the history of rugby league, having won 61.2% of games played since its induction in 1988, second only to Melbourne Storm with 66.1%.\nThe club records the highest annual revenue of all NRL clubs \u2013 $A32.8m for the 2012 financial year \u2013 and is one of the most valuable clubs of any code in Australia, worth over $42\u00a0million. Along with financial competitiveness, the Broncos have been voted one of Australia's most popular and most watched football teams, and has one of the highest average attendances of any rugby league club in the world; 33,337 in the 2012 NRL season.\nThe club was founded in April 1988 as part of the Winfield Cup's national expansion, becoming, along with the Gold Coast-Tweed Giants, one of Queensland's first two participants in the New South Wales Rugby League premiership. The Broncos later became the dominant force in the competition before playing a significant role in the Super League War of the mid-1990s, then continuing to compete successfully in the newly created National Rugby League competition. The Broncos are based in the Brisbane suburb of Red Hill where their training ground and Leagues club are located (), but they play their home games at Milton's Lang Park. It is the only publicly listed sports club on the Australian Securities Exchange, trading as Brisbane Broncos Limited ().\nFollowing the conclusion of the 2020 regular season, head coach Anthony Seibold announced his resignation on 26 August 2020. The Broncos Board moved quickly and offered Kevin Walters the vacant role of head coach on a 2-year contract.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nQueensland's success in the 1980s, the early years of the State of Origin series between Queensland and New South Wales, in addition to the inclusion of a combined Brisbane Rugby League team in the mid-week competition, convinced the New South Wales Rugby League (NSWRL) to invite a Queensland-based team into the competition. After tough competition between the various syndicates for the Brisbane licence, the Queensland Rugby League chose the bid of former Brisbane Rugby League (BRL) players, Barry Maranta and Paul \"Porky\" Morgan. At the first meeting with the NSWRL hierarchy, the newly formed Brisbane Broncos were asked to pay a $500,000 fee.\nThe Broncos secured the services of Australian Kangaroos captain Wally Lewis to be the inaugural club captain and former BRL and then Canberra Raiders coach Wayne Bennett, on top of a host of other talented players including Chris Johns, Allan Langer, Terry Matterson, Gene Miles and Kerrod Walters. The team made their debut in the NSWRL's 1988 Winfield Cup premiership against reigning premiers, the Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles, and defeated them 44\u201310. They sat inside the Top 4 for a majority of the season, even sitting in 1st for 3 weeks. But the competition race was so tight, a 16\u20134 loss to the South Sydney Rabbitohs in Round 14 was enough to drop them from 2nd to 6th. Brisbane would not return to the Top 5, and a 20\u201310 loss to eventual runners up Balmain Tigers denied them the chance to enter a playoff for 5th place. Leading into 1989, Brisbane recruited Sam Backo from the Raiders while Steve Renouf was given his first grade debut. In their second season they won the mid-week knockout competition, the 1989 Panasonic Cup, but their league performance again revolved around a midseason slump, this time a 5-game losing streak which dropped them from 2nd to 7th. Brisbane would recover to enter a playoff for the 5th and final spot in the finals, but lost 38\u201314 to the Cronulla Sharks, ending their season.\nLeading up to the 1990 season, Brisbane recruited Kevin Walters from Canberra. However, the biggest news was the decision of Bennett to remove Lewis as club captain on the basis that he wasn't a good trainer or teammate, with Miles resuming the captaincy of the side. While the move was controversial, it seemed to have the desired effect, as the Broncos finished the season in 2nd, qualifying for their maiden finals series. Their finals debut was an upset 26\u201316 loss to the Penrith Panthers in the major Preliminary Semi, before they beat Manly 12\u20134 in the Minor Semi to qualify for a Preliminary Final showdown with Canberra. With a spot in the Grand Final on the line, Brisbane collapsed in sensational fashion at the Sydney Football Stadium (SFS), losing 32\u20134. Lewis, still upset about Bennett's treatment of his captaincy, left the club to go to the Gold Coast. He was replaced by Trevor Gilmeister, who joined from the Eastern Suburbs Roosters. Unfortunately, Brisbane endured their worst season to date in 1991, spending just 2 weeks total inside the Top 5 and hovering around 10th for much of the year before a 5-game winning streak saw them finish 7th, just a solitary draw outside a playoff for 5th place.\nThe Golden Age and Super League.\nLeading up to 1992, Brisbane landed another major piece from the Raiders, premiership winning prop Glenn Lazarus. The retirement of Miles saw Langer appointed club captain. Despite the new captain, 1992 was by far their best season yet, never sitting below 4th on the ladder and finishing the season with the minor premiership. The Illawarra Steelers met them in the Major Semi Final, where Brisbane took a 22\u201312 win to go into the first Grand Final in club history. 14 days later, they met the St George Dragons at the SFS. After a cagey first half which saw Brisbane lead 8\u20136 at the break, the Broncos dominated the second 40 minutes, with Langer and backrower Allan Cann crossing for 2 tries each in a 28\u20138 victory. Langer was named Clive Churchill Medallist for his phenomenal performance.\nBrisbane's Premiership defence in 1993 got off to a slow start, but they would recover to return to contention for the minor premiership. On the last round of the season, Brisbane took on St George, needing a win to keep their minor premiership hopes alive. St George won 16\u201310, and wins to Manly and the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs saw Brisbane drop from 2nd all the way to 5th, plunging them into sudden death football, all matches being played in Sydney. They ended Manly's season with a dominant 36\u201310 win, then took on a Canberra side whose form had plummeted following a broken leg to superstar halfback Ricky Stuart, and Brisbane cast them aside 30\u201312. Brisbane then met minor premiers Canterbury for a spot in the Grand Final, and their season looked on tenterhooks as the Bulldogs took a 16-10 halftime lead. But Brisbane steeled and won 23\u201316, and set up a Grand Final rematch with the Dragons. No team had ever won the NSWRL from 5th, however Brisbane became the first to do so when they won a defensive dogfight 14\u20136, winning back to back premierships, the last team to do so in a unified comp until the Roosters in 2018\u201319. During that season, they also handed future dual-international winger Wendell Sailor his first grade debut.\n1994 was a tough year for Brisbane, they didn't reach the Top 5 until Round 8 before dropping out and not returning until Round 17, ultimately finishing 5th. Brisbane again ended Manly's season in the first week of the finals, this time 16\u20134, but they could not repeat the magic of '93, with a Jason Taylor field goal ending their season in a heart breaking 15\u201314 loss to the North Sydney Bears. In 1995, the Super League War broke out. After threats of expulsion from the NSWRL, the Broncos were one of the last clubs to sign with the new league and all players followed suit (The Canberra Raiders, Canterbury Bulldogs and Cronulla Sharks were the first to sign, and it was only revealed many years later that the Broncos were in fact one of the last clubs to sign for either competition). Broncos CEO John Ribot moved to take over the running of the rebel Super League, leading to a perception that the conflict was orchestrated by the club. The 1995 season, the first under the ARL banner, went pretty well for Brisbane- they sat in the Top 4 for most of the year, finished 3rd, and unearthed a pair of future club legends- rugged prop Shane Webcke and future Golden Boot winner Darren Lockyer. Unfortunately, Brisbane couldn't capitalise in the first 8-team finals series, losing to the Raiders 14\u20138 in the qualifying final before falling 24\u201310 to the eventual Premiers, the now-Sydney Bulldogs. 1996 went pretty similarly- sit comfortably in the Top 4 and ultimately finish 2nd, only to lose 21\u201316 to North Sydney and 22\u201316 to the Cronulla Sharks to end their season.\nBrisbane's decision to side with the Super League saw a host of players join them from the ARL- most notably St George pair Anthony Mundine and Gordon Tallis, which offset the departure of longtime hooker Kerrod Walters to the Adelaide Rams. Brisbane dominated the Super League season, never leaving 1st position after Round 5 and beating Cronulla 34-2 and then 2 weeks later 26\u20138 to win the title in convincing fashion. Brisbane also competed in the World Club Challenge, going undefeated in their group (including a 76-0 demolition of Halifax Blue Sox), before beating St Helens 66\u201312, the Auckland Warriors 22-16 and the Hunter Mariners 36\u201312 to win the only edition of the costly tournament.\nBrisbane entered the 1998 NRL season as one of the favourites to win the unified competition- despite the return of Mundine to the Dragons and the departure of Lazarus to become the inaugural captain of the newly formed Melbourne Storm. Despite a rocky period which saw them drop to 6th after 14 rounds, Brisbane stormed home on a 12-game unbeaten run to seal the minor premiership. They were also able to fill the hole of Lazarus by debuting Petero Civoniceva.Despite this form however, they were stunned 15-10 by the Parramatta Eels in their first finals match, meaning they would need an extra game to qualify for the Grand Final. They responded in typical Brisbane style- routing Melbourne and Sydney City (formerly Eastern Suburbs) 30-6 and 46-18 respectively to qualify for the big dance, where they ended Canterbury's dream finals run with a 38\u201312 victory. The rampaging Tallis was named Clive Churchill Medallist after a dominant performance in the middle of the park, including a try from dummy half.\n1999 was disappointing for the club with a terrible early-season form hindering their attempt at a third consecutive premiership losing 8 of their first 10 matches. Club legend Langer retired mid-season, with Kevin Walters taking over the captaincy. The club went on another 12 game unbeaten run and ultimately qualified for the finals in 8th position, however their season ended in a dominant 42\u201320 loss against minor premiers Cronulla. The season wasn't all negative, as future Queensland representatives Dane Carlaw, Lote Tuqiri and Chris Walker all made first grade debuts for the club, although club legend Renouf did leave to finish his career with the Wigan Warriors. But Brisbane responded with a dominant 2000 season, buoyed by the signing of Ben Ikin to fill the hole left by Langer. Brisbane dominated the regular season, running away with the minor premiership, before beating the Sharks 34-20 and the Eels 16\u201310 to book a Grand Final matchup with the Roosters. The Broncos ground out a 14\u20136 victory for their 5th title in 9 years, with Lockyer receiving the Clive Churchill Medal for his performance. 2000 also saw the debut of even more future representative players- Ashley Harrison, Justin Hodges, Brad Meyers and Carl Webb. After just one full season as captain, Walters retired (although he would have a 5-game comeback in 2001), with Tallis anointed as club captain, and young North Queensland Cowboys half Scott Prince was brought in as his replacement\n2001 saw the beginning of the Broncos \"Post-Origin Slump\", a succession of losing streaks after Origin which sees Brisbane slide down the ladder and disappoint in the finals. In Round 19, Brisbane sat 2nd on the ladder, before losing 6 straight matches and finishing the year in 5th place. They fell 22\u20136 to Cronulla in the Qualifying Final, before beating the now-merged St George-Illawarra Dragons 44\u201328 to secure a Preliminary Final berth, were they were defeated 24-16 by minor premiers Parramatta. The year saw the debut of 2 more future stars- the speedy Brent Tate as well as goal kicking forward Corey Parker. A brutal knee injury suffered by Ikin would sideline him for all of 2002, and while a neck injury to Tallis threatened to end his career, he would return at the start of the next season. Sailor would also leave the club, enticed by a massive offer from the Queensland Reds to switch codes. Hodges also left the club, the offer of guaranteed gametime from the Roosters too much for him to ignore. After joining the Warrington Wolves and making a stunning comeback to the Queensland squad, Langer returned to the club for one last season in 2002 to help ease their halves problem. Brisbane finished the year in 3rd position, although they were challenging for the minor premiership until they lost 4 of their last 5 matches. Brisbane eliminated Parramatta with a 24\u201314 win, but fell in the Preliminary Final for the second year in a row, losing 16\u201312 to the eventual premiers, the Roosters. 2002 also saw one of the greatest moments in Brisbane's club history- in a Round 12 clash with the Wests Tigers, missing 15 regular first graders as well as head coach Bennett due to injuries and Origin, a Broncos squad captained by Shane Walker and coached by assistant Craig Bellamy pulled off a stunning 28\u201314 victory. Just a year after Sailor went to Rugby Union, his former wing partner Tuqiri joined him, joining the New South Wales Waratahs. Wing partner Chris Walker also jumped ship, heading to the South Sydney Rabbitohs on a big contract.\n2003 saw one of the worst \"Post-Origin Slumps\" in club history. The club sat 1st as late as Round 17, and were comfortably positioned 3rd after 19 weeks before both Tallis and Lockyer were felled by injuries in the Round 19 win over Melbourne. Brisbane dropped their last 7 matches, even after the return of their 2 superstar for the last 2 weeks of the season, and dropped to 8th place on the ladder- their season ending in the Qualifying Final when minor premiers and eventual premiers Penrith reversed a 18-10 half time deficit to beat Brisbane 28\u201318. That year did see the debuts of Neville Costigan and Sam Thaiday. Meanwhile, Prince had struggled to find game time after 2001 and left for the Tigers, where he would win the 2005 Clive CHurchill medal and captain the side to premiership glory in one of the biggest \"Ones that Got Away\" for the Broncos. The club again had a bounceback year in 2004, with the shock move of Lockyer from fullback to five-eighth a major catalyst for their success. Of course, it helped that his replacement at fullback, 17 year old sensation Karmicheal Hunt, was able to fit straight into the Broncos side. Brisbane spent almost the entire season inside the Top 4 and finished in 3rd position, but were stunned 31-14 by Melbourne, who had Bellamy as their head coach. This set them up with a sudden death semi final against the Cowboys, who they were undefeated against leading into the match. Brisbane volunteered to move the match from Suncorp Stadium to Dairy Farmers Stadium, and the Cowboys responded by using their raucous home support to stun their \"Big Brothers\" 10\u20130. The match would be the last for a host of club icons- captain Tallis and Ikin both retired, their NSW representative goal kicking winger Michael De Vere (Huddersfield Giants) and QLD prop Meyers (Bradford Bulls) left for the English Super League, while their other Origin prop Webb joined the Cowboys. With Lockyer named club captain and Hodges returning to the club, Brisbane dominated the start of the 2005 season and sat in 1st position after 24 rounds, but 5 straight losses to end the season saw them again slide to 3rd, where they again lost in the opening week to Melbourne, this time 24\u201318. This sent them into another semi final, this time against Prince and the eventual premiers Tigers, who brushed the Broncos aside 34\u20136.\nLeading into 2006, Brisbane were able to retain a similar squad to 2005- Ben Hannant proved to be a key rotational piece after arriving from the Roosters, Darius Boyd made his first grade debut and would be a key part of Brisbane's backline, and longtime QLD Cup veteran Shane Perry would become the solution for Brisbane's halfback spot. After being inside the Top 2 after Round 17, the Broncos again entered the post-Origin slump, losing 5 consecutive games. This season however, they reversed this run of form, winning 5 straight games to close out the regular season in 3rd. This had come after Bennett had signed a secret deal to become the Roosters coach from 2007, but reneged on the deal after it became public. Despite the reverse in form, it looked like their finals success was going on par with previous seasons after they fell 20\u20134 against the Dragons in the qualifying final. But Brisbane got a break against an injury hit Knights squad, and Brisbane took a crushing 50\u20136 victory to qualify for their first Preliminary Final in 4 seasons. Brisbane took on the Bulldogs, and their season was on life support when Canterbury led 20\u20136 at half time. The lead prompted Bulldogs prop Willie Mason to exclaim \u201cWe\u2019re going to the grand final!\u201d. That sledge sparked a dramatic Broncos comeback, as they ran in a 31-0 second half to blitz the Bulldogs 37-20 and book a spot in the Grand Final against Melbourne. Despite being massive underdogs, Brisbane looked in control throughout the entire match, and a Darren Lockyer field goal sealed a dramatic 15\u20138 victory and Brisbane's 6th premiership. Unsung hooker Shaun Berrigan was awarded the Clive Churchill Medal for his aggressive performance in the ruck. Webcke had already announced his intention to retire, and did so as a champion.\nOnce again, Brisbane started a premiership defence poorly, losing 7 of their first 10 to sit 15th, but their stay at the bottom of the table was abruptly ended when they produced a club record 71\u20136 victory over a battered Knights side. Brisbane climbed back up the ladder to sit 5th after Origin, but their season again took a turn in a Round 18 clash with the Cowboys, when Lockyer's season abruptly ended with a torn ACL. Brisbane would lose 5 of their last 7 matches, including a 68-22 thrashing at the hands of the Eels, and would end the season in 8th place and being thrashed 40-0 by the Storm in the Qualifying Final. Civoniceva left the club for Penrith, upset that they had prioritised the signing of Panthers prop Joel Clinton over retaining him. Tate also departed for the Warriors, while Berrigan left for Hull FC. In their place came Clinton, Eels hooker PJ Marsh and another ex-Panther, Peter Wallace, who would replace the ageing Perry as Lockyer's halves partner. Lockyer, however, missed some serious game time in 2008 and wasn't 100% healthy until Round 18, at which point Brisbane sat 7th on the ladder. But the bigger news to come out of the start of that season was Bennett's decision to walk out of the final year of his contract to become the head coach of the Dragons from 2009. Bennett had seen his relationship with the Broncos board deteriorate after his courtship with the Roosters, and decided to leave after 21 seasons with the club. His former assistant Bellamy seemed set for a return to Brisbane as his replacement, only to blindside the club by re-signing with the Storm after a botched interview. Ultimately, it was decided that longtime assistant Ivan Henjak would be promoted to the head coaching role from 2009, and he began taking more of a role in training. With Lockyer returning, Brisbane won 6 of their final 9 games to finish 5th, and upset the Roosters 24\u201316 in the qualifying final to set up a semi final showdown with Bellamy and the Storm. Brisbane led 14\u201312 with under 10 minutes to go, and seemed to have won the game when Hannant crossed the line, with Bennett seen displaying a rare show of emotion. But the video referee deemed Hannant was held up, and a few minutes later an Ashton Sims knock on saw Greg Inglis score for the Storm to seal a late 16\u201314 victory, breaking Brisbane hearts and ending their season.\nThe Rebuild.\n2009 saw a wave of change around Red Hill- not only was there a new head coach, but a host of roster changes. Boyd joined Bennett at the Dragons, the representative foursome of Hannant, Greg Eastwood, Michael Ennis and David Staggs all joined the Bulldogs, and boom winger Denan Kemp, who tied the club record with 4 tries in a single game against the Eels, was lured away to the Warriors. In their place was boom teenager Israel Folau, young back rower Ben Te'o and a host of club-developed talent, including Gerard Beale, Alex Glenn, Josh McGuire, Andrew McCullough and Jharal Yow-Yeh. Brisbane sat Top 4 until the Origin period, when they collapsed, conceding 40+ points in 3 straight games, an extra 44\u201312 loss to South Sydney and a then-club record 56-0 thrashing at the hands of the Raiders, leaving them dangling in 10th position. But 5 straight wins to close out the season, including a 22\u201310 win over Canberra just 36 days later, saw them finish in 6th position. This revival was largely due to the emergence of rampaging forward Dave Taylor. The Broncos stunned the 3rd place Titans 40\u201332 in the qualifying final, setting up a showdown with Bennett's Dragons in a sudden death semi final. Brisbane took one up on their former mentor with a dominant 24\u201310 victory, however Wallace fractured his ankle in the win, leaving them without a recognised halfback ahead of their preliminary final matchup with the Storm, one of the bigger reasons they fell 40\u201310. 2010 saw significant roster changes: the injury-enforced retirement of Marsh, Taylor's decision to move to the Rabbitohs and Hunt's decision to switch to the AFL with the Gold Coast Suns. Furthermore, they received a massive blow during pre-season when Hodges ruptured his achilles, causing him to miss the entire season. Brisbane stuttered and lost 6 of their first 8 matches, before reversing form and entering the Top 8. But in their Round 22 clash with the Cowboys, Lockyer took a hit and injured his rib cartilage. Despite his best efforts, Lockyer missed the rest of the regular season, and without him Brisbane slumped to 4 straight defeats, sliding from 7th to 10th and missing the finals for the first time since 1991. An even bigger blow for Brisbane was a contract saga involving Inglis- after Inglis had agreed in principle to join the Broncos for 2011 onward, he decided to cancel a flight to Brisbane to sign the contract under the alibi that \"It's raining and I don't think the planes are flying\". Behind the scenes, former Bronco Anthony Mundine was convincing Inglis to join the Rabbitohs, which he did a week later. Inglis would've replaced Folau, who followed Hunt's lead in switching to the AFL, this time to the Greater Western Sydney Giants. On a positive note, the season saw the debut of future international Matt Gillett.\nIn February 2011, it was announced that Henjak was to be sacked from the club, only three weeks before the beginning of the season. Anthony Griffin, Henjak's assistant, took over as coach for the 2011 season, becoming just the third head coach in the history of Broncos. Hannant also returned to the club, But even more pressing was the decision of Lockyer to retire after the season, ending a 16-year playing career which, in Round 22, saw him overtake Terry Lamb and Steve Menzies for the most first grade games played, finishing at 355, a record which would stand until Cameron Smith overtook him in 2017. Brisbane stagnated for a little while, but finished the season in 3rd position, setting up a qualifying finals matchup with the Warriors which they won 40\u201310, meaning they would head to take on the Dragons once again in the semi finals. Bennett, who had looked like he was set to rejoin the Broncos in 2012, had announced that he was joining Newcastle at the end of the season- meaning the match would either be the last of Lockyer's career, or Bennett's last with the Dragons. Brisbane led 12-6 towards the end of the game before Lockyer caught Beale's knee in his face, fracturing his cheekbone. St George Illawarra tied the game, necessitating Golden Point, where an injured Lockyer slotted home a field goal to seal a 13\u201312 win and keep Brisbane in the finals. Unfortunately, Lockyer was unable to play in the Preliminary Final against Manly, which the Sea Eagles won 26\u201314.\n2012 marked the Broncos' 25th season in the NRL competition. Civoniceva returned for one last season, and Thaiday was appointed club captain. Brisbane spent much of the season inside the Top 4, but another \"Post-Origin Slide\" saw them finish 8th, and they were eliminated by the Cowboys 33\u201316 in the Qualifying Final. Beale (Dragons) and Te'o (Rabbitohs) both left the club, along with the retiring Civoniceva, and Prince returned to the club for his swansong. Unfortunately, 2013 was not a good year for Brisbane- they were out of the Top 8 after Round 10 and never returned, finishing 12th, at the time the lowest position in club history. It did see the debut of future Origin winger Corey Oates. Prince retired and Wallace returned to the Panthers, largely because of the emergence of Ben Hunt as the clubs halfback. Incoming was former Dally M Medallist Ben Barba, who had attempted to join the Broncos as early as 2013, but was refused a release by the Bulldogs. There was also a change in the club captaincy, with Thaiday standing down and being replaced by a co-captain structure of Hodges and Parker. Unfortunately, the changes did not pay off, as Brisbane never really challenged for the title and ultimately finished 8th, again being eliminated by the Cowboys in the Qualifying Final, this time by the score of 32\u201320. That game would be Griffin's last as head coach, as it had been announced midseason that Bennett was set to return to the Broncos from 2015.\nBennett Returns.\nThe Roster change under Bennett was dramatic from the moment he returned. Barba was shipped to Cronulla after just one season, Hannant left for the Cowboys, and Kiwi international Josh Hoffman departed for the Gold Coast. In return, Boyd returned to the club, and was joined by ex-Storm enforcer Adam Blair and boom Raider Anthony Milford, as well as a pair of up and coming rookies in Joe Ofahengaue and Kodi Nikorima. The captaincy underwent another change as well, with Hodges given sole captaincy of the club. Their campaign started rocky, a 36-6 thrashing at the hands of South Sydney, but they soon found their feet and won 8 straight matches during the Origin period- a drastic change from the previous years- ultimately finishing the season in 2nd place. They took down the Cowboys 16\u201312 in the Qualifying Final to advance straight to a Preliminary Final showdown with the minor premier Roosters. A Boyd intercept try inside the first minute set the tone for the clash, and Brisbane would dominate 31\u201312 to advance to a Grand Final rematch with the Cowboys. In what is considered by some commentators to be one of the best Grand Finals in recent history the, Broncos led 16-12 for much of the second half before Cowboys winger Kyle Feldt scored in the corner on the last play of regulation to tie the match. superstar half Johnathan Thurston missed the subsequent conversion, sending the clash to golden point. The Broncos won the golden point coin toss and elected to receive, putting them in a great position to win the match. However, off the kickoff, Hunt knocked on, giving the Cowboys possession just metres out from the Broncos line. Thurston kicked a field goal 2 minutes into the Golden Point period to win the match for the Cowboys 17\u201316, ending the season in jubilation for Townsville and heartbreak for Brisbane.\nHodges retired after the Grand Final, and the captaincy was again given to Parker. James Roberts, a speedy centre, had been lured away from the Titans at the last minute to join the Broncos, and he was joined by young Raiders forward Tevita Pangai Junior and young back rower Jai Arrow, who had emerged from Brisbane's development program. Brisbane stated the season strongly but endured a \"Post-Origin Slump\" to drop out of the Top 4, finishing in 5th. After eliminating the Titans 44\u201328 in the Qualifying Final, Brisbane travelled to Townsville for a knockout clash with the Cowboys. In another classic between the two sides, the game went into extra time- a new rule brought in after their grand final thriller 12 months earlier- at 20-all, when a Michael Morgan try sealed a 26\u201320 win for the Cowboys, ending their season- the third time in 5 years their season had concluding in Townsville. Parker retired after the match, but Brisbane brought in embttled ex-New Zealand halfback Benji Marshall on a lifeline deal, as well as established prop Korbin Sims from Newcastle, and Boyd was named captain. Prior to the start of the season it was announced Hunt had signed a large contract with the Dragons beginning in 2018, and that likely contributed to a season where Hunt was dropped to reserve grade and the bench, before finishing the season at hooker after McCullough tore his ACL. Brisbane finished the 2017 season in 3rd, but with a 4 win gap between them and the 1st placed Storm. Making matters worse, Boyd was injured in their Round 26 win over the Cowboys, and missed their 24\u201322 loss in a classic Qualifying Final against the Roosters, before the Boyd-less Broncos advanced to another Preliminary Final with a 13\u20136 win over the Panthers. Boyd was rushed back into the squad for the showdown with runaway favourites Melbourne, but was clearly not healthy and didn't do much to alter the 30\u20130 defeat. On top of Hunt, Arrow (Titans), Blair (Warriors) and Marshall (Tigers) also left the club, with Jack Bird being the clubs marquee signing, although his season lasted just 8 games as he dealt with injury. 2018 also saw a major success from Brisbane's youth, with debuts handed out to Payne Haas, David Fifita, Kotoni Staggs and Jake Turpin. Brisbane however were not the team they had been, and instead of the Top 4 race they were just looking to make the finals. A big 48\u201316 win over Manly, which saw Corey Oates score 4 tries, saw the club finish in 6th, but just one win separated them from 1st, such was the tightness of the competition, renewing hopes of another deep finals run. The following week, Brisbane were eliminated from the finals series after being defeated 48\u201318 by a highly unfancied St George-Illawarra side. The loss was also the final game for the retiring Thaiday. After the 2018 season, a rift emerged between Bennett and CEO Paul White, which ultimately saw Bennett sign with the Rabbitohs to become coach from 2020. Just weeks later, Bennett was sacked as the head coach for making preseason plans with the Rabbitohs for the following year, and in return South Sydney appointed Bennett as head coach with immediate effect, freeing up their coach Anthony Seibold, who had already signed with Brisbane from 2020, to become the Broncos head coach for 2019.\nPost Bennett era.\nAlong with Bennett, a host of key players left Brisbane- McGuire left for the Cowboys and Sims for the Dragons, then halfway through the season Roberts and Nikorima also departed the club. Bird again dealt with health issues, only playing 9 games, and it quickly became clear that the now 32 year old Boyd had lost a step. A 4 match losing streak early in the season set the tone for the club, as they sat 14th after Round 16 only to go on a run of 6 wins and a draw from their last 10 games to ensure they finished in 8th place. They played the Eels in week one of the finals at the new Bankwest Stadium and lost the match 58\u20130, marking the club's worst ever defeat. It was also the biggest finals loss in the history of the competition which eclipsed the previous record set by Newtown when they defeated St George 55\u20137 in the 1944 finals series. It also extended the club's longest ever premiership drought to thirteen seasons.\n2020 started well for the Brisbane club winning their first two games against North Queensland and Souths before the competition was suspended upon completion of round 2 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nWhen the competition returned from its unscheduled hiatus in late May, the optimism at the Broncos vaporized overnight firstly losing 34\u20136 to Parramatta before recording their worst ever loss the following week against the Sydney Roosters losing 59\u20130.\nThe club's only post COVID lockdown victory came against fellow bottom of the ladder team, Canterbury-Bankstown in round 9. After a 28\u201310 loss to South Sydney, Anthony Seibold resigned as coach of the Brisbane Broncos with assistant Peter Gentle taking over as caretaker coach until the end of the season.\nWhile the Broncos were more competitive under Gentle, the club's losing streak would reach a record 11 losses in a row including a 36\u20138 loss to the Canberra Raiders despite leading 8\u20136 at half time, another big loss against the Sydney Roosters, this time 58\u201312 at the Sydney Cricket Ground and a 32\u201316 loss in the final round to North Queensland which condemned Brisbane to the club's first ever wooden spoon after Canterbury-Bankstown beat Souths in round 19 to leap ahead of the Brisbane club on the ladder on points differential.\nEmblem and colours.\nIt had originally been planned for the Brisbane Broncos to adopt a logo incorporating both a kangaroo and a stylised \"Q\" which had been featured in the logo for the Queensland Rugby League for many years. However, with the Australian national rugby league team also known as the Kangaroos, this was deemed inappropriate and conflicting. The state flower the Cooktown Orchid and the Poinsettia which had long been used by Brisbane representative teams in the Bulimba Cup and midweek knockout competitions was also ruled out, along with other Australian animals such as the brumby, possum, galah and the kookaburra, which was used on Brisbane's Kookaburra Queen paddleships.\nHaving wanted to continue with the use of alliteration for local sporting teams such as the Brisbane Bullets and Brisbane Bears (later the Brisbane Lions), the club's directors eventually decided on the nickname Broncos. This name was chosen by Barry Maranta because he was a fan of NFL team, Denver Broncos. The Australian newspaper has described the name as \"Mystifyingly American\".\nThe original club logo was first featured in the Broncos' inaugural season in the premiership in 1988 and was used until 1999. It used a mostly gold colour scheme, in line with the predominant colour on the team jerseys. In 2000, the club adopted a new logo with a more maroon design, which was much closer to the traditional colour associated with Queensland rugby league and Queensland sport in general. This design continues to be used to date.\nTraditionally, the colours of the Brisbane Broncos have been maroon, white and gold, which have all long been linked to the history of rugby league in Queensland. Initially, the founders of the club favored the official blue and gold colours of Brisbane City Council. However, Sydney advertiser John Singleton advised the board that \"Queenslanders had been booing players wearing blue for more than three-quarters of a century.\" As a result, the traditional maroon and white colours of Queensland along with gold, symbolizing the Queensland sunshine,\n were adopted as the club's colours.\nIn the inaugural 1988 season, the club's jersey design featured the top third being gold, the middle being alternating hoops of maroon and white and the bottom third being maroon. Although this design featured gold strongly, it did not please everyone as the jersey had to differentiate from the maroon and white of Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles and the maroon of the Queensland rugby league team. Following a number of design changes in the 1990s including a predominantly white jersey from 1997 to 1998, blue was added to the jersey in 2001 as a minor colour to show the aforementioned historical link with the colours of Brisbane. However, this was later dropped from the design in favor of a mainly maroon jersey with gold trim.\nAt the 1995 Rugby League World Sevens tournament, the club introduced a new combination of jersey colours \u2013 mauve, aqua and white. Brisbane Broncos Marketing Manager Shane Edwards stated that it \"will become our Sevens strip... but we will never change the Broncos' colours.\" In 2001, following the release of the club's predominantly white with navy-blue and maroon away jersey, the National Rugby League ordered the club to produce a third jersey since the new away jersey clashed with the home jerseys of the Penrith Panthers, Melbourne Storm and New Zealand Warriors. An aqua strip using the same design as the jerseys used from 1999 to 2001 was worn, which was much derided by the local media. Following two years of public pressure the club dropped the jersey in favor of the design worn against Newcastle in 2003.\nInternational Sports Clothing became Brisbane's kit provider in October 2016, replacing long-time suppliers Nike.\nStadium.\nIn their first five seasons, the Broncos played their matches at the 52,500 capacity Lang Park (or more commonly referred to as \"Suncorp Stadium\" due to sponsorship of Suncorp, Australia), the ground considered to be the home of rugby league in Queensland. However, following ongoing conflict with the Queensland Rugby League and Lang Park Trust due to a sponsorship conflict with the QRL having a commercial agreement with Castlemaine XXXX brewery with prominent signs around the ground, while the Broncos were sponsored by rival brewery Powers who were not permitted any permanent signs (the Broncos initially got around this by not using the change rooms at half time during games, instead sitting on the ground with a temporary protective banner surrounding them which just happened to have prominent Powers logos), the team relocated to the 60,000 capacity ANZ Stadium in 1993 (ANZ had been the main stadium of the 1982 Commonwealth Games). The club's home match attendance, which had averaged 19,637 at Lang Park, increased to 43,200 at the new ground in the first season following the club's first premiership title in the previous season. However, despite the team's second premiership in 1993, crowds gradually declined and it was not until 2002 that the club again registered more than the 1996 average attendance of 23,712. ANZ Stadium, as the Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre was called at the time due to sponsorship rights, was featured on an episode of \"The Mole\" in April 2002.\nWith the Queensland Government's $280 million redevelopment of Lang Park, the team moved back to the refurbished and renamed Suncorp Stadium upon its completion in mid-2003. The more centrally-located stadium has begun to attract larger crowds, with the 2006 average attendance of 31,208 being significantly higher than the Newcastle Knights with 21,848 and about double the regular season competition average of 15,601.\nThe club record attendance for a regular season match is 58,593, set against the St. George Dragons in the final round of the 1993 season. The record attendance for a match at Suncorp Stadium is 50,859 for Darren Lockyer's final home game. Before kick-off at the Stadium an instrumental version of Led Zeppelin's \"Kashmir\" is routinely played.\nThe Broncos all-time home attendance record was set at ANZ Stadium during the 1997 Super League Grand Final when 58,912 saw the Broncos defeat the Cronulla Sharks 26\u20138 to claim the only Super League premiership played in Australia.\nBuck The Bronco.\nBuck the Bronco is currently the Broncos mascot.\nBrisbane Broncos Leagues Club.\nLocated in 98 Fulcher Road, Queensland, Australia (4059), the Brisbane Broncos League is the Broncos training ground and includes a restaurant and buffet. The Brisbane Broncos have also purchased the TAFE (opposite the club) and have recently built a new training field and building. The Broncos' training ground is also used for the Australian Kangaroos.\nThe club is located within Gilbert Park and opened in 1988. Wests Juniors Football Club originally called Gilbert Park home, with the small clubhouse beside owned by Wests Old Boys. These two clubs merged in 1967 and in 1987 was purchased to form Broncos Leagues Club.\nSupporters.\nThe Brisbane Broncos have the largest fan base of any NRL club and they have been voted the most popular rugby league team in Australia for several years. A Broncos supporters group called \"The Thoroughbreds\" which is made up of prominent businessmen, made an unsuccessful bid to purchase News Ltd's controlling share of the club in 2007.\nAverage regular season attendance\nNotable supporters\nNotable supporters of this club, amongst others, include:\nCorporate.\nThe Broncos are the only publicly listed NRL club. The parent company of the Brisbane Broncos is Nationwide News Pty Ltd., a subsidiary of News Limited, which as of 30 June 2007, owns 68.87% of Broncos shares.\nBGM Projects is another major shareholder.\nJohn Ribot, a former first grade rugby league player in Queensland and New South Wales, was the club's original chief executive officer (CEO). Ribot left when he signed to become the CEO of the rebel Australian rugby league competition Super League. (p.\u00a024,112) Shane Edwards, the Broncos Marketing Manager at the time, was promoted to CEO and later resigned. Bruno Cullen, who had been with the Broncos' off-field staff since 1989, became the club's third CEO in 2003.\n In 2011 Cullen was replaced by current CEO Paul White. Rugby league player Darren Lockyer is a member of the board of directors.\nKia are the major sponsor of the Broncos as of 2020, replacing NRMA Insurance. Nova 106.9 are the main radio sponsors after taking over from rival station B105 FM in late 2006. Live broadcasts of all Broncos matches are provided by both 612 ABC Brisbane (except games played on Monday Night) and 4MMM. Channel Nine Queensland also sponsors the Broncos, although former player Shane Webcke is signed to rival Seven Queensland.\nIn 2012, local Brisbane based company Firstmac replaced WOW sight &amp; Sound as sleeve sponsor for 3 years to launch into the retail financial services market. This sponsorship took only 9 days to negotiate following the announcement of WOW Sight &amp; Sound going into receivership. Firstmac stipulated a unique clause in their contract that they could pay for 250 tickets to be distributed to WOW Sight &amp; Sound staff that lost their jobs. Firstmac has since launched a Firstmac Broncos home loan in conjunction with their new sponsorship agreement.\nAsics are the Broncos current apparel provider as of November 2020.\nBetween 1997 and 2016, the club's apparel was manufactured by Nike. Between 2017 and 2020, International Sports Clothing served as the club's apparel manufacturer. From the 2021 season, Asics will supply the club's on-and-off-field apparel.\nSponsors.\nThe Brisbane Broncos' first major sponsor was Powers Brewing who sponsored them until 1993. The Broncos currently have a number of sponsorship deals with the following: \nPlayers.\nNotable players.\nDue to the club's premiership success and its being the dominant Queensland team in the competition for the majority of its participation, the Brisbane Broncos' list of representative players is extensive. Consequently, there have been a large number of Queensland Maroons in the team. In 2007, a 20-man legends team was announced to celebrate the club's 20-year anniversary.\nStatistics and records.\nThe Brisbane Broncos are the second most successful club in terms of percentage of total games won, having won 63.63% of their games, as of 29 August 2012. This is marginally less (0.01%) than first placed Melbourne Storm. In their twenty completed seasons, the club has made a total of seven Grand Finals, winning 6 and losing 1 to the North Qld Cowboys in 2015. They are one of only two clubs to have won the World Club Challenge twice, and were the first club to do so on British soil. They also won the now defunct Panasonic Cup in 1989.\nFormer team captain Darren Lockyer holds the record for the most First Grade games for both the club and National League. Lockyer did also hold the record for the most points scored for the club, tallying 1,171 since his debut in 1995, before Corey Parker overtook him in August 2015 with 1,222 career points for Brisbane Broncos. Darren Lockyer also holds the club record of 272 points in a season, having achieved this in 1998. Darren Lockyer was named Fullback in Queensland Rugby League's Team of the Century in 1998\u20132007 and he won 4 grand finals with the Brisbane Broncos (including a Clive Churchill Medal) and a World Cup title with Australia. He also won the Golden Boot Award for world's best player in this position before switching to Five-eighth.\nSteve Renouf also shares the club record for the most tries in a season with Darren Smith at 23. After over a decade after Steve Renouf's move from the Brisbane Broncos to Wigan Warriors, he was still the club's all-time try scorer with a 142 career tries. Five times, he has scored 4 tries in a single match from 1991 to 1998 and was known as one of the greatest centres the game has ever seen. In 2008, Steve Renouf was named centre in the Indigenous Team of the Century.\nLote Tuqiri's tally of 26 points from three tries and seven goals in a single match against the Northern Eagles remains the club record for most individual points in a game. He also won the 1999 Brisbane Broncos season's rookie of the year award.\nCorey Parker holds the record for most goals in a game kicking ten in a round one clash of 2008, breaking the previous mark of nine kicked by Lockyer in 1998 and matched by Michael De Vere in 2001. He also scored a try on debut during 2001. Parker converted ten from ten goals in the Broncos 48\u201312 win over the Penrith Panthers in which Parker scored 24 points placing him in equal second place on the most points in a match tally. In 2013, Corey Parker was named Dally M Lock of the Year and in 2009 received the Broncos' Paul Morgan Award. Corey Parker also received the Paul Morgan Award yet again in 2013 and 2015.\n Six players have scored four tries in a match for the Brisbane Broncos including Steve Renouf (5 times), Wendell Sailor, Karmichael Hunt, Justin Hodges, Denan Kemp and Australian Wallabies player, Israel Folau. Wendell Sailor has held the record for the most tries scored in a finals match (four tries against St. George Illawarra Dragons, Semi-final 2001, Brisbane won 44\u201328).\nThe most field goals in a match however hasn't been past one field goal which has been accomplished several times.\nThe club's biggest winning margin is 65 points, achieved in 2007 in a 71\u20136 victory over the Newcastle Knights. Their heaviest defeat is a 59\u20130 loss by the Sydney Roosters on 4 June 2020 . The clubhouse 's highest winning margin in a grand final is by 26 points against Canterbury Bulldogs (38\u201312, against Canterbury Bulldogs, grand final, 1998).\nIn, 2017 NRL season, the Brisbane Broncos' highest try-scorer of 2017 is former Gold Coast Titans Centre, James Roberts with 15 tries. Highest point-scorer is Jordan Kahu with 67 goals and 8 tries. The most metres ran in the season is by Tautau Moga with 3410 metres.\nClub Rivalries.\nNorth Queensland Cowboys.\nThe Broncos biggest rivals are the North Queensland Cowboys. The two clubs had a long-standing 'sibling rivalry' with the Cowboys characterized as the underdog. The rivalry increased in intensity after the Cowboys won their first premiership, beating the Broncos at the 2015 Grand Final at ANZ Stadium. Considered one of the greatest grand finals of all time, the win established the Cowboys as competitive equals. Between 2015 and 2017 a staggering 3 of 5 of the games played between the two clubs led to a Golden Point finish. It is regarded as one of the greatest sports rivalries and is considered the fiercest rivalry by far in the NRL, earning the nickname of the \"Queensland derby\".\nSydney Roosters.\nSince the 2000 Grand Final between the Roosters and Broncos, both clubs have built on a rivalry which still continues today. From 2002 to 2010, the Roosters and the Broncos played in the traditional Good Friday match.\nNewcastle Knights.\nAnother notable rivalry is with fellow debutants from 1988, the Newcastle Knights. From the omission of the Gold Coast Chargers at the end of the 1998 season until the arrival of the Gold Coast Titans in the 2007 season, the Knights were geographically the closest club to the Broncos. Adding to this, players from both Brisbane and Newcastle have featured heavily in the annual State of Origin sides for Queensland and New South Wales respectively.\nMelbourne Storm.\nSince the 2006 Grand Final where Brisbane etched out Melbourne in a thriller, a rivalry still continues today between the two clubs. Adding to this, both Brisbane and Melbourne usually feature heavily in Queensland's annual State of Origin side.\nGold Coast Titans.\nThe rivalry remains due to the fact that the Titans are geographically the closest club to the Broncos. Brisbane previously enjoyed the rivalry with the Gold Coast Chargers, until the Chargers exited the competition at the end of 1998 season, returning as the Gold Coast Titans in 2007.\nClub affiliations.\nThe Brisbane Broncos have four split feeder clubs from the Queensland Cup: Northern Suburbs Devils, Souths Logan Magpies, Central Queensland Capras and Wynnum-Manly Seagulls, making the Broncos the only club with more than three affiliated feeder clubs. Former feeder clubs of the Broncos are the now-defunct Aspley Broncos and Toowoomba Clydesdales, active clubs Ipswich Jets, who switched to Newcastle Knights, Redcliffe Dolphins who switched to New Zealand Warriors, and Burleigh Bears, who switched to the Gold Coast Titans.\nClub victory song.\nThe Broncos' victory song, \"We're The Broncos\":\nWe\u2019re the Broncos\nThe mighty Broncos\nWe keep fighting every second till the end\nWe\u2019re the Broncos\nThe greatest team on earth\nWe\u2019re the heart of all Queensland\nNever stop\nWe never rest\nOn and on we beat the best\nNever giving up we bleed maroon and gold\nFor the league\nWe risk it all\nMiles above\nWe\u2019re standing tall\nWe\u2019re the finest and the greatest club of all\nWe\u2019re the Broncos\nThe mighty Broncos\nWe keep fighting every second till the end\nWe breathe in our soul\nThe best game of all\nWe are the Broncos of Queensland\nHey!!\nNRL Women's team.\nIn 2017, the Brisbane Broncos launched a bid to enter a team in the inaugural NRL Women's Premiership in 2018. On 27 March 2018, the club won a license to participate in the inaugural NRL Women's season, on the back of a strong bid which included the NRL's desire for a geographical spread. Paul Dyer was named as the coach of the women's side, but stepped down after the inaugural season to concentrate on his role as game development manager. Kelvin Wright was named his replacement in May 2019.\nIn June 2018, Ali Brigginshaw, Brittany Breayley, Heather Ballinger, Teuila Fotu-Moala and Caitlyn Moran were unveiled as the club's first five signings. Tain Drinkwater was also appointed the CEO of the team.\nThe club won the inaugural NRL Women's Premiership title by defeating the Sydney Roosters by 34\u201312 in the 2018 NRL Women's Premiership Grand Final.\nExternal links.\nOfficial sites\nStatistics &amp; information sites\nSupporter sites"}
{"id": "5026", "revid": "8120059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5026", "title": "Brisbane Lions", "text": "The Brisbane Lions is a professional Australian rules football club based in Brisbane, Queensland, that plays in the Australian Football League (AFL). \nThe club was formed in late 1996 via a merger of the Fitzroy Football Club's football operations and the Brisbane Bears. The club's colours of maroon, gold and blue are drawn from both entities. The Lions were the most successful AFL club of the 2000's, appearing in four consecutive Grand Finals from 2001 to 2004 and winning three premierships (2001, 2002, 2003). They play home matches at the Gabba and have their offices and indoor training facilities located within the stadium.\nThe Lions also field teams in two other competitions. They were a foundation team in the AFL Women's competition in 2017 and have featured in two grand finals in that time, finishing runners-up on both occasions. They have also fielded a reserve men's team in several leagues over the years, and as of 2021 the reserves team competes in the Victorian Football League.\nHistory.\nPre-Merger.\nIn 1996, the ten-year-old Brisbane Bears had enjoyed their best season to date, losing a preliminary final to the eventual premiers, North Melbourne. However, the club was on extremely shaky financial ground and did not have many opportunities to generate revenue.\nIn contrast, the Fitzroy Lions, a foundation club of the VFL/AFL, had been among the bottom teams of the league for the better part of the last four decades. They had finished in last place for two successive seasons, although they contained a number of promising young players. The club was in serious trouble off the field as well. It had not had a permanent home since 1966 and had been on the verge of folding as early as 1986.\nBy the start of the 1996 season, Fitzroy was almost at the end of its financial tether. The club's directors agreed in principle to merge with the 1996 premiers, North Melbourne, as the \"North-Fitzroy Kangaroos\". However, that proposal was rejected 15\u20131 by the AFL Commission, reportedly out of concern that an all-Victorian merge would be too powerful. Instead, Fitzroy was placed into administration, and its administrator accepted an offer to merge its football operations with Brisbane. The merged team would be based in Brisbane, and Bears coach John Northey would become coach of the merged club. However, it adopted a logo, song, and guernsey based largely on those of Fitzroy, would take 8 Fitzroy players in the draft, three Fitzroy representatives would serve on the board, and the Lions would keep an office in Melbourne. \nThe Brisbane Lions were officially launched on 1 November 1996, joining the national competition in 1997.\nBeginnings: 1997\u20132000.\nIn their first year as a combined club the Lions made the finals, finishing in eighth position after being defeated by the St Kilda Football Club in a qualifying final. The following year, however, they finished in last position, despite boasting a talented playing list. Accordingly, Northey was sacked as coach with eight rounds remaining in the season. During the off-season the club hired Leigh Matthews, who in 1990 had delivered Collingwood its first premiership since 1958.\nMatthews, who was voted \"Player of the Century\" in 2000, played his entire career with Hawthorn and brought many of the Hawthorn disciplines to the Lions. Within a season the Lions rose from the bottom of the ladder to fourth, before losing to the eventual premiers, the Kangaroos, in a preliminary final. The Lions played finals again in 2000, but would bow out in the second week after losing to Carlton by 82 points.\nTriple premiership success: 2001\u20132003.\nAs the Brisbane Lions, the club won its first AFL premiership in the 2001 AFL Grand Final, defeating Essendon 15.18 (108) to 12.10 (82). Lions utility player Shaun Hart won the Norm Smith Medal as best on ground in the Grand Final. During their triple premiership years, the Lions took each premiership cup to Fitzroy's spiritual home of Brunswick street oval the morning after the grand final, a move seen by many as an important one, as it helped win over many disaffected former Fitzroy fans. \nIn 2002, the Lions won back-to-back premierships when they defeated Collingwood 9.12 (66) to 10.15 (75) in the 2002 AFL Grand Final in cold and wet conditions at the Melbourne Cricket Ground. Early in the contest, the Lions lost both ruckman Beau McDonald and utility player Martin Pike to injury and had to complete the match with a limited bench.\nIn 2003, the Lions won their 3rd premiership in a row. With a number of players under an injury cloud \u2013 and having lost to Collingwood in a qualifying final at the Melbourne Cricket Ground three weeks previously \u2013 the Lions went into the game as underdogs. However, they sealed their place in history as an AFL dynasty by thrashing the Magpies in cool but sunny conditions. At one stage in the final quarter, the Lions led by almost 80 points before relaxing when the match was well and truly won, allowing Collingwood to score the last four goals. The final score of 20.14 (134) to 12.12 (84) saw the club become only the fourth in VFL/AFL history to win three consecutive premierships and the first since the creation of the AFL. Simon Black claimed the Norm Smith Medal with a dominant 39 possession match, the most possessions ever gathered by a player in a grand final.\nThe 2004 season saw Brisbane remain in the top portion of the ladder for most of the season. Reaching the finals in second position, Brisbane controversially had to travel to Melbourne to play against Geelong in the preliminary final, due to a contract between the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG) and the Australian Football League (AFL) that required one preliminary final to be played each year at the MCG. Port Adelaide had finished on top of the ladder and hosted the other preliminary final in Adelaide. Despite this setback, Brisbane beat Geelong and reached the AFL Grand Final for the fourth consecutive year. Their opponents, Port Adelaide, playing in their first ever grand final, were too good on the day and recorded a 40-point win.\nRebuild &amp; Michael Voss: 2005\u20132013.\nThe 2005 season saw the end of domination by the Lions. \nAt the finish of the home and away season they were not placed in the final eight, finishing 11th.\nThe Lions began the 2006 season optimistically, but injuries again plagued the club, whose players recorded an AFL record total of 200 matches lost to injury for the season.\nThe Brisbane Lions started the 2007 season promisingly, finishing runner up in the 2007 NAB Cup. However, the Lions would fail to make the finals for a third successive year. Despite this, the Lions made history by becoming the first team in the history of the AFL to have five co-captains.\nThe team struggled during the 2008 season and missed out on the finals with a 10\u201312 record, losing 3 games despite having at least 5 more scoring shots in each of those games. Following the season, Coach Leigh Matthews resigned after 10 seasons and 3 premierships with the club. The Lions appointed former player and Captain Michael Voss as the coach ahead of 2009.\nBrisbane's 2009 season was promising for the club. After only winning 2 games from the first 5 played, the club won 9 of the next 12 to sit in 6th on the Ladder, where they would finish the season. They would also record a strong victory over eventual premiers Geelong during this timeframe by 43 points. The club beat Carlton in their Elimination Final, coming from 30 points behind in the final quarter to win by 7 points, before losing to the Western Bulldogs in a Semi Final.\nThe 2009/2010 off-season was dominated by the arrival of Brendan Fevola from Carlton, with a belief in the club that Fevola could help them capitalise and improve upon their strong 2009 season. Indeed, the Lions won their first four matches of the 2010 season to be top of the ladder after four rounds, but they would only win three more games after that to finish 13th by the end of the season.\nThe Lions' 2010/2011 off-season was disrupted by the sacking of Fevola after just one season at the Lions, following repeated off-field indiscretions which included getting drunk in the Brisbane streets during New Year's Eve celebrations. On the field, the Lions won only four games for the year and finished 15th overall. Despite their worst season since 1998, coach Michael Voss was granted a contract extension after the board recommended that Voss was the best man to take the club forward into the future. Leading into season 2012, only two players from the triple-premiership winning team of 2001\u20132003 remained: Simon Black and Jonathan Brown.\nThe 2013 season started well for Brisbane, defeating Carlton in the final of the NAB Cup, with Daniel Rich winning the Michael Tuck Medal for best on ground. However, the club began its 2013 season with back-to-back losses to the Western Bulldogs and Adelaide. Injuries took a toll on the team, with young players Claye Beams and Jared Polec suffering severe injuries. In Round 13, Brisbane defeated second-placed Geelong, coming from 52 points down late in the third quarter to win by 5 points due to an Ash McGrath goal after the siren in his 200th match, in what would become known as the Miracle on Grass.\nOn 13 August 2013, coach Michael Voss was told that his contract would not be renewed.\nOn 18 October 2013, Brisbane Lions legend Simon Black announced his retirement.\nPlaying under Justin Leppitsch: 2014\u20132016.\nOn 25 August 2013, former premiership player for the Lions, Justin Leppitsch, was confirmed to be the senior coach of the Lions for the next three seasons.\nDuring Round 13, 2014 Lions captain Jonathan Brown was the victim of a facial injury in a clash between the Lions and the Greater Western Sydney Giants. He collided with Tomas Bugg's knee and was taken off the ground. He suffered a concussion, and subsequently retired from football. His retirement, alongside the retirement of Ash McGrath, meant there were no players from the triple-premiership era remaining at the club.\nOn 29 August 2016, Leppitsch was sacked as coach of the Lions after multiple disappointing seasons.\nChris Fagan era: 2017\u2013present.\nOn 4 October 2016, Hawthorn football manager Chris Fagan was announced as Brisbane's senior coach from the 2017 season onwards. \nThe Lions claimed the 2017 wooden spoon, despite winning 5 games for the season, 2 more than the previous season. Their percentage of 74.3 was the worst in the league, behind Fremantle with a percentage of 74.4. The 2018 season was very similar, recording 5 wins to finish in 15th place.\nThe Lions had a magnificent 2019 season, making the finals for the first time since 2009 and finishing second on the AFL ladder with 16 wins, behind minor premiers Geelong on percentage. However, Brisbane were bundled out of the finals in straight sets at the Gabba, losing to eventual premiers Richmond by 47 points in their qualifying final and then to eventual runners-up Greater Western Sydney by three points in their semi-final due to a late Brett Daniels goal. The Lions would become the first team since Geelong in 1997 to finish second on the ladder and not progress to a preliminary final.\nBrisbane repeated their form displayed in 2019 the following year, once again finishing in second position on percentage at the conclusion of the Home and Away season. They won 14 games in a shortened 17-game season. During their qualifying final, they defeated Richmond for the first time since 2009 and qualified for a preliminary final berth, but would go onto be beaten by a more experienced Geelong side in that match.\nMembership base.\nCrowds and memberships for the Brisbane Lions grew dramatically during the four seasons in which they made the AFL Grand Final. \nThe club still maintains healthy Victorian support due to their Fitzroy origins, and The Royal Derby Hotel in Fitzroy is the official social venue for Victorian Lions fans, showing all televised games, and displaying a mural of club greats Kevin Murray and Jonathan Brown on its Alexandra Parade side. \nTo add to this presence in Melbourne, the Lions Historical Society is based at Etihad stadium, containing exhibits of club history stretching from Fitzroy, to the Bears, and the Brisbane Lions. \nStatistics highlighted in bold denote the best known season for Brisbane in that category\nStatistics highlighted in \"italic\" denote the worst known season for Brisbane in that category\nRelationship with Fitzroy FC.\nFitzroy FC Ltd improved its relationship with the Brisbane Lions in the ten years from 1999\u20132009. In that time Brisbane acknowledged the two parent clubs for the merger with the letters BBFFC printed below the back of the neck of the club's guernseys from 2002. The Fitzroy Reds played the curtain-raiser at the MCG when the Brisbane Lions met the Collingwood Magpies in the AFL Heritage Round of 2003. Brisbane also now wears a version of Fitzroy's AFL guernsey with red instead of maroon in most matches played in Victoria, consistent with Fitzroy's most recent colours.\nRelationships between Fitzroy and Brisbane were strained in late 2009, when Brisbane announced that it was adopting a new logo for season 2010 and beyond, which Fitzroy Football Club believed contravened Section 7.2 c) of the merger agreement. The new logo, a lion's head facing forward, replaced the former Fitzroy logo of a passant lion with a football. On 22 December 2009, Fitzroy lodged a Statement of Claim with the Supreme Court of Victoria, seeking an order that the Brisbane Lions be restrained from using as its logo, the new logo or any other logo other than 'the Fitzroy lion logo'. On 15 July 2010, the two clubs reached a settlement, agreeing that the Fitzroy logo symbolically represents the historic merger between the Bears and Fitzroy and the first 13 years of the Brisbane Lions competing in the AFL, and that Brisbane would use both the old and new logos alongside each other in an official capacity (e.g. on letterheads, marketing, etc.), with the old logo to be phased out altogether after 2014. Brisbane returned to using the old logo on its playing guernseys from 2015, but the new logo will remain for corporate purposes.\nThe Lions keep strong ties with the Fitzroy Football Club in the VAFA and the Fitzroy junior football club, sponsoring a male and female player per year from Fitzroy, and on many occasions inviting the Fitzroy juniors to form a guard of honour at Melbourne games. \nThis along with the support of Fitzroy greats such as Kevin Murray, Bernie Quinlan, and Garry Wilson, have ensured that the Brisbane Lions are considered a direct continuation of Fitzroy in the AFL.\nClub identity.\nEmblem.\nIn 1997, the club unveiled its new merger emblem, consisting of the golden Fitzroy Lion on a badge of Maroon and Blue. The club used this emblem from 1997 until the end of 2001. In 2002, the club would unveil a new emblem in the shape of a football, emblazoned with the words \"Brisbane Lions\" and with the Fitzroy Lion located within the o of Lions. This emblem was used until 2010, when the emblem was again changed, this time in favour of a forward-facing Lion head.\nGuernseys.\nHome Guernsey (worn since 2015): Predominantly maroon guernsey with a blue yoke featuring a golden Fitzroy Lion, with a gold collar and cuffs. XL Express is the current sponsor on the front whilst Ned's is the current sponsor on the back. For shorts, maroon home shorts are worn in home games and white away shorts are worn in away games not played in Victoria. This guernsey was also worn between 1997 and 2009.\nAway Guernsey (worn since 2015): Predominantly red guernsey with a blue yoke featuring a golden Fitzroy lion, with a blue collar and cuffs, and based on Fitzroy's final colours in the AFL. Ned's is the current sponsor on the front and XL Express is the current sponsor on the back. White away shorts are worn when this guernsey is used. This guernsey was also worn in 2008 and 2009.\nClash Guernsey (worn since 2020): This predominantly white guernsey features a golden Fitzroy lion on a maroon v (the v reminiscent of the Bears\u2019 final guernsey), with a maroon collar and cuffs. Ned's is the sponsor on the front and XL Express is the sponsor on the back. The same shorts as the Away Guernsey are worn.\nMascot.\nThe Lion's Mascot Manor representative and club mascot was Bernie \"Gabba\" Vegas, a caricature of a lion dressed in Brisbane Lions jumper, sunglasses, wide lapels, and flares, designed to resemble Elvis Presley.\nIn 2016 Roy the Lion (named Roy after the nickname for Fitzroy fans) replaced Bernie \"Gabba\" Vegas as club mascot.\nSong.\nThe club's team song, \"The Pride of Brisbane Town\", is based on the Fitzroy club song, and is sung to the music of \"La Marseillaise\", the French national anthem.\nTraining base.\nThe club trains out of the Gabba. The club's administrative facilities are located in the stadium. Due to the cricket season in the summer, the club has been required to train at alternate locations, such as Coorparoo and Burpengary. In 2021, the club will move into The Reserve, Springfield, a 10,000-capacity high-class facility in Ipswich that will ensure the club can base itself in the single location and play reserve-grade and AFLW matches at the one location.\nRivalries.\nCollingwood.\nAngst between supporters of Collingwood and Brisbane had been caused by plenty of history between the two clubs, despite the Brisbane Lions having a relatively short existence as a merged club. Pre-merger Fitzroy was a neighbouring suburb to Collingwood, with the boundary being based on Smith Street, along with the fact that Fitzroy and Collingwood topped the VFL/AFL premiership tally during the early existence of what was then the VFL competition. There was also animosity between the Brisbane Bears and the Magpies after the Bears' number one draft pick Nathan Buckley famously defected to Collingwood after one season on the Bears list. The Bears also lost their final regular season match in their final season (1996) to the Magpies, costing the Bears the minor premiership that season. However, the rivalry between the Lions and the Magpies was properly ignited post-merger, beginning in late 1999 when Collingwood played their last ever VFL/AFL game at their spiritual home ground, Victoria Park. The Lions emerged 42 point victors that day and consigned the Magpies to their second wooden spoon in their VFL/AFL history. The rivalry between the two clubs peaked in the early 2000's, as the clubs played off in two consecutive Grand Finals in 2002 and 2003, with the Lions emerging victors on both occasions.\nGold Coast.\nThe Brisbane Lions have a rivalry with fellow Queensland AFL team the Gold Coast Suns. The two teams contest the QClash twice each season. The first QClash was held in 2011, with Gold Coast winning by 8 points; the game established the highest pay TV audience ever for an AFL game, with a total of 354,745 viewers watching the game.\nThe medal for the player adjudged best on ground is known as the Marcus Ashcroft Medal. It is named after former footballer Marcus Ashcroft, who played junior football on the Gold Coast for Southport and 318 VFL/AFL games for the Brisbane Bears/Lions between 1989 and 2003. He later joined Gold Coast's coaching staff and was the first Queenslander to play 300 VFL/AFL games. Lion Dayne Beams has won the medal three times, the most by any player.\nThe trophy awarded to the winner of the game is currently known as the \"QClash Trophy\". The trophy is a \"traditional style\" looking silver cup with a wooden base and a plaque. The plaque's inscription reads from left to right, \"Brisbane Lions AFC\", \"QCLASH\", \"Gold Coast Suns FC\".\nPort Adelaide.\nThis rivalry dates back to 1997, the inaugural season of Port Adelaide and the newly merged Brisbane Lions. In their early days, the two clubs couldn\u2019t be separated and had multiple close encounters, with a draw in two of their first three meetings. In the early 2000's, the rivalry reached its peak as the two clubs would be the most dominant of the era, meeting in consecutive finals series between from 2001 to 2004 and consistently finishing at the top of the Ladder. The most notable meeting between the two sides is the 2004 AFL Grand Final, where Port Adelaide ended Brisbane's chances of a fourth consecutive premiership. In recent years, the rivalry has died down.\nClub facts.\nAFL finishing positions (1997\u2013present).\nLegend: Premiers, Wooden spoon\nReserves team.\nThe Brisbane Lions have fielded reserves teams in various competitions since 1998. In its inaugural year (1997) the club affiliated with the Queensland Australian Football League (QAFL), allowing players not selected for the AFL team to be drafted to individual clubs. Between 1998 and 2010 the club's reserves team participated in the QAFL, where it was initially known as the \"Lion Cubs\", until 2004 when it became the Suncoast Lions. In 2011 the team, whose name was now formally the \"Brisbane Lions reserves\", moved to the multi-state North East Australian Football League (NEAFL). The Lions won their first reserve-grade premiership in 2001 when they defeated the Southport Sharks in the QAFL Grand Final, and went on to claim four NEAFL premierships in 2012/13 and 2017/19. Following the NEAFL's dissolvement after the 2019 season, the Lions reserves moved to the Victorian Football League (VFL), and commenced playing in the competition in 2021. The Lions currently play reserves matches at South Pine Sports Complex in Brendale, a facility opened in 2016.\nSeason summaries.\nStatistics highlighted in bold denote the best known season for Brisbane in that category\nStatistics highlighted in \"italic\" denote the worst known season for Brisbane in that category\nAFL Women's team.\nIn May 2016, the club launched a bid to enter a team in the inaugural AFL Women's season in 2017. \nThe Brisbane Lions were granted a license on 15 June 2016, becoming one of eight teams to compete in the league's first season. Former AFL Queensland employee Breeanna Brock was appointed to the position of Women's CEO the following day.\nTayla Harris and Sabrina Frederick-Traub were the club's first signings, unveiled along with the league's other 14 marquee players on 27 July 2016. A further 23 senior players and two rookie players were added to the club's inaugural list in the league's drafting and signing period. Emma Zielke will captain the team for their inaugural season.\nFormer Collingwood and Brisbane Bears player and AFL Queensland coach Craig Starcevich was appointed the team's inaugural head coach in June 2016. The rest of the coaching team was announced on 8 November 2016 as David Lake as the midfield coach, Daniel Merrett as the backline coach and Brent Staker as the forward coach. Car company Hyundai, along with Epic Pharmacy, sponsored the team in 2017.\nThe Lions have been a fairly successful team in the AFLW, despite not yet claiming a premiership. They narrowly lost grand finals in 2017 and 2018, before missing out on finals in the following two seasons. The team plays its home games at Hickey Park in Brisbane.\nSeason summaries.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "5030", "revid": "8144267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5030", "title": "Bloody Sunday (1972)", "text": "Bloody Sunday, or the Bogside Massacre, was a massacre on 30 January 1972 in the Bogside area of Derry, Northern Ireland, when British soldiers shot 26 civilians during a protest march against internment without trial. Fourteen people died: 13 were killed outright, while the death of another man four months later was attributed to his injuries. Many of the victims were shot while fleeing from the soldiers, and some were shot while trying to help the wounded. Other protesters were injured by shrapnel, rubber bullets, or batons, and two were run down by army vehicles. All of those shot were Catholics. The march had been organised by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA). The soldiers were from the 1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment (\"1 Para\"), the same regiment implicated in the Ballymurphy massacre several months prior.\nTwo investigations were held by the British government. The Widgery Tribunal, held in the immediate aftermath, largely cleared the soldiers and British authorities of blame. It described the soldiers' shooting as \"bordering on the reckless\", but accepted their claims that they shot at gunmen and bomb-throwers. The report was widely criticised as a \"whitewash\". The Saville Inquiry, chaired by Lord Saville of Newdigate, was established in 1998 to reinvestigate the incident. Following a 12-year investigation, Saville's report was made public in 2010 and concluded that the killings were both \"unjustified\" and \"unjustifiable\". It found that all of those shot were unarmed, that none were posing a serious threat, that no bombs were thrown and that soldiers \"knowingly put forward false accounts\" to justify their firing. The soldiers denied shooting the named victims but also denied shooting anyone by mistake. On publication of the report, the British prime minister David Cameron made a formal apology on behalf of the United Kingdom. Following this, police began a murder investigation into the killings.\nBloody Sunday came to be regarded as one of the most significant events of the Troubles, because many civilians were killed by forces of the state, in full view of the public and the press. It was the highest number of people killed in a single shooting incident during the conflict and is considered the worst mass shooting in Northern Irish history. Bloody Sunday fuelled Catholic and Irish nationalist hostility towards the British Army and worsened the conflict. Support for the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) rose, and there was a surge of recruitment into the organisation, especially locally.\nBackground.\nThe City of Derry was perceived by many Catholics and Irish nationalists in Northern Ireland to be the epitome of what was described as \"fifty years of Unionist misrule\": despite having a nationalist majority, gerrymandering ensured elections to the City Corporation always returned a unionist majority. At the same time the city was perceived to be deprived of public investment: motorways were not extended to it, a university was opened in the relatively small (Protestant-majority) town of Coleraine rather than Derry and, above all, the city's housing stock was in an appalling state. The city therefore became a significant focus of the civil rights campaign led by organisations such as Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA) in the late 1960s and it was in Derry that the Battle of the Bogside \u2013 the event that more than any other pushed the Northern Ireland administration to ask for military support for civil policing \u2013 took place in August 1969.\nWhile many Catholics initially welcomed the British Army as a neutral force, in contrast to what was regarded as a sectarian police force, relations between them soon deteriorated.\nIn response to escalating levels of violence across Northern Ireland, internment without trial was introduced on 9 August 1971. There was disorder across Northern Ireland following the introduction of internment, with 21 people being killed in three days of rioting. In Belfast, soldiers of the Parachute Regiment shot dead 11 civilians in what became known as the Ballymurphy Massacre. On 10 August, Bombardier Paul Challenor became the first soldier to be killed by the Provisional IRA in Derry, when he was shot by a sniper on the Creggan estate. A further six soldiers had been killed in Derry by mid-December 1971. At least 1,332 rounds were fired at the British Army, who also faced 211 explosions and 180 nail bombs, and who fired 364 rounds in return.\nIRA activity also increased across Northern Ireland with thirty British soldiers being killed in the remaining months of 1971, in contrast to the ten soldiers killed during the pre-internment period of the year. Both the Official IRA and Provisional IRA had established no-go areas for the British Army and Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) in Derry through the use of barricades. By the end of 1971, 29 barricades were in place to prevent access to what was known as Free Derry, 16 of them impassable even to the British Army's one-ton armoured vehicles. IRA members openly mounted roadblocks in front of the media, and daily clashes took place between nationalist youths and the British Army at a spot known as \"aggro corner\". Due to rioting and damage to shops caused by incendiary devices, an estimated total of worth of damage had been caused to local businesses.\nLead-up to the march.\nOn 18 January 1972, Brian Faulkner, Prime Minister of Northern Ireland, banned all parades and marches in Northern Ireland until the end of the year.\nOn 22 January 1972, a week before Bloody Sunday, an anti-internment march was held at Magilligan strand, near Derry. The protesters marched to a new internment camp there, but were stopped by soldiers of the Parachute Regiment. When some protesters threw stones and tried to go around the barbed wire, paratroopers drove them back by firing rubber bullets at close range and making baton charges. The paratroopers badly beat a number of protesters and had to be physically restrained by their own officers. These allegations of brutality by paratroopers were reported widely on television and in the press. Some in the Army also thought there had been undue violence by the paratroopers.\nNICRA intended, despite the ban, to hold another anti-internment march in Derry on Sunday 30 January. The authorities decided to allow it to proceed in the Catholic areas of the city, but to stop it from reaching Guildhall Square, as planned by the organisers. The authorities expected that this would lead to rioting. Major General Robert Ford, then Commander of Land Forces in Northern Ireland, ordered that the 1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment (1 Para), should travel to Derry to be used to arrest possible rioters. The arrest operation was codenamed 'Operation Forecast'. The Saville Report criticised General Ford for choosing the Parachute Regiment for the operation, as it had \"a reputation for using excessive physical violence\". The paratroopers arrived in Derry on the morning of the march and took up positions in the city. Brigadier Pat MacLellan was the operational commander and issued orders from Ebrington Barracks. He gave orders to Lieutenant Colonel Derek Wilford, commander of 1 Para. He in turn gave orders to Major Ted Loden, who commanded the company who launched the arrest operation.\nEvents of the day.\nThe protesters planned on marching from Bishop's Field, in the Creggan housing estate, to the Guildhall, in the city centre, where they would hold a rally. The march set off at about 2:45pm. There were 10,000\u201315,000 people on the march, with many joining along its route. Lord Widgery, in his now discredited tribunal, said that there were only 3,000 to 5,000.\nThe march made its way along William Street but, as it neared the city centre, its path was blocked by British Army barriers. The organisers redirected the march down Rossville Street, intending to hold the rally at Free Derry Corner instead. However, some broke off from the march and began throwing stones at soldiers manning the barriers. The soldiers fired rubber bullets, CS gas and water cannon. Such clashes between soldiers and youths were common, and observers reported that the rioting was not intense.\nSome of the crowd spotted paratroopers occupying a derelict three-story building overlooking William Street, and began throwing stones at the windows. At about 3:55pm, these paratroopers opened fire. Civilians Damien Donaghy and John Johnston were shot and wounded while standing on waste ground opposite the building. These were the first shots fired. The soldiers claimed Donaghy was holding a black cylindrical object, but the Saville Inquiry concluded that all of those shot were unarmed.\nAt 4:07pm, the paratroopers were ordered to go through the barriers and arrest rioters. The paratroopers, on foot and in armoured vehicles, chased people down Rossville Street and into the Bogside. Two people were knocked down by the vehicles. Brigadier MacLellan had ordered that only one company of paratroopers be sent through the barriers, on foot, and that they should not chase people down Rossville Street. Colonel Wilford disobeyed this order, which meant there was no separation between rioters and peaceful marchers.\nThe paratroopers disembarked and began seizing people. There were many claims of paratroopers beating people, clubbing them with rifle butts, firing rubber bullets at them from close range, making threats to kill, and hurling abuse. The Saville Report agreed that soldiers \"used excessive force when arresting people [\u2026] as well as seriously assaulting them for no good reason while in their custody\".\nOne group of paratroopers took up position at a low wall about in front of a rubble barricade that stretched across Rossville Street. There were people at the barricade and some were throwing stones at the soldiers, but none were near enough to hit them. The soldiers fired on the people at the barricade, killing six and wounding a seventh.\nA large group of people fled or were chased into the car park of Rossville Flats. This area was like a courtyard, surrounded on three sides by high-rise flats. The soldiers opened fire, killing one civilian and wounding six others. This fatality, Jackie Duddy, was running alongside a priest, Father Edward Daly, when he was shot in the back.\nAnother group of people fled into the car park of Glenfada Park, which was also a courtyard-like area surrounded by flats. Here, the soldiers shot at people across the car park, about away. Two civilians were killed and at least four others wounded. The Saville Report says it is \"probable\" that at least one soldier fired from the hip towards the crowd, without aiming.\nThe soldiers went through the car park and out the other side. Some soldiers went out the southwest corner, where they shot dead two civilians. The other soldiers went out the southeast corner and shot four more civilians, killing two.\nAbout ten minutes had elapsed between the time soldiers drove into the Bogside and the time the last of the civilians was shot. More than 100 rounds were fired by the soldiers.\nSome of those shot were given first aid by civilian volunteers, either on the scene or after being carried into nearby homes. They were then driven to hospital, either in civilian cars or in ambulances. The first ambulances arrived at 4:28pm. The three boys killed at the rubble barricade were driven to hospital by the paratroopers. Witnesses said paratroopers lifted the bodies by the hands and feet and dumped them in the back of their APC, as if they were \"pieces of meat\". The Saville Report agreed that this is an \"accurate description of what happened\". It says the paratroopers \"might well have felt themselves at risk, but in our view this does not excuse them\".\nCasualties.\nIn all, 26 people were shot by the paratroopers; 13 died on the day and another died of his injuries four months later. The dead were killed in four main areas: the rubble barricade across Rossville Street, the courtyard car park of Rossville Flats (on the north side of the flats), the courtyard car park of Glenfada Park, and the forecourt of Rossville Flats (on the south side of the flats).\nAll of the soldiers responsible insisted that they had shot at, and hit, gunmen or bomb-throwers. No soldier said he missed his target and hit someone else by mistake. The Saville Report concluded that all of those shot were unarmed and that none were posing a serious threat. It also concluded that none of the soldiers fired in response to attacks, or threatened attacks, by gunmen or bomb-throwers. No warnings were given before soldiers opened fire.\nThe casualties are listed in the order in which they were killed.\nAftermath.\nThirteen people were shot and killed, with another man later dying of his wounds. The official army position, backed by the British Home Secretary, Reginald Maudling, the next day in the House of Commons, was that the paratroopers had reacted to gun and nail bomb attacks from suspected IRA members. Apart from the soldiers, all eyewitnesses\u2014including marchers, local residents, and British and Irish journalists present\u2014maintain that soldiers fired into an unarmed crowd, or were aiming at fleeing people and those tending the wounded, whereas the soldiers themselves were not fired upon. No British soldier was wounded by gunfire or reported any injuries, nor were any bullets or nail bombs recovered to back up their claims.\nOn 2 February 1972, the day that 12 of those killed were buried, there was a general strike in the Republic. It was described as the biggest general strike in Europe since the Second World War relative to population. Memorial services were held in Catholic and Protestant churches, as well as synagogues, throughout the Republic. The same day, irate crowds burned down the British embassy on Merrion Square in Dublin. Anglo-Irish relations hit one of their lowest ebbs with the Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Patrick Hillery, going to the United Nations Security Council in New York to demand the involvement of a UN peacekeeping force in the Northern Ireland conflict.\nIn the days following Bloody Sunday, Bernadette Devlin, the independent Irish nationalist Member of Parliament for Mid Ulster, expressed anger at what she perceived as British government attempts to stifle accounts being reported about the shootings. Having witnessed the events firsthand, she was infuriated that the Speaker of the House of Commons, Selwyn Lloyd, consistently denied her the chance to speak in Parliament about the shootings, although parliamentary convention decreed that any MP witnessing an incident under discussion would be granted an opportunity to speak about it in Parliament.\nDevlin slapped Reginald Maudling when he made a statement to Parliament that the British Army had fired only in self-defence.\nShe was temporarily suspended from Parliament as a result.\nAn inquest into the deaths was held in August 1973. The city's coroner, Hubert O'Neill, a retired British Army major, issued a statement at the completion of the inquest. He declared:\nSeveral months after Bloody Sunday, the 1st Battalion Parachute Regiment\u2014again under Lt Col Derek Wilford\u2014were involved in another controversial shooting incident. On 7 September, 1 Para raided houses and the headquarters of the Ulster Defence Association (UDA) in the Protestant Shankill area of Belfast. Two Protestant civilians were shot dead and others wounded by the paratroopers, who claimed they were returning fire at loyalist gunmen. This sparked angry demonstrations by local Protestants, and the UDA declared: \"Never has Ulster witnessed such licensed sadists and such blatant liars as the 1st Paras. These gun-happy louts must be removed from the streets\". A unit of the British Army's Ulster Defence Regiment refused to carry out duties until 1 Para was withdrawn from the Shankill.\nAt the end of 1972, Lt Col Wilford, who was directly in charge of the soldiers involved in Bloody Sunday, was awarded the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II.\nIn 1992, John Major, writing to John Hume stated: \"The Government made clear in 1974 that those who were killed on 'Bloody Sunday' should be regarded as innocent of any allegation that they were shot whilst handling firearms or explosives\". In 2007, General (then Captain) Sir Mike Jackson, adjutant of 1 Para on Bloody Sunday, said: \"I have no doubt that innocent people were shot\". This was in sharp contrast to his insistence, for more than 30 years, that those killed on the day had not been innocent. In 2008 a former aide to British prime minister Tony Blair, Jonathan Powell, described Widgery as a \"complete and utter whitewash\".\nIn 1998, Lt Col Derek Wilford expressed his anger at Tony Blair's intention of setting up the Saville inquiry, stating that he was proud of his actions on Bloody Sunday. Two years later in 2000 during an interview with the BBC, Wilford said: \"There might have been things wrong in the sense that some innocent people, people who were not carrying a weapon, were wounded or even killed. But that was not done as a deliberate malicious act. It was done as an act of war\".\nWidgery Inquiry.\nTwo days after Bloody Sunday, the British Parliament adopted a resolution for a tribunal into the shootings, resulting in Prime Minister Edward Heath commissioning the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Widgery, to undertake it. Many witnesses intended to boycott the tribunal as they lacked faith in Widgery's impartiality, but were eventually persuaded to take part. Widgery's quickly-produced report\u2014completed within 10 weeks (on 10 April) and published within 11 weeks (on 19 April)\u2014supported the Army's account of the events of the day. Among the evidence presented to the tribunal were the results of paraffin tests, used to identify lead residues from firing weapons, and that nail bombs had been found on the body of one of those killed. Tests for traces of explosives on the clothes of eleven of the dead proved negative, while those of the remaining man could not be tested as they had already been washed. It has been argued that firearms residue on some deceased may have come from contact with the soldiers who themselves moved some of the bodies, or that the presence of lead on the hands of one (James Wray) was easily explained by the fact that his occupation regularly involved the use of lead-based solder.\nMost witnesses to the event disputed the report's conclusions and regarded it as a whitewash, the slogan \"Widgery washes whiter\" \u2013 a play on the contemporary advertisement for Daz soap powder \u2013 emblazoned on walls in Derry, crystallized the views of many nationalists about the report.\nAlthough there were many IRA men\u2014both Official and Provisional\u2014at the protest, it is claimed they were all unarmed, apparently because it was anticipated that the paratroopers would attempt to \"draw them out\". March organiser and MP Ivan Cooper had been promised beforehand that no armed IRA men would be near the march. One paratrooper who gave evidence at the tribunal testified that they were told by an officer to expect a gunfight and \"We want some kills\". In the event, one man was witnessed by Father Edward Daly and others haphazardly firing a revolver in the direction of the paratroopers. Later identified as a member of the Official IRA, this man was also photographed in the act of drawing his weapon, but was apparently not seen or targeted by the soldiers.\nSaville Inquiry.\nAlthough British prime minister John Major rejected John Hume's requests for a public inquiry into the killings, his successor, Tony Blair, decided to start one. A second commission of inquiry, chaired by Lord Saville, was established in January 1998 to re-examine Bloody Sunday. The other judges were John Toohey QC, a former Justice of the High Court of Australia who had worked on Aboriginal issues (he replaced New Zealander Sir Edward Somers QC, who retired from the Inquiry in 2000 for personal reasons), and Mr Justice William Hoyt QC, former Chief Justice of New Brunswick and a member of the Canadian Judicial Council. The hearings were concluded in November 2004, and the report was published 15 June 2010. The Saville Inquiry was a more comprehensive study than the Widgery Tribunal, interviewing a wide range of witnesses, including local residents, soldiers, journalists and politicians. Lord Saville declined to comment on the Widgery report and made the point that the Saville Inquiry was a judicial inquiry into Bloody Sunday, not the Widgery Tribunal.\nEvidence given by Martin McGuinness, a senior member of Sinn F\u00e9in and later the deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland, to the inquiry stated that he was second-in-command of the Provisional IRA Derry Brigade and was present at the march. A claim was made at the Saville Inquiry that McGuinness was responsible for supplying detonators for nail bombs on Bloody Sunday. Paddy Ward claimed he was the leader of the Fianna \u00c9ireann, the youth wing of the Provisional IRA in January 1972. He claimed that McGuinness, the second-in-command of the Provisional IRA in the city at the time, and another anonymous Provisional IRA member gave him bomb parts on the morning of 30 January, the date planned for the civil rights march. He said his organisation intended to attack city-centre premises in Derry on 30 January. In response McGuinness rejected the claims as \"fantasy\", while Gerry O'Hara, a Sinn F\u00e9in councillor in Derry stated that he and not Ward was the Fianna leader at the time.\nMany observers allege that the Ministry of Defence (MoD) acted in a way to impede the inquiry. Over 1,000 army photographs and original army helicopter video footage were never made available. Additionally, guns used on the day by the soldiers that could have been evidence in the inquiry were lost by the MoD. The MoD claimed that all the guns had been destroyed, but some were subsequently recovered in various locations (such as Sierra Leone and Beirut) despite the obstruction.\nBy the time the inquiry had retired to write up its findings, it had interviewed over 900 witnesses, over seven years, making it the biggest investigation in British legal history. The cost of this process has drawn criticism; as of the publication of the Saville Report being .\nThe inquiry was expected to report in late 2009 but was delayed until after the general election on 6 May 2010.\nThe report of the inquiry was published on 15 June 2010. The report concluded, \"The firing by soldiers of 1 PARA on Bloody Sunday caused the deaths of 13 people and injury to a similar number, none of whom was posing a threat of causing death or serious injury.\" Saville stated that British paratroopers \"lost control\", fatally shooting fleeing civilians and those who tried to aid civilians who had been shot by the British soldiers. The report stated that British soldiers had concocted lies in their attempt to hide their acts. Saville stated that the civilians had not been warned by the British soldiers that they intended to shoot. The report states, contrary to previous assertions, that no stones and no petrol bombs were thrown by civilians before British soldiers shot at them, and that the civilians were not posing any threat.\nThe report concluded that an Official IRA sniper fired on British soldiers, albeit that on the balance of evidence his shot was fired \"after\" the Army shots that wounded Damien Donaghey and John Johnston. The Inquiry rejected the sniper's account that this shot had been made in reprisal, stating the view that he and another Official IRA member had already been in position, and the shot had probably been fired simply because the opportunity had presented itself. Ultimately the Saville Inquiry was inconclusive on Martin McGuinness's role, due to a lack of certainty over his movements, concluding that while he was \"engaged in paramilitary activity\" during Bloody Sunday, and had probably been armed with a Thompson submachine gun, there was insufficient evidence to make any finding other than they were \"sure that he did not engage in any activity that provided any of the soldiers with any justification for opening fire\".\nRegarding the soldiers in charge on the day of Bloody Sunday, the Saville Inquiry arrived at the following findings:\nReporting on the findings of the Saville Inquiry in the House of Commons, the British prime minister David Cameron said:\nMurder investigation.\nFollowing the publication of the Saville Report, a murder investigation was begun by the Police Service of Northern Ireland's Legacy Investigation Branch. On 10 November 2015, a 66-year-old former member of the Parachute Regiment was arrested for questioning over the deaths of William Nash, Michael McDaid and John Young. He was released on bail shortly after.\nThe Public Prosecution Service for Northern Ireland (PPS) announced in March 2019 that there was enough evidence to prosecute \"Soldier F\" for the murders of James Wray and William McKinney, both of whom were shot in the back. He will also be charged with four attempted murders. The Saville Inquiry concluded, based on the evidence, that \"Soldier F\" also killed Michael Kelly, Patrick Doherty and Barney McGuigan, but evidence from the inquiry was inadmissible to the prosecution and \"the only evidence capable of identifying the soldier who fired the relevant shots came from Soldier F's co-accused, Soldier G, who is deceased\". Relatives of the Bloody Sunday victims expressed feelings of devastation that only one soldier would face trial for the killings. In September 2020, it was ruled that there would be no further charges against British soldiers.\nImpact on Northern Ireland divisions.\nHarold Wilson, then the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons, reiterated his belief that a united Ireland was the only possible solution to Northern Ireland's Troubles. William Craig, then Stormont Home Affairs Minister, suggested that the west bank of Derry should be ceded to the Republic of Ireland.\nWhen it was deployed on duty in Northern Ireland, the British Army was welcomed by Roman Catholics as a neutral force there to protect them from Protestant mobs, the RUC and the B-Specials. After Bloody Sunday many Catholics turned on the British army, seeing it no longer as their protector but as their enemy. Young nationalists became increasingly attracted to violent republican groups. With the Official IRA and Official Sinn F\u00e9in having moved away from mainstream Irish republicanism towards Marxism, the Provisional IRA began to win the support of newly radicalised, disaffected young people.\nIn the following twenty years, the Provisional Irish Republican Army and other smaller republican groups such as the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) stepped up their armed campaigns against the state and those seen as being in service to it. With rival paramilitary organisations appearing in both the nationalist/republican and unionist/loyalist communities (such as the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), etc. on the loyalist side), the Troubles cost the lives of thousands of people.\nIn his speech to the House of Commons on the Inquiry, British prime minister David Cameron stated: \"These are shocking conclusions to read and shocking words to have to say. But you do not defend the British Army by defending the indefensible.\" He acknowledged that all those who died were unarmed when they were killed by British soldiers, and that a British soldier had fired the first shot at civilians. He also said that this was not a premeditated action, though \"there was no point in trying to soften or equivocate\" as \"what happened should never, ever have happened\". Cameron then apologised on behalf of the British Government by saying he was \"deeply sorry\".\nA survey conducted by Angus Reid Public Opinion in June 2010 found that 61 per cent of Britons and 70 per cent of Northern Irish agreed with Cameron's apology for the Bloody Sunday events.\nStephen Pollard, solicitor representing several of the soldiers, said on 15 June 2010 that Saville had cherry-picked the evidence and did not have justification for his findings.\nIn 2012 an actively serving British army soldier from Belfast was charged with inciting hatred by a surviving relative of the deceased, due to their online use of social media to promote sectarian slogans about the killings while featuring banners of the Parachute Regiment logo.\nIn January 2013, shortly before the annual Bloody Sunday remembrance march, two Parachute Regiment flags appeared in the loyalist Fountain, and Waterside, Drumahoe areas of Derry. The display of the flags was heavily criticised by nationalist politicians and relatives of the Bloody Sunday dead. The Ministry of Defence also condemned the flying of the flags. The flags were removed to be replaced by Union Flags. In the run up to the loyalist marching season in 2013 the flag of the Parachute Regiment appeared alongside other loyalist flags in other parts of Northern Ireland. In 2014 loyalists in Cookstown erected the flags in opposition, close to the route of a St.Patrick's Day parade in the town.\nArtistic reaction.\nPaul McCartney (who is of Irish descent) recorded the first song in response only two days after the incident. The single, entitled \"Give Ireland Back to the Irish\", expressed his views on the matter. This song was one of few McCartney released with Wings to be banned by the BBC.\nThe 1972 John Lennon album \"Some Time in New York City\" features a song entitled \"Sunday Bloody Sunday\", inspired by the incident, as well as the song \"The Luck of the Irish\", which dealt more with the Irish conflict in general. Lennon, who was of Irish descent, also spoke at a protest in New York in support of the victims and families of Bloody Sunday.\nIrish poet Thomas Kinsella's 1972 poem \"Butcher's Dozen\" is a satirical and angry response to the Widgery Tribunal and the events of Bloody Sunday.\nBlack Sabbath's Geezer Butler (also of Irish descent) wrote the lyrics to the Black Sabbath song \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\" on the album of the same name in 1973. Butler stated, \"\u2026the Sunday Bloody Sunday thing had just happened in Ireland, when the British troops opened fire on the Irish demonstrators\u2026 So I came up with the title 'Sabbath Bloody Sabbath', and sort of put it in how the band was feeling at the time, getting away from management, mixed with the state Ireland was in.\"\nThe Roy Harper song \"All Ireland\" from the album \"Lifemask\", written in the days following the incident, is critical of the military but takes a long-term view with regard to a solution. In Harper's book (\"The Passions of Great Fortune\"), his comment on the song ends \"\u2026there must always be some hope that the children of 'Bloody Sunday', on both sides, can grow into some wisdom\".\nBrian Friel's 1973 play \"The Freedom of the City\" deals with the incident from the viewpoint of three civilians.\nIrish poet Seamus Heaney's \"Casualty\" (published in \"Field Work,\" 1981) criticises Britain for the death of his friend.\nThe Irish rock band U2 commemorated the incident in their 1983 protest song \"Sunday Bloody Sunday\".\nChristy Moore's song \"Minds Locked Shut\" on the album \"Graffiti Tongue\" is all about the events of the day, and names the dead civilians.\nThe events of the day have been dramatised in two 2002 television films, \"Bloody Sunday\" (starring James Nesbitt) and \"Sunday\" by Jimmy McGovern.\nThe Celtic metal band Cruachan addressed the incident in a song \"Bloody Sunday\" from their 2002 album \"Folk-Lore\".\nWillie Doherty, a Derry-born artist, has amassed a large body of work which addresses the troubles in Northern Ireland. \"30 January 1972\" deals specifically with the events of Bloody Sunday.\nIn mid-2005, the play \"\", a dramatisation based on the Saville Inquiry, opened in London, and subsequently travelled to Derry and Dublin. The writer, journalist Richard Norton-Taylor, distilled four years of evidence into two hours of stage performance at the Tricycle Theatre. The play received glowing reviews in all the British broadsheets, including \"The Times\": \"The Tricycle's latest recreation of a major inquiry is its most devastating\"; \"The Daily Telegraph\": \"I can't praise this enthralling production too highly\u2026 exceptionally gripping courtroom drama\"; and \"The Independent\": \"A necessary triumph\".\nIn October 2010, T with the Maggies released the song \"Domhnach na Fola\" (Irish for \"Bloody Sunday\"), written by Mair\u00e9ad N\u00ed Mhaonaigh and Tr\u00edona N\u00ed Dhomhnaill on their debut album."}
{"id": "5031", "revid": "991382877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5031", "title": "Bruno of Querfurt", "text": "Bruno of Querfurt ( 974 \u2013 14 February or 9/14 March 1009 AD), also known as \"Brun\" and \"Boniface\", was a Christian missionary bishop and martyr, who was beheaded near the border of Kievan Rus and Lithuania for trying to spread Christianity. He is also called the second \"Apostle of the Prussians\".\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nBruno was from a noble family of Querfurt (now in Saxony-Anhalt). He is rumored to have been a relative of the Holy Roman Emperor Otto III. At the age of six, he was sent to be educated at the cathedral school in Magdeburg, seat of Adalbert of Magdeburg, the teacher and namesake of Adalbert of Prague. While still a youth, he was made a canon of the Cathedral of Magdeburg. The fifteen-year-old Otto III made Bruno a part of his royal court. In 995 Otto III appointed Bruno as his court chaplain.\nWhile in Rome for Otto's imperial coronation, Bruno met Adalbert of Prague, the first \"Apostle of the Prussians\", killed a year later, which inspired Bruno to write a biography of Adalbert when he reached the recently Christianized and consolidated Kingdom of Hungary himself. Bruno spent much time at the monastery where Adalbert had become a monk and where abbot John Canaparius may have written a life of Adalbert. In 998, Bruno entered a Benedictine monastery near Ravenna that Otto had founded, and later underwent strict ascetic training under the guidance of Romuald.\nMissionary life.\nOtto III hoped to establish a monastery between the Elbe and the Oder (somewhere in the pagan lands that became Brandenburg or Western Pomerania) to help convert the local population to Christianity and colonize the area. In 1001, two monks from his monastery traveled to Poland, while Bruno was with Otto in Italy, studying the language and awaiting the Apostolic appointment by Pope Sylvester II. \nIn 1003 Pope Sylvester II appointed Bruno, at the age of 33, to head a mission amongst the pagan peoples of Eastern Europe. Bruno left Rome in 1004, and having been named an archbishop was consecrated in February of that year by Archbishop Tagino of Magdeburg. Owing to a regional conflict between the Holy Roman Emperor Henry II and Duke Boleslaus I of Poland, Bruno could not go directly to Poland so he set out for Hungary. There he went to the places that Adalbert of Prague had attended.\nBruno tried to persuade Ahtum, the Duke of Banat, who was under jurisdiction of Patriarchate of Constantinople to accept the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, but this precipitated a large controversy leading to organized opposition from local monks. Bruno elected to gracefully exit the region after he first finished his book, the famous \"Life of Adalbert of Prague,\" a literary memorial giving a history of the (relatively recent) conversion of the Hungarians.\nAfter this diplomatic failure, Bruno went to Kyiv, where Grand Duke Vladimir I authorized him to make Christian converts among the Pechenegs, semi-nomadic Turkic peoples living between the Danube and the Don rivers. Bruno spent five months there and baptized some thirty adults. He helped to bring about a peace treaty between them and the ruler of Kyiv.\nBefore leaving for Poland, Bruno consecrated a bishop for the Pechenegs. While in Poland he consecrated the first Bishop of Sweden and is said to have sent emissaries to baptize the king of Sweden, whose mother had come from Poland. Bruno found out that his friend Benedict and four companions had been killed by robbers in 1003. Bruno took eyewitness accounts and wrote down a touching history of the so-called Five Martyred Brothers.\nMission to Prussia and death.\nIn the autumn or at the end of 1008 Bruno and eighteen companions set out to found a mission among the Old Prussians; they succeeded in converting Netimer and then traveled to the east, heading very likely towards Yotvingia. Yotvingia was a Prussian region, then subordinate to Kievan Rus (since 983), that intersected the borders of what was then Prussia, Kievan Rus and the Duchy of Lithuania.\nBruno met opposition in his efforts to evangelize the borderland and that when he persisted in disregarding their warnings he was beheaded on 14 February (or 9 or 14 March) 1009, and most of his eighteen companions were hanged by Zebeden, brother of Netimer. Duke Boleslaus the Brave bought the bodies and brought them to Poland (it was supposed that they were laid to rest in Przemy\u015bl, where some historians place Bruno's diocese; such localization of the Bruno's burial place is hardly probable because Przemy\u015bl then belonged to Orthodox Kievan Rus through 1018). The \"Annals of Magdeburg,\" Thietmar of Merseburg's \"Chronicle\", the \"Annals of Quedlinburg\", various works of Magdeburg Bishops, and many other written sources of 11th\u201315th centuries record this story.\nSoon after his death, Bruno and his companions were venerated as martyrs and Bruno was soon after canonized. It was said that Braunsberg was named after Bruno."}
{"id": "5033", "revid": "3229404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5033", "title": "Bo Diddley", "text": "Ellas McDaniel (born Ellas Otha Bates; December 30, 1928 \u2013 June 2, 2008), known as Bo Diddley, was an American singer, guitarist, songwriter and music producer who played a key role in the transition from the blues to rock and roll. He influenced many artists, including Buddy Holly, Elvis Presley, the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, the Animals, and the Clash.\nHis use of African rhythms and a signature beat, a simple five-accent hambone rhythm, is a cornerstone of hip hop, rock, and pop music. In recognition of his achievements, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987, the Blues Hall of Fame in 2003, and the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame in 2017. He received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Rhythm and Blues Foundation and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. Diddley is also recognized for his technical innovations, including his distinctive rectangular guitar, with its unique booming, resonant, shimmering tones.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nBorn in McComb, Mississippi, as Ellas Otha Bates, he was adopted and raised by his mother's cousin, Gussie McDaniel, whose surname he assumed. In 1934, the McDaniel family moved to the South Side of Chicago, where he dropped Otha from his name and became Ellas McDaniel. He was an active member of Chicago's Ebenezer Baptist Church, where he studied the trombone and the violin, becoming so proficient on the violin that the musical director invited him to join the orchestra. He performed until he was 18. However, he was more interested in the pulsating, rhythmic music he heard at a local Pentecostal Church and took up the guitar.\nInspired by a performance by John Lee Hooker, he supplemented his income as a carpenter and mechanic by playing on street corners with friends, including Jerome Green (c. 1934\u20131973), in the Hipsters band, later renamed the Langley Avenue Jive Cats. Green became a near-constant member of McDaniel's backing band, the two often trading joking insults with each other during live shows. During the summers of 1943 and 1944, he played at the Maxwell Street market in a band with Earl Hooker. By 1951 he was playing on the street with backing from Roosevelt Jackson on washtub bass and Jody Williams, whom he had taught to play the guitar. Williams later played lead guitar on \"Who Do You Love?\" (1956).\nIn 1951, he landed a regular spot at the 708 Club, on Chicago's South Side, with a repertoire influenced by Louis Jordan, John Lee Hooker, and Muddy Waters. In late 1954, he teamed up with harmonica player Billy Boy Arnold, drummer Clifton James and bass player Roosevelt Jackson and recorded demos of \"I'm a Man\" and \"Bo Diddley\". They re-recorded the songs at Chess Studios, with a backing ensemble comprising Otis Spann (piano), Lester Davenport (harmonica), Frank Kirkland (drums), and Jerome Green (maracas). The record was released in March 1955, and the A-side, \"Bo Diddley\", became a number one R&amp;B hit.\nOrigins of stage name.\nThe origin of the stage name Bo Diddley is unclear. McDaniel claimed that his peers gave him the name, which he suspected was an insult. He also said that the name first belonged to a singer his adoptive mother knew. Harmonicist Billy Boy Arnold said that it was a local comedian's name, which Leonard Chess adopted as McDaniel's stage name and the title of his first single. McDaniel also stated that his school classmates in Chicago gave him the nickname, which he started using when sparring and boxing in the neighborhood with The Little Neighborhood Golden Gloves Bunch.\nIn the story \"Black Death\" by Zora Neale Hurston, Beau Diddely was a womanizer who impregnates a young woman, disavows responsibility, and meets his undoing by the powers of the local hoodoo man. Hurston submitted it in a contest run by the academic journal \"\" in 1925, where it won an honorable mention, but it was never published in her lifetime.\nA diddley bow is a homemade single-string instrument played mainly by farm workers in the South. It probably has influences from the West African coast. In the American slang term \"bo diddly\", \"bo\" is an intensifier and \"diddly\" is a truncation of \"diddly squat\", which means \"absolutely nothing\".\nSuccess in the 1950s and 1960s.\nOn November 20, 1955, Diddley appeared on the popular television program \"The Ed Sullivan Show\". When someone on the show's staff overheard him casually singing \"Sixteen Tons\" in the dressing room, he was asked to perform the song on the show. Seeing \"Bo Diddley\" on the cue card, he thought he was to perform both his self-titled hit single and \"Sixteen Tons\". Sullivan was furious and banned Diddley from his show, reputedly saying that he wouldn't last six months. Chess Records included Diddley's cover of \"Sixteen Tons\" on the 1960 album \"Bo Diddley Is a Gunslinger\".\nDiddley's hit singles continued in the 1950s and 1960s: \"Pretty Thing\" (1956), \"Say Man\" (1959), and \"You Can't Judge a Book by the Cover\" (1962). He also released numerous albums, including \"Bo Diddley Is a Gunslinger\" and \"Have Guitar, Will Travel\". These bolstered his self-invented legend. Between 1958 and 1963, Checker Records released eleven full-length Bo Diddley albums. In the 1960s, he broke through as a crossover artist with white audiences (appearing at the Alan Freed concerts, for example), but he rarely aimed his compositions at teenagers. The album title \"Surfing with Bo Diddley\" derived from his influence on surf guitarists rather than surfing per se.\nIn 1963, Diddley starred in a UK concert tour with the Everly Brothers and Little Richard along with the Rolling Stones (an unknown band at that time).\nHe wrote many songs for himself and also for others. In 1956, he and guitarist Jody Williams co-wrote the pop song \"Love Is Strange\", a hit for Mickey &amp; Sylvia in 1957. He also wrote \"Mama (Can I Go Out)\", which was a minor hit for the pioneering rockabilly singer Jo Ann Campbell, who performed the song in the 1959 rock and roll film \"Go Johnny Go\".\nAfter moving from Chicago to Washington, D.C., Diddley built his first home recording studio in the basement of his home at 2614 Rhode Island Avenue NE. Frequented by several of Washington, D.C.'s musical luminaries, the studio was the site where he recorded the Checker LP (Checker LP-2977) \"Bo Diddley Is a Gunslinger\". Diddley also produced and recorded several up and coming groups from the Washington, D.C. area. One of the first singles he recorded was \"Wyatt Earp\" with local Doo Wop group the Marquees, featuring his valet, Marvin Gaye. After the Chess brothers failed to see the commercial potential of releasing a song that extended the black cowboy concept, Diddley found acceptance at Okeh Records, a label that rivaled Chess in the promotion of Rhythm and Blues. Diddley convinced Moonglows' founder, and backing vocalist Harvey Fuqua, to hire Gaye. Gaye joined the Moonglows, who then moved to Detroit with the hope of signing with Motown Records founder Berry Gordy Jr. \nDiddley included women in his band: Norma-Jean Wofford, also known as The Duchess; Gloria Jolivet; Peggy Jones, also known as Lady Bo, a lead guitarist (rare for a woman at that time); and Cornelia Redmond, also known as Cookie V.\nLater years.\nOver the decades, Diddley's performing venues ranged from intimate clubs to stadiums. On March 25, 1972, he played with the Grateful Dead at the Academy of Music in New York City. The Grateful Dead released part of this concert as Volume 30 of the band's concert album series, \"Dick's Picks\". Also in the early 1970s, the soundtrack of the ground-breaking animated film \"Fritz the Cat\" contained his song \"Bo Diddley\", in which a crow idly finger-pops to the track.\nDiddley spent some years in New Mexico, living in Los Lunas from 1971 to 1978, while continuing his musical career. He served for two and a half years as a deputy sheriff in the Valencia County Citizens' Patrol; during that time he purchased and donated three highway-patrol pursuit cars. In the late 1970s, he left Los Lunas and moved to Hawthorne, Florida, where he lived on a large estate in a custom-made log cabin, which he helped to build. For the remainder of his life he divided his time between Albuquerque and Florida, living the last 13 years of his life in Archer, Florida, a small farming town near Gainesville.\nIn 1979, he appeared as an opening act for The Clash on their US tour.\nIn 1983, he made a cameo appearance as a Philadelphia pawn shop owner in the comedy film \"Trading Places\". He also appeared in George Thorogood's music video for the song \"Bad to the Bone,\" portraying a guitar-slinging pool shark.\nIn 1989, Diddley entered into a licensing agreement with the sportswear brand Nike. The Wieden &amp; Kennedy produced commercial in the \"Bo Knows\" campaign, teamed Diddley with dual sportsman Bo Jackson, and resulted in one of the most iconic advertisements in advertising history. The agreement ended in 1991, but in 1999, a T-shirt of Diddley's image and \"You don't know diddley\" slogan was purchased in a Gainesville, Florida sports apparel store. Diddley felt that Nike should not continue to use the slogan or his likeness and fought Nike over the copyright infringement. Despite the fact that lawyers for both parties could not come to a renewed legal arrangement, Nike allegedly continued marketing the apparel and ignored cease-and-desist orders, and a lawsuit was filed on Diddley's behalf, in Manhattan Federal Court.\nIn \"Legends of Guitar\" (filmed live in Spain in 1991), Diddley performed with B.B. King, Les Paul, Albert Collins, and George Benson, among others. He joined the Rolling Stones on their 1994 concert broadcast of \"Voodoo Lounge\", performing \"Who Do You Love?\".\nIn 1996, he released \"A Man Amongst Men\", his first major label album (and his final studio album) with guest artists like Keith Richards, Ron Wood and the Shirelles. The album earned a Grammy Award nomination in 1997 for the Best Contemporary Blues Album category.\nDiddley performed a number of shows around the country in 2005 and 2006, with fellow Rock and Roll Hall of Famer Johnnie Johnson and his band, consisting of Johnson on keyboards, Richard Hunt on drums and Gus Thornton on bass. In 2006, he participated as the headliner of a grassroots-organized fundraiser concert to benefit the town of Ocean Springs, Mississippi, which had been devastated by Hurricane Katrina. The \"Florida Keys for Katrina Relief\" had originally been set for October 23, 2005, when Hurricane Wilma barreled through the Florida Keys on October 24, causing flooding and economic mayhem.\nIn January 2006, the Florida Keys had recovered enough to host the fundraising concert to benefit the more hard-hit community of Ocean Springs. When asked about the fundraiser, Diddley stated, \"This is the United States of America. We believe in helping one another\". The all-star band included members of the Soul Providers, and famed artists Clarence Clemons of the E Street Band, Joey Covington of Jefferson Airplane, Alfonso Carey of The Village People, and Carl Spagnuolo of Jay &amp; The Techniques. In an interview with Holger Petersen, on \"Saturday Night Blues\" on CBC Radio in the fall of 2006, He commented on racism in the music industry establishment during his early career, which deprived him of royalties from the most successful part of his career.\nHis final guitar performance on a studio album was with the New York Dolls on their 2006 album \"One Day It Will Please Us to Remember Even This\". He contributed guitar work to the song \"Seventeen\", which was included as a bonus track on the limited-edition version of the disc.\nIn May 2007, Diddley suffered a stroke after a concert the previous day in Council Bluffs, Iowa. Nonetheless, he delivered an energetic performance to an enthusiastic crowd. A few months later he had a heart attack. While recovering, Diddley came back to his hometown of McComb, Mississippi, in early November 2007, for the unveiling of a plaque devoted to him on the Mississippi Blues Trail. This marked his achievements and noted that he was \"acclaimed as a founder of rock-and-roll.\" He was not supposed to perform, but as he listened to the music of local musician Jesse Robinson, who sang a song written for this occasion, Robinson sensed that Diddley wanted to perform and handed him a microphone, the only time that he performed publicly after his stroke.\nOn June 25, 2019, \"The New York Times Magazine\" listed Bo Diddley among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nBo Diddley was married four times. His first marriage, at 18, to Louise Woolingham, lasted a year. Diddley married his second wife Ethel Mae Smith in 1949; they had two children. He met his third wife, Kay Reynolds, when she was 15, while performing in Birmingham, Alabama. They soon moved in together and married, despite taboos against interracial marriage. They had two daughters. He married his fourth wife, Sylvia Paiz, in 1992; they were divorced at the time of his death.\nHealth problems.\nOn May 13, 2007, Diddley was admitted to intensive care in Creighton University Medical Center in Omaha, Nebraska, following a stroke after a concert the previous day in Council Bluffs, Iowa. Starting the show, he had complained that he did not feel well. He referred to smoke from the wildfires that were ravaging south Georgia and blowing south to the area near his home in Archer, Florida. The next day, as he was heading back home, he seemed dazed and confused at the airport; 911 and airport security were called, and he was immediately taken by ambulance to Creighton University Medical Center where he stayed for several days. After tests, it was confirmed that he had suffered a stroke. Diddley had a history of hypertension and diabetes, and the stroke affected the left side of his brain, causing receptive and expressive aphasia (speech impairment). The stroke was followed by a heart attack, which he suffered in Gainesville, Florida, on August 28, 2007.\nDeath.\nBo Diddley died on June 2, 2008, of heart failure at his home in Archer, Florida at the age of 79. Garry Mitchell, his grandson and one of more than thirty-five family members at the musician's home when he died at 1:45\u00a0am. EDT, said his death was not unexpected. \"There was a gospel song that was sang [at his bedside] and [when it was done] he said 'wow' with a thumbs up,\" Mitchell told Reuters, when asked to describe the scene at the deathbed. \"The song was 'Walk Around Heaven' and in his last words he stated that he was going to heaven.\"\nHe was survived by his children, Evelyn Kelly, Ellas A. McDaniel, Pamela Jacobs, Steven Jones, Terri Lynn McDaniel-Hines, and Tammi D. McDaniel; a brother, the Rev. Kenneth Haynes; and eighteen grandchildren, fifteen great-grandchildren and three great-great-grandchildren.\nHis funeral, a four-hour \"homegoing\" service, took place on June 7, 2008, at Showers of Blessings Church in Gainesville, Florida. Some in attendance chanted \"Hey Bo Diddley\" as the Archer Church of God in Christ gospel band played. A number of notable musicians sent flowers, including Little Richard, George Thorogood, Tom Petty and Jerry Lee Lewis. Little Richard, who had been asking his audiences to pray for Bo Diddley throughout his illness, had to fulfill concert commitments in Westbury and New York City the weekend of the funeral. He remembered Diddley at the concert, performing his namesake tune.\nAfter the funeral service, a tribute concert was held at the Martin Luther King Center in Gainesville, Florida, and featured guest performances by his son and daughter, Ellas A. McDaniel and Evelyn \"Tan\" Cooper; long-time background vocalist and original Boette, Gloria Jolivet; long-time friend, co-producer, and former Bo Diddley &amp; Offspring guitarist Scott \"Skyntyte\" Free; and Eric Burdon. In the days following his death, tributes were paid by then-President George W. Bush, the United States House of Representatives, and musicians and performers including B. B. King, Ronnie Hawkins, Mick Jagger, Ronnie Wood, George Thorogood, Eric Clapton, Tom Petty, Robert Plant, Elvis Costello, Bonnie Raitt, Robert Randolph and the Family Band and Eric Burdon. Burdon used video footage of the McDaniel family and friends in mourning for a video promoting his ABKCO Records release \"Bo Diddley Special\".\nIn November 2009, the guitar used by Bo Diddley in his final stage performance sold for $60,000 at auction.\nAll twenty-two beneficiaries of his estate sought a forensic accounting of his estate, but were denied without explanation. The current value is unknown to the heirs.\nAccolades.\nBo Diddley was posthumously awarded a Doctor of Fine Arts degree by the University of Florida for his influence on American popular music. In its \"People in America\" radio series, about influential people in American history, the Voice of America radio service paid tribute to him, describing how \"his influence was so widespread that it is hard to imagine what rock and roll would have sounded like without him.\" Mick Jagger stated that \"he was a wonderful, original musician who was an enormous force in music and was a big influence on the Rolling Stones. He was very generous to us in our early years and we learned a lot from him\". Jagger also praised the late star as a one-of-a-kind musician, adding, \"We will never see his like again\". The documentary film \"\" by director Phil Ranstrom features Bo Diddley's last on-camera interview.\nHe achieved numerous accolades in recognition of his significant role as one of the founding fathers of rock and roll.\nIn 2003, U.S. Representative John Conyers paid tribute to Bo Diddley in the United States House of Representatives, describing him as \"one of the true pioneers of rock and roll, who has influenced generations\".\nIn 2004, Mickey and Sylvia's 1956 recording of \"Love Is Strange\" (a song first recorded by Bo Diddley but not released until a year before his death) was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame as a recording of qualitative or historical significance. Also in 2004, Bo Diddley was inducted into the Blues Foundation's Blues Hall of Fame and was ranked number 20 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time.\nIn 2005, Bo Diddley celebrated his 50th anniversary in music with successful tours of Australia and Europe and with coast-to-coast shows across North America. He performed his song \"Bo Diddley\" with Eric Clapton and Robbie Robertson at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 20th annual induction ceremony. In the UK, \"Uncut\" magazine included his 1957 debut album, \"Bo Diddley\", in its listing of the '100 Music, Movie &amp; TV Moments That Have Changed the World'.\nBo Diddley was honored by the Mississippi Blues Commission with a Mississippi Blues Trail historic marker placed in McComb, his birthplace, in recognition of his enormous contribution to the development of the blues in Mississippi. On June 5, 2009, the city of Gainesville, Florida, officially renamed and dedicated its downtown plaza the Bo Diddley Community Plaza. The plaza was the site of a benefit concert at which Bo Diddley performed to raise awareness about the plight of the homeless in Alachua County and to raise money for local charities, including the Red Cross.\nBeat.\nThe \"Bo Diddley beat\" is essentially the clave rhythm, one of the most common bell patterns found in sub-Saharan African music traditions. One scholar found this rhythm in 13 rhythm and blues recordings made in the years 1944\u201355, including two by Johnny Otis from 1948.\nBo Diddley gave different accounts of how he began to use this rhythm. Ned Sublette says, \"In the context of the time, and especially those maracas [heard on the record], 'Bo Diddley' has to be understood as a Latin-tinged record. A rejected cut recorded at the same session was titled only 'Rhumba' on the track sheets.\" The Bo Diddley beat is similar to \"hambone\", a style used by street performers who play out the beat by slapping and patting their arms, legs, chest, and cheeks while chanting rhymes. Somewhat resembling the \"shave and a haircut, two bits\" rhythm, Diddley came across it while trying to play Gene Autry's \"(I've Got Spurs That) Jingle, Jangle, Jingle\". Three years before his \"Bo Diddley\", a song with similar syncopation \"Hambone\", was cut by the Red Saunders Orchestra with the Hambone Kids. In 1944, \"Rum and Coca Cola\", containing the Bo Diddley beat, was recorded by the Andrews Sisters. Buddy Holly's \"Not Fade Away\" (1957) and Them's \"Mystic Eyes\" (1965) used the beat.\n In its simplest form, the Bo Diddley beat can be counted out as either a one-bar or a two-bar phrase. Here is the count as a one-bar phrase: One e and ah, two e and ah, three e and ah, four e and ah (the boldface counts are the clave rhythm).\nMany songs (for example, \"Hey Bo Diddley\" and \"Who Do You Love?\") often have no chord changes; that is, the musicians play the same chord throughout the piece, so that the rhythms create the excitement, rather than having the excitement generated by harmonic tension and release. In his other recordings, Bo Diddley used various rhythms, from straight back beat to pop ballad style to doo-wop, frequently with maracas by Jerome Green.\nAn influential guitar player, Bo Diddley developed many special effects and other innovations in tone and attack, particularly the resonant \"shimmering\" sound. His trademark instrument was his self-designed, one-of-a-kind, rectangular-bodied \"Twang Machine\" (referred to as \"cigar-box shaped\" by music promoter Dick Clark), built by Gretsch. He had other uniquely shaped guitars custom-made for him by other manufacturers throughout the years, most notably the \"Cadillac\" and the rectangular \"Turbo 5-speed\" (with built-in envelope filter, flanger and delay) designs, made by Tom Holmes (who also made guitars for ZZ Top's Billy Gibbons, among others). In a 2005 interview on JJJ radio in Australia, he implied that the rectangular design sprang from an embarrassing moment. During an early gig, while jumping around on stage with a Gibson L5 guitar, he landed awkwardly, hurting his groin. He then went about designing a smaller, less-restrictive guitar that allowed him to keep jumping around on stage while still playing his guitar. He also played the violin, which is featured on his mournful instrumental \"The Clock Strikes Twelve\", a twelve-bar blues.\nHe often created lyrics as witty and humorous adaptations of folk music themes. The song \"Bo Diddley\" was based on the African-American clapping rhyme \"Hambone\" (which in turn was based on the lullaby \"Hush Little Baby\"). Likewise, \"Hey Bo Diddley\" is based on the song \"Old MacDonald\". The song \"Who Do You Love?\" with its rap-style boasting, and his use of the African-American game known as \"the dozens\" on the songs \"Say Man\" and \"Say Man, Back Again,\" are cited as progenitors of hip-hop music (for example, \"You got the nerve to call somebody ugly. Why, you so ugly, the stork that brought you into the world ought to be arrested\")."}
{"id": "5034", "revid": "1273126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5034", "title": "Bela Lugosi", "text": "B\u00e9la Ferenc Dezs\u0151 Blask\u00f3 (; 20 October 1882 \u2013 16 August 1956), known professionally as Bela Lugosi (; ), was a Hungarian-American actor best remembered for portraying Count Dracula in the 1931 film and for his roles in other horror films.\nAfter playing small parts on the stage in his native Hungary, Lugosi gained his first role in a film in 1917. He had to leave the country after the failed Hungarian Communist Revolution of 1919 because of his socialist activism. He acted in several films in Weimar Germany before arriving in the United States as a seaman on a merchant ship.\nIn 1927, he appeared as Count Dracula in a Broadway adaptation of Bram Stoker's novel. He later appeared in the 1931 film \"Dracula\" directed by Tod Browning and produced by Universal Pictures. Through the 1930s, he occupied an important niche in horror films, with their East European setting, but his Hungarian accent limited his potential casting, and he unsuccessfully tried to avoid typecasting.\nMeanwhile, he was often paired with Boris Karloff, who was able to demand top billing. To his frustration, Lugosi, a charter member of the American Screen Actors Guild, was increasingly restricted to minor parts, kept employed by the studio principally so that they could put his name on the posters. Among his pairings with Karloff, he performed major roles only in \"The Black Cat\" (1934), \"The Raven\" (1935), and \"Son of Frankenstein\" (1939); even in \"The Raven\", Karloff received top billing despite Lugosi performing the lead role. By this time, Lugosi had been receiving regular medication for sciatic neuritis, and he became addicted to morphine and methadone. This drug dependence was known to producers, and the offers eventually dwindled to a few parts in low-budget films directed by Ed Wood, including a brief appearance in \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\" (1959). Lugosi was married five times and had one son, Bela George.\nEarly life.\nLugosi, the youngest of four children, was born B\u00e9la Ferenc Dezs\u0151 Blask\u00f3 in Lugos, Kingdom of Hungary (now Lugoj, Romania) to Hungarian father Istv\u00e1n Blask\u00f3, a banker, and Serbian-born mother Paula de Vojnich. He later based his last name on his hometown. He and his sister Vilma were raised in a Roman Catholic family.\nAt the age of 12, Lugosi dropped out of school. He began his acting career in 1901 or 1902. His earliest known performances are from provincial theatres in the 1903\u201304 season, playing small roles in several plays and operettas. He went on to perform in Shakespeare's plays. After moving to Budapest in 1911, he played dozens of roles with the National Theatre of Hungary between 1913 and 1919. Although Lugosi would later claim that he \"became the leading actor of Hungary's Royal National Theatre\", almost all his roles there were small or supporting parts.\nDuring World War I, he served as an infantryman in the Austro-Hungarian Army from 1914 to 1916, rising to the rank of Lieutenant. He was awarded the Wound Medal for wounds he suffered while serving on the Russian front.\nDue to his activism in the actors' union in Hungary during the revolution of 1919, he was forced to flee his homeland. He went first to Vienna before settling in Berlin (in the Langestrasse), where he continued acting. He took the name \"Lugosi\" in 1903 to honor his birthplace, and eventually travelled to New Orleans, Louisiana as a crewman aboard a merchant ship.\nCareer.\nEarly films.\nLugosi's first film appearance was in the movie \"Az ezredes\" (\"The Colonel\", 1917). When appearing in Hungarian silent films, he used the stage name Arisztid Olt. Lugosi made 12 films in Hungary between 1917 and 1918 before leaving for Germany. Following the collapse of B\u00e9la Kun's Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919, leftists and trade unionists became vulnerable. Lugosi was proscribed from acting due to his participation in the formation of an actors' union. Exiled in Weimar-era Germany, he began appearing in a small number of well-received films, among them adaptations of the Karl May novels \"On the Brink of Paradise\" (\"Auf den Tr\u00fcmmern des Paradieses\", 1920) and \"Caravan of Death\" (\"Die Todeskarawane\", also 1920) with Dora Gerson (Gerson, who was Jewish, died in Auschwitz).\nLugosi left Germany in October 1920, intending to emigrate to the United States, and entered the country at New Orleans in December 1920. He made his way to New York and was inspected by immigration officers at Ellis Island in March 1921. He declared his intention to become a US citizen in 1928; on June 26, 1931, he was naturalized.\nOn his arrival in America, the , Lugosi worked for some time as a laborer, and then entered the theater in New York City's Hungarian immigrant colony. With fellow expatriate Hungarian actors he formed a small stock company that toured Eastern cities, playing for immigrant audiences. Lugosi acted in several Hungarian plays before breaking out into his first English Broadway play, \"The Red Poppy\", in 1922. Three more parts came in 1925\u201326, including a five-month run in the comedy-fantasy \"The Devil in the Cheese\".\nIn 1925, he appeared as an Arab Sheik in \"Arabesque\" which premiered in Buffalo, New York at the Teck Theatre before moving to Broadway. His first American film role was in the melodrama \"The Silent Command\" (1923). Several more silent roles followed, villains and continental types, all in productions made in the New York area.\n\"Dracula\".\nLugosi was approached in the summer of 1927 to star in a Broadway theatre production of \"Dracula\", which had been adapted by Hamilton Deane and John L. Balderston from Bram Stoker's 1897 novel. The Horace Liveright production was successful, running for 261 performances before touring the United States to much fanfare and critical acclaim throughout 1928 and 1929. In 1928, Lugosi decided to stay in California when the play ended its West Coast run. His performance had piqued the interest of Fox Film, and he was cast in the studio's silent film \"The Veiled Woman\" (1929). He also appeared in the film \"Prisoners\" (also 1929), believed lost, which was released in both silent and talkie versions.\nIn 1929, with no other film roles in sight, he returned to the stage as Dracula for a short West Coast tour of the play. Lugosi remained in California where he resumed his film work under contract with Fox, appearing in early talkies often as a heavy or an \"exotic sheik\". He also continued to lobby for his prized role in the film version of \"Dracula\".\nDespite his critically acclaimed performance on stage, Lugosi was not Universal Pictures' first choice for the role of Dracula when the company optioned the rights to the Deane play and began production in 1930. Different prominent actors were considered before Browning cast Lugosi for the role, but the film was a hit.\nTypecasting.\nThrough his association with \"Dracula\" (in which he appeared with minimal makeup, using his natural, heavily accented voice), Lugosi found himself typecast as a horror villain in films such as \"Murders in the Rue Morgue\" (1932), \"The Raven\" (1935), and \"Son of Frankenstein\" (1939) for Universal, and the independent \"White Zombie\" (1932). His accent, while a part of his image, limited the roles he could play.\nLugosi did attempt to break type by auditioning for other roles. He lost out to Lionel Barrymore for the role of Grigori Rasputin in \"Rasputin and the Empress\" (also 1932); C. Henry Gordon for the role of Surat Khan in \"Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1936), and Basil Rathbone for the role of Commissar Dimitri Gorotchenko in \"Tovarich\" (1937), a role Lugosi had played on stage. He played the elegant, somewhat hot-tempered General Nicholas Strenovsky-Petronovich in \"International House\" (1933).\nRegardless of controversy, five films at Universal \u2013 \"The Black Cat\" (1934), \"The Raven\" (1935), \"The Invisible Ray\" (1936), \"Son of Frankenstein\" (1939), \"Black Friday\" (1940), plus minor cameo performances in \"Gift of Gab\" (1934) and two at RKO Pictures, \"You'll Find Out\" (1940) and \"The Body Snatcher\" (1945) \u2013 paired Lugosi with Boris Karloff. Despite the relative size of their roles, Lugosi inevitably received second billing, below Karloff. There are contradictory reports of Lugosi's attitude toward Karloff, some claiming that he was openly resentful of Karloff's long-term success and ability to gain good roles beyond the horror arena, while others suggested the two actors were \u2013 for a time, at least \u2013 good friends. Karloff himself in interviews suggested that Lugosi was initially mistrustful of him when they acted together, believing that the Englishman would attempt to upstage him. When this proved not to be the case, according to Karloff, Lugosi settled down and they worked together amicably (though some have further commented that the English Karloff's on-set demand to break from filming for mid-afternoon tea annoyed Lugosi). Karloff also insinuated that his rival could not act, claiming Lugosi had \"never learned his trade\". A small percentage of critics cited his \"dull and slow performance\" in \"Dracula\" as a great example of minimal dialogue with no real acting prowess needed. Lugosi did get a few heroic leads, as in Universal's \"The Black Cat\" after Karloff had been accorded the more colorful role of the villain, \"The Invisible Ray\", and a romantic role in producer Sol Lesser's adventure serial \"The Return of Chandu\" (1934), but his typecasting problem appears to have been too entrenched to be alleviated by those films.\nLugosi addressed his plea to be cast in non-horror roles directly to casting directors through his listing in the 1937 \"Players Directory\", published by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, in which he (or his agent) calls the idea that he is only fit for horror films \"an error.\"\nCareer decline.\nA number of factors began to work against Lugosi's career in the mid-1930s. Universal changed management in 1936 and, because of a British ban on horror films, dropped them from their production schedule; Lugosi found himself consigned to Universal's non-horror B-film unit, at times in small roles where he was obviously used for \"name value\" only. Throughout the 1930s, Lugosi, experiencing a severe career decline despite popularity with audiences (Universal executives always preferred his rival Karloff), accepted many leading roles from independent producers like Nat Levine, Sol Lesser, and Sam Katzman. These low-budget thrillers indicate that Lugosi was much less discriminating than Karloff in selecting screen vehicles, but the exposure helped Lugosi financially if not artistically. Lugosi tried to keep busy with stage work, but had to borrow money from the Actors Fund of America to pay hospital bills when his only child, Bela George Lugosi, was born in 1938.\nHistorian John McElwee reports, in his 2013 book \"Showmen, Sell It Hot!\", that Bela Lugosi's popularity received a much-needed boost in August 1938, when California theater owner Emil Umann revived \"Dracula\" and \"Frankenstein\" as a special double feature. The combination was so successful that Umann scheduled extra shows to accommodate the capacity crowds, and invited Lugosi to appear in person, which thrilled new audiences that had never seen Lugosi's classic performance. \"I owe it all to that little man at the Regina Theatre,\" said Lugosi of exhibitor Umann. \"I was dead, and he brought me back to life.\" Universal took notice of the tremendous business and launched its own national re-release of the same two horror favorites. The studio then rehired Lugosi to star in new films.\nUniversal cast Lugosi in \"Son of Frankenstein\" (1939), appearing in the character role of Ygor, a mad blacksmith with a broken neck, in heavy makeup and beard. The same year saw Lugosi making a rare appearance in an A-list motion picture: he was a stern Soviet commissar in the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer romantic comedy \"Ninotchka\", starring Greta Garbo and directed by Ernst Lubitsch. Lugosi was quite effective in this prestigious character role and it could have been a turning point for the actor, but within the year, he was back on Hollywood's Poverty Row, playing leads for Sam Katzman. These horror, comedy and mystery B-films were released by Monogram Pictures. At Universal, he often received star billing for what amounted to a supporting part. Lugosi went to 20th Century-Fox for \"The Gorilla\" (1939), which had him playing straight man to Patsy Kelly and the Ritz Brothers.\nOstensibly due to injuries received during military service, Lugosi developed severe, chronic sciatica. Though at first he was treated with benign pain remedies such as asparagus juice, doctors increased the medication to opiates. The growth of his dependence on opiates, particularly morphine and, after 1947 when it became available in America, methadone, was directly proportional to the dwindling of Lugosi's screen offers. He was finally cast in the role of Frankenstein's monster for Universal's \"Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man\" (1943), but Lugosi's dialogue was edited out after the film was shot, along with the fact that the Monster was blind, leaving his performance featuring outstretched arms seeming enigmatic to audiences. Lugosi's voice had been dubbed over that of Lon Chaney Jr., from line readings at the end of \"The Ghost of Frankenstein\" (1942). Lugosi played Dracula for a second and last time on film in \"Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein\" (1948).\n\"Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein\" was Bela Lugosi's last \"A\" movie. For the remainder of his life he appeared \u2013 less and less frequently \u2013 in obscure, forgettable, low-budget features. From 1947 to 1950, he performed in summer stock, often in productions of \"Dracula\" or \"Arsenic and Old Lace\", and during the other parts of the year made personal appearances in a touring \"spook show\", and on early commercial television.\nIn September 1949, Milton Berle invited Lugosi to appear in a sketch on \"Texaco Star Theatre\". Lugosi memorized the script for the skit, but became confused on the air when Berle began to ad lib. His only television dramatic role was on the anthology series \"Suspense\" on October 11, 1949, in an adaptation of Edgar Allan Poe's \"The Cask of Amontillado\".\nIn 1951, while in England to play a six-month tour of \"Dracula\", Lugosi co-starred in a lowbrow film comedy, \"Mother Riley Meets the Vampire\" (also known as \"Vampire over London\" and \"My Son, the Vampire\"), released the following year. Following his return to the United States, he was interviewed for television, and reflected wistfully on his typecasting in horror parts: \"Now I am the boogie man\". In the same interview he expressed a desire to play more comedy, as he had in the \"Mother Riley\" farce. Independent producer Jack Broder took Lugosi at his word, casting him in a jungle-themed comedy, \"Bela Lugosi Meets a Brooklyn Gorilla\" (1952), starring nightclub comedians Duke Mitchell and Jerry Lewis look-alike Sammy Petrillo, whose act closely resembled that of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis (Martin and Lewis).\nStage and personal appearances.\nLugosi enjoyed a lively career on stage. with plenty of personal appearances. As film offers declined, he became more and more dependent on live venues to support his family. Lugosi took over the role of Jonathan Brewster from Boris Karloff for \"Arsenic and Old Lace\". Lugosi had also expressed interest in playing Elwood P. Dowd in \"Harvey\" to help himself professionally. He also made plenty of personal appearances to promote his horror image and/or an accompanying film.\nEd Wood and final projects.\nLate in his life, Bela Lugosi again received star billing in films when the ambitious but financially limited filmmaker Ed Wood, a fan of Lugosi, found him living in obscurity and near-poverty and offered him roles in his films, such as an anonymous narrator in \"Glen or Glenda\" (1953) and a Dr. Frankenstein-like mad scientist in \"Bride of the Monster\" (1955). During post-production of the latter, Lugosi decided to seek treatment for his drug addiction, and the premiere of the film was said to be intended to help pay for his hospital expenses. According to Kitty Kelley's biography of Frank Sinatra, when the entertainer heard of Lugosi's problems, he helped with expenses and visited Lugosi at the hospital. Sinatra would recall Lugosi's amazement at his visit, since the two men had never met before.\nDuring an impromptu interview upon his exit from the treatment center in 1955, Lugosi stated that he was about to go to work on a new Ed Wood film, \"The Ghoul Goes West\". This was one of several projects proposed by Wood, including \"The Phantom Ghoul\" and \"Dr. Acula\". With Lugosi in his Dracula cape, Wood shot impromptu test footage, with no storyline in mind, in front of Tor Johnson's home, a suburban graveyard, and in front of Lugosi's apartment building on Carlton Way. This footage ended up in \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\" (1959), which was mostly filmed after Lugosi died. Wood hired Tom Mason, his wife's chiropractor, to double for Lugosi in additional shots. Mason was noticeably taller and thinner than Lugosi, and had the lower half of his face covered with his cape in every shot, as Lugosi sometimes did in \"Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein\".\nFollowing his treatment, Lugosi made one final film, in late 1955, \"The Black Sleep\", for Bel-Air Pictures, which was released in the summer of 1956 through United Artists with a promotional campaign that included several personal appearances. To Lugosi's disappointment, however, his role in this film was that of a mute, with no dialogue.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1917, Lugosi married Ilona Szmik (1898\u20131991). The couple divorced in 1920, reputedly over political differences with her parents. In 1921, he married Ilona von Montagh, and divorced in 1924. In 1929, Lugosi took his place in Hollywood society and scandal when he married wealthy San Francisco resident Beatrice Weeks (1897\u20131931), widow of architect Charles Peter Weeks. She filed for divorce four months later, citing actress Clara Bow as the \"other woman\".\nOn 26 June 1931, Lugosi became a naturalized United States citizen. In 1933, he married 22-year-old Lillian Arch (1911\u20131981), the daughter of Hungarian immigrants. They had a child, Bela G. Lugosi, in 1938. Bela had four grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.\nLillian and Bela, as well as his mother, vacationed on their lake property in Lake Elsinore, California (then called Elsinore), on two lots between 1944 and 1953. Bela Lugosi Jr. attended the Elsinore Naval &amp; Military School in Lake Elsinore. Lillian and B\u00e9la divorced in 1953, at least partially because of B\u00e9la's jealousy over Lillian taking a full-time job as an assistant to Brian Donlevy on the sets and studios for Donlevy's radio and television series \"Dangerous Assignment\" \u2013 Lillian eventually did marry Donlevy in 1966. Lugosi married Hope Lininger, his fifth wife, in 1955; they remained married until his death. She had been a fan, writing letters to him when he was in the hospital, recovering from addiction to Demerol. She would sign her letters \"A dash of Hope\". She died in 1997 at age 78.\nDeath.\nLugosi died of a heart attack on 16 August 1956 in his Los Angeles apartment. He was 73. The rumor that Lugosi was clutching the script for \"The Final Curtain\", a planned Ed Wood project, at the time of his death is not true.\nLugosi was buried wearing one of the \"Dracula\" cape costumes in the Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California. Contrary to popular belief, Lugosi never requested to be buried in his cloak; Bela G. Lugosi confirmed on numerous occasions that he and his mother, Lillian, actually made the decision but believed that it is what his father would have wanted.\nCalifornia Supreme Court decision on personality rights.\nIn 1979, the \"Lugosi v. Universal Pictures\" decision by the California Supreme Court held that Lugosi's personality rights could not pass to his heirs, as a copyright would have. The court ruled that under California law any rights of publicity, including the right to his image, terminated with Lugosi's death.\nLegacy.\nIn Tim Burton's \"Ed Wood\", Lugosi is portrayed by Martin Landau, who received the 1994 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the performance. According to Bela G. Lugosi (his son), Forrest Ackerman, Dolores Fuller and Richard Sheffield, the film's portrayal of Lugosi is inaccurate: In real life, he never used profanity, owned small dogs, or slept in coffins. And contrary to this film, Bela did not struggle performing on \"The Red Skelton Show\".\nThree Lugosi projects were featured on the television show \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\". The 1942 film \"The Corpse Vanishes\" appeared in episode 105; the serial \"The Phantom Creeps\" appeared throughout season two, and the Ed Wood production \"Bride of the Monster\" in episode 423.\nAn episode of \"Sledge Hammer!\" titled \"Last of the Red Hot Vampires\" was an homage to Bela Lugosi; at the end of the episode, it was dedicated to \"Mr. Blasko\".\nIn 2001, BBC Radio 4 broadcast \"There Are Such Things\" by Steven McNicoll and Mark McDonnell. Focusing on Lugosi and his well-documented struggle to escape from the role that had typecast him, the play went on to receive the Hamilton Deane Award for best dramatic presentation from the Dracula Society in 2002.\nOn July 19, 2003, German artist Hartmut Zech erected a bust of Lugosi on one of the corners of Vajdahunyad Castle in Budapest.\nThe Ellis Island Immigration Museum in New York City features a live 30-minute play that focuses on Lugosi's illegal entry into the country and then his arrival at Ellis Island to enter the country legally.\nThe cape Lugosi wore in \"Dracula\" (1931) was in the possession of his family until it was put up for auction in 2011. It was expected to sell for up to $2 million, but has since been listed again by Bonhams in 2018. In 2019 the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures announced acquisition of the cape via partial donation from the Lugosi family and that the cape will be on display in 2020.\nP\u00e9ter M\u00fcller's theatrical play \"Lugosi - the Shadow of the Vampire\" () is based on Lugosi's life, telling the story of his life as he became typecast as Dracula and as his drug addiction worsened. In the Hungarian production, directed by Istv\u00e1n Szab\u00f3, Lugosi was played by Ivan Darvas.\nAndy Warhol's 1963 silkscreen \"The Kiss\" depicts Lugosi from \"Dracula\" about to bite into the neck of co-star Helen Chandler, who played Mina Harker. A copy sold for $798,000 at Christie's in May 2000.\nLugosi was also the subject of \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", the first single by the English band Bauhaus. Released in August 1979, it is often considered to be the first gothic rock record.\nLugosi's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame is mentioned in \"Celluloid Heroes\", a song performed by The Kinks and written by their lead vocalist and principal songwriter, Ray Davies. It appeared on their 1972 album \"Everybody's in Show-Biz\".\nAccording to Paru Itagaki, the creator of the Japanese manga/anime \"Beastars\", the main character Legoshi was inspired by Bela Lugosi (regarding the similar-sounding names).\nIn 2020, Legendary Comics published an adaptation of Bram Stoker's 1897 \"Dracula\" novel, which used the likeness of Lugosi."}
{"id": "5035", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5035", "title": "Bride of the Monster", "text": "Bride of the Monster is a 1955 American science fiction horror film directed, written and produced by Edward D. Wood Jr., and starring Bela Lugosi and Tor Johnson with a supporting cast featuring Tony McCoy and Loretta King.\nThe film is considered to have Wood's biggest budget ($70,000). Production commenced in 1953 but, due to further financial problems, was not completed until 1955. It was released in May 1955, initially on a double bill with \"Macumba\".\nA sequel, entitled \"Night of the Ghouls\", was finished in 1959, but due to last-minute financial problems, was not released until 1984.\nPlot.\nIn a stretch of woods, two hunters are caught in a \"raging thunderstorm\". They decide to seek refuge in Willows House, which is supposedly abandoned and haunted. When they reach Willows House, they find it to be occupied and the current owner repeatedly denies them hospitality. One of the hunters attempts to force his entry into the house, but a giant octopus is released from its tank and sent after the intruders. One of the fleeing hunters is killed by the octopus, while the other is captured by the giant. The owner is a scientist, Dr. Eric Vornoff, and the giant is his mute assistant, Lobo. Vornoff explains that he will perform an experiment on the unwilling hunter, who dies on the operating table.\nIn a police station, Officer Tom Robbins sees Lieutenant Dick Craig. There are now 12 missing victims, and the police still do not know what happened to them. The reporter behind the newspaper reports is Janet Lawton, Craig's fianc\u00e9e. Janet forces her way into the office and argues with Robbins, and vows to go to Lake Marsh to investigate. At the police station, Robbins and Craig have a meeting with an intellectual from Europe, Professor Vladimir Strowski, who agrees to assist the police in investigating the Marsh, but not at night. As night falls and another storm begins, Janet drives alone to Lake Marsh, but visibility is poor and she drives off the road and into a ravine. Lobo rescues her.\nJanet awakens to find herself a prisoner of Vornoff, who uses hypnosis to put her back to sleep. The following day, Craig and his partner drive to the area around Lake Marsh, a swamp. The partners also discuss the strange weather and mention that the newspapers could be right about \"the atom bomb explosions distorting the atmosphere\". The duo eventually discover Janet's abandoned car and realize she is the 13th missing victim. They leave the swamp while Strowski drives a rented car to the swamp.\nJanet awakens at Willows House. Vornoff assures her that Lobo is harmless, but the giant seems fascinated with the female captive and approaches her with questionable intent. Vornoff explains the giant is human and that Vornoff found him in the \"wilderness of Tibet\". Vornoff then hypnotically places Janet back to sleep. He orders Lobo to transport the captive to Vornoff's private quarters. Meanwhile, Strowski silently approaches Willows House and enters through the unlocked front door. While Strowski searches the house, Vornoff arrives to greet him. Their country of origin is interested in Vornoff's groundbreaking experiments with atomic energy and wants to recruit him. Vornoff narrates that two decades prior, Vornoff had suggested using experiments with nuclear power which could create superhumans of great strength and size. In response, he was branded a madman and exiled by his country. Strowski reveals that he has dreams of conquest in the name of their country, while Vornoff dreams of his creations conquering in his own name. By late evening, Craig and his partner return to the swamp and discover Strowski's abandoned car. The partners split up to search the area, Craig heading towards Willows House. Back in the secret laboratory, Vornoff uses a wave of his hand to summon Janet to his current location. She arrives dressed as a bride, summoned through telepathy. He has decided to use her as the next subject of his experiments. Lobo is reluctant to take part in this experiment, and Vornoff uses a whip to re-assert his control over his slave and assistant. Meanwhile, Craig has entered the house and accidentally discovers the secret passage. He is himself captured by Vornoff and Lobo.\nAs the experiment is about to begin, Lobo is visibly distressed. Making his decision, Lobo rebels and attacks Vornoff. After a fight, Lobo knocks Vornoff out, releases Janet, and transports the unconscious Vornoff to the operating table. The scientist becomes the subject of his own human experiment. This time the experiment works and Vornoff is transformed into an atomic-powered superhuman being. He and Lobo physically struggle with each other, and their fight destroys the laboratory and starts a fire. Vornoff grabs Janet and escapes from the flames. Robbins and other officers arrive to help Craig. The police pursue Vornoff through the woods. There is another thunderstorm, and a lightning strike further destroys Willows House. With his home and equipment destroyed, a distressed Vornoff abandons Janet and merely attempts to escape. Craig rolls a rock at him and lands him in the water with the octopus. They struggle until a nuclear explosion obliterate both combatants, apparently the end result of the chain reaction started at the destroyed laboratory. Robbins comments that Vornoff \"tampered in God's domain\".\nProduction and release.\nThe first incarnation of the film was a 1953 script by Alex Gordon titled \"The Atomic Monster\", but a lack of financing prevented any production. Later Ed Wood revived the project as \"The Monster of the Marshes\". Actual shooting began in October 1954 at the Ted Allan Studios, but further money problems quickly halted the production. The required funds were supplied by a rancher named Donald McCoy, who became the film's producer. He also provided his son to star as the film's hero. According to screenwriter Dennis Rodriguez, casting the younger McCoy as a protagonist was one of two terms Donald imposed on Wood. The other term was to include an atomic explosion in the finale. Production resumed in 1955 at Centaur Studios.\nThe film premiered at Hollywood's Paramount theater in May 1955, under the title \"Bride of the Atom\". The film was reportedly completed and released through a deal with Samuel Z. Arkoff. Arkoff profited from the film more than Wood, and his earnings contributed to the funding of American International Pictures. The ending credits identify the copyright holder of the film as \"Filmakers Releasing Organization\". Distribution rights were held by Banner Films in the United States, and by Exclusive in the United Kingdom.\nAnalysis.\nGenre and background.\nThe film combines elements of science fiction and horror fiction, genres which were frequently combined in films of the 1950s. Like many of these contemporaries, \"Bride\" serves in part as a Cold War propaganda film. Once again, an external threat from \"Old Europe\" serves as the enemy of the righteous United States. In Cold War thrillers, foreign nations served as a vilified and demonized Other for American audiences. The country of origin for Vornoff and Strowski is left unnamed. The only clues is that it is European and has its own dreams of conquest. By implication, the country which exiled Vornoff in the 1930s could be Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union. Their role as villains for the American cinema had already been solidified by the 1950s, and Wood could be alluding to both of them. Strowski uses the term master race, which is a key concept in Nazism.\nBoth the working title \"Bride of the Atom\" and the final title \"Bride of the Monster\" allude to the earlier film \"Bride of Frankenstein\" (1935). The film otherwise follows the template of the Poverty Row horror films of the 1940s. The Atomic Age influences the film in its ominous implications concerning nuclear weapons and the threat they posed towards human civilization. Rob Craig makes an argument for including the film in a subgenre of Cold War-themed thrillers along with \"Kiss Me Deadly\" (1955), \"The World, the Flesh and the Devil\" (1959), \"On the Beach\" (1959), \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1962), \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964), \"Seven Days in May\" (1964) and \"Fail-Safe\" (1964).\nContent.\nThis was Bela Lugosi's last speaking role in a feature film. Lugosi subsequently played a silent part in \"The Black Sleep\" (1956). \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\" (1959) uses silent archive footage of Lugosi, but he died prior to the creation of its script. The footage was from an unfinished Ed Wood film that was to be called \"The Vampire's Tomb\". \"Lock Up Your Daughters\" (1959) recycled footage from Lugosi's earlier films, possibly mixed with some new material. According to Rob Craig, in \"Bride\" Lugosi for the last time plays \"a charismatic villain whose megalomania leads to downfall and destruction\". Craig considers this to be one of Lugosi's finest roles, citing the surprisingly energetic performance of the aging actor. The scenes involving hypnosis contain close-ups of Lugosi's eyes. Wood was probably trying to recreate similar scenes from an older film of Lugosi, \"White Zombie\" (1932). Lugosi did not actually play Vornoff in the scenes demanding physicality. The film made use of body doubles for Lugosi: Eddie Parker and Red Reagan. Parker was also the body-double of Lugosi in \"Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man\" (1943). Lugosi's fee for the film is estimated to have been 1000 dollars.\nThe story is similar to an earlier Bela Lugosi movie, \"The Corpse Vanishes\" (1942). In both movies, each bride at her wedding was given an orchid, which she sniffed before passing out. In \"The Corpse Vanishes\", Lugosi played a doctor who captured the brides and took some kind of liquid from each bride's body and injected it into his wife to make her temporarily young again. Characters included his wife, an old woman, the old woman's grown son, and a dwarf. In \"Bride of the Monster\", Lugosi again plays a doctor doing experiments, but his only housemate/assistant is Lobo, and when his experiment fails to turn someone into an \"atomic-powered superman\", he throws the dead subject to an octopus or an alligator, similar to Lugosi throwing a body into a river in \"Murders in the Rue Morgue\" (1932).\nThe hunters of the opening scenes are unnamed in the actual scenes, but identified later in the film as Jake Long and Blake \"Mac\" McCreigh. According to the credits, Jake was played by John Warren and Mac by Bud Osborne. The police station scenes feature cameos by a drunk and a newspaper seller. The former is played by Ben Frommer (known for playing Count Bloodcount in \"Transylvania 6-5000\"), the latter is played by William Benedict (known as one of The Bowery Boys). Janet Lawton briefly speaks with a co-worker called Margie. Margie is played by Dolores Fuller. Dick Craig's partner, Martin, is played by Don Nagel. Both Fuller and Nagel had worked with Wood in \"Jail Bait\" (1954).\nThe film uses both stock footage of both a real octopus and a fake, rubber octopus in scenes where \"the monster\" interacts with the actors. It is widely believed this was a prop from the John Wayne film \"Wake of the Red Witch\" (1948). Contradictory accounts claim that Wood either stole or legally rented the prop from Republic Pictures, which produced the earlier film. The struggle between Vornoff and the octopus was filmed at Griffith Park.\nCraig comments that there is a stark contrast between the characters of Dick Craig and Janet Lawton. Dick speaks in a deadpan unemotional way and seems to be a rather lethargic character. Janet is a \"brassy girl reporter\", a dynamic character with a sense of autonomy. The role was reportedly intended for Dolores Fuller. According to Fuller's recollections, Loretta King bribed Wood into casting her as Janet, with promises of securing further funding for the film. Fuller was thus reduced to a cameo role. King vehemently denies bribing Wood in any way, so the story lacks confirmation.\nIn a subplot of the film, there are storms every night for three months and strange weather patterns. The characters attribute the phenomenon to the effects the nuclear explosions have on the atmosphere. This probably reflects actual anxiety of the 1950s about potential climate change. Until the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (1963), atmospheric nuclear weapons testing was used widely and recklessly. Rob Craig suggests that the months of constant storms could be inspired by the Genesis flood narrative. In the context of the film, the strange weather is implied to be a side-effect of the experiments of Vornoff which apparently release radioactivity into the atmosphere.\nThe dialogue of the film includes well-known lines such as \"Home? I have no home!\", \"One is always considered mad, when one discovers something which others cannot grasp\", and the closing \"He tampered in God's domain\". The phrases could well apply to the fates of avant-garde artists and thinkers. The title \"Bride of the Atom\", which Vornoff uses for Janet in the bridal dress, is inexplicable unless the scientist is actually attempting to use Janet to replace his long-lost wife. One of his reassuring lines to Janet concerning the experiment, \"It hurts, just for a moment, but then you will emerge a woman...\", sounds as if preparing her for the loss of her virginity. The scene of a young woman, in a bridal gown, restrained by leather shackles seems to be sadomasochistic in nature.\nThroughout the film, the mute Lobo is implied to have an unspecified intellectual disability and to be of sub-human intelligence. Yet he successfully operates complex machinery as if trained to do so. Craig views this scene as implying that supposedly \"dumb\" servants, can have a capacity of learning the secrets of their masters .\nThe final scenes, with the mushroom cloud of the nuclear explosion, use stock footage from the blast of a thermonuclear weapon (\"hydrogen bomb\").\nFilm series.\nThe apparent fetish of Lobo with angora wool is a reflection of Wood's own fetish for the material. This also serves as the film's connection to \"Glen or Glenda\" (1953), where the fetish plays a more prominent role.\nThe character of Lobo also appeared again in Wood's \"Night of the Ghouls\". This film served as a sequel of sorts to \"Bride\". Vornoff is absent from the later film, but there are references to the activities of \"the mad doctor\".\n Tor Johnson also plays a character called Lobo in \"The Unearthly\" (1957) by Boris Petroff. This character also serves the main villain.\nThis film is part of what Wood aficionados refer to as \"The Kelton Trilogy\", a trio of films featuring Paul Marco as Officer Kelton, a whining, reluctant policeman. The other two films are \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\" and \"Night of the Ghouls\". Kelton is the only character to appear in all three films.\nLegacy.\nIn 1986, the film was featured in the syndicated series, the \"Canned Film Festival\" and was later featured on the comedy series, \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\".\nThe late 1990s dream trance track \"Alright\", by DJ Taucher, sampled a monologue from Bela Lugosi during the interlude of the song.\nIn 2005, The Devil's Rejects Footage of the movie was played in the movie.\nIn 2008, a colorized version was released by Legend Films. This version is also available from Amazon Video on Demand.\nIn 2010, a retrospective on the movie entitled \"Citizen Wood: Making \u2018The Bride\u2019, Unmaking the Legend\" was included in the \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\" Volume 19 DVD set as a bonus feature for said episode featuring the movie. Horror host Mr. Lobo is among the interviewees of the 27 minute documentary.\nControversies.\nIn 1980, the book \"The Golden Turkey Awards\" claims that Lugosi's character declares his manservant Lobo (Tor Johnson) \"as harmless as kitchen\" . This allegedly misspoken line is cited as evidence of either Lugosi's failing health/mental faculties, or as further evidence of Wood's incompetence as a director. However, a viewing of the film itself reveals that Lugosi said this line correctly, the exact words being, \"Don't be afraid of Lobo; he's as gentle as a kitten.\" The easier explanation would be that authors Michael Medved and Harry Medved saw the film in a theater setting with inferior sound quality, or viewed a damaged print. A single viewing in such conditions could result in mishearing some lines of dialogue. Unfortunately the inaccurate claim managed to achieve urban legend status, and it keeps circulating.\nIn 1994, the biopic \"Ed Wood\", directed by Tim Burton, alleged that Wood and the filmmakers stole the mechanical octopus (previously used in the film \"Wake of the Red Witch\") from the Republic Studios backlot, while failing to steal the motor which enabled the prop to move realistically, although, by the director's admission, the film preferred narrative interest over historical accuracy. These events are also alleged in the 2004 documentary, \"The 50 Worst Movies Ever Made.\" However, other stories circulated insist Wood legitimately rented the octopus, along with some cars. To remedy the lack of movement from the octopus prop, whenever someone was killed by the monster in the film, they simply flailed around in the shallow water while holding the tentacles to imitate movement. The filming of these scenes, as well as the production of the film in general, were played to comic effect in \"Ed Wood\".\nRudolph Grey's book \"Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood Jr.\" contains anecdotes regarding the making of this film.\nGrey notes that participants in the original events sometimes contradict one another, but he relates each person's information for posterity. He also includes Ed Wood's claim that one of his films made a profit and surmises that it was most likely \"Bride of the Monster\", but that Wood had oversold the film and could not reimburse the backers."}
{"id": "5036", "revid": "24880950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5036", "title": "Berry paradox", "text": "The Berry paradox is a self-referential paradox arising from an expression like \"The smallest positive integer not definable in under sixty letters\" (a phrase with fifty-seven letters). Bertrand Russell, the first to discuss the paradox in print, attributed it to G. G. Berry (1867\u20131928), a junior librarian at Oxford's Bodleian library.\nOverview.\nConsider the expression:\nSince there are only twenty-six letters in the English alphabet, there are finitely many phrases of under sixty letters, and hence finitely many positive integers that are defined by phrases of under sixty letters. Since there are infinitely many positive integers, this means that there are positive integers that cannot be defined by phrases of under sixty letters. If there are positive integers that satisfy a given property, then there is a \"smallest\" positive integer that satisfies that property; therefore, there is a smallest positive integer satisfying the property \"not definable in under sixty letters\". This is the integer to which the above expression refers. But the above expression is only fifty-seven letters long, therefore it \"is\" definable in under sixty letters, and is \"not\" the smallest positive integer not definable in under sixty letters, and is \"not\" defined by this expression. This is a paradox: there must be an integer defined by this expression, but since the expression is self-contradictory (any integer it defines is definable in under sixty letters), there cannot be any integer defined by it.\nPerhaps another helpful analogy to Berry's Paradox would be the phrase \"indescribable feeling\". If the feeling is indeed indescribable, then no description of the feeling would be true. But if the word \"indescribable\" communicates something about the feeling, then it may be considered a description: this is self-contradictory.\nMathematician and computer scientist Gregory J. Chaitin in \"The Unknowable\" (1999) adds this comment: \"Well, the Mexican mathematical historian Alejandro Garcidiego has taken the trouble to find that letter [of Berry's from which Russell penned his remarks], and it is rather a different paradox. Berry\u2019s letter actually talks about the first ordinal that can\u2019t be named in a finite number of words. According to Cantor\u2019s theory such an ordinal must exist, but we\u2019ve just named it in a finite number of words, which is a contradiction.\"\nResolution.\nThe Berry paradox as formulated above arises because of systematic ambiguity in the word \"definable\". In other formulations of the Berry paradox, such as one that instead reads: \"...not nameable in less...\" the term \"nameable\" is also one that has this systematic ambiguity. Terms of this kind give rise to vicious circle fallacies. Other terms with this type of ambiguity are: satisfiable, true, false, function, property, class, relation, cardinal, and ordinal. To resolve one of these paradoxes means to pinpoint exactly where our use of language went wrong and to provide restrictions on the use of language which may avoid them.\nThis family of paradoxes can be resolved by incorporating stratifications of meaning in language. Terms with systematic ambiguity may be written with subscripts denoting that one level of meaning is considered a higher priority than another in their interpretation. \"The number not nameable0 in less than eleven words\" may be nameable1 in less than eleven words under this scheme.\nFormal analogues.\nUsing programs or proofs of bounded lengths, it is possible to construct an analogue of the Berry expression in a formal mathematical language, as has been done by Gregory Chaitin. Though the formal analogue does not lead to a logical contradiction, it does prove certain impossibility results.\nGeorge Boolos (1989) built on a formalized version of Berry's paradox to prove G\u00f6del's Incompleteness Theorem in a new and much simpler way. The basic idea of his proof is that a proposition that holds of \"x\" if and only if \"x\" = \"n\" for some natural number \"n\" can be called a \"definition\" for \"n\", and that the set {(\"n\", \"k\"): \"n\" has a definition that is \"k\" symbols long} can be shown to be representable (using G\u00f6del numbers). Then the proposition \"\"m\" is the first number not definable in less than \"k\" symbols\" can be formalized and shown to be a definition in the sense just stated.\nRelationship with Kolmogorov complexity.\nIt is not possible in general to unambiguously define what is the minimal number of symbols required to describe a given string (given a specific description mechanism). In this context, the terms \"string\" and \"number\" may be used interchangeably, since a number is actually a string of symbols, e.g. an English word (like the word \"eleven\" used in the paradox) while, on the other hand, it is possible to refer to any word with a number, e.g. by the number of its position in a given dictionary or by suitable encoding. Some long strings can be described exactly using fewer symbols than those required by their full representation, as is often achieved using data compression. The complexity of a given string is then defined as the minimal length that a description requires in order to (unambiguously) refer to the full representation of that string.\nThe Kolmogorov complexity is defined using formal languages, or Turing machines which avoids ambiguities about which string results from a given description. It can be proven that the Kolmogorov complexity is not computable. The proof by contradiction shows that if it were possible to compute the Kolmogorov complexity, then it would also be possible to systematically generate paradoxes similar to this one, i.e. descriptions shorter than what the complexity of the described string implies. That is to say, the definition of the Berry number is paradoxical because it is not actually possible to compute how many words are required to define a number, and we know that such computation is not possible because of the paradox."}
{"id": "5038", "revid": "1010966715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5038", "title": "List of Olympic medalists in biathlon", "text": "This is the complete list of Olympic medalists in biathlon.\nMedalists in military patrol, a precursor to biathlon, are listed separately.\nMen.\nThe numbers in brackets denotes biathletes who won gold medal in corresponding disciplines more than one time. Bold numbers denotes record number of victories in certain disciplines.\nWomen.\nThe numbers in brackets denotes biathletes who won gold medal in corresponding disciplines more than one time. Bold numbers denotes record number of victories in certain disciplines.\nRelay (4\u00d76 km).\nThe women's relay event has been competed over three different distances:\nStatistics.\nBiathletes with most victories.\nTop 10 biathletes who won more gold medals at the Winter Olympics are listed below. Boldface denotes active biathletes and highest medal count among all biathletes (including those not in the tables) per type."}
{"id": "5039", "revid": "16851353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5039", "title": "Biathlon World Championships", "text": "The first Biathlon World Championships (BWCH) was held in 1958, with individual and team contests for men. The number of events has grown significantly over the years. Beginning in 1984, women biathletes had their own World Championships, and finally, from 1989, both genders have been participating in joint Biathlon World Championships. In 1978 the development was enhanced by the change from the large army rifle calibre to a small bore rifle, while the range to the target was reduced from 150 to 50 meters.\nVenues.\nThe Biathlon World Championships of the season takes place during February or March. Some years it has been necessary to schedule parts of the Championships at other than the main venue because of weather and/or snow conditions. Full, joint Biathlon World Championships have never been held in Olympic Winter Games seasons. Biathlon World Championships in non-IOC events, however, have been held in Olympic seasons. In 2005, the then new event of Mixed Relay (two legs done by women, two legs by men) was arranged separately from the ordinary Championships.\nArranged Championships:\nUpcoming:\nMen.\nBold numbers in brackets denotes record number of victories in corresponding disciplines.\nIndividual (20 km).\nThis event was first held in 1958.\nMedal table\nSprint (10 km).\nThis event was first held in 1974.\nMedal table\nPursuit (12.5 km).\nThis event was first held in 1997.\nMedal table\nMass start (15 km).\nThis event was first held in 1999.\nMedal table\nRelay (4 \u00d7 7.5 km).\nThis event was first held unofficially in 1965. It was a success, and replaced\nthe team competition as an official event in 1966.\nMedal table\nTeam (time).\nThis event was held from 1958 to 1965. The times of the top 3 athletes from each country in the 20\u00a0km individual were added together\n(in 1958 the top 4).\nMedal table\nTeam.\nThis event, a patrol race, was held from 1989 to 1998. 1989\u201393: 20\u00a0km. 1994\u201398: 10\u00a0km.\nMedal table\nWomen.\nBold numbers in brackets denotes record number of victories in corresponding disciplines.\nIndividual (15 km).\nThis event was first held in 1984. Through 1988 the distance was 10\u00a0km.\nMedal table\nSprint (7.5 km).\nThis event was first held in 1984. Through 1988 the distance was 5\u00a0km.\nMedal table\nPursuit (10 km).\nThis event was first held in 1997.\nMedal table\nMass start (12.5 km).\nThis event was first held in 1999.\nMedal table\nRelay (4 \u00d7 6 km).\nThis event was first held in 1984. Through 1988, the event was 3 \u00d7 5\u00a0km. 1989\u201391: 3 \u00d7 7.5\u00a0km. 1993\u20132001: 4 \u00d7 7.5\u00a0km. In 2003, the leg distance was set to 6\u00a0km.\nMedal table\nTeam.\nThis event, a patrol race, was held from 1989 to 1998. 1989\u201393: 15\u00a0km. 1994\u201398: 7.5\u00a0km.\nMedal table\nMixed.\nBold numbers in brackets denotes record number of victories in corresponding disciplines.\nMixed Relay.\nThis event was first held in 2005, at the Biathlon World Cup finals in Khanty-Mansiysk. In 2005\u201320, the women biathletes did the first two legs and the men did the following two (except 2006 when sequence was woman\u2013man\u2013woman\u2013man), the women's ski legs were 6\u00a0km each while men ski legs were 7.5\u00a0km each (except 2005, 2006 and 2020 when ski legs were 6\u00a0km each for all relay members). Since 2021, the sequence became man\u2013man\u2013woman\u2013woman while leg distance was set to 7.5\u00a0km for all relay members.\nMedal table\nSingle Mixed Relay.\nThis event was first held in 2019. Each team consists of two members - man and woman. The first of the team members runs the first and third legs (3\u00a0km each), the other team member \u2013 the second and fourth legs (3\u00a0km and 4.5\u00a0km respectively). In 2019 and 2020 the women biathletes started single mixed relay and the men biathletes finished it, in 2021 this order was reversed.\nMedal table\nTotal medals by country.\nUpdated after the 2021 Championships.\nMultiple medalists.\nBoldface denotes active biathletes and highest medal count among all biathletes (including these who not included in these tables) per type."}
{"id": "5040", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5040", "title": "Inedia", "text": "Inedia (Latin for 'fasting') or breatharianism is the claimed ability for a person to live without consuming food, and in some cases water. It is a deadly pseudoscience, and several adherents of these practices have died from starvation or dehydration. It is an established fact that humans require food and water (nutrients) to survive.\nBreatharians claim that food (and sometimes water) is not necessary for survival, and that humans can be sustained solely by \"prana\", the vital life force in Hinduism. According to Ayurveda, sunlight is one of the main sources of prana, and some practitioners believe that it is possible for a person to survive on sunlight alone. The terms \"breatharianism\" or \"inedia\" may also refer to this philosophy when it is practiced as a lifestyle in place of a usual diet.\nScientific assessment.\nDocumented studies on the physiological effects of food restriction clearly show that fasting for extended periods leads to starvation, dehydration, and eventual death. In the absence of food intake, the body normally burns its own reserves of glycogen, body fat, and muscle. Breatharians claim that their bodies do not consume these reserves while fasting.\nSome breatharians have submitted themselves to medical testing, including a hospital's observation of Indian mystic Prahlad Jani appearing to survive without food or water for 15 days. However, the hospital Jani attended was privately owned, and official documentation of the event has not been publicised. In other cases, people have attempted to survive on sunlight alone, only to abandon the effort after losing a large percentage of their body weight.\nIn a handful of documented cases, individuals attempting breatharian fasting have died. Scientific societies such as the British Dietetic Association strongly disadvise the breatharian diet, qualifying it as \"dangerous\", and stating that \"the basic fact is we all need food and liquid in our diet to live.\"\nPractitioners.\nRosicrucianism.\nThe 1670 Rosicrucian text \"Comte de Gabalis\" attributed the practice to the physician and occultist Paracelsus (1493\u20131541) who was described as having lived \"several years by taking only one half scrupule of Solar Quintessence\". In this book, it is also stated that \"Paracelsus affirms that He has seen many of the Sages fast twenty years without eating anything whatsoever.\"\nRam Bahadur Bomjon (\"Bakji\").\nRam Bahadur Bomjon is a young Nepalese Buddhist monk who lives as an ascetic in a remote area of Nepal. Bomjon appears to go for long periods of time without ingesting either food or water. One such period was chronicled in a 2006 Discovery Channel documentary titled \"The Boy With Divine Powers\", which reported that Bomjon neither moved, ate, nor drank anything during 96 hours of filming. Bomjon has attracted controversy for abuse and violence against his followers and against any who investigate him. He has been accused of rape, kidnapping, and physical violence.\nPrahlad Jani (\"Mataji\").\nPrahlad Jani was an Indian sadhu who claimed to have lived without food and water for more than 70 years. His claims were investigated by doctors at Sterling Hospital, Ahmedabad, Gujarat in 2003 and 2010. The study concluded that Prahlad Jani was able to survive under observation for two weeks without either food or water, and had passed no urine or stool, with no need for dialysis. Interviews with the researchers speak of strict observation and relate that round-the-clock observation was ensured by multiple CCTV cameras. Jani was subjected to multiple medical tests. The research team could not comment on his claim of having been able to survive in this way for decades.\nThe case has attracted criticism, both after the 2003 tests and the 2010 tests. Sanal Edamaruku, president of the Indian Rationalist Association, criticized the 2010 experiment for allowing Jani to move out of a certain CCTV camera's field of view, meet devotees, and leave the sealed test room to sunbathe. Edamaruku stated that the regular gargling and bathing activities were not sufficiently monitored, and accused Jani of having had some \"influential protectors\" who denied Edamaruku permission to inspect the project during its operation.\nJasmuheen.\nJasmuheen (born Ellen Greve) was a prominent advocate of breatharianism in the 1990s. She said \"I can go for months and months without having anything at all other than a cup of tea. My body runs on a different kind of nourishment.\" Interviewers found her house stocked with food; Jasmuheen claimed the food was for her husband and daughter. In 1999, she volunteered to be monitored closely by the Australian television program \"60 Minutes\" for one week without eating, to demonstrate her methods. Jasmuheen stated that she found it difficult on the third day of the test because the hotel room in which she was confined was located near a busy road, causing stress and pollution that prevented absorption of required nutrients from the air. \"I asked for fresh air. Seventy percent of my nutrients come from fresh air. I couldn\u2019t even breathe,\" she said. The third day, the test was moved to a mountainside retreat, where her condition continued to deteriorate. After Jasmuheen had fasted for four days, Berris Wink, president of the Queensland branch of the Australian Medical Association, urged her to stop the test.\nAccording to Wink, Jasmuheen's pupils were dilated, her speech was slow, and she was \"quite dehydrated, probably over 10%, getting up to 11%\". Towards the end of the test, she said, \"Her pulse is about double what it was when she started. The risks if she goes any further are kidney failure. \"60 Minutes\" would be culpable if they encouraged her to continue. She should stop now.\" The test was stopped. Wink said, \"Unfortunately there are a few people who may believe what she says, and I'm sure it's only a few, but I think it's quite irresponsible for somebody to be trying to encourage others to do something that is so detrimental to their health.\" Jasmuheen challenged the results of the program, saying, \"Look, 6,000 people have done this around the world without any problem.\"\nJasmuheen was awarded the Bent Spoon Award by Australian Skeptics in 2000 (\"presented to the perpetrator of the most preposterous piece of paranormal or pseudoscientific piffle\"). She also won the 2000 Ig Nobel Prize for Literature for \"Living on Light\". Jasmuheen claims that their beliefs are based on the writings and \"more recent channelled material\" from St. Germain. She stated that some people's DNA has expanded from 2 to 12 strands, to \"absorb more hydrogen\". When offered $30,000 to prove her claim with a blood test, she said that she didn't understand the relevance as she was not referring to herself.\nIn the documentary \"No Way to Heaven\", the Swiss chemist Michael Werner claims to have followed the directions appearing in Jasmuheen's books, living for several years without food. The documentary also describes two attempts at scientific verification of his claims. , five deaths had been directly linked to breatharianism as a result of Jasmuheen's publications. Jasmuheen has denied any responsibility for the deaths.\nWiley Brooks.\nWiley Brooks is the founder of the Breatharian Institute of America. He was first introduced to the public in 1980 when he appeared on the TV show \"That's Incredible!\". Brooks stopped teaching recently to \"devote 100% of his time on solving the problem as to why he needed to eat some type of food to keep his physical body alive and allow his light body to manifest completely\". Brooks claims to have found \"four major deterrents\" which prevented him from living without food: \"people pollution\", \"food pollution\", \"air pollution\", and \"electro pollution\".\nIn 1983 he was reportedly observed leaving a Santa Cruz 7-Eleven with a Slurpee, a hot dog, and Twinkies. He told \"Colors\" magazine in 2003 that he periodically breaks his fasting with a cheeseburger and a cola, explaining that when he's surrounded by junk culture and junk food, consuming them adds balance.\nWiley Brooks later claimed that Diet Coke and McDonald's cheeseburgers have special \"5D\" properties. The idea of separate but interconnected 5D and 3D worlds is a major part of Wiley Brooks' ideology, and Wiley Brooks encourages his followers to only eat these special 5D foods, as well as to meditate on a set of magical 5D words.\nBrooks's institute has set various prices for prospective clients wishing to learn how to live without food, ranging from US$100,000 with an initial deposit of $10,000, to one billion dollars, to be paid via bank wire transfer with a preliminary deposit of $100,000, for a session called \"Immortality workshop\". A payment plan was also offered. These charges have typically been presented as limited time offers exclusively for billionaires.\nHira Ratan Manek.\nHira Ratan Manek (born 12 September 1937) claims that since 18 June 1995, he has lived on water and occasionally tea, coffee, and buttermilk. Manek states that Sungazing is the key to his health, citing yogis, ancient Egyptians, Aztecs, Mayans, and Native Americans as practitioners of the art. While he and his proponents state that medical experts have confirmed his ability to draw sustenance by gazing at the sun, he was caught on camera eating a big meal in a San Francisco restaurant in the 2011 documentary \"Eat the Sun\".\nRay Maor.\nIn a television documentary produced by the Israeli television investigative show \"The Real Face\" (\u05e4\u05e0\u05d9\u05dd \u05d0\u05de\u05d9\u05ea\u05d9\u05d5\u05ea), hosted by Amnon Levy, Israeli practitioner of inedia Ray Maor (\u05e8\u05d9\u05d9 \u05de\u05d0\u05d5\u05e8) appeared to survive without food or water for eight days and eight nights. According to the documentary, he was restricted to a small villa and placed under constant video surveillance, with medical supervision that included daily blood testing. The documentary claimed Maor was in good spirits throughout the experiment; that he lost 17\u00a0lb after eight days; that blood tests showed no change before, during or after the experiment; and that cardiologist Ilan Kitsis from Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center was \"baffled\".\nMythology and Religion.\nHinduism.\nHindu religious texts contain account of saints and hermits practicing what would be called inedia, breatharianism or Sustenance through Light in modern terms. In Valmiki's Ramayana, Book III, Canto VI, an account of anchorites and holy men is given, who flocked around Rama when he came to \u015aarabhanga's hermitage. These included, among others, the \"...saints who live on rays which moon and daystar give\" and \"those ... whose food the wave of air supplies\". In Canto XI of the same book a hermit named M\u0101\u1e47\u1e0dakar\u1e47i is mentioned: \"For he, great votarist, intent \u2013 On strictest rule his stern life spent \u2013 ... \u2013 Ten thousand years on air he fed...\" (English quotations are from Ralph T. H. Griffith's translation).\nParamahansa Yogananda's \"Autobiography of a Yogi\" details two alleged historical examples of breatharianism, Hari Giri Bala and Therese Neumann.\nThere are claims that Devraha Baba lived without food.\nTaoism.\nBigu (grain avoidance) is a fasting technique with various different interpretations, from simply avoiding eating specific grains, to avoiding all grains, to eating no food at all, and drawing sustenance from gulps of air.\nJainism.\nThere are varying types of fasts practised by followers of Jainism. Some Jain monks and laities continuously fast for months. These fasts last six months or even longer. A Jain monk Sahaj Muni Maharaj is said to have completed his 365-day fast on 1 May 1998. Another Jain monk Hansaratna Vijayji said to have completed 423-day fast in 494 days in 2015. He had previously fast for 108 days in 2013 and for 180 days in 2014. Several others have claimed to have fast for six months."}
{"id": "5041", "revid": "32156510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5041", "title": "Bihar (disambiguation)", "text": "Bihar is a state in India.\nBihar may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5044", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5044", "title": "Beast of bodmin", "text": ""}
{"id": "5046", "revid": "31273721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5046", "title": "Belfast", "text": "Belfast ( ; , ) is the capital and largest city of Northern Ireland, standing on the banks of the River Lagan on the east coast. It is the 12th-largest city in the United Kingdom and the second-largest on the island of Ireland. It had a population of 343,542 . Belfast suffered greatly during the violence that accompanied the partition of Ireland, and especially during the more recent conflict known as the Troubles: in the 1970s and 1980s it was one of the world's most dangerous cities, with a homicide rate around 31 per 100,000.\nBy the early 19th century, Belfast became a major port. It played an important role in the Industrial Revolution in Ireland, becoming briefly the biggest linen-producer in the world, earning it the nickname \"Linenopolis\". By the time it was granted city status in 1888, it was a major centre of Irish linen production, tobacco-processing and rope-making. Shipbuilding was also a key industry; the Harland and Wolff shipyard, which built the , was the world's largest shipyard. Belfast has a major aerospace and missiles industry. Industrialisation, and the inward migration it brought, made Belfast Northern Ireland's biggest city. Following the partition of Ireland in 1922, Belfast became the seat of government for Northern Ireland. Belfast's status as a global industrial centre ended in the decades after the Second World War.\nBelfast is still a port with commercial and industrial docks, including the Harland and Wolff shipyard, dominating the Belfast Lough shoreline. It is served by two airports: George Best Belfast City Airport, from the city centre, and Belfast International Airport west of the city. The Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC) listed Belfast as a Gamma + global city in 2020.\nName.\nThe name Belfast derives from the Irish ', later spelt '. The word ' means \"mouth\" or \"river-mouth\" while ' is the genitive singular of ' and refers to a sandbar or tidal ford across a river's mouth. The name therefore translates literally as \"(river) mouth of the sandbar\" or \"(river) mouth of the ford\". The sandbar formed at the confluence (at present-day Donegall Quay) of two rivers: the Lagan, which flows into Belfast Lough, and the Lagan's tributary the Farset. This area became the hub around which the original settlement developed. The Irish name ' is shared by a County Mayo townland which has the anglicised name \"Belfarsad\".\nAn alternative interpretation of the name, \"mouth of [the river] of the sandbar\", would allude to the River Farset, which flows into the Lagan where the sandbar was located. Edmund Hogan and John O'Donovan favoured this interpretation. It seems clear, however, that the river itself took its name from the tidal crossing.\nIn Ulster-Scots, the name of the city can appear variously written as \"Bilfawst\", \"Bilfaust\" or \"Baelfawst\", although \"Belfast\" is also used.\nHistory.\nThe county borough of Belfast was created when it was granted city status by Queen Victoria in 1888, and the city continues to straddle County Antrim and County Down.\nOrigins.\nThe site of Belfast has been occupied since the Bronze Age. The Giant's Ring, a 5,000-year-old henge, is located near the city, and the remains of Iron Age hill forts can still be seen in the surrounding hills. Belfast remained a small settlement of little importance during the Middle Ages. John de Courcy built a castle on what is now Castle Street in the city centre in the 12th century, but this was on a lesser scale and not as strategically important as Carrickfergus Castle to the north, which was built by de Courcy in 1177. The O'Neill clan had a presence in the area.\nIn the 14th century, Cloinne Aodha Buidhe, descendants of Aodh Buidhe O'Neill, built Grey Castle at Castlereagh, now in the east of the city. Conn O'Neill of the Clannaboy O'Neills owned vast lands in the area and was the last inhabitant of Grey Castle, one remaining link being the Conn's Water river flowing through east Belfast.\nThe Early Town.\nBelfast became a substantial settlement in the 17th century after being established as an English town by Sir Arthur Chichester. As it grew with the port, and with textile manufacture, the English element was overwhelmed by the influx of Scottish Presbyterians. As \"Dissenters\" from the established Church of Ireland communion, the Presbyterians were conscious of sharing, if only in part, the disabilities of Ireland's largely dispossessed Roman Catholic majority.\nWhen, in the American War of Independence, Belfast Lough was raided by the privateer, John Paul Jones, the townspeople assembled their own Volunteer militia. This emboldened a spirit a radical disaffection. Further enthused by the French Revolution, the Volunteers and townspeople rallied in support of Catholic emancipation and \"a more equal representation of the people\" in the Irish Parliament.\nThe two MPs Belfast returned to Dublin had remained nominees of the Chichesters (Marquesses of Donegall). In the face of the Ascendancy's intransigence, these were demands taken up by the Society of United Irishmen formed at a meeting in the town addressed by Theobald Wolfe Tone. In the expectation of French assistance the Society organised a republican insurrection, defeated to the north and south of Belfast, at Antrim and Ballynahinch, in 1798.\nEvidence of this period of Belfast's growth can still be seen in the oldest areas of the city, known as the Entries.\nThe Industrial City.\nRapid industrial growth in the nineteenth century drew in landless Catholics from outlying rural and western districts, most settling to the west of the town. The plentiful supply of cheap labour helped attract the English and Scottish capital to Belfast, but it was also a cause of insecurity. Protestant workers organised to protect \"their\" jobs giving a new lease of life in the town to the once largely rural Orange Order. Sectarian tensions were heightened by movements to repeal the Acts of Union and to restore a Parliament in Dublin. Given the progressive enlargement of the British electoral franchise, this would have had an overwhelming Catholic majority and, it was widely believed, interests inimical to the Protestant and industrial north. In 1864 and 1886 the issue had helped trigger deadly sectarian riots.\nSectarian tension was not in itself unique to Belfast: it was shared with Liverpool and Glasgow, cities that following the Great Famine had also experienced large scale Irish Catholic immigration. But also common to this \"industrial triangle\" were traditions of labour militancy. In 1919, workers in all three cities struck for a ten-hour reduction in the working week. In Belfast\u2014notwithstanding the political friction caused by Sinn F\u00e9in's electoral triumph in the south\u2014this involved some 60,000 workers, Protestant and Catholic, in a four-week walk-out.\nIn a demonstration of their resolve not to submit to a Dublin parliament, in 1912 Belfast City Hall unionists presented the Ulster Covenant, which, with an associated Declaration for women, was to accumulate over 470,000 signatures. This was followed by the drilling and eventual arming of a 100,000 strong Ulster Volunteer Force. The crisis was abated by the onset of the Great War, the sacrifices of the UVF in which continue to be commemorated in the city (Somme Day) by unionist and loyalist organisations.\nIn 1921, as the greater part of Ireland seceded as the Irish Free State, Belfast became the capital of the six counties remaining as Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom. In 1932 the devolved parliament for the region was housed in new buildings at Stormont on the eastern edge of the city. In 1920\u201321, as the two parts of Ireland drew apart, up to 500 people were killed in disturbances in Belfast, the bloodiest period of strife in the city until the Troubles of the late 1960s onwards.\nBelfast was heavily bombed during World War II. Initial raids were a surprise as the city was believed to be outside of the range of German bomber planes. In one raid, in 1941, German bombers killed around one thousand people and left tens of thousands homeless. Apart from London, this was the greatest loss of life in a night raid during the Blitz.\nThe Troubles.\nBelfast has been the capital of Northern Ireland since its establishment in 1921 following the Government of Ireland Act 1920. It had been the scene of various episodes of sectarian conflict between its Catholic and Protestant populations. These opposing groups in this conflict are now often termed republican and loyalist respectively, although they are also loosely referred to as 'nationalist' and 'unionist'. The most recent example of this conflict was known as the Troubles \u2013 a civil conflict that raged from around 1969 to 1998.\nBelfast saw some of the worst of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, particularly in the 1970s, with rival paramilitary groups formed on both sides. Bombing, assassination and street violence formed a backdrop to life throughout the Troubles. In December 1971, 15 people, including two children, were killed when the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) bombed McGurk's Bar, the greatest loss of life in a single incident in Belfast. Loyalist paramilitaries including the UVF and the Ulster Defence Association (UDA) said that the killings they carried out were in retaliation for the IRA campaign. Most of their victims were Catholics with no links to the Provisional IRA. A particularly notorious group, based on the Shankill Road in the mid-1970s, became known as the Shankill Butchers. The Provisional IRA detonated 22 bombs within the confines of Belfast city centre on 21 July 1972, on what is known as Bloody Friday, killing nine people.\nDuring the Troubles the Europa Hotel suffered 36 bomb attacks becoming known as \"the most bombed hotel in the world\". In all, over 1,600 people were killed in political violence in the city between 1969 and 2001.\n21st century.\nBelfast city centre has undergone expansion and regeneration since the late 1990s, notably around Victoria Square. In late 2018, it was announced that Belfast would undergo a \u00a3500\u00a0million urban regeneration project known as \"Tribeca\" on a large city centre site. However, tensions and civil disturbances still occur despite the 1998 peace agreement, including sectarian riots and paramilitary attacks.\nBelfast and the Causeway Coast were together named the best place to visit in 2018 by Lonely Planet. Tourist numbers have increased since the end of The Troubles, boosted in part by newer attractions such as Titanic Belfast and tours of locations used in the HBO television series \"Game of Thrones\".\nGovernance.\nBelfast was granted borough status by James VI and I in 1613 and official city status by Queen Victoria in 1888. Since 1973 it has been a local government district under local administration by Belfast City Council. Belfast is represented in both the British House of Commons and in the Northern Ireland Assembly. For elections to the European Parliament, Belfast was within the Northern Ireland constituency.\nLocal government.\nBelfast City Council is the local council with responsibility for the city. The city's elected officials are the Lord Mayor of Belfast, Deputy Lord Mayor and High Sheriff who are elected from among 60 councillors. The first Lord Mayor of Belfast was Daniel Dixon, who was elected in 1892. The Lord Mayor for 2019\u201320 is John Finucane Sinn F\u00e9in, while the Deputy Lord Mayor is an Alliance Party of Northern Ireland councillor. The Lord Mayor's duties include presiding over meetings of the council, receiving distinguished visitors to the city, representing and promoting the city on the national and international stage.\nIn 1997, unionists lost overall control of Belfast City Council for the first time in its history, with the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland gaining the balance of power between nationalists and unionists. This position was confirmed in four subsequent council elections, with mayors from Sinn F\u00e9in and the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), both of whom are nationalist parties, and the cross-community Alliance Party regularly elected since. The first nationalist Lord Mayor of Belfast was Alban Maginness of the SDLP, in 1997.\nNorthern Ireland Assembly and Westminster.\nAs Northern Ireland's capital city, Belfast is host to the Northern Ireland Assembly at Stormont, the site of the devolved legislature for Northern Ireland. Belfast is divided into four Northern Ireland Assembly and UK parliamentary constituencies: Belfast North, Belfast West, Belfast South and Belfast East. All four extend beyond the city boundaries to include parts of Castlereagh, Lisburn and Newtownabbey districts. In the Northern Ireland Assembly Elections in 2017, Belfast elected 20 Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs), 5 from each constituency. Belfast elected 7 Sinn F\u00e9in, 5 DUP, 2 SDLP, 3 Alliance Party, 1 UUP, 1 Green and 1 PBPA MLAs. In the 2017 UK general election, Belfast elected one MP from each constituency to the House of Commons at Westminster, London. This comprised 3 DUP and 1 Sinn F\u00e9in. In the 2019 UK general election, the DUP lost two of their seats in Belfast; to Sinn F\u00e9in in North Belfast and to the SDLP in South Belfast.\nGeography.\nBelfast is at the western end of Belfast Lough and at the mouth of the River Lagan giving it the ideal location for the shipbuilding industry that once made it famous. When the \"Titanic\" was built in Belfast in 1911\u20131912, Harland and Wolff had the largest shipyard in the world.\nBelfast is situated on Northern Ireland's eastern coast at . A consequence of this northern latitude is that it both endures short winter days and enjoys long summer evenings. During the winter solstice, the shortest day of the year, local sunset is before 16:00 while sunrise is around 08:45. This is balanced by the summer solstice in June, when the sun sets after 22:00 and rises before 05:00.\nIn 1994, a weir was built across the river by the Laganside Corporation to raise the average water level so that it would cover the unseemly mud flats which gave Belfast its name (). The area of Belfast Local Government District is .\nThe River Farset is also named after this silt deposit (from the Irish \"feirste\" meaning \"sand spit\"). Originally a more significant river than it is today, the Farset formed a dock on High Street until the mid 19th century. Bank Street in the city centre referred to the river bank and Bridge Street was named for the site of an early Farset bridge. Superseded by the River Lagan as the more important river in the city, the Farset now languishes in obscurity, under High Street. There are no less than twelve other minor rivers in and around Belfast, namely the Blackstaff, the Colin, the Connswater, the Cregagh, the Derriaghy, the Forth, the Knock, the Legoniel, the Loop, the Milewater, the Purdysburn and the Ravernet.\nThe city is flanked on the north and northwest by a series of hills, including Divis Mountain, Black Mountain and Cavehill, thought to be the inspiration for Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\". When Swift was living at Lilliput Cottage near the bottom of Belfast's Limestone Road, he imagined that the Cavehill resembled the shape of a sleeping giant safeguarding the city. The shape of the giant's nose, known locally as \"Napoleon's Nose\", is officially called McArt's Fort probably named after Art O'Neill, a 17th-century chieftain who controlled the area at that time. The Castlereagh Hills overlook the city on the southeast.\nClimate.\nAs with the vast majority of the rest of Ireland, Belfast has a temperate oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), with a narrow range of temperatures and rainfall throughout the year. The climate of Belfast is significantly milder than most other locations in the world at a similar latitude, due to the warming influence of the Gulf Stream. There are currently five weather observing stations in the Belfast area: Helen's Bay, Stormont, Newforge, Castlereagh, and Ravenhill Road. Slightly further afield is Aldergrove Airport. The highest temperature recorded at any official weather station in the Belfast area was at Shaw's Bridge on 12 July 1983.\nThe city gets significant precipitation (greater than 1mm) on 157 days in an average year with an average annual rainfall of , less than areas of northern England or most of Scotland, but higher than Dublin or the south-east coast of Ireland. As an urban and coastal area, Belfast typically gets snow on fewer than 10 days per year. The absolute maximum temperature at the weather station at Stormont is , set during July 1983. In an average year the warmest day will rise to a temperature of with a day of or above occurring roughly once every two in three years. The absolute minimum temperature at Stormont is , during January 1982, although in an average year the coldest night will fall no lower than with air frost being recorded on just 26 nights. The lowest temperature to occur in recent years was on 22 December 2010.\nThe nearest weather station for which sunshine data and longer term observations are available is Belfast International Airport (Aldergrove). Temperature extremes here have slightly more variability due to the more inland location. The average warmest day at Aldergrove for example will reach a temperature of , ( higher than Stormont) and 2.1 days should attain a temperature of or above in total. Conversely the coldest night of the year averages (or lower than Stormont) and 39 nights should register an air frost. Some 13 more frosty nights than Stormont. The minimum temperature at Aldergrove was , during December 2010.\nAreas and districts.\nThe townlands of Belfast are its oldest surviving land divisions and most pre-date the city. Belfast expanded very rapidly from being a market town to becoming an industrial city during the course of the 19th century. Because of this, it is less an agglomeration of villages and towns which have expanded into each other, than other comparable cities, such as Manchester or Birmingham. The city expanded to the natural barrier of the hills that surround it, overwhelming other settlements. Consequently, the arterial roads along which this expansion took place (such as the Falls Road or the Newtownards Road) are more significant in defining the districts of the city than nucleated settlements. Parts of Belfast are segregated by walls, commonly known as \"peace lines\", erected by the British Army after August 1969, and which still divide 14 districts in the inner city. In 2008 a process was proposed for the removal of the 'peace walls'. In June 2007, a \u00a316\u00a0million programme was announced which will transform and redevelop streets and public spaces in the city centre. Major arterial roads (quality bus corridor) into the city include the Antrim Road, Shore Road, Holywood Road, Newtownards Road, Castlereagh Road, Cregagh Road, Ormeau Road, Malone Road, Lisburn Road, Falls Road, Springfield Road, Shankill Road, and Crumlin Road, Four Winds.\nBelfast city centre is divided into two postcode districts, \"BT1\" for the area lying north of the City Hall, and \"BT2\" for the area to its south. The industrial estate and docklands \"BT3\". The rest of the Belfast post town is divided in a broadly clockwise system from \"BT3\" in the north-east round to \"BT15\", with \"BT16\" and \"BT17\" further out to the east and west respectively. Although \"BT\" derives from \"Belfast\", the BT postcode area extends across the whole of Northern Ireland.\nSince 2001, boosted by increasing numbers of tourists, the city council has developed a number of cultural quarters. The Cathedral Quarter takes its name from St Anne's Cathedral (Church of Ireland) and has taken on the mantle of the city's key cultural locality. It hosts a yearly visual and performing arts festival.\nCustom House Square is one of the city's main outdoor venues for free concerts and street entertainment. The Gaeltacht Quarter is an area around the Falls Road in west Belfast which promotes and encourages the use of the Irish language. The Queen's Quarter in south Belfast is named after Queen's University. The area has a large student population and hosts the annual Belfast International Arts Festival each autumn. It is home to Botanic Gardens and the Ulster Museum, which was reopened in 2009 after major redevelopment. The Golden Mile is the name given to the mile between Belfast City Hall and Queen's University. Taking in Dublin Road, Great Victoria Street, Shaftesbury Square and Bradbury Place, it contains some of the best bars and restaurants in the city. Since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, the nearby Lisburn Road has developed into the city's most exclusive shopping strip. Finally, the Titanic Quarter covers of reclaimed land adjacent to Belfast Harbour, formerly known as \"Queen's Island\". Named after \"RMS Titanic\", which was built here in 1912, work has begun which promises to transform some former shipyard land into \"one of the largest waterfront developments in Europe\". Plans include apartments, a riverside entertainment district, and a major Titanic-themed museum.\nIn its 2018 report on Best Places to Live in Britain, \"The Sunday Times\" named Ballyhackamore, \"the brunch capital of Belfast\", as the best place in Northern Ireland. The district of Ballyhackamore has even acquired the name \"Ballysnackamore\" due to the preponderance of dining establishments in the area.\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nThe architectural style of Belfast's public buildings range from a small set of Georgian buildings, many examples of Victorian, including the main \"Lanyon Building\" at Queen's University Belfast and the Linenhall Library, (both designed by Sir Charles Lanyon). There are also many examples of Edwardian, such as the City Hall, to modern, such as the Waterfront Hall.\nThe City Hall was finished in 1906 and was built to reflect Belfast's city status, granted by Queen Victoria in 1888. The Edwardian architectural style of Belfast City Hall influenced the Victoria Memorial in Calcutta, India, and Durban City Hall in South Africa. The dome is high and figures above the door state \"Hibernia encouraging and promoting the Commerce and Arts of the City\".\nAmong the city's grandest buildings are two former banks: Ulster Bank in Waring Street (built in 1860) and Northern Bank, in nearby Donegall Street (built in 1769). The Royal Courts of Justice in Chichester Street are home to Northern Ireland's Supreme Court. Many of Belfast's oldest buildings are found in the Cathedral Quarter area, which is currently undergoing redevelopment as the city's main cultural and tourist area. Windsor House, high, has 23 floors and is the second tallest building (as distinct from structure) in Ireland. Work has started on the taller Obel Tower, which already surpasses the height of Windsor House in its unfinished state.\nThe ornately decorated Crown Liquor Saloon, designed by Joseph Anderson in 1876, in Great Victoria Street is one of only two pubs in the UK that are owned by the National Trust (the other is the George Inn, Southwark in London). It was made internationally famous as the setting for the classic film, \"Odd Man Out\", starring James Mason. The restaurant panels in the Crown Bar were originally made for \"Britannic\", the sister ship of the \"Titanic\", built in Belfast.\nThe Harland and Wolff shipyard has two of the largest dry docks in Europe, where the giant cranes, Samson and Goliath stand out against Belfast's skyline.\nIncluding the Waterfront Hall and the Odyssey Arena, Belfast has several other venues for performing arts. The architecture of the Grand Opera House has an oriental theme and was completed in 1895. It was bombed several times during the Troubles but has now been restored to its former glory. The Lyric Theatre, (re-opened 1 May 2011 after undergoing a rebuilding programme) the only full-time producing theatre in the country, is where film star Liam Neeson began his career. The Ulster Hall (1859\u20131862) was originally designed for grand dances but is now used primarily as a concert and sporting venue. Lloyd George, Parnell and Patrick Pearse all attended political rallies there.\nA legacy of the Troubles are the many 'peace lines' or 'peace walls' that still act as barriers to reinforce ethno-sectarian residential segregation in the city. In 2017, the Belfast Interface Project published a study entitled 'Interface Barriers, Peacelines &amp; Defensive Architecture' that identified 97 separate walls, barriers and interfaces in Belfast. A history of the development of these structures can be found at the Peacewall Archive.\nParks and gardens.\nSitting at the mouth of the River Lagan where it becomes a deep and sheltered lough, Belfast is surrounded by mountains that create a micro-climate conducive to horticulture. From the Victorian Botanic Gardens in the heart of the city to the heights of Cave Hill Country Park, the great expanse of Lagan Valley Regional Park to Colin Glen, Belfast contains an abundance of parkland and forest parks.\nParks and gardens are an integral part of Belfast's heritage, and home to an abundance of local wildlife and popular places for a picnic, a stroll or a jog. Numerous events take place throughout including festivals such as Rose Week and special activities such as bird watching evenings and great beast hunts.\nBelfast has over forty public parks. The Forest of Belfast is a partnership between government and local groups, set up in 1992 to manage and conserve the city's parks and open spaces. They have commissioned more than 30 public sculptures since 1993. In 2006, the City Council set aside \u00a38\u00a0million to continue this work. The Belfast Naturalists' Field Club was founded in 1863 and is administered by National Museums and Galleries of Northern Ireland.\nWith an average of 670,000 visitors per year between 2007 and 2011, one of the most popular parks is Botanic Gardens in the Queen's Quarter. Built in the 1830s and designed by Sir Charles Lanyon, Botanic Gardens Palm House is one of the earliest examples of a curvilinear and cast iron glasshouse. Other attractions in the park include the Tropical Ravine, a humid jungle glen built in 1889, rose gardens and public events ranging from live opera broadcasts to pop concerts. U2 played here in 1997. Sir Thomas and Lady Dixon Park, to the south of the city centre, attracts thousands of visitors each year to its International Rose Garden. Rose Week in July each year features over 20,000 blooms. It has an area of of meadows, woodland and gardens and features a Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Garden, a Japanese garden, a walled garden, and the Golden Crown Fountain commissioned in 2002 as part of the Queen's Golden Jubilee celebrations.\nIn 2008, Belfast was named a finalist in the Large City (200,001 and over) category of the RHS Britain in Bloom competition along with London Borough of Croydon and Sheffield.\nBelfast Zoo is owned by Belfast City Council. The council spends \u00a31.5\u00a0million every year on running and promoting the zoo, which is one of the few local government-funded zoos in the UK and Ireland. The zoo is one of the top visitor attractions in Northern Ireland, receiving more than 295,000 visitors a year. The majority of the animals are in danger in their natural habitat. The zoo houses more than 1,200 animals of 140 species including Asian elephants, Barbary lions, Malayan sun bears (one of the few in the United Kingdom), two species of penguin, a family of western lowland gorillas, a troop of common chimpanzees, a pair of red pandas, a pair of Goodfellow's tree-kangaroos and Francois' langurs. The zoo also carries out important conservation work and takes part in European and international breeding programmes which help to ensure the survival of many species under threat.\nDemography.\nAt the 2001 census, the population was 276,459, while 579,554 people lived in the wider Belfast Metropolitan Area.\nThis made it the fifteenth-largest city in the United Kingdom, but the eleventh-largest conurbation.\nBelfast experienced a huge growth in population in the first half of the 20th century. This rise slowed and peaked around the start of the Troubles with the 1971 census showing almost 600,000 people in the Belfast Urban Area. Since then, the inner city numbers have dropped dramatically as people have moved to swell the Greater Belfast suburb population. The 2001 census population in the same Urban Area had fallen to 277,391 people, with 579,554 people living in the wider Belfast Metropolitan Area.\nThe 2001 census recorded 81,650 people from Catholic backgrounds and 79,650 people from Protestant backgrounds of working age living in Belfast. The population density in 2011 was 24.88 people/hectare (compared to 1.34 for the rest of Northern Ireland).\nAs with many cities, Belfast's inner city is currently characterised by the elderly, students and single young people, while families tend to live on the periphery. Socio-economic areas radiate out from the Central Business District, with a pronounced wedge of affluence extending out the Malone Road and Upper Malone Road to the south. An area of deprivation is found in the inner parts of the north and west of the city. The areas around the Falls Road, Ardoyne and New Lodge (Catholic nationalist) and the Shankill Road (Protestant loyalist) are among the ten most deprived wards in Northern Ireland.\nDespite a period of relative peace, most areas and districts of Belfast still reflect the divided nature of Northern Ireland as a whole. Many areas are still highly segregated along ethnic, political and religious lines, especially in working-class neighbourhoods.\nThese zones \u2013 Catholic/republican on one side and Protestant/loyalist on the other \u2013 are invariably marked by flags, graffiti and murals. Segregation has been present throughout the history of Belfast but has been maintained and increased by each outbreak of violence in the city. This escalation in segregation, described as a \"ratchet effect\", has shown little sign of decreasing.\nThe highest levels of segregation in the city are in west Belfast with many areas greater than 90% Catholic. Opposite but comparatively high levels are seen in the predominantly Protestant east Belfast. Areas where segregated working-class areas meet are known as interface areas and sometimes marked by peace lines. When violence flares, it tends to be in interface areas.\nEthnic minority communities have been in Belfast since the 1930s. The largest groups are Poles, Chinese and Indians.\nSince the expansion of the European Union, numbers have been boosted by an influx of Eastern European immigrants. Census figures (2011) showed that Belfast has a total non-white population of 10,219 or 3.3%, while 18,420 or 6.6% of the population were born outside the UK and Ireland. Almost half of those born outside the UK and Ireland live in south Belfast, where they comprise 9.5% of the population. The majority of the estimated 5,000 Muslims and 200 Hindu families living in Northern Ireland live in the Greater Belfast area.\n2011 Census.\nOn Census Day (27 March 2011) the usually resident population of Belfast Local Government District (2014) was 333,871 accounting for 18.44% of the NI total. This represents a 1.60% increase since the 2001 Census. \nOn Census Day 27 March 2011, in Belfast Local Government District (2014), considering the resident population:\nRespondents could indicate more than one national identity\nOn Census Day 27 March 2011, in Belfast Local Government District (2014), considering the population aged 3 years old and over:\nOn Census Day 27 March 2011, considering the population aged 16 years old and over:\nLevel 1 is 1\u20134 O Levels/CSE/GCSE (any grades) or equivalent\nOn Census Day 27 March 2011, considering the population aged 16 to 74 years old:\nLong-term unemployed are those who stated that they have not worked since 2009 or earlier\nEconomy.\nWhen the population of Belfast town began to grow in the 17th century, its economy was built on commerce. It provided a market for the surrounding countryside and the natural inlet of Belfast Lough gave the city its own port. The port supplied an avenue for trade with Great Britain and later Europe and North America. In the mid-17th century, Belfast exported beef, butter, hides, tallow and corn and it imported coal, cloth, wine, brandy, paper, timber and tobacco.\nAround this time, the linen trade in Northern Ireland blossomed and by the middle of the 18th century, one fifth of all the linen exported from Ireland was shipped from Belfast. The present city however is a product of the Industrial Revolution. It was not until industry transformed the linen and shipbuilding trades that the economy and the population boomed. By the turn of the 19th century, Belfast had transformed into the largest linen producing centre in the world, earning the nickname \"Linenopolis\".\nBelfast harbour was dredged in 1845 to provide deeper berths for larger ships. Donegall Quay was built out into the river as the harbour was developed further and trade flourished. The Harland and Wolff shipbuilding firm was created in 1861, and by the time the \"Titanic\" was built, in 1912, it had become the largest shipyard in the world.\nShort Brothers plc is a British aerospace company based in Belfast. It was the first aircraft manufacturing company in the world. The company began its association with Belfast in 1936, with Short &amp; Harland Ltd, a venture jointly owned by Shorts and Harland and Wolff. Now known as Shorts Bombardier it works as an international aircraft manufacturer located near the Port of Belfast.\nThe rise of mass-produced and cotton clothing following World War I were some of the factors which led to the decline of Belfast's international linen trade. Like many British cities dependent on traditional heavy industry, Belfast suffered serious decline since the 1960s, exacerbated greatly in the 1970s and 1980s by the Troubles. More than 100,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost since the 1970s. For several decades, Northern Ireland's fragile economy required significant public support from the British exchequer of up to \u00a34\u00a0billion per year.\nAfter the Troubles.\nThe IRA ceasefire in 1994 and the signing of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998 have given investors increased confidence to invest in Belfast. This has led to a period of sustained economic growth and large-scale redevelopment of the city centre. Developments include Victoria Square, the Cathedral Quarter, and the Laganside with the Odyssey complex and the landmark Waterfront Hall. \nOther major developments include the regeneration of the Titanic Quarter, and the erection of the Obel Tower, a skyscraper set to be the tallest tower on the island.\nToday, Belfast is Northern Ireland's educational and commercial hub. In February 2006, Belfast's unemployment rate stood at 4.2%, lower than both the Northern Ireland and the UK average of 5.5%. Over the past 10 years employment has grown by 16.4%, compared with 9.2% for the UK as a whole.\nNorthern Ireland's peace dividend has led to soaring property prices in the city. In 2007, Belfast saw house prices grow by 50%, the fastest rate of growth in the UK. In March 2007, the average house in Belfast cost \u00a391,819, with the average in south Belfast being \u00a3141,000. In 2004, Belfast had the lowest owner occupation rate in Northern Ireland at 54%.\nPeace has boosted the numbers of tourists coming to Belfast. There were 6.4\u00a0million visitors in 2005, which was a growth of 8.5% from 2004. The visitors spent \u00a3285.2\u00a0million, supporting more than 15,600 jobs. Visitor numbers rose by 6% to reach 6.8\u00a0million in 2006, with tourists spending \u00a3324\u00a0million, an increase of 15% on 2005. The city's two airports have helped make the city one of the most visited weekend destinations in Europe.\nBelfast has been the fastest-growing economy of the thirty largest cities in the UK over the past decade, a new economy report by Howard Spencer has found. \"That's because [of] the fundamentals of the UK economy and [because] people actually want to invest in the UK,\" he commented on that report.\nBBC Radio 4's World reported furthermore that despite higher levels of corporation tax in the UK than in the Republic. There are \"huge amounts\" of foreign investment coming into the country.\n\"The Times\" wrote about Belfast's growing economy: \"According to the region's development agency, throughout the 1990s Northern Ireland had the fastest-growing regional economy in the UK, with GDP increasing 1 per cent per annum faster than the rest of the country. As with any modern economy, the service sector is vital to Northern Ireland's development and is enjoying excellent growth. In particular, the region has a booming tourist industry with record levels of visitors and tourist revenues and has established itself as a significant location for call centres.\"\nSince the ending of the region's conflict tourism has boomed in Northern Ireland, greatly aided by low cost.\n\"Der Spiegel\", a German weekly magazine for politics and economy, titled Belfast as \"The New Celtic Tiger\" which is \"open for business\".\nInfrastructure.\nBelfast saw the worst of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, with nearly half of the total deaths in the conflict occurring in the city. However, since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, there has been significant urban regeneration in the city centre including Victoria Square, Queen's Island and Laganside as well as the Odyssey complex and the landmark Waterfront Hall. The city is served by two airports: The George Best Belfast City Airport adjacent to Belfast Lough and Belfast International Airport which is near Lough Neagh. Queen's University of Belfast is the main university in the city. The Ulster University also maintains a campus in the city, which concentrates on fine art, design and architecture.\nBelfast is one of the constituent cities that makes up the Dublin-Belfast corridor region, which has a population of just under 3\u00a0million.\nUtilities.\nMost of Belfast's water is supplied via the Aquarius pipeline from the Silent Valley Reservoir in County Down, created to collect water from the Mourne Mountains. The rest of the city's water is sourced from Lough Neagh, via \"Dunore Water Treatment Works\" in County Antrim. The citizens of Belfast pay for their water in their rates bill. Plans to bring in additional water tariffs have been deferred by devolution in May 2007. Belfast has approximately of sewers, which are currently being replaced in a project costing over \u00a3100\u00a0million and due for completion in 2009.\nPower is provided from a number of power stations via NIE Networks Limited transmission lines. Phoenix Natural Gas Ltd. started supplying customers in Larne and Greater Belfast with natural gas in 1996 via the newly constructed Scotland-Northern Ireland pipeline. Rates in Belfast (and the rest of Northern Ireland) were reformed in April 2007. The discrete capital value system means rates bills are determined by the capital value of each domestic property as assessed by the \"Valuation and Lands Agency\". The recent dramatic rise in house prices has made these reforms unpopular.\nHealth care.\nThe Belfast Health &amp; Social Care Trust is one of five trusts that were created on 1 April 2007 by the Department of Health. Belfast contains most of Northern Ireland's regional specialist centres. The Royal Victoria Hospital is an internationally renowned centre of excellence in trauma care and provides specialist trauma care for all of Northern Ireland. It also provides the city's specialist neurosurgical, ophthalmology, ENT, and dentistry services. The Belfast City Hospital is the regional specialist centre for haematology and is home to a cancer centre that rivals the best in the world. The Mary G McGeown Regional Nephrology Unit at the City Hospital is the kidney transplant centre and provides regional renal services for Northern Ireland.\nMusgrave Park Hospital in south Belfast specialises in orthopaedics, rheumatology, sports medicine and rehabilitation. It is home to Northern Ireland's first Acquired Brain Injury Unit, costing \u00a39\u00a0million and opened by the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall in May 2006. Other hospitals in Belfast include the Mater Hospital in north Belfast and the Children's Hospital.\nTransport.\nBelfast is a relatively car-dependent city by European standards, with an extensive road network including the M2 and M22 motorway route. A 2005 survey of how people travel in Northern Ireland showed that people in Belfast made 77% of all journeys by car, 11% by public transport and 6% on foot. It showed that Belfast has 0.70 cars per household compared to figures of 1.18 in the East and 1.14 in the West of Northern Ireland. A road improvement-scheme in Belfast began early in 2006, with the upgrading of two junctions along the Westlink dual-carriageway to grade-separated standard. The improvement scheme was completed five months ahead of schedule in February 2009, with the official opening taking place on 4 March 2009.\nCommentators have argued that this may create a bottleneck at York Street, the next at-grade intersection, until that too is upgraded. On 25 October 2012 the stage 2 report for the York Street intersection was approved and in December 2012 the planned upgrade moved into stage 3 of the development process. If successfully completing the necessary statutory procedures, work on a grade separated junction to connect the Westlink to the M2/M3 motorways is scheduled to take place between 2014 and 2018, creating a continuous link between the M1 and M2, the two main motorways in Northern Ireland.\nBlack taxis are common in the city, operating on a share basis in some areas. These are outnumbered by private hire taxis. Bus and rail public transport in Northern Ireland is operated by subsidiaries of Translink. Bus services in the city proper and the nearer suburbs are operated by Translink Metro, with services focusing on linking residential districts with the city centre on 12 quality bus corridors running along main radial roads,\nMore distant suburbs are served by Ulsterbus. Northern Ireland Railways provides suburban services along three lines running through Belfast's northern suburbs to Carrickfergus, Larne and Larne Harbour, eastwards towards Bangor and south-westwards towards Lisburn and Portadown. This service is known as the Belfast Suburban Rail system. Belfast is linked directly to Coleraine, Portrush and Derry. Belfast has a direct rail connection with Dublin called \"Enterprise\" which is operated jointly by NIR and Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann, the state railway company of the Republic of Ireland. There are no rail services to cities in other countries of the United Kingdom, due to the lack of a bridge or tunnel connecting Great Britain to the island of Ireland. There is, however, a combined ferry and rail ticket between Belfast and cities in Great Britain, which is referred to as \"Sailrail\".\nIn April 2008, the Department for Regional Development reported on a plan for a light-rail system, similar to that in Dublin. The consultants said Belfast does not have the population to support a light rail system, suggesting that investment in bus-based rapid transit would be preferable. The study found that bus-based rapid transit produces positive economic results, but light rail does not. The report by Atkins &amp; KPMG, however, said there would be the option of migrating to light rail in the future should the demand increase.\nThe city has two airports: Belfast International Airport offering, domestic, European and international flights such as Orlando operated seasonally by Virgin Atlantic. The airport is located northwest of the city, near Lough Neagh, while the George Best Belfast City Airport, which is closer to the city centre by train from Sydenham on the Bangor Line, adjacent to Belfast Lough, offers UK domestic flights and a few European flights. In 2005, Belfast International Airport was the 11th busiest commercial airport in the UK, accounting for just over 2% of all UK terminal passengers while the George Best Belfast City Airport was the 16th busiest and had 1% of UK terminal passengers. The Belfast \u2013 Liverpool route is the busiest domestic flight route in the UK excluding London with 555,224 passengers in 2009. Over 2.2\u00a0million passengers flew between Belfast and London in 2009.\nBelfast has a large port used for exporting and importing goods, and for passenger ferry services. Stena Line runs regular routes to Cairnryan in Scotland using its conventional vessels\u2014with a crossing time of around 2 hours 15 minutes. Until 2011 the route went to Stranraer and used inter alia a HSS (High Speed Service) vessel\u2014with a crossing time of around 90 minutes. Stena Line also operates a route to Liverpool. A seasonal sailing to Douglas, Isle of Man is operated by the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company.\nThe Glider bus service is a new form of transport in Belfast. Introduced in 2018, it is a rapid transit system linking East Belfast, West Belfast and the Titanic Quarter from the City Centre. Using articulated buses, the \u00a390\u00a0million service saw a 17% increase in its first month in Belfast, with 30,000 more people using the Gliders every week. The service is being recognised as helping to modernise the city's public transport.\nCulture.\nBelfast's population is evenly split between its Protestant and Catholic residents. These two distinct cultural communities have both contributed significantly to the city's culture. Throughout the Troubles, Belfast artists continued to express themselves through poetry, art and music. In the period since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, Belfast has begun a social, economic and cultural transformation giving it a growing international cultural reputation. In 2003, Belfast had an unsuccessful bid for the 2008 European Capital of Culture. The bid was run by an independent company, \"Imagine Belfast\", who boasted that it would \"make Belfast the meeting place of Europe's legends, where the meaning of history and belief find a home and a sanctuary from caricature, parody and oblivion.\" According to \"The Guardian\" the bid may have been undermined by the city's history and volatile politics.\nIn 2004\u201305, art and cultural events in Belfast were attended by 1.8\u00a0million people (400,000 more than the previous year). The same year, 80,000 people participated in culture and other arts activities, twice as many as in 2003\u201304. A combination of relative peace, international investment and an active promotion of arts and culture is attracting more tourists to Belfast than ever before. In 2004\u201305, 5.9\u00a0million people visited Belfast, a 10% increase from the previous year, and spent \u00a3262.5\u00a0million.\nThe Ulster Orchestra, based in Belfast, is Northern Ireland's only full-time symphony orchestra and is well renowned in the United Kingdom. Founded in 1966, it has existed in its present form since 1981, when the BBC Northern Ireland Orchestra was disbanded. The music school of Queen's University is responsible for arranging a notable series of lunchtime and evening concerts, often given by renowned musicians which are usually given in The Harty Room at the university (University Square).\nMusicians and bands who have written songs about or dedicated to Belfast include\nU2, Van Morrison, Snow Patrol, Simple Minds, Elton John, Rogue Male, Katie Melua, Boney M, Paul Muldoon, Stiff Little Fingers, Nanci Griffith, Glenn Patterson, Orbital, James Taylor, Fun Boy Three, Spandau Ballet, The Police, Barnbrack, Gary Moore, Neon Neon, Toxic Waste, Energy Orchard, and Billy Bragg.\nBelfast has a longstanding underground club scene which was established in the early 1980s.\nBelfast has the highest concentration of Irish-speakers in Northern Ireland. Like all areas of the island of Ireland outside of the Gaeltacht, the Irish language in Belfast is not that of an unbroken intergenerational transmission. Due to community activity in the 1960s, including the establishment of the Shaw's Road Gaeltacht community, the expanse in the Irish language arts, and the advancements made in the availability of Irish medium education throughout the city, it can now be said that there is a 'mother-tongue' community of speakers. The language is heavily promoted in the city and is particularly visible in the Falls Road area, where the signs on both the iconic black taxis and on the public buses are bilingual. Projects to promote the language in the city are funded by various sources, notably Foras na Gaeilge, an all-Ireland body funded by both the Irish and British governments. There are a number of Irish language Primary schools and one secondary school in Belfast. The provision of certain resources for these schools (for example, such as the provision of textbooks) is supported by the charitable organisation TACA.\nIn late August 2018, at least three groups were vying for the right to purchase the 5,500 RMS Titanic relics that were an asset of the bankrupt Premier Exhibitions. One of the offers was by a group including the National Maritime Museum and National Museums Northern Ireland, with assistance by James Cameron. Oceanographer Robert Ballard said he favored this bid since it would ensure that the memorabilia would be permanently displayed in Belfast (where the Titanic was built) and in Greenwich. A decision as to the outcome was to be made by a United States district court judge.\nMedia.\nBelfast is the home of the \"Belfast Telegraph\", \"Irish News\", and \"The News Letter\", the oldest English-language daily newspaper in the world still in publication.\nThe city is the headquarters of BBC Northern Ireland, ITV station UTV and commercial radio stations Q Radio and U105. Two community radio stations, Blast 106 and Irish-language station Raidi\u00f3 F\u00e1ilte, broadcast to the city from west Belfast, as does Queen's Radio, a student-run radio station which broadcasts from Queen's University Students' Union.\nOne of Northern Ireland's two community TV stations, NvTv, is based in the Cathedral Quarter of the city. There are two independent cinemas in Belfast: the Queen's Film Theatre and the Strand Cinema, which host screenings during the Belfast Film Festival and the Belfast Festival at Queen's. Broadcasting only over the Internet is Homely Planet, the Cultural Radio Station for Northern Ireland, supporting community relations.\nThe city has become a popular film location; The Paint Hall at Harland and Wolff has become one of the UK Film Council's main studios. The facility comprises four stages of . Shows filmed at The Paint Hall include the film \"City of Ember\" (2008) and HBO's \"Game of Thrones\" series (beginning in late 2009).\nIn November 2011, Belfast became the smallest city to host the MTV Europe Music Awards. The event was hosted by Selena Gomez and celebrities such as Justin Bieber, Jessie J, Hayden Panettiere, and Lady Gaga travelled to Northern Ireland to attend the event, held in the Odyssey Arena.\nSports.\nBelfast has several notable sports teams playing a diverse variety of sports such as football, Gaelic games, rugby, cricket, and ice hockey. The Belfast Marathon is run annually on May Day, and attracted 20,000 participants in 2011.\nThe Northern Ireland national football team, ranked 23rd in August 2017 in the FIFA World Rankings, plays its home matches at Windsor Park. The 2017\u201318 Irish League champions Crusaders are based at Seaview, in the north of the city. Other senior clubs are Glentoran, Linfield, Cliftonville, Harland &amp; Wolff Welders and PSNI. Intermediate-level clubs are: Dundela, Newington Youth, Queen's University and Sport &amp; Leisure Swifts, who compete in the NIFL Premier Intermediate League; Albert Foundry, Bloomfield, Colin Valley, Crumlin Star, Dunmurry Rec., Dunmurry Young Men, East Belfast, Grove United, Immaculata, Iveagh United, Malachians, Orangefield Old Boys, Rosario Youth Club, St Luke's, St Patrick's Young Men, Shankill United, Short Brothers and Sirocco Works of the Northern Amateur Football League and Brantwood and Donegal Celtic of the Ballymena &amp; Provincial League.\nBelfast was the home town of former Manchester United player George Best, the 1968 European Footballer of the Year, who died in November 2005. On the day he was buried in the city, 100,000 people lined the route from his home on the Cregagh Road to Roselawn cemetery. Since his death the City Airport was named after him and a trust has been set up to fund a memorial to him in the city centre.\nBelfast is home to over twenty Gaelic football and hurling clubs. Casement Park in west Belfast, home to the Antrim county teams, has a capacity of 32,000 which makes it the second largest Gaelic Athletic Association ground in Ulster. In May 2020, the foundation of East Belfast GAA returned Gaelic Games to unionist East Belfast after decades of its absence in the area. The current club president is Irish-language enthusiast Linda Ervine who comes from a unionist background in the area. The team currently plays in the Down Senior County League.\nThe 1999 Heineken Cup champions Ulster Rugby play at Ravenhill Stadium in the south of the city. Belfast has four teams in rugby's All-Ireland League: Belfast Harlequins in Division 1B; and Instonians, Queen's University and Malone in Division 2A.\nBelfast is home to the Stormont cricket ground since 1949 and was the venue for the Irish cricket team's first ever One Day International (ODI) against England in 2006.\nIn 2007, Pro Wrestling Ulster formed. This is wrestling promotion on the independent circuit, holding events and PPVs in Europa Hotel and The Mandela Hall. It runs to this day.\nBelfast is home to one of the biggest British ice hockey clubs, the Belfast Giants. The Giants were founded in 2000 and play their games at the 9,500 capacity Odyssey Arena, where crowds normally range from 4,000 to 7,000. Many ex-NHL players have featured on the Giants roster, none more famous than world superstar Theo Fleury. The Giants play in the 10-team professional Elite Ice Hockey League which is the top league in Britain. The Giants have been league champions 5 times, most recently in the 2018\u201319 season. The Belfast Giants are a huge brand in Northern Ireland and their increasing stature in the game led to the Belfast Giants playing the Boston Bruins of the NHL on 2 October 2010 at the Odyssey Arena in Belfast, losing the game 5\u20131.\nOther significant sportspeople from Belfast include double world snooker champion Alex \"Hurricane\" Higgins and world champion boxers Wayne McCullough, Rinty Monaghan and Carl Frampton.\nLeander A.S.C is a well known swimming club in Belfast. Belfast produced the Formula One racing stars John Watson who raced for five different teams during his career in the 1970s and 1980s and Ferrari driver Eddie Irvine.\nNotable people.\nAcademia and science\nArts and media\nPolitics\nSports\nOther\nEducation.\nBelfast has two universities. Queen's University Belfast was founded in 1845 and is a member of the Russell Group, an association of 24 leading research-intensive universities in the UK. It is one of the largest universities in the UK with 25,231 undergraduate and postgraduate students spread over 250 buildings, 120 of which are listed as being of architectural merit.\nUlster University, created in its current form in 1984, is a multi-centre university with a campus in the Cathedral Quarter of Belfast. The Belfast campus has a specific focus on Art and Design and Architecture, and is currently undergoing major redevelopment. The Jordanstown campus, just from Belfast city centre concentrates on engineering, health and social science. The Coleraine campus, about from Belfast city centre concentrates on a broad range of subjects. Course provision is broad \u2013 biomedical sciences, environmental science and geography, psychology, business, the humanities and languages, film and journalism, travel and tourism, teacher training and computing are among the campus strengths. The Magee campus, about from Belfast city centre has many teaching strengths; including business, computing, creative technologies, nursing, Irish language and literature, social sciences, law, psychology, peace and conflict studies and the performing arts. The Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) Web Service receives funding from both universities and is a rich source of information and source material on the Troubles as well as society and politics in Northern Ireland.\nBelfast Metropolitan College is a large further education college with three main campuses around the city, including several smaller buildings. Formerly known as Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education, it specialises in vocational education. The college has over 53,000 students enrolled on full-time and part-time courses, making it one of the largest further education colleges in the UK and the largest in the island of Ireland.\nThe Belfast Education and Library Board was established in 1973 as the local council responsible for education, youth and library services within the city. In 2006, this board became part of the Education Authority for Northern Ireland. There are 184 primary, secondary and grammar schools in the city.\nTourism.\nBelfast is one of the most visited cities in the UK, and the second most visited on the island of Ireland. In 2008, 7.1\u00a0million tourists visited the city. Numerous popular tour bus companies and boat tours run there throughout the year, including tours based on the popular series Game of Thrones, which has had various filming locations around Northern Ireland.\nFrommer's, the American travel guidebook series, listed Belfast as the only United Kingdom destination in its \"Top 12 Destinations to Visit\" in 2009. The other listed destinations were Berlin (Germany), Cambodia, Cape Town (South Africa), Cartagena (Colombia), Istanbul (Turkey), the Lassen Volcanic National Park (US), Saqqara (Egypt), the Selma To Montgomery National Historic Trail (US), Waiheke Island (New Zealand), Washington, D.C. (US), and Waterton Lakes National Park (Canada).\nThe Belfast City Council is currently investing into the complete redevelopment of the Titanic Quarter, which is planned to consist of apartments, hotels, and a riverside entertainment district. A major visitor attraction, Titanic Belfast is a monument to Belfast's maritime heritage on the site of the former Harland &amp; Wolff shipyard, opened on 31 March 2012. It features a criss-cross of escalators and suspended walkways and nine high-tech galleries. They also hope to invest in a new modern transport system (including high-speed rail and others) for Belfast, with a cost of \u00a3250\u00a0million.\n2017 was a great year for Belfast in terms of tourism with nearly 1.5\u00a0million trips being made to the city, generating around 5\u00a0million bed nights and incredible tourism revenue of 328\u00a0million pounds.\nIn 2018, Belfast saw six new hotels being opened, with the biggest in Northern Ireland, the \u00a353\u00a0million Grand Central Hotel Belfast officially open to the public. The other hotels included AC Marriot, Hampton By Hilton, EasyHotel, Maldron Belfast City Centre and Flint. The new hotels have helped to increase a further 1,000 bedrooms in the city.\nBelfast was successful in attracting many conferencing events, both national and international, to the city in 2018. Over 60 conferences took place that year with 30,000 people helping contribute to a record 45\u00a0million pounds for the local economy.\nThere is a tourist information centre located at Donegall Square North.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBelfast City Council takes part in the twinning scheme, and is twinned with the following sister cities:\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Belfast."}
{"id": "5047", "revid": "1720909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5047", "title": "Biotite", "text": "Biotite is a common group of phyllosilicate minerals within the mica group, with the approximate chemical formula . It is primarily a solid-solution series between the iron-endmember annite, and the magnesium-endmember phlogopite; more aluminous end-members include siderophyllite and eastonite. Biotite was regarded as a mineral \"species\" by the International Mineralogical Association until 1998, when its status was changed to a mineral \"group\". The term \"biotite\" is still used to describe unanalysed dark micas in the field. Biotite was named by J.F.L. Hausmann in 1847 in honor of the French physicist Jean-Baptiste Biot, who performed early research into the many optical properties of mica.\nMembers of the biotite group are sheet silicates. Iron, magnesium, aluminium, silicon, oxygen, and hydrogen form sheets that are weakly bound together by potassium ions. The term \"iron mica\" is sometimes used for iron-rich biotite, but the term also refers to a flaky micaceous form of haematite, and the field term Lepidomelane for unanalysed iron-rich Biotite avoids this ambiguity. Biotite is also sometimes called \"black mica\" as opposed to \"white mica\" (muscovite) \u2013 both form in the same rocks, and in some instances side-by-side.\nProperties.\nLike other mica minerals, biotite has a highly perfect basal cleavage, and consists of flexible sheets, or lamellae, which easily flake off. It has a monoclinic crystal system, with tabular to prismatic crystals with an obvious pinacoid termination. It has four prism faces and two pinacoid faces to form a pseudohexagonal crystal. Although not easily seen because of the cleavage and sheets, fracture is uneven. It appears greenish to brown or black, and even yellow when weathered. It can be transparent to opaque, has a vitreous to pearly luster, and a grey-white streak. When biotite crystals are found in large chunks, they are called \"books\" because they resemble books with pages of many sheets. The color of biotite is usually black and the mineral has a hardness of 2.5\u20133 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness.\nBiotite dissolves in both acid and alkaline aqueous solutions, with the highest dissolution rates at low pH. However, biotite dissolution is highly anisotropic with crystal edge surfaces (\"h k\"0) reacting 45 to 132 times faster than basal surfaces (001).\nOptical properties.\nIn thin section, biotite exhibits moderate relief and a pale to deep greenish brown or brown color, with moderate to strong pleochroism. Biotite has a high birefringence which can be partially masked by its deep intrinsic color. Under cross-polarized light, biotite exhibits extinction approximately parallel to cleavage lines, and can have characteristic bird's eye maple extinction, a mottled appearance caused by the distortion of the mineral's flexible lamellae during grinding of the thin section. Basal sections of biotite in thin section are typically approximately hexagonal in shape and usually appear isotropic under cross-polarized light.\nOccurrence.\nMembers of the biotite group are found in a wide variety of igneous and metamorphic rocks. For instance, biotite occurs in the lava of Mount Vesuvius and in the Monzoni intrusive complex of the western Dolomites. Biotite in granite tends to be poorer in magnesium than the biotite found in its volcanic equivalent, rhyolite. Biotite is an essential phenocryst in some varieties of lamprophyre. Biotite is occasionally found in large cleavable crystals, especially in pegmatite veins, as in New England, Virginia and North Carolina USA. Other notable occurrences include Bancroft and Sudbury, Ontario Canada. It is an essential constituent of many metamorphic schists, and it forms in suitable compositions over a wide range of pressure and temperature. It has been estimated that biotite comprises up to 7% of the exposed continental crust.\nAn igneous rock composed almost entirely of dark mica (biotite or phlogopite) is known as a \"glimmerite\" or \"biotitite\".\nBiotite may be found in association with its common alteration product chlorite.\nThe largest documented single crystals of biotite were approximately sheets found in Iveland, Norway.\nUses.\nBiotite is used extensively to constrain ages of rocks, by either potassium-argon dating or argon\u2013argon dating. Because argon escapes readily from the biotite crystal structure at high temperatures, these methods may provide only minimum ages for many rocks. Biotite is also useful in assessing temperature histories of metamorphic rocks, because the partitioning of iron and magnesium between biotite and garnet is sensitive to temperature."}
{"id": "5048", "revid": "40276288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5048", "title": "Brigham Young", "text": "Brigham Young (; June 1, 1801August 29, 1877) was an American religious leader, politician, and settler. He was the second president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) from 1847 until his death in 1877. He founded Salt Lake City and served as the first governor of the Utah Territory. Young also led the foundings of the precursors to the University of Utah and Brigham Young University.\nYoung had many nicknames, among the most popular being \"American Moses\" (alternatively, \"Modern Moses\" or \"Mormon Moses\"), because, like the biblical figure, Young led his followers, the Mormon pioneers, in an exodus through a desert, to what they saw as a promised land. Young was dubbed by his followers the \"Lion of the Lord\" for his bold personality and commonly was called \"Brother Brigham\" by Latter-day Saints. A polygamist, Young had 55 wives. He instituted a ban prohibiting conferring the priesthood on men of black African descent, and also led the church during the Utah War against the United States.\nEarly life.\nYoung was born the eighth child of John Young and Abigail \"Nabby\" Howe, a farming family in Whitingham, Vermont. When he was three his family moved to upstate New York settling in Sherburne, New York. At age 12 he moved with his parents to Aurelius, New York close to Cayuga Lake. When he was 14 his mother died of tuberculosis. After that he moved with his father to Tyrone, New York. \nAt age 16, Young's father made him leave home. He first worked odd jobs and then became an apprentice to a John C. Jeffries in Auburn, New York. He worked as a carpenter, joiner, glazer and painter. One home that Young helped paint in Auburn was that of Elijah Miller, which later became the residence of William Seward. It is now a local museum (see William Seward House). It is also claimed by locals that the fireplace mantle of this house was created by Young. With the onset of the depression of 1819 Jeffries dismissed Young from his apprenticeship and Young moved to Port Byron, New York.\nYoung had converted to the Reformed Methodist Church in 1824. This was after a period of deep reading of the Bible. He insisted when joining the Methodists on being baptized by immersion instead of their normal practice of sprinkling.\nYoung was first married in 1824 to Miriam Angeline Works, whom he had met in Port Byron. They first lived in a small unpainted house adjacent to the pail factory which was at the time Young's main place of employment. Also in Port Byron, Young joined a debating society. Shortly after the birth of their first daughter the family moved to Oswego, New York on the shores of Lake Ontario. Later on in 1828 they moved to Mendon, New York. Most of Young's siblings had already moved to Mendon, or did so shortly after he moved there. It was here he first became friends with Heber C. Kimball. Here he worked as a carpenter and joiner and built a saw mill that he operated. In 1832, Miriam died and Young and his two young daughters moved into the household of Kimball and his wife, Vilate.\nBy this point Young had for all intents and purposes left the Reformed Methodist, becoming a Christian seeker, unconvinced that he had found a church with the true authority of Jesus Christ. As early as 1830, Young was introduced to the Book of Mormon by way of a copy his brother, Phineas H., had obtained from Samuel H. Smith. In 1831, five missionaries of the Latter Day Saint movement (Eleazer Miller, Elial Strong, Alpheus Gifford, Enos Curtis, and Daniel Bowen) came from the branch of the church in Columbia, Pennsylvania to preach in Mendon. A key attraction of the teachings of this group to Young was their practicing of spiritual gifts. This was partly experienced when Young traveled with his wife and Kimball to visit the branch of the church in Columbia, Pennsylvania.\nYoung was drawn to the new church after reading the Book of Mormon. He officially joined the Church of Christ on April 14, 1832, being baptized by Eleazer Miller. A branch of the church was organized in Mendon, and Young was one of the regular preachers to the branch. He quickly expanded his area of sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ, traveling southwest to Warsaw, New York and southeast to various towns along Lake Canandaigua. Shortly after this, Young saw Alpheus Gifford speak in tongues and in response Young also spoke in an unknown language. In November 1832, Young travelled with Kimball to Kirtland, Ohio and visited Joseph Smith. During this trip Young spoke in a tongue that was identified by Smith as the \"Adamic language\".\nIn December 1832, Young left his daughters with the Kimballs and set out on a mission with his brother, Joseph, to Upper Canada, primarily to what is now Kingston, Ontario. Later they extended their preaching to various towns along the north shore of Lake Erie. In February 1833, they returned to Mendon. A few months later Young again set out on a mission with his brother, Joseph, this time traveling into the north of New York and then on into modern Ontario.\nIn the summer of 1833, Young moved to Kirtland, Ohio. Here he met Mary Ann Angell and they were married on February 18, 1834. In Kirtland, Young continued to preach the gospel; in fact Mary Ann first encountered him through hearing him preach. Young also resumed work on building houses. In May 1834, Young became a member of Zion's Camp. He traveled to Missouri and was part of it until it disbanded on July 3, 1834. After his return to Kirtland, Young focused his carpentry work on the Kirtland Temple and also prepared for the birth of his third child, his first son, Joseph A. Young. Mary Ann had largely provided for Young's two daughters on her own while pregnant with her first child while Young was away with Zion's Camp. In Kirtland, Young was involved in adult education including studying in a Hebrew language class under Joshua Sexias.\nChurch service.\nYoung was ordained a member of the original Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in May 1835. Later that month, Young left with the other members of the Quorum of the Twelve on a proselytizing mission to New York state and New England. In August 1835, Young and the rest of the Quorum of the Twelve issued a testimony in support of the divine origin of the Doctrine and Covenants. He was then involved in the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in 1836. Shortly after this Young went on another mission with his brother, Joseph, to New York and New England. On this mission he visited the family of his aunt, Rhoda Howe Richards. They converted to the church, including his cousin Willard Richards. He then returned to Kirtland where he remained until events related to anger over the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society forced him to flee the community in December 1837. He then stayed for a short time in Dublin, Indiana with his brother, Lorenzo, and then moved on to Caldwell County, Missouri.\nYoung became the quorum president in March 1839. Under his direction, the quorum served a mission to the United Kingdom and organized the exodus of Latter Day Saints from Missouri in 1838.\nIn 1844, while in jail awaiting trial for treason charges, the church's president, Joseph Smith was killed by an armed mob. Several claimants to the role of church president emerged during the succession crisis that ensued. Before a large meeting convened to discuss the succession in Nauvoo, Illinois, Sidney Rigdon, the senior surviving member of the church's First Presidency, argued there could be no successor to the deceased prophet and that he should be made the \"Protector\" of the church. Young opposed this reasoning and motion. Smith had earlier recorded a revelation which stated the Quorum of the Twelve was \"equal in authority and power\" to the First Presidency, so Young claimed that the leadership of the church fell to the Twelve Apostles. The majority in attendance were persuaded that the Quorum of the Twelve was to lead the church, with Young as the quorum's president. Many of Young's followers would later reminisce that while Young spoke to the congregation, he looked or sounded exactly like Smith, which they attributed to the power of God. Young was ordained President of the Church in December 1847, three and a half years after Smith's death. Rigdon became the president of a separate church organization based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and other potential successors emerged to lead what became other denominations of the movement.\nMigration west.\nRepeated conflict led Young to relocate his group of Latter-day Saints to the Salt Lake Valley, which was then part of Mexico. Young organized the journey that would take the Mormon pioneers to Winter Quarters, Nebraska, in 1846, then to the Salt Lake Valley. By the time Young arrived at the final destination, it had come under American control as a result of war with Mexico, although U.S. sovereignty would not be confirmed until 1848. Young arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on July 24, 1847, a date now recognized as Pioneer Day in Utah. Young's expedition was one of the largest and one of the best organized westward treks. On August 22, 29 days after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Young organized the Mormon Tabernacle Choir.\nAfter three years of leading the church as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Young reorganized a new First Presidency and was sustained as the second president of the church on December 27, 1847.\nGovernor of Utah Territory.\nAs colonizer and founder of Salt Lake City, Young was appointed the territory's first governor and superintendent of American Indian affairs by President Millard Fillmore on February 3, 1851. During his time as prophet, Young directed the establishment of settlements throughout present-day Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Nevada, California and parts of southern Colorado and northern Mexico. Under his direction, the Mormons built roads and bridges, forts, irrigation projects; established public welfare; organized a militia; issued an extermination order against the Timpanogos and after a series of wars eventually made peace with the Native Americans. Young was also one of the first to subscribe to Union Pacific stock, for the construction of the First Transcontinental Railroad. Young organized the first Utah Territorial Legislature and established Fillmore as the territory's first capital.\nYoung organized a board of regents to establish a university in the Salt Lake Valley. It was established on February 28, 1850, as the University of Deseret; its name was eventually changed to the University of Utah.\nIn 1851, Young and several federal officials, including territorial Secretary Broughton Harris, became unable to work cooperatively. Harris and the others departed Utah without replacements being named, and these individuals later became known as the Runaway Officials of 1851.\nYoung supported slavery and its expansion into Utah, and led the efforts to legalize and regulate slavery in the 1852 Act in Relation to Service, based on his beliefs on slavery. Young said in an 1852 speech, \"In as much as we believe in the Bible ... we must believe in slavery. This colored race have been subjected to severe curses ... which they have brought upon themselves.\"\nIn 1856, Young organized an efficient mail service. In 1858, following the events of the Utah War, he stepped down to his successor, Alfred Cumming.\nLDS Church president.\nYoung was the longest-serving president of the LDS Church in history, having served for 29 years.\nEducational endeavors.\nOn October 16, 1875, Young deeded buildings and land in Provo, Utah to a board of trustees for establishing an institution of learning, ostensibly as part of the University of Deseret. Young said, \"I hope to see an Academy established in Provo ... at which the children of the Latter-day Saints can receive a good education unmixed with the pernicious atheistic influences that are found in so many of the higher schools of the country.\" The school broke off from the University of Deseret and became Brigham Young Academy, the precursor to Brigham Young University.\nWithin the church, Young reorganized the Relief Society for women in 1867, and he created organizations for young women in 1869 and young men in 1875.\nTemple building.\nYoung was involved in temple building throughout his membership in the LDS Church, making it a priority of his church presidency. Under Smith's leadership, Young participated in the building of the Kirtland and Nauvoo temples. Just four days after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Young designated the location for the Salt Lake Temple; he presided over its groundbreaking on April 6, 1853. During his tenure, Young oversaw construction of the Salt Lake Tabernacle and he announced plans to build the St. George (1871), Manti (1875), and Logan (1877) temples. He also provisioned the building of the Endowment House, a \"temporary temple\" which began to be used in 1855 to provide temple ordinances to church members while the Salt Lake Temple was under construction.\nTeachings.\nThe majority of Young's teachings are contained in the 19 volumes of transcribed and edited sermons in the Journal of Discourses. The LDS Church's Doctrine and Covenants contains one section from Young that has been canonized as scripture, adding the section in 1876.\nThough polygamy was practiced by Young's predecessor Joseph Smith, the practice is often associated with Young. Some Latter Day Saint denominations, such as the Community of Christ, consider Young the \"Father of Mormon Polygamy\". In 1853, Young made the church's first official statement on the subject since the church had arrived in Utah. Young acknowledged the suffering the doctrine created for women, but stated its necessity for creating large families, proclaiming: \"But the first wife will say, 'It is hard, for I have lived with my husband twenty years, or thirty, and have raised a family of children for him, and it is a great trial to me for him to have more women;' then I say it is time that you gave him up to other women who will bear children.\"\nOne of the more controversial teachings of Young was the Adam\u2013God doctrine. According to Young, he was taught by Smith that Adam is \"our Father and our God, and the only God with whom we have to do\". According to the doctrine, Adam was once a mortal man who became resurrected and exalted. From another planet, Adam brought Eve, one of his wives, with him to the earth, where they became mortal by eating the fruit of the Garden of Eden. After bearing mortal children and establishing the human race, Adam and Eve returned to their heavenly thrones where Adam acts as the god of this world. Later, as Young is generally understood to have taught, Adam returned to the earth to become the biological father of Jesus. The LDS Church has since repudiated the Adam\u2013God doctrine.\nYoung is generally considered to have instituted a church ban against conferring the priesthood on men of black African descent, who had been treated equally in this respect under Smith's presidency. After settling in Utah in 1848, Young announced the ban, which also forbade blacks from participating in Mormon temple rites such as the endowment or sealings. On many occasions, Young taught that blacks were denied the priesthood because they were \"the seed of Cain\", but also stated that they would eventually receive the priesthood after \"all the other children of Adam have the privilege of receiving the Priesthood, and of coming into the kingdom of God, and of being redeemed from the four-quarters of the earth, and have received their resurrection from the dead, then it will be time enough to remove the curse from Cain and his posterity.\" These racial restrictions remained in place until 1978, when the policy was rescinded by LDS Church president Spencer W. Kimball, and the LDS Church subsequently \"disavow[ed] theories advanced in the past\" to explain this ban, thereby \"plac[ing] the origins of black priesthood denial blame squarely on Brigham Young.\" \nIn 1863, Young stated: \"Shall I tell you the law of God in regard to the African race? If the white man who belongs to the chosen seed mixes his blood with the seed of Cain, the penalty, under the law of God, is death on the spot. This will always be so.\" \nYoung was a vocal opponent of theories of human polygenesis, being a firm voice for stating that all humans were the product of one creation.\nConflicts.\nShortly after the arrival of Young's pioneers, the new Mormon colonies were incorporated into the United States through the Mexican Cession. Young petitioned the U.S. Congress to create the State of Deseret. The Compromise of 1850 instead carved out Utah Territory and Young was installed as governor. As governor and church president, Young directed both religious and economic matters. He encouraged independence and self-sufficiency. Many cities and towns in Utah, and some in neighboring states, were founded under Young's direction. Young's leadership style has been viewed as autocratic. When federal officials received reports of widespread and systematic obstruction of federal officials in Utah (most notably judges), U.S. President James Buchanan decided to install a non-Mormon governor. Buchanan accepted the reports of the judges without any further investigation, and the new non-sectarian governor was accompanied by troops sent to garrison forts in the new territory. When Young received word that federal troops were headed to Utah with his replacement, he called out his militia to ambush the federal force. During the defense of Utah, now called the Utah War, Young held the U.S. Army at bay for a winter by taking their cattle and burning supply wagons. The Mormon forces were largely successful thanks to Lot Smith. Young eventually relented and agreed to step down as governor. He later received a pardon from Buchanan. Relations between Young and future governors and U.S. Presidents were mixed.\nThe degree of Young's involvement in the Mountain Meadows massacre, which took place in Washington County in 1857, is disputed. Leonard J. Arrington reports that Young received a rider at his office on the day of the massacre, and that when he learned of the contemplated attack by the members of the LDS Church in Parowan and Cedar City, he sent back a letter directing that the Fancher party be allowed to pass through the territory unmolested. Young's letter reportedly arrived on September 13, 1857, two days after the massacre. As governor, Young had promised the federal government he would protect immigrants passing through Utah Territory, but over 120 men, women and children were killed in this incident. There is no debate concerning the involvement of individual Mormons from the surrounding communities by scholars. Only children under the age of seven, who were cared for by local Mormon families, survived, and the murdered members of the wagon train were left unburied. The remains of about 40 people were later found and buried, and Union Army officer James Henry Carleton had a large cross made from local trees, the transverse beam bearing the engraving, \"Vengeance Is Mine, Saith The Lord: I Will Repay\" and erected a cairn of rocks at the site. A large slab of granite was put up on which he had the following words engraved: \"Here 120 men, women and children were massacred in cold blood early in September, 1857. They were from Arkansas.\" For two years, the monument stood as a memorial to those travelling the Spanish Trail through Mountain Meadow. Some claim that, in 1861, Young brought an entourage to Mountain Meadows and had the cairn and cross destroyed, while exclaiming, \"Vengeance is mine and I have taken a little\".\nDeath.\nBefore his death in Salt Lake City on August 29, 1877, Young was suffering from cholera morbus and inflammation of the bowels. It is believed that he died of peritonitis from a ruptured appendix. His last words were \"Joseph! Joseph! Joseph!\", invoking the name of the late Joseph Smith, founder of the Mormon faith. On September 2, 1877, Young's funeral was held in the Tabernacle with an estimated 12,000 to 15,000 people in attendance. He is buried on the grounds of the Mormon Pioneer Memorial Monument in the heart of Salt Lake City. A bronze marker was placed at the grave site June 10, 1938, by members of the Young Men and Young Women organizations, which he founded.\nBusiness ventures and wealth.\nYoung engaged in a vast assortment of commercial ventures by himself and in partnership with others. These included a wagon express company, a ferryboat company, a railroad and the manufacturing of processed lumber, wool, sugar beets, iron, and liquor. Young achieved greatest success in real estate. He also tried to promote Mormon self-sufficiency by establishing collectivist communities, known as the United Order of Enoch. \nAt the time of his death, Young was the wealthiest man in Utah, with an estimated personal fortune of $600,000 ().\nLegacy.\nImpact.\nA century after his death, one writer stated that\nHe credited Young's leadership with helping to settle much of the American West:\nMemorials to Young include a bronze statue in front of the Abraham O. Smoot Administration Building, Brigham Young University; a marble statue in the National Statuary Hall Collection at the United States Capitol, donated by the State of Utah in 1950; and a statue atop the \"This is the Place Monument\" in Salt Lake City.\nYoung's teachings were the 1998\u201399 course of study in the LDS Church's Sunday Relief Society and Melchizedek priesthood classes.\nFamily and descendants.\nYoung was a polygamist, marrying a total of 55 wives, 54 of them after he converted to Mormonism. The policy was difficult for many in the church. Young stated that upon being taught about plural marriage, \"It was the first time in my life that I desired the grave.\" By the time of his death, Young had 56 children by 16 of his wives; 46 of his children reached adulthood.\nSources have varied on the number of Young's wives, as well as their ages, noting that some Mormons of the time were known to marry girls as young as 12 or 13, sometimes even members of their own family. This is due to differences in what scholars have considered to be a \"wife\". There were 55 women who Young was sealed to during his lifetime. While the majority of the sealings were \"for eternity\", some were \"for time only\". Researchers believe that not all of the 55 marriages were conjugal. Young did not live with a number of his wives or publicly hold them out as wives, which has led to confusion on the number and their identities. This is in part due to the complexity of how wives were identified in the Mormon society at the time.\nOf Young's 55 wives, 21 had never been married before; 16 were widows; six were divorced; six had living husbands and the marital status of six others is unknown. In 1856, Young built the Lion House to accommodate his sizable family. This building remains a Salt Lake City landmark, together with the Beehive House, another Young family home. A contemporary of Young wrote: \"It was amusing to walk by Brigham Young's big house, a long rambling building with innumerable doors. Each wife has an establishment of her own, consisting of parlor, bedroom, and a front door, the key of which she keeps in her pocket.\" At the time of Young's death, 19 of his wives had predeceased him; he was divorced from ten, and 23 survived him. The status of four was unknown. One of his wives, Zina Huntington Young, served as the third president of the Relief Society. In his will, Young shared his estate with the 16 surviving wives who had lived with him; the six surviving non-conjugal wives were not mentioned in the will.\nNotable descendants.\nIn 1902, 25 years after his death, \"The New York Times\" established that Young's direct descendants numbered more than 1,000. Some of Young's descendants have become leaders in the LDS Church.\nCultural references.\nIn comics.\nBrigham Young appeared at the end of Le Fil qui chante album, the last Lucky Luke album written by Goscinny.\nIn literature.\nThe Scottish poet John Lyon, who was an intimate friend of Young, wrote \"Brigham the Bold\" in tribute to him after his death.\nFlorence Claxton's graphic novel, \"The Adventures of a Woman in Search of Her Rights\" (1872), satirizes a would-be emancipated woman whose failure to establish an independent career results in her marriage to Young before she wakes to discover she's been dreaming.\nArthur Conan Doyle based his first Sherlock Holmes novel, \"A Study in Scarlet\", on Mormon history, mentioning Young by name. When asked to comment on the story, which had, \"provoked the animosity of the Mormon faithful\", Doyle noted, \"all I said about the Danite Band and the murders is historical so I cannot withdraw that though it is likely that in a work of fiction it is stated more luridly than in a work of history.\" Doyle's daughter stated: \"You know father would be the first to admit that his first Sherlock Holmes novel was full of errors about the Mormons.\"\nMark Twain devoted a chapter and much of an appendix to Young in \"Roughing It\".\nOliver Wendell Holmes Sr., talking about his fondness of trees, joked in his \"The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table\": \"I call all trees mine that I have put my wedding-ring on, and I have as many tree-wives as Brigham Young has human ones.\"\nIn movies.\nBrigham Young was played by Dean Jagger in the 1940 film \"Brigham Young\". Brigham Young was also played by Terence Stamp in the 2007 film, \"September Dawn\". In the 1995 film \"The Avenging Angel\", the role of Brigham Young was played by Charlton Heston.\nIn television.\nByron Morrow played Young in a cameo appearance in the \"Death Valley Days\" 1966 episode, \"An Organ for Brother Brigham\". In the story line, the organ built and guided west to Salt Lake City by Joseph Harris Ridges (1827\u20131914) of Australia becomes mired in the sand. Wagonmaster Luke Winner (Morgan Woodward) feels compelled to leave the instrument behind until Ridges finds solid rock under the sand.\nIn another \"Death Valley Days\" episode in 1969, \"Biscuits and Billy, the Kid\", Michael Hinn (1913\u20131988) of the former \"Boots and Saddles\" western series was cast as Young. In the story line, the Tugwell family, Jason (Ben Cooper), Ellie (Emily Banks), and Mary (Erin Moran), are abandoned by their guide while on a wagon train from Utah to California.\nGregg Henry depicts Young in the fourth (2014) and fifth (2015) seasons of the TV series \"Hell on Wheels\", a fictional story about the construction of the First Transcontinental Railroad. As the competing rail lines approach Utah from the east and west coasts, Young supplies Mormon laborers to both railroad companies and negotiates with the railways to have them make Salt Lake City their meeting point. In the Season 5 mid-season finale, \"False Prophets\", Young's son, Phineas, attempts to murder his father. Persuaded by The Swede, Phineas believed he was the chosen one to go forward to lead the Mormons, instead of his father.\nLiterary works.\nSince Young's death, a number of works have published collections of his discourses and sayings."}
{"id": "5049", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5049", "title": "Burns supper", "text": "A Burns supper is a celebration of the life and poetry of the poet Robert Burns (25 January 175921 July 1796), the author of many Scots poems. The suppers are normally held on or near the poet's birthday, 25 January, known as Burns Night (; also called Robert Burns Day or Rabbie Burns Day). However, in principle, celebrations may be held at any other time of the year. Burns suppers are held all around the world.\nHistory.\nThe first supper was held \"in memoriam\" at Burns Cottage by Burns's friends, on 21 July 1801, the fifth anniversary of his death; it has been a regular occurrence ever since. The first still extant Burns Club was founded in Greenock in 1801 by merchants who were born in Ayrshire, some of whom had known Burns. They held the first Burns supper on what they thought was his birthday, 29 January 1802, but in 1803, they discovered the Ayr parish records that noted his date of birth was actually 25 January 1759. Since then, suppers have been held on or about 25 January.\nThe Scottish Parliament consider the celebration of Burns Night each year to be a key cultural heritage event.The Parliament welcomes the annual celebration of Scotland\u2019s national poet, Robert Burns, which is held on 25 January each year to mark the Bard\u2019s birthday; considers that Burns was one of the greatest poets and that his work has influenced thinkers across the world; notes that Burns' first published collection, Poems Chiefly in the Scottish Dialect, also known as the \"Kilmarnock Edition\", published in 1786, did much to popularise and champion the Scots language, and considers that this is one of his most important legacies; believes that the celebration of Burns Night is an opportunity to raise awareness of the cultural significance of Scots and its status as one of the indigenous languages of Scotland, and further believes in the importance of the writing down of the Scots language to ensure its continuation through written documentation, as well as oral tradition.\nBurns suppers may be formal or informal. Both typically include haggis (a traditional Scottish dish celebrated by Burns in \"), Scotch whisky and the recitation of Burns's poetry. Formal dinners are hosted by organisations such as universities, sporting clubs, Burns clubs, the Freemasons or St Andrews Societies; they occasionally end with dancing or a ceilidh. During the global pandemic in 2021 Burns Night celebrations moved online and were popular amongst families eating at home. Formal suppers follow a standard order.\nStandard order.\nPiping in guests.\nA bagpiper generally greets the guests, who gather and mix as at any informal party. At less formal gatherings, traditional Scottish music is played.\nHost's welcoming speech.\nThe host says a few words welcoming everyone to the supper and perhaps stating the reason for it.\nAll the guests are seated and grace is said, usually using the \", a well-known thanksgiving said before meals that uses the Scots language. Although attributed to Burns, the Selkirk Grace was already known in the 17th century as the \"Galloway Grace\" or the \"Covenanters' Grace\". It came to be called the Selkirk Grace because Burns was said to have delivered it at a dinner given by the Earl of Selkirk.\nSoup course.\nThe supper starts with the soup course. Normally a Scottish soup, such as Scotch broth, potato soup, cullen skink, or cock-a-leekie, is served.\nHaggis.\nPiping in the haggis.\nEveryone stands as the haggis is brought in. Haggis is a meat dish but in recent decades, a vegetarian alternative is often available. It is usually brought in by the cook on a large dish, generally while a bagpiper leads the way to the host's table, where the haggis is laid down. \"A Man's A Man for A' That\", \"Robbie Burns Medley\" or \"The Star O' Robbie Burns\" might be played. The host, or perhaps a guest, then recites the \n\"Address to a Haggis\".\nAt the line \"His knife see rustic Labour dicht\", the speaker normally draws and sharpens a knife. At the line \"An' cut you up wi' ready slicht\", he plunges it into the haggis and cuts it open from end to end. When done properly, the \"ceremony\" is a highlight of the evening.\nMain course.\nAt the end of the poem, a whisky toast will be proposed to the haggis, and the company will sit down to the meal. The haggis is traditionally served with mashed potatoes (tatties) and mashed swede turnip (neeps).\nOther courses.\nA dessert course, cheese courses, coffee, etc., may also be part of the meal. The courses normally use traditional Scottish recipes. For instance, dessert may be cranachan or tipsy laird (whisky trifle), followed by oatcakes and cheese, all washed down with the \"water of life\" (uisge beatha), Scotch whisky.\nToasts.\nWhen the meal reaches the coffee stage, various speeches and toasts are given.\nImmortal memory.\nThe main speaker gives a speech remembering some aspect of Burns's life or poetry. It may be either light-hearted or serious and may include the recitation of a poem or a song by Burns. A toast to the Immortal Memory of Robert Burns then follows.\nAddress to the Lassies.\nThis was originally a short speech given by a male guest in thanks to the women who had prepared the meal. However, it is now much more wide-ranging and generally covers the male speaker's view on women. It is normally amusing and not offensive, particularly since it will be followed by a reply from the \"lassies\" concerned. The men drink a toast to the women's health.\nReply to the Laddies.\nThis is occasionally (and humorously) called the \"Toast to the Laddies\". Like the previous toast, it is generally now quite wide-ranging. A female guest will give her views on men and reply to any specific points raised by the previous speaker. Like the previous speech, it should be amusing but not offensive. Quite often, the speakers giving this toast and the previous one will collaborate so that the two toasts complement each other.\nWorks by Burns.\nAfter the speeches there may be singing of songs by Burns (such as \"Ae Fond Kiss\", \"Parcel o' Rogues\", and \"A Man's a Man\") and more poetry (such as \"To a Mouse\", \"To a Louse\", \"Tam o' Shanter\", \"The Twa Dogs\", and \"Holy Willie's Prayer\").\nThat may be done by the individual guests or by invited experts, and it goes on for as long as the guests wish. It may include other works by poets influenced by Burns, particularly poets writing in Scots. Foreign guests may also be invited to sing or say works from their land.\nClosing.\nFinally, the host will call on one of the guests to give the vote of thanks. Then, everyone is asked to stand, join hands, and sing \"Auld Lang Syne\" to bring the evening to an end."}
{"id": "5050", "revid": "37698590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5050", "title": "Bill Bryson", "text": "William McGuire Bryson (; born 8 December 1951) is an American\u2013British author of books on travel, the English language, science, and other non-fiction topics. Born in the United States, he has been a resident of Britain for most of his adult life, returning to the U.S. between 1995 and 2003, and holds dual American and British citizenship. He served as the chancellor of Durham University from 2005 to 2011.\nBryson came to prominence in the United Kingdom with the publication of \"Notes from a Small Island\" (1995), an exploration of Britain, and its accompanying television series. He received widespread recognition again with the publication of \"A Short History of Nearly Everything\" (2003), a book widely acclaimed for its accessible communication of science.\nEarly life.\nBryson was born and raised in Des Moines, Iowa, the son of Bill Bryson Sr., a sports journalist who worked for 50 years at the \"Des Moines Register\", and Agnes Mary (n\u00e9e McGuire), the home furnishings editor at the same newspaper. His mother was of Irish descent. He had an older brother, Michael (1942\u20132012), and a sister, Mary Jane Elizabeth. In 2006, Bryson published \"The Life and Times of the Thunderbolt Kid\", a humorous account of his childhood years in Des Moines.\nBryson attended Drake University for two years before dropping out in 1972, deciding instead to backpack around Europe for four months. He returned to Europe the following year with a high school friend, Matt Angerer (the pseudonymous Stephen Katz). Bryson wrote about some of his experiences from the trip in his book \"\".\nMove to the United Kingdom.\nBryson first visited Britain in 1973 during his tour of Europe and decided to stay after landing a job working in a psychiatric hospital, the now-defunct Holloway Sanatorium in Virginia Water, Surrey. He met a nurse there, Cynthia Billen, whom he married in 1975. They moved to Bryson's hometown of Des Moines, Iowa, in 1975 so Bryson could complete his degree at Drake University. In 1977 they settled in Britain.\nHe worked as a journalist, first for the \"Bournemouth Evening Echo\", eventually becoming chief copy editor of the business section of \"The Times\" and deputy national news editor of the business section of \"The Independent\".\nThe Brysons have moved around the UK, living in Virginia Water (Surrey), Purewell (Dorset), Burton (Dorset), Kirkby Malham (North Yorkshire, in the 1980s and '90s), and the Old Rectory in Wramplingham, Norfolk (2003\u20132013). They currently live in rural Hampshire and maintain a small flat in South Kensington, London. From 1995 to 2003 they lived in Hanover, New Hampshire.\nAlthough able to apply for British citizenship, Bryson said in 2010 that he had declined a citizenship test, declaring himself \"too cowardly\" to take it. However, in 2014, he said that he was preparing to take it and in the prologue to his 2015 book \"\" he describes doing so, in Eastleigh. His citizenship ceremony took place in Winchester and he now holds dual citizenship.\nWritings.\nWhile living in the US in the 1990s Bryson wrote a column for a British newspaper for several years, reflecting on humorous aspects of his repatriation in the United States. These columns were selected and adapted to become his book \"I'm a Stranger Here Myself\", alternatively titled \"Notes from a Big Country\" in Britain, Canada, and Australia. During his time in the US, Bryson decided to walk the Appalachian Trail with his friend Stephen Katz (a pseudonym), about which he wrote the book \"A Walk in the Woods\". In the 2015 film adaptation of \"A Walk in the Woods\", Bryson is portrayed by Academy Award winner Robert Redford, and Katz by Nick Nolte.\nIn 2003, in conjunction with World Book Day, British voters chose Bryson's book \"Notes from a Small Island\" as that which best summed up British identity and the state of the nation. The same year, he was appointed a Commissioner for English Heritage.\nHis popular science book, the 500-page \"A Short History of Nearly Everything\", explores not only the histories and current statuses of the sciences, but also their humble and often humorous beginnings. Although one \"top scientist\" is alleged to have jokingly described the book as \"annoyingly free of mistakes,\" Bryson himself makes no such claim, and a list of some of its reported errors is available online.\nIn November 2006, Bryson interviewed then British prime minister Tony Blair on the state of science and education.\nBryson has also written two popular works on the history of the English language, \"The Mother Tongue\" and \"Made in America\"\u2014and, more recently, an update of his guide to usage, \"Bryson's Dictionary of Troublesome Words\" (first published as \"The Penguin Dictionary of Troublesome Words\" in 1983).\nIn October 2020 he announced that he had \"retired\" from writing books.\nLitigation.\nIn 2012 Bryson sued his agent, Jed Mattes Inc., in New York County Supreme Court, claiming it had \"failed to perform some of the most fundamental duties of an agent.\" The case was settled out of court, with part of the settlement being that Bryson may not discuss it.\nIn 2013 Bryson claimed copyright on an interview he had given nearly 20 years previously, after the interviewer republished it as an 8000-word e-book. Amazon removed the e-book from publication.\nAwards, positions and honours.\nIn 2005, Bryson was appointed chancellor of Durham University, succeeding the late Sir Peter Ustinov, and became more active with student activities than is common for holders of that post, appearing in a Durham student film and promoting litter-collection in the city. He had praised Durham as \"a perfect little city\" in \"Notes from a Small Island\". In October 2010, it was announced that Bryson would step down at the end of 2011.\nIn May 2007, he became the president of the Campaign to Protect Rural England. His first focus in this role was the establishment of an anti-littering campaign across England. He discussed the future of the countryside with Richard Mabey, Sue Clifford, Nicholas Crane, and Richard Girling at CPRE's Volunteer Conference in November 2007.\nBryson has received numerous awards for his ability to communicate science with passion and enthusiasm. In 2004, he won the Aventis Prize for best general science book that year, with \"A Short History of Nearly Everything\". In 2005, the book won the European Union's Descartes Prize for science communication. In 2005, he received the President's Award from the Royal Society of Chemistry for advancing the cause of the chemical sciences. In 2007, he won the Bradford Washburn Award, from the Museum of Science in Boston, Massachusetts, for contributions to the popularization of science. In 2012, he received the Kenneth B. Myer Award, from the Florey Institute of Neuroscience, in Melbourne, Australia.\nWith the Royal Society of Chemistry, the Bill Bryson prize for Science Communication was established in 2005.\n The competition engages students from around the world in explaining science to non-experts.\nHe was made an honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for his contribution to literature on 13 December 2006. In 2007, he was awarded the James Joyce Award by the Literary and Historical Society of University College Dublin. After he received British citizenship, his OBE was made substantive.\nIn 2011, Bryson won the Golden Eagle Award from the Outdoor Writers and Photographers Guild. On 22 November 2012, Durham University officially renamed the Main Library the Bill Bryson Library for his contributions as the university's 11th chancellor (2005\u20132011). The library also has a cafe named after Bryson's book \"Notes from a Small Island\".\nBryson was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2013, becoming the first non-Briton to receive this honour. His biography at the Society reads:\nBill Bryson is a popular author who is driven by a deep curiosity for the world we live in. Bill's books and lectures demonstrate an abiding love for science and an appreciation for its social importance. His international bestseller, \"A Short History of Nearly Everything\" (2003), is widely acclaimed for its accessible communication of science and has since been adapted for children.\nIn 2006 Frank Cownie, the mayor of Des Moines, awarded Bryson the key to the city and announced that 21 October 2006 would be \"Bill Bryson, The Thunderbolt Kid, Day.\"\nIn January 2007, Bryson was the Schwartz Visiting Fellow at the Pomfret School in Connecticut.\nBooks.\nBryson has written the following books:"}
{"id": "5051", "revid": "1012453607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5051", "title": "Big Audio Dynamite", "text": "Big Audio Dynamite (later known as Big Audio Dynamite II and Big Audio, and often abbreviated BAD) were an English band formed in London in 1984 by Mick Jones, the former guitarist and singer of the Clash. The band mixed various musical styles, incorporating elements of punk rock, dance music, hip hop, reggae, and funk. After releasing a number of well-received albums and touring extensively throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Big Audio Dynamite broke up in 1997. In 2011, the band embarked on a reunion tour.\nHistory.\nT.R.A.C. (1984).\nAfter being fired from the Clash in 1983 and following a brief stint with the band General Public, Mick Jones formed a new band called Top Risk Action Company (T.R.A.C.). He recruited bassist Leo \"E-Zee Kill\" Williams, saxophonist John \"Boy\" Lennard (from Theatre of Hate), and former Clash drummer Nicky \"Topper\" Headon. Headon was quickly fired for his heroin addiction and Lennard either left or was fired and the band folded. Although the band released no material (only demos were recorded which have yet to be officially released), T.R.A.C. can be seen as a forerunner to Big Audio Dynamite in much the same way London SS can be seen as an early incarnation of the Clash.\nBig Audio Dynamite (1984\u20131990).\nJones then formed Big Audio Dynamite with film director Don Letts (maker of \"The Punk Rock Movie\", various Clash music videos, and later the Clash documentary \"\"), bassist Leo Williams (from T.R.A.C.), drummer Greg Roberts, and keyboardist Dan Donovan. In 1985 the band's debut, \"This Is Big Audio Dynamite,\" was released. The album's cover shows the band as a four piece, minus Donovan who took and designed the photo. In 2016 \"This is Big Audio Dynamite\" was reissued on vinyl, with the album being mastered using analog tapes and pressed on 180-gram vinyl.\n1986's \"No. 10, Upping St.\" reunited Jones for one last album with former Clash lyricist and lead vocalist Joe Strummer, who was credited with co-producing the album and co-writing of five of its nine tracks. BAD supported U2 on their 1987 world tour, then released 1988's \"Tighten Up Vol. 88\" and 1989's \"Megatop Phoenix\". \"Tighten Up, Vol. 88\" contained \"Just Play Music!\", which was the second No.\u00a01 single on Billboard's Modern Rock Tracks chart. The band also recorded an unreleased track called \"Keep off the Grass\" which was a rock-style instrumental of the theme to the classic western film, \"The Magnificent Seven\". A promo video can be seen on YouTube.\nIn 1990, the original line-up wrote and recorded the song \"Free\" for the soundtrack to the adventure comedy film \"Flashback\". This would be the final song written with the original line-up, as the band would break-up shortly after. \"The Bottom Line\" from the band's first album was remixed and used as the title track for \"Flashback\". However, this track was not included on the soundtrack. It can be found on the 12\" or by download. Later in 1990, Mick Jones debuted Big Audio Dynamite II and release the UK only album \"Kool-Aid\". Dan Donovan remained in BAD II for one song, a re-working of the final BAD track \"Free\" renamed \"Kickin' In\".\nBig Audio Dynamite II (1991\u20131993).\nFor 1991's \"The Globe\", only Jones remained from the original incarnation of Big Audio Dynamite, and the band was now called \"Big Audio Dynamite II\". This new line-up featured two guitarists. \"The Globe\" featured the band's most commercially successful single, \"Rush,\" which hit No.\u00a01 on both the US Modern Rock Tracks chart and the Australian National ARIA Chart. \"Rush\" was also released in the United Kingdom with the 1991 re-release of The Clash's \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\". The sleeve art for the 7-inch and CD singles displayed the Clash on the front, and BAD II on the rear with the record label displaying \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\" as side \"A\" and \"Rush\" as side \"AA\". Even though it was effectively a double A-side release, the Chart Information Network/Gallup decided that only The Clash would be credited with a number one hit. \"Innocent Child\" and \"The Globe\" were also released as singles.\nBAD supported U2 on their Zoo TV Tour, headlined the MTV 120 Minutes tour which also featured Public Image Ltd, Live, and Blind Melon, and released the live EP \"On the Road Live '92\".\nIn 1991, while Mick Jones formed Big Audio Dynamite II, the rest of the original lineup briefly formed a band called Screaming Target. They released one album \"Hometown Hi Fi\" and two singles \"Who Killed King Tubby?\" and \"Knowledge N Numbers\" before disbanding. The title and album cover were purposely meant as a tribute to Big Youth's reggae album Screaming Target.\nIn 1993, Greg Roberts formed the electronic band Dreadzone with Tim Bran, with the name suggested to them by Don Letts. Leo Williams and Dan Donovan joined the band before their second album \"Second Light\" and the single \"Little Britain\" in 1995. Dreadzone is still active, with Roberts and Williams remaining members.\nBig Audio (1994).\nThe band later recruited keyboardist Andre Shapps (co-producer of \"The Globe\" and Mick Jones's cousin) and DJ Michael \" Lord Zonka\" Custance as DJ and vocalist. Both appeared on the band's 1994 album \"Higher Power\", which was released under the shortened name \"Big Audio\".\nFinal years and subsequent activities (1995\u20132010).\nAfter signing a recording contract with Gary Kurfirst's Radioactive Records in 1995, the band reverted to the original \"Big Audio Dynamite\" moniker and released their least successful album to date, \"F-Punk\".\nRadioactive Records refused to release the next proposed BAD album, \"Entering a New Ride\". The line-up contained MC vocals by Joe Attard of Punks Jump Up, Ranking Roger of the Beat and General Public and drummer Bob Wond of Under Two Flags. In 1998, the band launched a new website, primarily intended as a means to distribute songs from the \"Entering a New Ride\" album. In 2001, after having only released 6 songs from the album, the website went down and Big Audio Dynamite disbanded. Their final album was never properly released in its entirety, but it has been heavily leaked online for fans who wished to hear it.\nSince 2005, Jones has been working on a project with Tony James (ex-member of Generation X and Sigue Sigue Sputnik) called Carbon/Silicon.\nIn early 2007, a BAD II live 8 song DVD was released, titled Big Audio Dynamite Live: E=MC\u00b2.\n2011 reunion.\nIn 2010, Don Letts revealed to Billboard.com that he and Mick Jones broached the idea of a Big Audio Dynamite reunion in 2011. He explained, \"I could lie to you and say 'Not in a million years,' but... if Mick wasn't tied up with Gorillaz it might happen this year. (Jones) has looked at me and said, 'Maybe next year,' but who knows. I've got to admit that in the past I'm not a great one for reformations; I always think if you're lucky in life, you get a window of opportunity, use it to the best of your ability and then fuck off and let someone else have their turn. But here I am 25 years down the line considering the thing.\" Besides a Big Audio Dynamite reunion, Letts said he was also hopeful for more Legacy Editions of the band's albums after finding more unreleased material\u2014including live recordings\u2014in the vaults. \"There's definitely more stuff; whether Sony thinks it's worthwhile, that's another matter. But there seems to be a lot of respect for Big Audio Dynamite. Time has shown that a lot of the things we were dabbling in back then have come to manifest themselves today...so hopefully we'll get to do some more.\"\nThe reformation of the original line-up of BAD was confirmed on 25 January 2011 with the announcement of a UK tour. The 9-date tour was a commercial and critical success. The first of their two sold out Shepherd's Bush Empire shows received a 4 star review in \"The Times\" ('Not just a reformation - this is \"their\" time'), \"The Observer\" welcomed BAD's return with a glowing review declaring, 'they remain a joy'. Their headline slot at Beautiful Days festival was favourably reviewed on the Louder Than War music website.\nBig Audio Dynamite played sets at the 2011 Outside Lands Music and Arts Festival, Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, Glastonbury Festival 2011, and Lollapalooza.\nMembers.\nBig Audio Dynamite (1984\u20131990, 2011)\nBig Audio Dynamite II (1990\u20131993)\nBig Audio (1994\u20131995)\nBig Audio Dynamite (1996\u20131998)"}
{"id": "5052", "revid": "19339494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5052", "title": "Bentley", "text": "Bentley Motors Limited is a British manufacturer and marketer of luxury cars and SUVs, and a subsidiary of the Volkswagen Group since 1998.\nHeadquartered in Crewe, England, the company was founded as Bentley Motors Limited by W. O. Bentley in 1919 in Cricklewood, North London, and became widely known for winning the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1924, 1927, 1928, 1929 and 1930.\nProminent models extend from the historic sports-racing Bentley 4\u00bd Litre and Bentley Speed Six; the more recent Bentley R Type Continental, Bentley Turbo R, and Bentley Arnage; to its current model line, including the Flying Spur, Continental GT, Bentayga and the Mulsanne\u2014which are marketed worldwide, with China as its largest market as of November 2012.\nToday most Bentley models are assembled at the company's Crewe factory, with a small number assembled at Volkswagen's Dresden factory, Germany, and with bodies for the Continental manufactured in Zwickau and for the Bentayga manufactured at the Volkswagen Bratislava Plant.\nThe joining and eventual separation of Bentley and Rolls-Royce followed a series of mergers and acquisitions, beginning with the 1931 purchase by Rolls-Royce of Bentley, then in receivership. In 1971, Rolls-Royce itself was forced into receivership and the UK government nationalised the company\u2014splitting into two companies the aerospace division (Rolls-Royce Plc) and automotive (Rolls-Royce Motors Limited) divisions\u2014the latter retaining the Bentley subdivision. Rolls-Royce Motors was subsequently sold to engineering conglomerate, Vickers and in 1998, Vickers sold Rolls-Royce to Volkswagen AG.\nIntellectual property rights to both the name \"Rolls-Royce\" as well as the company's logo had been retained not by Rolls-Royce Motors, but by aerospace company, Rolls-Royce Plc, which had continued to license both to the automotive division. Thus the sale of \"Rolls-Royce\" to VW included the Bentley name and logos, vehicle designs, model nameplates, production, and administrative facilities, the Spirit of Ecstasy and Rolls-Royce grille shape trademarks (subsequently sold to BMW by VW)\u2014but not the rights to the Rolls-Royce name or logo. The aerospace company, Rolls-Royce Plc, ultimately sold both to BMW AG.\nCricklewood (1919\u20131931).\nBefore World War\u00a0I, Walter Owen Bentley and his brother, Horace Millner Bentley, sold French DFP cars in Cricklewood, North London, but W.O, as Walter was known, always wanted to design and build his own cars. At the DFP factory, in 1913, he noticed an aluminium paperweight and thought that aluminium might be a suitable replacement for cast iron to fabricate lighter pistons. The first Bentley aluminium pistons were fitted to Sopwith Camel aero engines during the First World War.\nW.O. registered Bentley Motors Ltd. in August 1919, and in October he exhibited a car chassis, with a dummy engine, at the London Motor Show. Ex\u2013Royal Flying Corps officer Clive Gallop designed an innovative four-valves-per-cylinder engine for the chassis. By December the engine was built and running. Delivery of the first cars was scheduled for June 1920, but development took longer than estimated so the date was extended to September 1921. The durability of the first Bentley cars earned widespread acclaim, and they competed in hill climbs and raced at Brooklands.\nBentley's first major event was the 1922 Indianapolis 500, a race dominated by specialized cars with Duesenberg racing chassis. They entered a modified road car driven by works driver Douglas Hawkes, accompanied by riding mechanic H. S. \"Bertie\" Browning. Hawkes completed the full and finished 13th with an average speed of after starting in 19th position. The team was then rushed back to England to compete in the 1922 RAC Tourist Trophy.\nCaptain Woolf Barnato.\nIn an ironic reference to his heavyweight boxer's stature, Captain Woolf Barnato was nicknamed \"Babe\". In 1925, he acquired his first Bentley, a 3-litre. With this car he won numerous Brooklands races. Just a year later, he acquired the Bentley business itself.\nThe Bentley enterprise was always underfunded, but inspired by the 1924 Le Mans win by John Duff and Frank Clement, Barnato agreed to finance Bentley's business. Barnato had incorporated Baromans Ltd in 1922, which existed as his finance and investment vehicle. Via Baromans, Barnato initially invested in excess of \u00a3100,000, saving the business and its workforce. A financial reorganisation of the original Bentley company was carried out and all existing creditors paid off for \u00a375,000. Existing shares were devalued from \u00a31 each to just 1 shilling, or 5% or their original value. Barnato held 149,500 of the new shares giving him control of the company and he became chairman. Barnato injected further cash into the business: \u00a335,000 secured by debenture in July 1927; \u00a340,000 in 1928; \u00a325,000 in 1929. With renewed financial input, W. O. Bentley was able to design another generation of cars.\nThe Bentley Boys.\nThe Bentley Boys were a group of British motoring enthusiasts that included Barnato, Sir Henry \"Tim\" Birkin, steeple chaser George Duller, aviator Glen Kidston, automotive journalist S.C.H. \"Sammy\" Davis, and Dudley Benjafield. The Bentley Boys favoured Bentley cars. Many were independently wealthy and many had a military background. They kept the marque's reputation for high performance alive; Bentley was noted for its four consecutive victories at the 24 Hours of Le Mans, from 1927 to 1930.\nBirkin developed the 4\u00bd-litre, lightweight Blower Bentley at Welwyn Garden City in 1929 and produced five racing specials, starting with Bentley Blower No.1 which was optimised for the Brooklands racing circuit. Birkin overruled Bentley and put the model on the market before it was fully developed. As a result, it was unreliable.\nDuring the March 1930 Blue Train Races, Barnato raised the stakes on Rover and its Rover Light Six, having raced and beaten \"Le Train Bleu\" for the first time, to better that record with his 6\u00bd-litre Bentley Speed Six on a bet of \u00a3100. He drove against the train from Cannes to Calais, then by ferry to Dover, and finally London, travelling on public highways, and won.\nBarnato drove his H.J. Mulliner\u2013bodied formal saloon in the race against the Blue Train. Two months later, on 21 May 1930, he took delivery of a Speed Six with streamlined fastback \"sportsman coup\u00e9\" by Gurney Nutting. Both cars became known as the \"Blue Train Bentleys\"; the latter is regularly mistaken for, or erroneously referred to as being, the car that raced the Blue Train, while in fact Barnato named it in memory of his race. A painting by Terence Cuneo depicts the Gurney Nutting coup\u00e9 racing along a road parallel to the Blue Train, which scenario never occurred as the road and railway did not follow the same route.\nCricklewood Bentleys.\nThe original model was the three-litre, but as customers put heavier bodies on the chassis, a larger 4\u00bd-litre model followed. Perhaps the most iconic model of the period is the 4\u00bd-litre \"Blower Bentley\", with its distinctive supercharger projecting forward from the bottom of the grille. Uncharacteristically fragile for a Bentley it was not the racing workhorse the 6\u00bd-litre was, though in 1930 Birkin remarkably finished second in the French Grand Prix at Pau in a stripped-down racing version of the Blower Bentley, behind Philippe Etancelin in a Bugatti Type 35.\nThe 4\u00bd-litre model later became famous in popular media as the vehicle of choice of James Bond in the original novels, but this has been seen only briefly in the films. John Steed in the television series \"The Avengers\" also drove a Bentley.\nThe new eight-litre was such a success that when Barnato's money seemed to run out in 1931 and Napier was planning to buy Bentley's business, Rolls-Royce purchased Bentley Motors to prevent it from competing with their most expensive model, the Phantom\u00a0II.\nPerformance at Le Mans.\n24 hours of Le Mans Grand Prix d'Endurance.\nBentley withdrew from motor racing just after winning at Le Mans in 1930, claiming that they had learned enough about speed and reliability.\nLiquidation.\nThe Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the resulting Great Depression throttled the demand for Bentley's expensive motor cars. In July 1931, two mortgage payments were due which neither the company nor Barnato, the guarantor, were able to meet. On 10 July 1931 a receiver was appointed.\nNapier offered to buy Bentley with the purchase to be final in November 1931. Instead, British Central Equitable Trust made a winning sealed bid of \u00a3125,000. British Central Equitable Trust later proved to be a front for Rolls-Royce Limited. Not even Bentley himself knew the identity of the purchaser until the deal was completed.\nBarnato received \u00a342,000 for his shares in Bentley Motors. In 1934 he was appointed to the board of the new Bentley Motors (1931) Ltd. In the same year Bentley confirmed that it would continue racing.\nRolls-Royce (1931\u20131970).\nDerby.\nRolls-Royce took over the assets of Bentley Motors (1919) Ltd and formed a subsidiary, Bentley Motors (1931) Ltd. Rolls-Royce had acquired the Bentley showrooms in Cork Street, the service station at Kingsbury, the complex at Cricklewood and the services of Bentley himself. This last was disputed by Napier in court without success. Bentley had neglected to register their trademark so Rolls-Royce immediately did so. They also sold the Cricklewood factory in 1932. Production stopped for two years, before resuming at the Rolls-Royce works in Derby. Unhappy with his role at Rolls-Royce, when his contract expired at the end of April 1935 W.\u00a0O. Bentley left to join Lagonda.\nWhen the new Bentley 3\u00bd litre appeared in 1933, it was a sporting variant of the Rolls-Royce 20/25, which disappointed some traditional customers yet was well received by many others. W.\u00a0O. Bentley was reported as saying, \"Taking all things into consideration, I would rather own this Bentley than any other car produced under that name\". Rolls-Royce's advertisements for the \u00a0Litre called it \"the silent sports car\", a slogan Rolls-Royce continued to use for Bentley cars until the 1950s.\nAll Bentleys produced from 1931 to 2004 used inherited or shared Rolls-Royce chassis, and adapted Rolls-Royce engines, and are described by critics as badge-engineered Rolls-Royces.\nCrewe.\nIn preparation for war, Rolls-Royce and the British Government searched for a location for a shadow factory to ensure production of aero-engines. Crewe, with its excellent road and rail links, as well as being located in the northwest away from the aerial bombing starting in mainland Europe, was a logical choice. Crewe also had extensive open farming land. Construction of the factory started on a 60-acre area on the potato fields of Merrill's Farm in July 1938, with the first Rolls-Royce Merlin aero-engine rolling off the production line five months later. 25,000 Merlin engines were produced and at its peak, in 1943 during World War II, the factory employed 10,000 people. With the war in Europe over and the general move towards the then new jet engines, Rolls-Royce concentrated its aero engine operations at Derby and moved motor car operations to Crewe.\nStandard Steel saloons.\nUntil some time after World War\u00a0II, most high-end motorcar manufacturers like Bentley and Rolls-Royce did not supply complete cars. They sold rolling chassis, near-complete from the instrument panel forward. Each chassis was delivered to the coach builder of the buyer's choice. The biggest specialist car dealerships had coachbuilders build standard designs for them which were held in stock awaiting potential buyers.\nTo meet post-war demand, particularly UK Government pressure to export and earn overseas currency, Rolls-Royce developed an all steel body using pressings made by Pressed Steel to create a \"standard\" ready-to-drive complete saloon car. The first steel-bodied model produced was the Bentley Mark VI: these started to emerge from the newly reconfigured Crewe factory early in 1946. Some years later, initially only for export, the Rolls-Royce Silver Dawn was introduced, a standard steel Bentley but with a Rolls-Royce radiator grille for a small extra charge, and this convention continued.\nChassis remained available to coachbuilders until the end of production of the Bentley S3, which was replaced for October 1965 by the chassis-less monocoque construction T series.\nBentley Continental.\nThe Continental fastback coup\u00e9 was aimed at the UK market, most cars, 164 plus a prototype, being right-hand drive. The chassis was produced at the Crewe factory and shared many components with the standard R type. Other than the R-Type standard steel saloon, R-Type Continentals were delivered as rolling chassis to the coachbuilder of choice. Coachwork for most of these cars was completed by H.\u00a0J. Mulliner &amp; Co. who mainly built them in fastback coupe form. Other coachwork came from Park Ward (London) who built six, later including a drophead coupe version. Franay (Paris) built five, Graber (Wichtrach, Switzerland) built three, one of them later altered by K\u00f6ng (Basel, Switzerland), and Pininfarina made one. James Young (London) built in 1954 a Sports Saloon for the owner of James Young's, James Barclay.\nThe early R\u00a0Type Continental has essentially the same engine as the standard R\u00a0Type, but with modified carburation, induction and exhaust manifolds along with higher gear ratios. After July 1954 the car was fitted with an engine, having now a larger bore of 94.62\u00a0mm (3.7\u00a0in) with a total displacement of . The compression ratio was raised to 7.25:1.\nVickers (1970\u20131998).\nThe problems of Bentley's owner with Rolls-Royce aero engine development, the RB211, brought about the financial collapse of its business in 1970.\nThe motorcar division was made a separate business, Rolls-Royce Motors Limited, which remained independent until bought by Vickers plc in August 1980. By the 1970s and early 1980s Bentley sales had fallen badly; at one point less than 5% of combined production carried the Bentley badge. Under Vickers, Bentley set about regaining its high-performance heritage, typified by the 1980 Mulsanne. Bentley's restored sporting image created a renewed interest in the name and Bentley sales as a proportion of output began to rise. By 1986 the Bentley:Rolls-Royce ratio had reached 40:60; by 1991 it achieved parity.\nVolkswagen (1998\u2013present).\nIn October 1997, Vickers announced that it had decided to sell Rolls-Royce Motors. BMW AG seemed to be a logical purchaser because BMW already supplied engines and other components for Bentley and Rolls-Royce branded cars and because of BMW and Vickers joint efforts in building aircraft engines. BMW made a final offer of \u00a3340m, but was outbid by Volkswagen AG, which offered \u00a3430m. Volkswagen AG acquired the vehicle designs, model nameplates, production and administrative facilities, the Spirit of Ecstasy and Rolls-Royce grille shape trademarks, but not the rights to the use of the Rolls-Royce name or logo, which are owned by Rolls-Royce Holdings plc. In 1998, BMW started supplying components for the new range of Rolls-Royce and Bentley cars\u2014notably V8 engines for the Bentley Arnage and V12 engines for the Rolls-Royce Silver Seraph, however, the supply contract allowed BMW to terminate its supply deal with Rolls-Royce with 12 months' notice, which would not be enough time for Volkswagen to re-engineer the cars.\nBMW paid Rolls-Royce plc \u00a340m to license the Rolls-Royce name and logo. After negotiations, BMW and Volkswagen AG agreed that, from 1998 to 2002, BMW would continue to supply engines and components and would allow Volkswagen temporary use of the Rolls-Royce name and logo. All BMW engine supply ended in 2003 with the end of Silver Seraph production.\nFrom 1 January 2003 forward, Volkswagen AG would be the sole provider of cars with the \"Bentley\" marque. BMW established a new legal entity, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Limited, and built a new administrative headquarters and production facility for Rolls-Royce branded vehicles in Goodwood, West Sussex, England.\nInvestment and company development.\nAfter acquiring the business, Volkswagen spent GBP500\u00a0million (about US$845\u00a0million) to modernise the Crewe factory and increase production capacity.\nAs of early 2010, there are about 3,500 working at Crewe, compared with about 1,500 in 1998 before being taken over by Volkswagen. It was reported that Volkswagen invested a total of nearly US$2\u00a0billion in Bentley and its revival. As a result of upgrading facilities at Crewe the bodywork now arrives fully painted at the Crewe facility for final assembly, with the parts coming from Germany\u2014similarly Rolls-Royce body shells are painted and shipped to the UK for assembly only.\nDemand had been so great that the factory at Crewe was unable to meet orders despite an installed capacity of approximately 9,500 vehicles per year; there was a waiting list of over a year for new cars to be delivered. Consequently, part of the production of the new Flying Spur, a four-door version of the Continental GT, was assigned to the Transparent Factory (Germany), where the Volkswagen Phaeton luxury car was also assembled. This arrangement ceased at the end of 2006 after around 1,000 cars, with all car production reverting to the Crewe plant.\nBentley presented Queen Elizabeth II with an official State Limousine in 2002 to celebrate her Golden Jubilee. Production of the two-door convertible Bentley Azure finished in 2003. It was replaced by a large luxury coup\u00e9 powered by a W12 engine built in Crewe and named Bentley Continental GT.\nIt was confirmed in April 2005 a four-seat convertible Azure derived from the Arnage Drophead Coup\u00e9 prototype would begin at Crewe in 2006. By the autumn of 2005, a convertible version of the successful Continental GT, the Continental GTC, was also presented in the autumn of 2005. These two models were launched in late 2006.\nA limited run of a Zagato modified GT was also announced in March 2008, dubbed \"GTZ\".\nA new version of the Bentley Continental was introduced at the 2009 Geneva Motor Show: The Continental Supersports. This new Bentley is a supercar combining extreme power with environmentally friendly FlexFuel technology, capable of using petrol (gasoline) and biofuel (E85 ethanol).\nBentley sales continued to increase, and in 2005 8,627 were sold worldwide, 3,654 in the United States. In 2007, the 10,000 cars-per-year threshold was broken for the first time with sales of 10,014. For 2007, a record profit of \u20ac155\u00a0million was also announced. Bentley reported a sale of about 7,600 units in 2008. However, its global sales plunged 50 percent to 4,616 vehicles in 2009 (with the U.S. deliveries dropped 49% to 1,433 vehicles) and it suffered an operating loss of \u20ac194\u00a0million, compared with an operating profit of \u20ac10\u00a0million in 2008. As a result of the slump in sales, production at Crewe was shut down during March and April 2009. Though vehicle sales increased by 11% to 5,117 in 2010, operating loss grew by 26% to \u20ac245\u00a0million. In Autumn 2010, workers at Crewe staged a series of protests over proposal of compulsory work on Fridays and mandatory overtime during the week.\nVehicle sales in 2011 rose 37% to 7,003 vehicles, with the new Continental GT accounting for over one-third of total sales. The current workforce is about 4,000 people.\nThe business earned a profit in 2011 after two years of losses as a result of the following sales results:\nOn 23 March 2020, Bentley announced to halt production due to COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2020, Bentley announced that it will cut around 1,000 (one quarter of 4,200) job places in the UK as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nOn 3 November 2020, Bentley announced that all new cars sold will be electric by 2030. This announcement also follows after United Kingdom Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced in February 2020 that he approved legislation that will ban and phase-out fuel combustion vehicles (including Hybrid and Plug-in Hybrid vehicles) from the UK by 2030 with hybrids being banned by 2035.\nDeliveries, profits and staff.\nSources \nProduction.\nSources \nUnsold cars: During the years 2011 and 2012 production exceeded deliveries by 1,187 cars which is estimated to have trebled inventory.\nMotorsport.\nA Bentley Continental GT3 entered by the M-Sport factory team won the Silverstone round of the 2014 Blancpain Endurance Series. This was Bentley's first official entry in a British race since the 1930 RAC Tourist Trophy."}
{"id": "5054", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5054", "title": "CountriesOfTheWorld", "text": ""}
{"id": "5055", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5055", "title": "ComputinG", "text": ""}
{"id": "5056", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5056", "title": "ComputerSoftware", "text": ""}
{"id": "5057", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5057", "title": "CommonSense", "text": ""}
{"id": "5058", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5058", "title": "CelticMusic", "text": ""}
{"id": "5060", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5060", "title": "CountriesA", "text": ""}
{"id": "5061", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5061", "title": "CountriesN", "text": ""}
{"id": "5062", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5062", "title": "CountriesZ", "text": ""}
{"id": "5063", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5063", "title": "CountriesP", "text": ""}
{"id": "5064", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5064", "title": "CountriesG", "text": ""}
{"id": "5065", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5065", "title": "CountriesO", "text": ""}
{"id": "5066", "revid": "508734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5066", "title": "CoBoL", "text": ""}
{"id": "5067", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5067", "title": "ChristianIty", "text": ""}
{"id": "5068", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5068", "title": "CountriesS", "text": ""}
{"id": "5069", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5069", "title": "CountriesU", "text": ""}
{"id": "5070", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5070", "title": "CountriesD", "text": ""}
{"id": "5071", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5071", "title": "CountriesK", "text": ""}
{"id": "5072", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5072", "title": "CountrY", "text": ""}
{"id": "5073", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5073", "title": "CountriesC", "text": ""}
{"id": "5074", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5074", "title": "CountriesH", "text": ""}
{"id": "5075", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5075", "title": "CountriesJ", "text": ""}
{"id": "5076", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5076", "title": "CountriesB", "text": ""}
{"id": "5077", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5077", "title": "CountriesL", "text": ""}
{"id": "5078", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5078", "title": "CountriesM", "text": ""}
{"id": "5079", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5079", "title": "CountriesE", "text": ""}
{"id": "5080", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5080", "title": "CountriesF", "text": ""}
{"id": "5081", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5081", "title": "CountriesQ", "text": ""}
{"id": "5082", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5082", "title": "CountriesI", "text": ""}
{"id": "5085", "revid": "1960810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5085", "title": "CityBerlin", "text": ""}
{"id": "5088", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5088", "title": "CountriesR", "text": ""}
{"id": "5089", "revid": "7777104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5089", "title": "CantorSet", "text": ""}
{"id": "5093", "revid": "10379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5093", "title": "ColdWar", "text": ""}
{"id": "5097", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5097", "title": "CryptologY", "text": ""}
{"id": "5098", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5098", "title": "CryptographY", "text": ""}
{"id": "5099", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5099", "title": "CryptanalysiS", "text": ""}
{"id": "5100", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5100", "title": "CodE", "text": ""}
{"id": "5101", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5101", "title": "CipheR", "text": ""}
{"id": "5103", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5103", "title": "CharlestoN", "text": ""}
{"id": "5104", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5104", "title": "ConsequentialIsm", "text": ""}
{"id": "5105", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5105", "title": "ConsolationOfPhilosophy", "text": ""}
{"id": "5107", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5107", "title": "CommonSenseAndTheDiallelus", "text": ""}
{"id": "5110", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5110", "title": "ConsciousNess", "text": ""}
{"id": "5112", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5112", "title": "CharlieChaplin", "text": ""}
{"id": "5115", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5115", "title": "Cambodian Language", "text": ""}
{"id": "5120", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5120", "title": "ChordaTa", "text": ""}
{"id": "5121", "revid": "18024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5121", "title": "CombinaTorics", "text": ""}
{"id": "5122", "revid": "7777104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5122", "title": "ConStellations", "text": ""}
{"id": "5123", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5123", "title": "CognitiveTherapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "5125", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5125", "title": "CategoryTheory", "text": ""}
{"id": "5126", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5126", "title": "ChoosingSummaryStatistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "5128", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5128", "title": "ComedyFilm", "text": ""}
{"id": "5129", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5129", "title": "CultFilm", "text": ""}
{"id": "5130", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5130", "title": "CountriesT", "text": ""}
{"id": "5131", "revid": "36510957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5131", "title": "Chordate", "text": "A chordate () is an animal of the phylum Chordata (). During some period of their life cycle, chordates possess a notochord, a dorsal nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail: these four anatomical features define this phylum. Chordates are also bilaterally symmetric, and have a coelom, metameric segmentation, and circulatory system.\nThe Chordata and Ambulacraria together form the superphylum Deuterostomia. Chordates are divided into three subphyla: Vertebrata (fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals); Tunicata or Urochordata (sea squirts, salps); and Cephalochordata (which includes lancelets). There are also extinct taxa such as the Vetulicolia. Hemichordata (which includes the acorn worms) has been presented as a fourth chordate subphylum, but now is treated as a separate phylum: hemichordates and Echinodermata form the Ambulacraria, the sister phylum of the Chordates. Of the more than 65,000 living species of chordates, about half are bony fish that are members of the superclass Pisces, class Osteichthyes.\nChordate fossils have been found from as early as the Cambrian explosion, 541 million years ago. Cladistically (phylogenetically), vertebrates \u2013 chordates with the notochord replaced by a vertebral column during development \u2013 are considered to be a subgroup of the clade Craniata, which consists of chordates with a skull. The Craniata and Tunicata compose the clade Olfactores. (See diagram under Phylogeny.)\nAnatomy.\nChordates form a phylum of animals that are defined by having at some stage in their lives all of the following anatomical features:\nThere are soft constraints that separate chordates from certain other biological lineages, but are not part of the formal definition:\nClassification.\nThe following schema is from the 2014 edition of \"Vertebrate Palaeontology\". The invertebrate chordate classes are from \"Fishes of the World\". While it is structured so as to reflect evolutionary relationships (similar to a cladogram), it also retains the traditional ranks used in Linnaean taxonomy.\nSubphyla.\nCephalochordata: Lancelets.\nCephalochordates, one of the three subdivisions of chordates, are small, \"vaguely fish-shaped\" animals that lack brains, clearly defined heads and specialized sense organs. These burrowing filter-feeders compose the earliest-branching chordate sub-phylum.\nTunicata (Urochordata).\nMost tunicates appear as adults in two major forms, known as \"sea squirts\" and salps, both of which are soft-bodied filter-feeders that lack the standard features of chordates. Sea squirts are sessile and consist mainly of water pumps and filter-feeding apparatus; salps float in mid-water, feeding on plankton, and have a two-generation cycle in which one generation is solitary and the next forms chain-like colonies. However, all tunicate larvae have the standard chordate features, including long, tadpole-like tails; they also have rudimentary brains, light sensors and tilt sensors. The third main group of tunicates, Appendicularia (also known as Larvacea), retain tadpole-like shapes and active swimming all their lives, and were for a long time regarded as larvae of sea squirts or salps. The etymology of the term Urochordata (Balfour 1881) is from the ancient Greek \u03bf\u1f50\u03c1\u03ac (oura, \"tail\") + Latin chorda (\"cord\"), because the notochord is only found in the tail. The term Tunicata (Lamarck 1816) is recognised as having precedence and is now more commonly used.\nCraniata (Vertebrata).\nCraniates all have distinct skulls. They include the hagfish, which have no vertebrae. Michael J. Benton commented that \"craniates are characterized by their heads, just as chordates, or possibly all deuterostomes, are by their tails\".\nMost craniates are vertebrates, in which the notochord is replaced by the vertebral column. These consist of a series of bony or cartilaginous cylindrical vertebrae, generally with neural arches that protect the spinal cord, and with projections that link the vertebrae. However hagfish have incomplete braincases and no vertebrae, and are therefore not regarded as vertebrates,\nbut as members of the craniates, the group from which vertebrates are thought to have evolved. However the cladistic exclusion of hagfish from the vertebrates is controversial, as they may be degenerate vertebrates who have lost their vertebral columns.\nThe position of lampreys is ambiguous. They have complete braincases and rudimentary vertebrae, and therefore may be regarded as vertebrates and true fish. However, molecular phylogenetics, which uses biochemical features to classify organisms, has produced both results that group them with vertebrates and others that group them with hagfish. If lampreys are more closely related to the hagfish than the other vertebrates, this would suggest that they form a clade, which has been named the Cyclostomata.\nPhylogeny.\nOverview.\nThere is still much ongoing differential (DNA sequence based) comparison research that is trying to separate out the simplest forms of chordates. As some lineages of the 90% of species that lack a backbone or notochord might have lost these structures over time, this complicates the classification of chordates. Some chordate lineages may only be found by DNA analysis, when there is no physical trace of any chordate-like structures.\nAttempts to work out the evolutionary relationships of the chordates have produced several hypotheses. The current consensus is that chordates are monophyletic, meaning that the Chordata include all and only the descendants of a single common ancestor, which is itself a chordate, and that craniates' nearest relatives are tunicates.\nAll of the earliest chordate fossils have been found in the Early Cambrian Chengjiang fauna, and include two species that are regarded as fish, which implies that they are vertebrates. Because the fossil record of early chordates is poor, only molecular phylogenetics offers a reasonable prospect of dating their emergence. However, the use of molecular phylogenetics for dating evolutionary transitions is controversial.\nIt has also proved difficult to produce a detailed classification within the living chordates. Attempts to produce evolutionary \"family trees\" shows that many of the traditional classes are paraphyletic.\nDiagram of the family tree of chordates\nWhile this has been well known since the 19th century, an insistence on only monophyletic taxa has resulted in vertebrate classification being in a state of flux.\nThe majority of animals more complex than jellyfish and other Cnidarians are split into two groups, the protostomes and deuterostomes, the latter of which contains chordates. It seems very likely the \"Kimberella\" was a member of the protostomes. If so, this means the protostome and deuterostome lineages must have split some time before \"Kimberella\" appeared\u2014at least , and hence well before the start of the Cambrian . The Ediacaran fossil \"Ernietta\", from about , may represent a deuterostome animal.\n \nFossils of one major deuterostome group, the echinoderms (whose modern members include starfish, sea urchins and crinoids), are quite common from the start of the Cambrian, . The Mid Cambrian fossil \"Rhabdotubus johanssoni\" has been interpreted as a pterobranch hemichordate. Opinions differ about whether the Chengjiang fauna fossil \"Yunnanozoon\", from the earlier Cambrian, was a hemichordate or chordate. Another fossil, \"Haikouella lanceolata\", also from the Chengjiang fauna, is interpreted as a chordate and possibly a craniate, as it shows signs of a heart, arteries, gill filaments, a tail, a neural chord with a brain at the front end, and possibly eyes\u2014although it also had short tentacles round its mouth. \"Haikouichthys\" and \"Myllokunmingia\", also from the Chengjiang fauna, are regarded as fish. \"Pikaia\", discovered much earlier (1911) but from the Mid Cambrian Burgess Shale (505 Ma), is also regarded as a primitive chordate. On the other hand, fossils of early chordates are very rare, since invertebrate chordates have no bones or teeth, and only one has been reported for the rest of the Cambrian.\nThe evolutionary relationships between the chordate groups and between chordates as a whole and their closest deuterostome relatives have been debated since 1890. Studies based on anatomical, embryological, and paleontological data have produced different \"family trees\". Some closely linked chordates and hemichordates, but that idea is now rejected. Combining such analyses with data from a small set of ribosome RNA genes eliminated some older ideas, but opened up the possibility that tunicates (urochordates) are \"basal deuterostomes\", surviving members of the group from which echinoderms, hemichordates and chordates evolved. Some researchers believe that, within the chordates, craniates are most closely related to cephalochordates, but there are also reasons for regarding tunicates (urochordates) as craniates' closest relatives.\nSince early chordates have left a poor fossil record, attempts have been made to calculate the key dates in their evolution by molecular phylogenetics techniques\u2014by analyzing biochemical differences, mainly in RNA. One such study suggested that deuterostomes arose before and the earliest chordates around . However, molecular estimates of dates often disagree with each other and with the fossil record, and their assumption that the molecular clock runs at a known constant rate has been challenged.\nTraditionally, Cephalochordata and Craniata were grouped into the proposed clade \"Euchordata\", which would have been the sister group to Tunicata/Urochordata. More recently, Cephalochordata has been thought of as a sister group to the \"Olfactores\", which includes the craniates and tunicates. The matter is not yet settled.\nDiagram.\nPhylogenetic tree of the Chordate phylum. Lines show probable evolutionary relationships, including extinct taxa, which are denoted with a dagger, \u2020. Some are invertebrates. The positions (relationships) of the Lancelet, Tunicate, and Craniata clades are as reported\nClosest nonchordate relatives.\nHemichordates.\nHemichordates (\"half chordates\") have some features similar to those of chordates: branchial openings that open into the pharynx and look rather like gill slits; stomochords, similar in composition to notochords, but running in a circle round the \"collar\", which is ahead of the mouth; and a dorsal nerve cord\u2014but also a smaller ventral nerve cord.\nThere are two living groups of hemichordates. The solitary enteropneusts, commonly known as \"acorn worms\", have long proboscises and worm-like bodies with up to 200 branchial slits, are up to long, and burrow though seafloor sediments. Pterobranchs are colonial animals, often less than long individually, whose dwellings are interconnected. Each filter feeds by means of a pair of branched tentacles, and has a short, shield-shaped proboscis. The extinct graptolites, colonial animals whose fossils look like tiny hacksaw blades, lived in tubes similar to those of pterobranchs.\nEchinoderms.\nEchinoderms differ from chordates and their other relatives in three conspicuous ways: they possess bilateral symmetry only as larvae - in adulthood they have radial symmetry, meaning that their body pattern is shaped like a wheel; they have tube feet; and their bodies are supported by skeletons made of calcite, a material not used by chordates. Their hard, calcified shells keep their bodies well protected from the environment, and these skeletons enclose their bodies, but are also covered by thin skins. The feet are powered by another unique feature of echinoderms, a water vascular system of canals that also functions as a \"lung\" and surrounded by muscles that act as pumps. Crinoids look rather like flowers, and use their feather-like arms to filter food particles out of the water; most live anchored to rocks, but a few can move very slowly. Other echinoderms are mobile and take a variety of body shapes, for example starfish, sea urchins and sea cucumbers.\nHistory of name.\nAlthough the name Chordata is attributed to William Bateson (1885), it was already in prevalent use by 1880. Ernst Haeckel described a taxon comprising tunicates, cephalochordates, and vertebrates in 1866. Though he used the German vernacular form, it is allowed under the ICZN code because of its subsequent latinization."}
{"id": "5132", "revid": "1012975679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5132", "title": "Charlize Theron", "text": "Charlize Theron ( ; ; born 7 August 1975) is a South African and American actress and producer. One of the world's highest-paid actresses, Theron is the recipient of numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a Screen Actors Guild Award, and a Golden Globe Award. In 2016, \"Time\" named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world.\nTheron came to international prominence in the 1990s by playing the leading lady in the Hollywood films \"The Devil's Advocate\" (1997), \"Mighty Joe Young\" (1998), and \"The Cider House Rules\" (1999). She received critical acclaim for her portrayal of serial killer Aileen Wuornos in \"Monster\" (2003), for which she won the Silver Bear and Academy Award for Best Actress, becoming the first South African to win an Oscar in an acting category. She received another Academy Award nomination for playing a sexually abused woman seeking justice in the drama \"North Country\" (2005).\nTheron has since starred in several commercially successful action films, including \"The Italian Job\" (2003), \"Hancock\" (2008), \"Snow White and the Huntsman\" (2012), \"Prometheus\" (2012), \"\" (2015), \"The Fate of the Furious\" (2017), \"Atomic Blonde\" (2017), and \"The Old Guard\" (2020). She also received praise for playing troubled women in Jason Reitman's comedy-dramas \"Young Adult\" (2011) and \"Tully\" (2018), and for portraying Megyn Kelly in the biographical drama \"Bombshell\" (2019), receiving a third Academy Award nomination for the last.\nSince the early 2000s, Theron has ventured into film production with her company Denver and Delilah Productions. She has produced numerous films, in many of which she had a starring role, including \"The Burning Plain\" (2008), \"Dark Places\" (2015), and \"Long Shot\" (2019). Theron became an American citizen in 2007, while retaining her South African citizenship. She has been honored with a motion picture star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nEarly life.\nTheron was born in Benoni, in the then Transvaal Province (now Gauteng Province) of South Africa, the only child of road constructionists Gerda (born Maritz) and Charles Theron (27 November 1947 \u2013 21 June 1991). Second Boer War military leader Danie Theron was her great-great-uncle. She is from an Afrikaner family, and her ancestry includes Dutch as well as French and German; her French forebears were early Huguenot colonizers in South Africa. \"Theron\" is an Occitan surname (originally spelled Th\u00e9ron) pronounced in Afrikaans as .\nShe grew up on her parents' farm in Benoni, near Johannesburg. On 21 June 1991, Theron's father, an alcoholic, threatened both teenaged Charlize and her mother while drunk, physically attacking her mother and firing a gun at both of them. Theron's mother retrieved her own handgun, shot back and killed him. The shooting was legally adjudged to have been self-defense, and her mother faced no charges.\nTheron attended Putfontein Primary School (Laerskool Putfontein), a period during which she has said she was not \"fitting in\". She was frequently unwell with jaundice throughout childhood and the antibiotics she was administered made her upper incisor milk teeth rot (they had to be surgically removed) and teeth did not grow until she was roughly ten years old. At 13, Theron was sent to boarding school and began her studies at the National School of the Arts in Johannesburg. Although Theron is fluent in English, her first language is Afrikaans.\nCareer.\nBeginnings (1991\u20131996).\nAlthough seeing herself as a dancer, at age 16 Theron won a one-year modelling contract at a local competition in Salerno and moved with her mother to Milan, Italy. After Theron spent a year modelling throughout Europe, she and her mother moved to the US, both New York City and Miami. In New York, she attended the Joffrey Ballet School, where she trained as a ballet dancer until a knee injury closed this career path. As Theron recalled in 2008:\nIn 1994, Theron flew to Los Angeles, on a one-way ticket her mother bought for her, intending to work in the film industry. During the initial months there, she lived in a motel with the $300 budget that her mother had given her; she continued receiving cheques from New York and lived \"from paycheck to paycheck\" to the point of stealing bread from a basket in a restaurant to survive. One day, she went to a Hollywood Boulevard bank to cash a few cheques, including one her mother had sent to help with the rent, but it was rejected because it was out-of-state and she was not an American citizen. Theron argued and pleaded with the bank teller until talent agent John Crosby, who was the next customer behind her, cashed it for her and gave her his business card.\nCrosby introduced Theron to an acting school, and in 1995 she played her first non-speaking role in the horror film \"\". Her first speaking role was Helga Svelgen the hitwoman in \"2 Days in the Valley\" (1996), but despite the movie's mixed reviews, attention drew to Theron due to her beauty and the scene where she fought Teri Hatcher's character. Theron feared being typecast as characters similar to Helga and recalled being asked to repeat her performance in the movie during auditions: \"A lot of people were saying, 'You should just hit while the iron's hot'[...] But playing the same part over and over doesn't leave you with any longevity. And I knew it was going to be harder for me, because of what I look like, to branch out to different kinds of roles\".\nWhen auditioning for \"Showgirls\", Theron was introduced to talent agent J. J. Harris by the co-casting director Johanna Ray. She recalled being surprised at how much faith Harris had in her potential and referred to Harris as her mentor. Harris would find scripts and movies for Theron in a variety of genres and encouraged her to become a producer. She would be Theron's agent for over 15 years until Harris's death.\nRise to fame (1997\u20132002).\nLarger roles in widely released Hollywood films followed, and her career expanded by the end of the 1990s. In the horror drama \"The Devil's Advocate\" (1997), which is credited to be her break-out film, Theron starred alongside Keanu Reeves and Al Pacino as the haunted wife of an unusually successful lawyer. She subsequently starred in the adventure film \"Mighty Joe Young\" (1998) as the friend and protector of a giant mountain gorilla, and in the drama \"The Cider House Rules\" (1999), as a woman who seeks an abortion in World War II-era Maine. While \"Mighty Joe Young\" flopped at the box office, \"The Devil's Advocate\" and \"The Cider House Rules\" were commercially successful. She was on the cover of the January 1999 issue of \"Vanity Fair\" as the \"White Hot Venus\". She also appeared on the cover of the May 1999 issue of \"Playboy\" magazine, in photos taken several years earlier when she was an unknown model; Theron unsuccessfully sued the magazine for publishing them without her consent.\nBy the early 2000s, Theron continued to steadily take on roles in films such as \"Reindeer Games\" (2000), \"The Yards\" (2000), \"The Legend of Bagger Vance\" (2000), \"Men of Honor\" (2000), \"Sweet November\" (2001), \"The Curse of the Jade Scorpion\" (2001), and \"Trapped\" (2002), all of which, despite achieving only limited commercial success, helped to establish her as an actress. On this period in her career, Theron remarked: \"I kept finding myself in a place where directors would back me but studios didn't. [I began] a love affair with directors, the ones I really, truly admired. I found myself making really bad movies, too. \"Reindeer Games\" was not a good movie, but I did it because I loved [director] John Frankenheimer.\"\nWorldwide recognition (2003\u20132008).\nTheron starred as a safe and vault \"technician\" in the 2003 heist film \"The Italian Job\", an American homage/remake of the 1969 British film of the same name, directed by F. Gary Gray and opposite Mark Wahlberg, Edward Norton, Jason Statham, Seth Green, and Donald Sutherland. The film was a box office success, grossing US$176 million worldwide.\nIn \"Monster\" (2003), Theron portrayed serial killer Aileen Wuornos, a former prostitute who was executed in Florida in 2002 for killing six men (she was not tried for a seventh murder) in the late 1980s and early 1990s; film critic Roger Ebert felt that Theron gave \"one of the greatest performances in the history of the cinema\". For her portrayal, she was awarded the Academy Award for Best Actress at the 76th Academy Awards in February 2004, as well as the Screen Actors Guild Award and the Golden Globe Award. She is the first South African to win an Oscar for Best Actress. The Oscar win pushed her to \"The Hollywood Reporter's\" 2006 list of highest-paid actresses in Hollywood, earning up to US$10 million for a film; she ranked seventh. \"AskMen\" also named her the number one most desirable woman of 2003.\nFor her role of Swedish actress and singer Britt Ekland in the 2004 HBO film \"The Life and Death of Peter Sellers\", Theron garnered Golden Globe Award and Primetime Emmy Award nominations. In 2005, she portrayed Rita, the mentally challenged love interest of Michael Bluth (Jason Bateman), on the third season of Fox's television series \"Arrested Development\", and starred in the financially unsuccessful science fiction thriller \"Aeon Flux\"; for her voice-over work in the \"Aeon Flux\" video game, she received a Spike Video Game Award for Best Performance by a Human Female.\nIn the critically acclaimed drama \"North Country\" (2005), Theron portrayed a single mother and an iron mine worker experiencing sexual harassment. David Rooney of \"Variety\" wrote: \"The film represents a confident next step for lead Charlize Theron. Though the challenges of following a career-redefining Oscar role have stymied actresses, Theron segues from \"Monster\" to a performance in many ways more accomplished [...] The strength of both the performance and character anchor the film firmly in the tradition of other dramas about working-class women leading the fight over industrial workplace issues, such as \"Norma Rae\" or \"Silkwood\".\" Roger Ebert echoed the same sentiment, calling her \"an actress who has the beauty of a fashion model but has found resources within herself for these powerful roles about unglamorous women in the world of men.\" For her performance, she received Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for Best Actress. \"Ms.\" magazine also honoured her for this performance with a feature article in its Fall 2005 issue. On 30 September 2005, Theron received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nIn 2007, Theron played a police detective in the critically acclaimed crime film \"In the Valley of Elah\", and produced and starred as a reckless, slatternly mother in the little-seen drama film \"Sleepwalking\", alongside Nick Stahl and AnnaSophia Robb. \"The Christian Science Monitor\" praised the latter film, commenting that \"Despite its deficiencies, and the inadequate screen time allotted to Theron (who's quite good), \"Sleepwalking\" has a core of feeling\". In 2008, Theron starred as a woman who faced a traumatic childhood in the drama \"The Burning Plain\", directed by Guillermo Arriaga and opposite Jennifer Lawrence and Kim Basinger, and also played the ex-wife of an alcoholic superhero alongside Will Smith in the superhero film \"Hancock\". \"The Burning Plain\" found a limited release in USA theaters, but grossed $5,267,917 outside the USA. Moreover \"Hancock\" made US$624.3 million worldwide. Also in 2008, Theron was named the Hasty Pudding Theatricals Woman of the Year, and was asked to be a UN Messenger of Peace by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. During this time she began appearing in J'adore Commercials.\nHiatus and return to acting (2009\u20132011).\nHer film releases in 2009 were the post-apocalyptic drama \"The Road\", in which she briefly appeared in flashbacks, and the animated film \"Astro Boy\", providing her voice for a character. On 4 December 2009, Theron co-presented the draw for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in Cape Town, South Africa, accompanied by several other celebrities of South African nationality or ancestry. During rehearsals she drew an Ireland ball instead of France as a joke at the expense of FIFA, referring to Thierry Henry's handball controversy in the play-off match between France and Ireland. The stunt alarmed FIFA enough for it to fear she might do it again in front of a live global audience.\nFollowing a two-year hiatus from the big screen, Theron returned to the spotlight in 2011 with the black comedy \"Young Adult\". Directed by Jason Reitman, the film earned critical acclaim, particularly for her performance as a depressed divorced, alcoholic 37-year-old ghostwriter. Richard Roeper awarded the film an A grade, stating \"Charlize Theron delivers one of the most impressive performances of the year\". She was nominated for a Golden Globe Award and several other awards. Roger Ebert called her one of the best actors working today.\nIn 2011, Theron spoke about her method of working on roles: \"When I'm figuring out a character, for me it's easy, since once I say yes to something, I become super-obsessed about it \u2013 and I have an obsessive nature in general. How I want to play it starts at that moment. It's a very lonely, internal experience. I think about [the character] all the time \u2013 I observe things, I see things and file things [in my head], everything geared to what I'm going to do. I'm obsessed with the human condition. You read the script and become obsessed with [a character's] nature, her habits. When the camera rolls, it's time to do my job, to do the honest truth\".\nReturn to prominence and critical acclaim (2012\u2013present).\nIn 2012, Theron took on the role of villain in two big-budgeted films. She played Evil Queen Ravenna, Snow White's evil stepmother, in \"Snow White and the Huntsman\", opposite Kristen Stewart and Chris Hemsworth, and appeared as a crew member with a hidden agenda in Ridley Scott's \"Prometheus\". Mick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" found \"Snow White and the Huntsman\" to be \"[a] slow, boring film that has no charm and is highlighted only by a handful of special effects and Charlize Theron's truly evil queen\", while \"The Hollywood Reporter\" writer Todd McCarthy, describing her role in \"Prometheus\", asserted: \"Theron is in ice goddess mode here, with the emphasis on ice [...] but perfect for the role all the same\". Both films were major box office hits, grossing around US$400 million internationally each.\nIn 2013, \"Vulture\"/\"NYMag\" named her the 68th Most Valuable Star in Hollywood saying: \"We're just happy that Theron can stay on the list in a year when she didn't come out with anything [...] any actress who's got that kind of skill, beauty, and ferocity ought to have a permanent place in Hollywood\". On 10 May 2014, Theron hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" on NBC. In 2014, Theron took on the role of the wife of an infamous sheepherder in the western comedy film \"A Million Ways to Die in the West\", directed by Seth MacFarlane, which was met with mediocre reviews and moderate box office returns.\nIn 2015, Theron played the sole survivor of the massacre of her family in the film adaptation of the Gillian Flynn novel \"Dark Places\", directed by Gilles Paquet-Brenner, in which she had a producer credit, and starred as Imperator Furiosa in \"\" (2015), opposite Tom Hardy. \"Mad Max\" received widespread acclaim, with praise going towards Theron for the dominant nature taken by her character. The film made US$378.4 million worldwide.\nTheron reprised her role as Queen Ravenna in the 2016 film \"\", a sequel to \"Snow White and the Huntsman\", which was a critical and commercial failure. In 2016, Theron also starred as a physician and activist working in West Africa in the little-seen romantic drama \"The Last Face\", with Sean Penn, provided her voice for the 3D stop-motion fantasy film \"Kubo and the Two Strings\", and produced the independent drama \"Brain on Fire\". That year, \"Time\" named her in the Time 100 list of the most influential people in the world.\nIn 2017, Theron starred in \"The Fate of the Furious\" as the main antagonist of the entire franchise, and played a spy on the eve of the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 in \"Atomic Blonde\", an adaptation of the graphic novel \"The Coldest City\", directed by David Leitch. With a worldwide gross of US$1.2 billion, \"The Fate of The Furious\" became Theron's most widely seen film, and \"Atomic Blonde\" was described by Richard Roeper of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" as \"a slick vehicle for the magnetic, badass charms of Charlize Theron, who is now officially an A-list action star on the strength of this film and \"Mad Max: Fury Road\"\".\nIn the black comedy \"Tully\" (2018), directed by Jason Reitman and written by Diablo Cody, Theron played an overwhelmed mother of three. The film was acclaimed by critics, who concluded it \"delves into the modern parenthood experience with an admirably deft blend of humor and raw honesty, brought to life by an outstanding performance by Charlize Theron\". She also played the president of a pharmaceutical in the little-seen crime film \"Gringo\" and produced the biographical war drama film \"A Private War\", both released in 2018.\nIn 2019, Theron produced and starred in the romantic comedy film \"Long Shot\", opposite Seth Rogen and directed by Jonathan Levine, portraying a U.S. Secretary of State who reconnects with a journalist she used to babysit. The film had its world premiere at South by Southwest in March 2019, and was released on 3 May 2019, to positive reviews from film critics. Theron next starred as Megyn Kelly in the drama \"Bombshell\", which she also co-produced. Directed by Jay Roach, the film revolves around the sexual harassment allegations made against Fox News CEO Roger Ailes by former female employees. For her work in the film, Theron was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress, Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama, Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress, Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role, and BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role. That year, \"Forbes\" ranked her as the ninth highest-paid actress in the world, with an annual income of $23 million.\nTheron produced and starred in \"The Old Guard\" directed by Gina Prince-Bythewood, opposite KiKi Layne for Netflix, which was released in July 2020. She will next reprise her role as Cipher in \"F9\", originally set for release on 22 May 2020, before its delay to 2 April 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIt was announced in February of 2021 that she will be playing Lady Lesso in upcoming movie The School for Good and Evil (film) (2022).\nOther ventures.\nActivism.\nThe Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project (CTAOP) was created in 2007 by Theron, who the following year was named a UN Messenger of Peace, in an effort to support African youth in the fight against HIV/AIDS. The project is committed to supporting community-engaged organizations that address the key drivers of the disease. Although the geographic scope of CTAOP is Sub-Saharan Africa, the primary concentration has mostly been Charlize's home country of South Africa. By November 2017, CTAOP had raised more than $6.3 million to support African organizations working on the ground.\nIn 2008, Theron was named a United Nations Messenger of Peace. In his citation, Ban Ki-Moon said of Theron \"You have consistently dedicated yourself to improving the lives of women and children in South Africa, and to preventing and stopping violence against women and girls\". She recorded a public service announcement in 2014 as part of their Stop Rape Now program.\nIn December 2009, CTAOP and TOMS Shoes partnered to create a limited edition unisex shoe. The shoe was made from vegan materials and inspired by the African baobab tree, the silhouette of which was embroidered on blue and orange canvas. Ten thousand pairs were given to destitute children, and a portion of the proceeds went to CTAOP.\nIn 2020, CTAOP partnered with Parfums Christian Dior to create Dior Stands With Women, an initiative that includes Cara Delevingne, Yalitza Aparicio, Leona Bloom, Paloma Elsesser, and others, to encourage women to be assertive by documenting their journey, challenges and accomplishments.\nTheron is involved in women's rights organizations and has marched in pro-choice rallies.\nTheron is a supporter of same-sex marriage and attended a march and rally to support that in Fresno, California, on 30 May 2009. She publicly stated that she refused to get married until same sex marriage became legal in the United States, saying: \"I don't want to get married because right now the institution of marriage feels very one-sided, and I want to live in a country where we all have equal rights. I think it would be exactly the same if we were married, but for me to go through that kind of ceremony, because I have so many friends who are gays and lesbians who would so badly want to get married, that I wouldn't be able to sleep with myself\". Theron further elaborated on her stance in a June 2011 interview on \"Piers Morgan Tonight\". She stated: \"I do have a problem with the fact that our government hasn't stepped up enough to make this federal, to make [gay marriage] legal. I think everybody has that right\".\nIn March 2014, CTAOP was among the charities that benefited from the annual Fame and Philanthropy fundraising event on the night of the 86th Academy Awards. Theron was an honoured guest along with Halle Berry and keynote speaker James Cameron.\nIn 2015, Theron signed an open letter which One Campaign had been collecting signatures for; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urging them to focus on women as they serve as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively, which will start to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 that will establish new development goals for the generation. In August 2018, she visited South Africa with Trevor Noah and made a donation to the South African charity Life Choices. In 2018, she gave a speech about AIDS prevention at the 22nd International AIDS Conference in Amsterdam, organized by the International AIDS Society.\nEndorsements.\nHaving signed a deal with John Galliano in 2004, Theron replaced Estonian model Tiiu Kuik as the spokeswoman in the J'Adore advertisements by Christian Dior. In 2018, she appeared in a new advertisement for Dior J'adore. From October 2005 to December 2006, Theron earned US$3 million for the use of her image in a worldwide print media advertising campaign for Raymond Weil watches. In February 2006, she and her production company were sued by Weil for breach of contract. The lawsuit was settled on 4 November 2008. In 2018, Theron joined Brad Pitt, Daniel Wu and Adam Driver as brand ambassadors for Breitling, dubbed the Breitling Cinema Squad.\nPersonal life.\nIn 2007, Theron became a naturalized citizen of the United States, while retaining her South African citizenship. She lives in Los Angeles.\nTheron has adopted two children: a trans daughter Jackson in March 2012 and a daughter August in July 2015. She had been interested in adoption throughout her life because of her concern about overly-full orphanages in her childhood. In April 2019, Theron revealed that her seven-year-old child Jackson is a transgender girl. She stated, \"They were born who they are and exactly where in the world both of them get to find themselves as they grow up, and who they want to be, is not for me to decide\".\nActing inspirations include Susan Sarandon and Sigourney Weaver. She has described her admiration for Tom Hanks as a \"love affair\" and watched many of his movies throughout her youth. Hollywood actors were never featured in magazines in South Africa so she never knew how famous she was until she moved to the United States, which has been inferred as a factor to her \"down-to-earth\" attitude to fame. After filming for \"That Thing You Do!\" finished, Theron got Hanks' autograph on her script. She later presented him his Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2020, in which Hanks revealed that he had a mutual admiration for Theron's career since the day he met her.\nTheron revealed in 2018 that she went to therapy in her 30s because she had unexplained anger, discovering that it was due to her frustration growing up during South Africa's apartheid, which ended when she was 15.\nRelationships.\nTheron's first public relationship was with actor Craig Bierko, whom she dated from 1995 to 1997.\nTheron was in a three-year relationship with singer Stephan Jenkins until October 2001. Some of Third Eye Blind's third album, \"Out of the Vein\", explores the emotions Jenkins experienced as a result of their breakup.\nTheron began a relationship with Irish actor Stuart Townsend in 2001 after meeting him on the set of \"Trapped\". The couple lived together in Los Angeles and Ireland. Theron split from Townsend in late 2009.\nIn December 2013, Theron began dating American actor Sean Penn. The two were rumoured to be engaged in December 2014. Theron ended their relationship in June 2015.\nUnited Nations Messenger of Peace.\nSince 2008, Theron has been officially recognized as a United Nations Messenger of Peace.\nHealth concerns.\nTheron often quips that she has more injuries on sets that are not action films; however, while filming \"\u00c6on Flux\" in Berlin, Theron suffered a herniated disc in her neck, caused by a fall while filming a series of back handsprings. It required her to wear a neck brace for a month. Her thumb ligament tore during \"The Old Guard\" when her thumb caught in another actor's jacket during a fight scene, which required three operations and six months in a thumb brace. There were no major injuries during the filming of \"Atomic Blonde\" but she broke teeth from jaw clenching and had dental surgery to remove them: \"I had the removal and I had to put a donor bone in there to heal until I came back, and then I had another surgery to put a metal screw in there.\"\nOutside of action movies, she had a herniated disk in her lower back as she filmed \"Tully\" and also suffered from a depression-like state, which she theorised was the result from the processed food she had to eat for her character's post-natal body. In July 2009, she was diagnosed with a serious stomach virus, thought to be contracted while overseas. While filming \"The Road\", Theron injured her vocal cords during the labour screaming scenes. On her first modelling job in Morocco, the camel she sat on smacked its head into her jaw, causing two dislocations. When promoting \"Long Shot\", she revealed that she laughed so hard at \"Borat\" that her neck locked for five days. Then she added that on the set of \"Long Shot\" she \"ended up in the ER\" after knocking her head against a bench behind her when she was putting on knee pads.\nAwards and nominations.\nAs of early 2020, Theron's extensive film work has earned her 100 award nominations and 39 wins."}
{"id": "5133", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5133", "title": "Charlize Theron/Filmography", "text": ""}
{"id": "5134", "revid": "23950057", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5134", "title": "Chess", "text": "Chess is a recreational and competitive board game played between two players. It is sometimes called Western or international chess to distinguish it from related games such as xiangqi. The current form of the game emerged in Southern Europe during the second half of the 15th century after evolving from similar, much older games of Indian and Persian origin. Today, chess is one of the world's most popular games, played by millions of people worldwide at home, in clubs, online, by correspondence, and in tournaments.\nChess is an abstract strategy game and involves no hidden information. It is played on a square chessboard with 64 squares arranged in an eight-by-eight grid. At the start, each player (one controlling the white pieces, the other controlling the black pieces) controls sixteen pieces: one king, one queen, two rooks, two knights, two bishops, and eight pawns. The object of the game is to checkmate the opponent's king, whereby the king is under immediate attack (in \"check\") and there is no way to remove it from attack on the next move. There are also several ways a game can end in a draw.\nOrganized chess arose in the 19th century. Chess competition today is governed internationally by FIDE (International Chess Federation). The first universally recognized World Chess Champion, Wilhelm Steinitz, claimed his title in 1886; Magnus Carlsen is the current World Champion. A huge body of chess theory has developed since the game's inception. Aspects of art are found in chess composition; and chess in its turn influenced Western culture and art and has connections with other fields such as mathematics, computer science, and psychology.\nOne of the goals of early computer scientists was to create a chess-playing machine. In 1997, Deep Blue became the first computer to beat the reigning World Champion in a match when it defeated Garry Kasparov. Today's chess engines are significantly stronger than even the best human players, and have deeply influenced the development of chess theory.\nRules.\nThe rules of chess are published by FIDE (\"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale des \u00c9checs\"), chess's international governing body, in its \"Handbook\". Rules published by national governing bodies, or by unaffiliated chess organizations, commercial publishers, etc., may differ. FIDE's rules were most recently revised in 2018.\nSetup.\nChess pieces are divided into white and black sets. While the sets may not be literally white and black (e.g. the light set may be a yellowish or off-white color, the dark set may be red), they are always referred to as \"white\" and \"black\". Each set consists of 16 pieces: one king, one queen, two rooks, two bishops, two knights, and eight pawns. The pieces are set out as shown in the diagram and photo. The players of the sets are referred to as \"White\" and \"Black\", respectively.\nThe game is played on a square board of eight rows (called ', denoted \"1\" to \"8\" from bottom to top according to White's perspective) and eight columns (called ', denoted \"a\" to \"h\" from left to right according to White's perspective). The 64 squares alternate in color and are referred to as \"light\" and \"dark\" squares. The chessboard is placed with a light square at the right-hand corner nearest to each player. Thus, each queen starts on a square of its own color (the white queen on a light square; the black queen on a dark square).\nMovement.\nIn competitive games, the colors are allocated by the organizers; in informal games, the colors are usually decided randomly, for example by a coin toss, or by one player concealing a white pawn in one hand and a black pawn in the other, and having the opponent choose. White moves first, after which players alternate turns, moving one piece per turn (except for castling, when two pieces are moved). A piece is moved to either an unoccupied square or one occupied by an opponent's piece, which is captured and removed from play. With the sole exception of \"en passant\", all pieces capture by moving to the square that the opponent's piece occupies.\nMoving is compulsory; it is illegal to skip a turn, even when having to move is detrimental. A player may not make any move that would put or leave the player's own king in check. If the player to move has no legal move, the game is over; the result is either checkmate (a loss for the player with no legal move) if the king is in check, or stalemate (a draw) if the king is not.\nEach piece has its own way of moving. In the diagrams, the dots mark the squares to which the piece can move if there are no intervening piece(s) of either color (except the knight, which leaps over any intervening pieces).\nCastling.\nOnce in every game, each king can make a special move, known as \"castling\". Castling consists of moving the king two squares along the first rank toward a rook on the player's first rank, and then placing the rook on the last square that the king crossed. Castling is permissible if the following conditions are met:\n\"En passant\".\nWhen a pawn makes a two-step advance from its starting position and there is an opponent's pawn on a square next to the destination square on an adjacent file, then the opponent's pawn can capture it \"en passant\" (\"in passing\"), moving to the square the pawn passed over. This can be done only on the very next turn; otherwise, the right to do so is forfeited. For example, in the animated diagram, the black pawn advances two steps from g7 to g5, and the white pawn on f5 can take it \"en passant\" on g6 (but only on White's next move).\nPromotion.\nWhen a pawn advances to the eighth rank, as a part of the move it is \"promoted\" and must be exchanged for the player's choice of queen, rook, bishop, or knight of the same color. Usually, the pawn is chosen to be promoted to a queen, but in some cases, another piece is chosen; this is called underpromotion. In the animated diagram, the pawn on c7 can be advanced to the eighth rank and be promoted. There is no restriction on the piece promoted to, so it is possible to have more pieces of the same type than at the start of the game (e.g., two or more queens).\nEnd of the game.\nCheck and checkmate.\nWhen a king is under immediate attack by one or two of the opponent's pieces, it is said to be \"in check\". A move in response to a check is legal only if it results in a position where the king is no longer in check. This can involve capturing the checking piece; interposing a piece between the checking piece and the king (which is possible only if the attacking piece is a queen, rook, or bishop and there is a square between it and the king); or moving the king to a square where it is not under attack. Castling is not a permissible response to a check.\nThe object of the game is to checkmate the opponent; this occurs when the opponent's king is in check, and there is no legal way to remove it from attack. It is never legal for a player to make a move that puts or leaves the player's own king in check. In casual games, it is common to announce \"check\" when putting the opponent's king in check, but this is not required by the rules of chess and is not usually done in tournaments.\nStalemate and dead position.\nIf the player to move has no legal moves, but is not in check, the position is a stalemate, and the game is drawn.\nIf the game reaches a \"dead position\", in which neither player is able to checkmate the other by any legal sequence of moves, the game is drawn. For example, if only the kings are on the board, all other pieces having been captured, checkmate is impossible and the game is drawn by this rule.\nOn the other hand, if both players still have a knight there is a highly unlikely yet theoretical possibility of checkmate, so this rule does not apply. This rule supersedes the previous rule which referred to \"insufficient material\", extending it to include other positions where checkmate is impossible such as blocked pawn endings where the pawns cannot be attacked.\nOther rules.\nGames can also be won in the following ways:\nThere are also several ways games can end in a draw:\nTime control.\nIn competition, chess games are played with a time control. If a player's time runs out before the game is completed, the game is automatically lost (provided the opponent has enough pieces left to deliver checkmate). The duration of a game ranges from long (or \"classical\") games, which can take up to seven hours (even longer if adjournments are permitted), to bullet chess (under 3\u00a0minutes per player for the entire game). Intermediate between these are rapid chess games, lasting between 20\u00a0minutes and two hours per game, a popular time control in amateur weekend tournaments.\nTime is controlled using a chess clock that has two displays, one for each player's remaining time. Analog chess clocks have been largely replaced by digital clocks, which allow for time controls with increments.\nTime controls are also enforced in correspondence chess competition. A typical time control is 50 days for every 10 moves.\nNotation.\nMany different notation systems have historically been used to record chess moves; the standard system today is short-form algebraic notation. In this system, each square is uniquely identified by a set of co-ordinates, \"a\"\u2013\"h\" for the files followed by \"1\"\u2013\"8\" for the ranks. The usual format is:\nThe pieces are identified by their initials. In English, these are \"K\" (king), \"Q\" (queen), \"R\" (rook), \"B\" (bishop), and \"N\" (knight; N is used to avoid confusion with king). For example, Qg5 means \"queen moves to the g-file, 5th rank\" (that is, to the square g5). Different initials may be used for other languages. In chess literature figurine algebraic notation (FAN) may be used to avoid language issues.\nTo resolve ambiguities, an additional letter or number is added to indicate the file or rank from which the piece moved (e.g. Ngf3 means \"knight from the g-file moves to the square f3\"; R1e2 means \"rook on the first rank moves to e2\"). For pawns, no letter initial is used; so e4 means \"pawn moves to the square e4\".\nIf the piece makes a capture, \"x\" is usually inserted before the destination square. Thus Bxf3 means \"bishop captures on f3\". When a pawn makes a capture, the file from which the pawn departed is used to identify the pawn making the capture, for example, exd5 (pawn on the e-file captures the piece on d5). Ranks may be omitted if unambiguous, for example, exd (pawn on the e-file captures a piece somewhere on the d-file). A minority of publications use \":\" to indicate a capture, and some omit the capture symbol altogether. In its most abbreviated form, exd5 may be rendered simply as ed. An \"en passant\" capture may optionally be marked with the notation \"e.p.\"\nIf a pawn moves to its last rank, achieving promotion, the piece chosen is indicated after the move (for example, e1=Q or e1Q). Castling is indicated by the special notations 0-0 (or O-O) for castling and 0-0-0 (or O-O-O) for castling. A move that places the opponent's king in check usually has the notation \"+\" added. There are no specific notations for discovered check or double check. Checkmate can be indicated by \"#\". At the end of the game, \"1\u20130\" means White won, \"0\u20131\" means Black won, and \"\u00bd\u2013\u00bd\" indicates a draw.\nChess moves can be annotated with punctuation marks and other symbols. For example: \"!\" indicates a good move; \"!!\" an excellent move; \"?\" a mistake; \"??\" a blunder; \"!?\" an interesting move that may not be best; or \"?!\" a dubious move not easily refuted.\nFor example, one variation of a simple trap known as the Scholar's mate (see animated diagram) can be recorded:\nVariants of algebraic notation include long form algebraic, in which both the departure and destination square are indicated; abbreviated algebraic, in which capture signs, check signs, and ranks of pawn captures may be omitted; and Figurine Algebraic Notation, used in chess publications for universal readability regardless of language.\nPortable Game Notation (PGN) is a text-based file format for recording chess games, based on short form English algebraic notation with a small amount of markup. PGN files (suffix .pgn) can be processed by most chess software, as well as being easily readable by humans.\nUntil about 1980, the majority of English language chess publications used descriptive notation, in which files are identified by the initial letter of the piece that occupies the first rank at the beginning of the game. In descriptive notation, the common opening move 1.e4 is rendered as \"1.P-K4\" (\"pawn to king four\"). Another system is ICCF numeric notation, recognized by the International Correspondence Chess Federation though its use is in decline.\nIn competitive games, players are normally required to keep a score (record of the game). For this purpose, only algebraic notation is recognized in FIDE-sanctioned events; game scores recorded in a different notation system may not be used as evidence in the event of a dispute.\nOrganized competition.\nTournaments and matches.\nContemporary chess is an organized sport with structured international and national leagues, tournaments, and congresses. \nThousands of chess tournaments, matches, and festivals are held around the world every year catering to players of all levels.\nTournaments with a small number of players may use the round-robin format, in which every player plays one game against every other player. For a large numbers of players, the Swiss system may be used, in which each player is paired against an opponent who has the same (or as similar as possible) score in each round. In either case, a player's score is usually calculated as 1 point for each game won and one-half point for each game drawn. Variations such as \"football scoring\" (3 points for a win, 1 point for a draw) may be used by tournament organizers, but ratings are always calculated on the basis of standard scoring.\nThe word \"match\" refers to either a series of games between two players, or a team competition in which each player of one team plays one game against a player of the other team. It is a common error by non-chess writers to refer to an individual game as a \"match\".\nGovernance.\nChess's international governing body is usually known by its French acronym FIDE (pronounced FEE-day) (French: F\u00e9d\u00e9ration internationale des \u00e9checs), or International Chess Federation. FIDE's membership consists of the national chess organizations of over 180 countries; there are also several associate members, including various supra-national organizations, the International Braille Chess Association (IBCA), International Committee of Chess for the Deaf (ICCD), and the International Physically Disabled Chess Association (IPCA). FIDE is recognized by the International Olympic Committee, but the game of chess has never been part of the Olympic Games.\nThe current World Chess Champion is Magnus Carlsen of Norway. The reigning Women's World Champion is Ju Wenjun from China.\nOther competitions for individuals include the World Junior Chess Championship, the European Individual Chess Championship, and the various national championships. Invitation-only tournaments regularly attract the world's strongest players. Examples include Spain's Linares event, Monte Carlo's Melody Amber tournament, the Dortmund Sparkassen meeting, Sofia's M-tel Masters, and Wijk aan Zee's Tata Steel tournament.\nRegular team chess events include the Chess Olympiad and the European Team Chess Championship.\nThe World Chess Solving Championship and World Correspondence Chess Championships include both team and individual events; these are held independently of FIDE.\nTitles and rankings.\nPlayers may be awarded lifetime titles by FIDE:\nThe above titles are open to both men and women. There are also separate women-only titles; Woman Grandmaster (WGM), Woman International Master (WIM), Woman FIDE Master (WFM) and Woman Candidate Master (WCM). These require a performance level approximately 200 Elo rating points below the similarly named open titles, and their continued existence has sometimes been controversial. Beginning with Nona Gaprindashvili in 1978, a number of women have earned the open GM title. \nFIDE also awards titles for arbiters and trainers. International titles are also awarded to composers and solvers of chess problems and to correspondence chess players (by the International Correspondence Chess Federation). National chess organizations may also award titles.\nIn order to rank players, FIDE, ICCF, and most national chess organizations use the Elo rating system developed by Arpad Elo. The highest FIDE rating of all time, 2881, was achieved by Magnus Carlsen on the March 2014 FIDE rating list.\nTheory.\nChess has an extensive literature. In 1913, the chess historian H.J.R. Murray estimated the total number of books, magazines, and chess columns in newspapers to be about 5,000. B.H. Wood estimated the number, as of 1949, to be about 20,000. David Hooper and Kenneth Whyld write that, \"Since then there has been a steady increase year by year of the number of new chess publications. No one knows how many have been printed.\" There are two significant public chess libraries: the John G. White Chess and Checkers Collection at Cleveland Public Library, with over 32,000 chess books and over 6,000 bound volumes of chess periodicals; and the Chess &amp; Draughts collection at the National Library of the Netherlands, with about 30,000 books.\nChess theory usually divides the game of chess into three phases with different sets of strategies: the opening, typically the first 10 to 20 moves, when players move their pieces to useful positions for the coming battle; the middlegame; and last the endgame, when most of the pieces are gone, kings typically take a more active part in the struggle, and pawn promotion is often decisive.\n\"Opening theory\" is concerned with finding the best moves in the initial phase of the game. There are dozens of different openings, and hundreds of variants. \"The Oxford Companion to Chess\" lists 1,327 named openings and variants.\n\"Middlegame theory\" is usually divided into chess tactics and chess strategy. Chess strategy concentrates on setting and achieving long-term positioning advantages during the game\u00a0\u2013 for example, where to place different pieces\u00a0\u2013 while tactics concerns immediate maneuver. These two aspects of the gameplay cannot be completely separated, because strategic goals are mostly achieved through tactics, while the tactical opportunities are based on the previous strategy of play.\n\"Endgame theory\" is concerned with positions where there are only a few pieces left. Theoretics categorise these positions according to the pieces, for example \"King and pawn endings\" or \"Rook versus a minor piece\".\nOpening.\nA chess opening is the group of initial moves of a game (the \"opening moves\"). Recognized sequences of opening moves are referred to as \"openings\" and have been given names such as the Ruy Lopez or Sicilian Defense. They are catalogued in reference works such as the \"Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings\". There are dozens of different openings, varying widely in character from quiet (for example, the R\u00e9ti Opening) to very aggressive (the Latvian Gambit). In some opening lines, the exact sequence considered best for both sides has been worked out to more than 30 moves. Professional players spend years studying openings and continue doing so throughout their careers, as opening theory continues to evolve.\nThe fundamental strategic aims of most openings are similar:\nMost players and theoreticians consider that White, by virtue of the first move, begins the game with a small advantage. This initially gives White the initiative. Black usually strives to neutralize White's advantage and achieve , or to develop in an unbalanced position.\nMiddlegame.\nThe middlegame is the part of the game which starts after the opening. There is no clear line between the opening and the middlegame, but typically the middlegame will start when most pieces have been developed. (Similarly, there is no clear transition from the middlegame to the endgame; see start of the endgame.) Because the opening theory has ended, players have to form plans based on the features of the position, and at the same time take into account the tactical possibilities of the position. The middlegame is the phase in which most combinations occur. Combinations are a series of tactical moves executed to achieve some gain. Middlegame combinations are often connected with an attack against the opponent's king. Some typical patterns have their own names; for example, the Boden's Mate or the Lasker\u2013Bauer combination.\nSpecific plans or strategic themes will often arise from particular groups of openings which result in a specific type of pawn structure. An example is the , which is the attack of queenside pawns against an opponent who has more pawns on the queenside. The study of openings is therefore connected to the preparation of plans that are typical of the resulting middlegames.\nAnother important strategic question in the middlegame is whether and how to reduce material and transition into an endgame (i.e. ). Minor material advantages can generally be transformed into victory only in an endgame, and therefore the stronger side must choose an appropriate way to achieve an ending. Not every reduction of material is good for this purpose; for example, if one side keeps a light-squared bishop and the opponent has a dark-squared one, the transformation into a bishops and pawns ending is usually advantageous for the weaker side only, because an endgame with bishops on opposite colors is likely to be a draw, even with an advantage of a pawn, or sometimes even with a two-pawn advantage.\nTactics.\nIn chess, tactics in general concentrate on short-term actions\u00a0\u2013 so short-term that they can be calculated in advance by a human player or a computer. The possible depth of calculation depends on the player's ability. In positions with many possibilities on both sides, a deep calculation is more difficult and may not be practical, while in positions with a limited number of variations, strong players can calculate long sequences of moves.\nTheoreticians describe many elementary tactical methods and typical maneuvers, for example: pins, forks, skewers, batteries, discovered attacks (especially discovered checks), zwischenzugs, deflections, decoys, sacrifices, underminings, overloadings, and interferences. Simple one-move or two-move tactical actions\u00a0\u2013 threats, exchanges of , and double attacks\u00a0\u2013 can be combined into more complicated sequences of tactical maneuvers that are often forced from the point of view of one or both players. A forced variation that involves a sacrifice and usually results in a tangible gain is called a \"combination\". Brilliant combinations\u00a0\u2013 such as those in the Immortal Game\u00a0\u2013 are considered beautiful and are admired by chess lovers. A common type of chess exercise, aimed at developing players' skills, is a position where a decisive combination is available and the challenge is to find it.\nStrategy.\nChess strategy is concerned with the evaluation of chess positions and with setting up goals and long-term plans for future play. During the evaluation, players must take into account numerous factors such as the value of the pieces on the board, control of the center and centralization, the pawn structure, king safety, and the control of key squares or groups of squares (for example, diagonals, open files, and dark or light squares).\nThe most basic step in evaluating a position is to count the total value of pieces of both sides. The point values used for this purpose are based on experience; usually, pawns are considered worth one point, knights and bishops about three points each, rooks about five points (the value difference between a rook and a bishop or knight being known as the exchange), and queens about nine points. The king is more valuable than all of the other pieces combined, since its checkmate loses the game. But in practical terms, in the endgame, the king as a fighting piece is generally more powerful than a bishop or knight but less powerful than a rook. These basic values are then modified by other factors like position of the piece (e.g. advanced pawns are usually more valuable than those on their initial squares), coordination between pieces (e.g. a pair of bishops usually coordinate better than a bishop and a knight), or the type of position (e.g. knights are generally better in with many pawns while bishops are more powerful in ).\nAnother important factor in the evaluation of chess positions is the \"pawn structure\" (sometimes known as the \"pawn skeleton\"): the configuration of pawns on the chessboard. Since pawns are the least mobile of the pieces, the pawn structure is relatively static and largely determines the strategic nature of the position. Weaknesses in the pawn structure, such as isolated, doubled, or backward pawns and , once created, are often permanent. Care must therefore be taken to avoid these weaknesses unless they are compensated by another valuable asset (for example, by the possibility of developing an attack).\nEndgame.\nThe endgame (also \"end game\" or \"ending\") is the stage of the game when there are few pieces left on the board. There are three main strategic differences between earlier stages of the game and the endgame:\nEndgames can be classified according to the type of pieces remaining on the board. Basic checkmates are positions in which one side has only a king and the other side has one or two pieces and can checkmate the opposing king, with the pieces working together with their king. For example, king and pawn endgames involve only kings and pawns on one or both sides, and the task of the stronger side is to promote one of the pawns. Other more complicated endings are classified according to pieces on the board other than kings, such as \"rook and pawn versus rook\" endgames.\nHistory.\nPredecessors.\nChess is believed to have originated in northwest India, by about the early 7th\u00a0century. Its early form was known as \"chatura\u1e45ga\" (), literally \"four divisions\" [of the military]\u00a0\u2013 infantry, cavalry, elephants, and chariotry, represented by the pieces that would evolve into the modern pawn, knight, bishop, and rook, respectively. \"Chaturanga\" was played on an 8\u00d78 uncheckered board, called \"asht\u0101pada.\" Thence it spread eastward and westward along the Silk Road. The earliest evidence of chess is found in the nearby Sasanian Persia around 600, where the game came to be known by the name \"chatrang\". Chatrang was taken up by the Muslim world after the Islamic conquest of Persia (633\u201344), where it was then named \"shatranj\", with the pieces largely retaining their Persian names. In Spanish \"shatranj\" was rendered as \"ajedrez\" (\"al-shatranj\"), in Portuguese as \"xadrez\", and in Greek as \u03b6\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03af\u03ba\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd (\"zatrikion\", which comes directly from the Persian \"chatrang\"), but in the rest of Europe it was replaced by versions of the Persian \"sh\u0101h\" (\"king\"), which was familiar as an exclamation and became the English words \"check\" and \"chess\". The word \"checkmate\" is derived from the Persian \"sh\u0101h m\u0101t\" (\"the king is helpless\").\nThe oldest archaeological chess artifacts, ivory pieces, were excavated in ancient Afrasiab, today's Samarkand, in Uzbekistan, Central Asia, and date to about 760, with some of them possibly older. The oldest known chess manual was in Arabic and dates to 840\u2013850, written by al-Adli ar-Rumi (800\u2013870), a renowned Arab chess player, titled \"Kitab ash-shatranj\" (Book of the chess). This is a lost manuscript, but referenced in later works. The eastern migration of chess, into China and Southeast Asia, has even less documentation than its migration west. The first reference to Chinese chess, called \"xi\u00e0ngq\u00ed\" , appears in a book entitled \"Xu\u00e1n gua\u00ec l\u00f9\" (\"Record of the Mysterious and Strange\"), dating to about 800. Alternatively, some contend that chess arose from Chinese chess or one of its predecessors, although this has been contested.\nThe game reached Western Europe and Russia by at least three routes, the earliest being in the 9th\u00a0century. By the year 1000, it had spread throughout both Muslim Iberia and Latin Europe. A Latin poem \"de scachis\" dated to the late 10th century has been preserved in Einsiedeln Abbey. A famous 13th-century manuscript covering chess, backgammon, and dice is known as the \"Libro de los juegos\".\n1200\u20131700: Origins of the modern game.\nAround 1200, the rules of shatranj started to be modified in southern Europe, and around 1475, several major changes made the game essentially as it is known today. These modern rules for the basic moves had been adopted in Italy and Spain. Pawns gained the option of advancing two squares on their first move, while bishops and queens acquired their modern abilities. The queen replaced the earlier vizier chess piece towards the end of the 10th\u00a0century and by the 15th\u00a0century had become the most powerful piece; consequently, modern chess was referred to as \"Queen's Chess\" or \"Mad Queen Chess\". Castling, derived from the \"kings leap\" usually in combination with a pawn or rook move to bring the king to safety, was introduced. These new rules quickly spread throughout western Europe.\nWritings about chess theory began to appear in the 15th\u00a0century. The \"Repetici\u00f3n de Amores y Arte de Ajedrez\" (\"Repetition of Love and the Art of Playing Chess\") by Spanish churchman Luis Ram\u00edrez de Lucena was published in Salamanca in 1497. Lucena and later masters like Portuguese Pedro Damiano, Italians Giovanni Leonardo Di Bona, Giulio Cesare Polerio and Gioachino Greco, and Spanish bishop Ruy L\u00f3pez de Segura developed elements of openings and started to analyze simple endgames.\n1700\u20131873: The Romantic Era in chess.\nIn the 18th century, the center of European chess life moved from the Southern European countries to France. The two most important French masters were Fran\u00e7ois-Andr\u00e9 Danican Philidor, a musician by profession, who discovered the importance of pawns for chess strategy, and later Louis-Charles Mah\u00e9 de La Bourdonnais, who won a famous series of matches with the Irish master Alexander McDonnell in 1834. Centers of chess activity in this period were coffee houses in major European cities like \"Caf\u00e9 de la R\u00e9gence\" in Paris and \"Simpson's Divan\" in London.\nThe rules concerning stalemate were finalized in the early 19th\u00a0century. Also in the 19th\u00a0century, the convention that White moves first was established (formerly either White or Black could move first). Finally, the rules around castling were standardized\u00a0\u2013 variations in the castling rules had persisted in Italy until the late 19th\u00a0century. The resulting standard game is sometimes referred to as \"Western chess\" or \"international chess\", particularly in Asia where other games of the chess family such as xiangqi are prevalent. Since the 19th\u00a0century, the only rule changes have been technical in nature, for example establishing the correct procedure for claiming a draw by repetition.\nAs the 19th century progressed, chess organization developed quickly. Many chess clubs, chess books, and chess journals appeared. There were correspondence matches between cities; for example, the London Chess Club played against the Edinburgh Chess Club in 1824. Chess problems became a regular part of 19th-century newspapers; Bernhard Horwitz, Josef Kling, and Samuel Loyd composed some of the most influential problems. In 1843, von der Lasa published his and Bilguer's \"Handbuch des Schachspiels\" (\"Handbook of Chess\"), the first comprehensive manual of chess theory.\nThe first modern chess tournament was organized by Howard Staunton, a leading English chess player, and was held in London in 1851. It was won by the German Adolf Anderssen, who was hailed as the leading chess master. His brilliant, energetic attacking style was typical for the time. Sparkling games like Anderssen's Immortal Game and Evergreen Game or Morphy's \"Opera Game\" were regarded as the highest possible summit of the chess art.\nDeeper insight into the nature of chess came with the American Paul Morphy, an extraordinary chess prodigy. Morphy won against all important competitors (except Staunton, who refused to play), including Anderssen, during his short chess career between 1857 and 1863. Morphy's success stemmed from a combination of brilliant attacks and sound strategy; he intuitively knew how to prepare attacks.\n1873\u20131945: Birth of a sport.\nPrague-born Wilhelm Steinitz laid foundations for the scientific approach to the game, the art to break a position down into its components and prepare correct plans. In addition to his theoretical achievements, Steinitz founded an important tradition: his triumph over the leading German master Johannes Zukertort in 1886 is regarded as the first official World Chess Championship. Steinitz lost his crown in 1894 to a much younger player, the German mathematician Emanuel Lasker, who maintained this title for 27\u00a0years, the longest tenure of any world champion.\nAfter the end of the 19th century, the number of master tournaments and matches held annually quickly grew. The first Olympiad was held in Paris in 1924, and FIDE was founded initially for the purpose of organizing that event. In 1927, the Women's World Chess Championship was established; the first to hold the title was Czech-English master Vera Menchik.\nA prodigy from Cuba, Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca, known for his skill in endgames, won the World Championship from Lasker in 1921. Capablanca was undefeated in tournament play for eight years, from 1916 to 1924. His successor (1927) was the Russian-French Alexander Alekhine, a strong attacking player who died as the world champion in 1946. Alekhine briefly lost the title to Dutch player Max Euwe in 1935 and regained it two years later.\nBetween the world wars, chess was revolutionized by the new theoretical school of so-called hypermodernists like Aron Nimzowitsch and Richard R\u00e9ti. They advocated controlling the of the board with distant pieces rather than with pawns, thus inviting opponents to occupy the center with pawns, which become objects of attack.\n1945\u2013present: Post-World War II era.\nAfter the death of Alekhine, a new World Champion was sought. FIDE, which has controlled the title since then (except for one interruption), ran a tournament of elite players. The winner of the 1948 tournament was Russian Mikhail Botvinnik.\nIn 1950 FIDE established a system of titles, conferring the titles of Grandmaster and International Master on 27 players. (Some sources state that in 1914 the title of chess Grandmaster was first formally conferred by Tsar Nicholas II of Russia to Lasker, Capablanca, Alekhine, Tarrasch, and Marshall, but this is a disputed claim.)\nBotvinnik started an era of Soviet dominance in the chess world. Until the end of the Soviet Union, there was only one non-Soviet champion, American Bobby Fischer (champion 1972\u20131975). Botvinnik revolutionized opening theory. Previously Black strove for equality, to neutralize White's first-move advantage. As Black, Botvinnik strove for the initiative from the beginning. In the previous informal system of World Championships, the current champion decided which challenger he would play for the title and the challenger was forced to seek sponsors for the match. FIDE set up a new system of qualifying tournaments and matches. The world's strongest players were seeded into Interzonal tournaments, where they were joined by players who had qualified from Zonal tournaments. The leading finishers in these Interzonals would go on the \"Candidates\" stage, which was initially a tournament, and later a series of knockout matches. The winner of the Candidates would then play the reigning champion for the title. A champion defeated in a match had a right to play a rematch a year later. This system operated on a three-year cycle. Botvinnik participated in championship matches over a period of fifteen years. He won the world championship tournament in 1948 and retained the title in tied matches in 1951 and 1954. In 1957, he lost to Vasily Smyslov, but regained the title in a rematch in 1958. In 1960, he lost the title to the 23-year-old Latvian prodigy Mikhail Tal, an accomplished tactician and attacking player. Botvinnik again regained the title in a rematch in 1961.\nFollowing the 1961 event, FIDE abolished the automatic right of a deposed champion to a rematch, and the next champion, Armenian Tigran Petrosian, a player renowned for his defensive and positional skills, held the title for two cycles, 1963\u20131969. His successor, Boris Spassky from Russia (champion 1969\u20131972), won games in both positional and sharp tactical style. The next championship, the so-called Match of the Century, saw the first non-Soviet challenger since World War II, American Bobby Fischer. Fischer defeated his opponents in the Candidates matches by unheard-of margins, and convincingly defeated Spassky for the world championship. The match was followed closely by news media of the day, leading to a surge in popularity for chess. In 1975, however, Fischer refused to defend his title against Soviet Anatoly Karpov when FIDE did not meet his demands, and Karpov obtained the title by default. Fischer modernized many aspects of chess, especially by extensively preparing openings.\nKarpov defended his title twice against Viktor Korchnoi and dominated the 1970s and early 1980s with a string of tournament successes. Karpov's reign finally ended in 1985 at the hands of Garry Kasparov, another Soviet player from Baku, Azerbaijan. Kasparov and Karpov contested five world title matches between 1984 and 1990; Karpov never won his title back. In 1993, Garry Kasparov and Nigel Short broke with FIDE to organize their own match for the title and formed a competing Professional Chess Association (PCA). From then until 2006, there were two simultaneous World Champions and World Championships: the PCA or Classical champion extending the Steinitzian tradition in which the current champion plays a challenger in a series of many games, and the other following FIDE's new format of many players competing in a tournament to determine the champion. Kasparov lost his Classical title in 2000 to Vladimir Kramnik of Russia. The World Chess Championship 2006, in which Kramnik beat the FIDE World Champion Veselin Topalov, reunified the titles and made Kramnik the undisputed World Chess Champion. In September 2007, he lost the title to Viswanathan Anand of India, who won the championship tournament in Mexico City. Anand defended his title in the revenge match of 2008, 2010 and 2012. In 2013, Magnus Carlsen of Norway beat Anand in the 2013 World Chess Championship. He defended his title the following year, again against Anand. Carlsen confirmed his title in 2016 against the Russian Sergey Karjakin and in 2018 against the American Fabiano Caruana, in both occasions by a rapid tiebreaker match after equality in 12 games of classical time control, and is the reigning world champion.\nConnections.\nArts and humanities.\nIn the Middle Ages and during the Renaissance, chess was a part of noble culture; it was used to teach war strategy and was dubbed the \"King's Game\". Gentlemen are \"to be meanly seene in the play at Chestes\", says the overview at the beginning of Baldassare Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\" (1528, English 1561 by Sir Thomas Hoby), but chess should not be a gentleman's main passion. Castiglione explains it further:\nAnd what say you to the game at chestes? It is truely an honest kynde of enterteynmente and wittie, quoth Syr Friderick. But me think it hath a fault, whiche is, that a man may be to couning at it, for who ever will be excellent in the playe of chestes, I beleave he must beestowe much tyme about it, and applie it with so much study, that a man may assoone learne some noble scyence, or compase any other matter of importaunce, and yet in the ende in beestowing all that laboure, he knoweth no more but a game. Therfore in this I beleave there happeneth a very rare thing, namely, that the meane is more commendable, then the excellency.\nSome of the elaborate chess sets used by the aristocracy at least partially survive, such as the Lewis chessmen.\nChess was often used as a basis of sermons on morality. An example is \"Liber de moribus hominum et officiis nobilium sive super ludo scacchorum\" ('Book of the customs of men and the duties of nobles or the Book of Chess'), written by an Italian Dominican monk Jacobus de Cessolis . This book was one of the most popular of the Middle Ages. The work was translated into many other languages (the first printed edition was published at Utrecht in 1473) and was the basis for William Caxton's \"The Game and Playe of the Chesse\" (1474), one of the first books printed in English. Different chess pieces were used as metaphors for different classes of people, and human duties were derived from the rules of the game or from visual properties of the chess pieces:\nThe knyght ought to be made alle armed upon an hors in suche wyse that he haue an helme on his heed and a spere in his ryght hande/ and coueryd wyth his sheld/ a swerde and a mace on his lyft syde/ Cladd wyth an hawberk and plates to fore his breste/ legge harnoys on his legges/ Spores on his heelis on his handes his gauntelettes/ his hors well broken and taught and apte to bataylle and couerid with his armes/ whan the knyghtes ben maad they ben bayned or bathed/ that is the signe that they shold lede a newe lyf and newe maners/ also they wake alle the nyght in prayers and orysons vnto god that he wylle gyue hem grace that they may gete that thynge that they may not gete by nature/ The kynge or prynce gyrdeth a boute them a swerde in signe/ that they shold abyde and kepe hym of whom they take theyr dispenses and dignyte.\nKnown in the circles of clerics, students, and merchants, chess entered into the popular culture of the Middle Ages. An example is the 209th song of Carmina Burana from the 13th\u00a0century, which starts with the names of chess pieces, \"Roch, pedites, regina...\" Of course the game of chess, at times, has been discouraged by various religious authorities in Middle Ages: Jewish, Catholic and Orthodox. Some Muslim authorities prohibited it even recently, for example Ruhollah Khomeini in 1979 and Abdul-Aziz ash-Sheikh even later.\nDuring the Age of Enlightenment, chess was viewed as a means of self-improvement. Benjamin Franklin, in his article \"The Morals of Chess\" (1750), wrote:\nThe Game of Chess is not merely an idle amusement; several very valuable qualities of the mind, useful in the course of human life, are to be acquired and strengthened by it, so as to become habits ready on all occasions; for life is a kind of Chess, in which we have often points to gain, and competitors or adversaries to contend with, and in which there is a vast variety of good and ill events, that are, in some degree, the effect of prudence, or the want of it. By playing at Chess then, we may learn:\nI. Foresight, which looks a little into futurity, and considers the consequences that may attend an action [...]\nII. Circumspection, which surveys the whole Chess-board, or scene of action: \u2013 the relation of the several Pieces, and their situations [...]\nIII. Caution, not to make our moves too hastily [...]\nChess was occasionally criticized in the 19th century as a waste of time.\nChess is taught to children in schools around the world today. Many schools host chess clubs, and there are many scholastic tournaments specifically for children. Tournaments are held regularly in many countries, hosted by organizations such as the United States Chess Federation and the National Scholastic Chess Foundation.\nChess is many times depicted in the arts; significant works where chess plays a key role range from Thomas Middleton's \"A Game at Chess\" to \"Through the Looking-Glass\" by Lewis Carroll, to Vladimir Nabokov's \"The Defense\", to \"The Royal Game\" by Stefan Zweig. Chess is featured in films like Ingmar Bergman's \"The Seventh Seal\" and Satyajit Ray's \"The Chess Players\".\nChess is also present in contemporary popular culture. For example, the characters in \"Star Trek\" play a futuristic version of the game called \"Federation Tri-Dimensional Chess\" and \"Wizard's Chess\" is played in J.K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter\".\nMathematics.\nThe game structure and nature of chess are related to several branches of mathematics. Many combinatorical and topological problems connected to chess, such as the knight's tour and the eight queens puzzle, have been known for hundreds of years.\nThe number of legal positions in chess is estimated to be about 1043, and has been proved to be fewer than 1047, with a game-tree complexity of approximately 10123. The game-tree complexity of chess was first calculated by Claude Shannon as 10120, a number known as the Shannon number. An average position typically has thirty to forty possible moves, but there may be as few as zero (in the case of checkmate or stalemate) or (in a constructed position) as many as 218.\nIn 1913, Ernst Zermelo used chess as a basis for his theory of game strategies, which is considered as one of the predecessors of game theory. Zermelo's theorem states that it is possible to solve chess, i.e. to determine with certainty the outcome of a perfectly played game (either White can force a win, or Black can force a win, or both sides can force at least a draw). Of course with 1043 legal positions in chess, it will take an impossibly long time to compute a perfect strategy with any feasible technology.\nPsychology.\nThere is an extensive scientific literature on chess psychology. Alfred Binet and others showed that knowledge and verbal, rather than visuospatial, ability lies at the core of expertise. In his doctoral thesis, Adriaan de Groot showed that chess masters can rapidly perceive the key features of a position. According to de Groot, this perception, made possible by years of practice and study, is more important than the sheer ability to anticipate moves. De Groot showed that chess masters can memorize positions shown for a few seconds almost perfectly. The ability to memorize does not alone account for chess-playing skill, since masters and novices, when faced with random arrangements of chess pieces, had equivalent recall (about six positions in each case). Rather, it is the ability to recognize patterns, which are then memorized, which distinguished the skilled players from the novices. When the positions of the pieces were taken from an actual game, the masters had almost total positional recall.\nMore recent research has focused on chess as mental training; the respective roles of knowledge and look-ahead search; brain imaging studies of chess masters and novices; blindfold chess; the role of personality and intelligence in chess skill; gender differences; and computational models of chess expertise. The role of practice and talent in the development of chess and other domains of expertise has led to much recent research. Ericsson and colleagues have argued that deliberate practice is sufficient for reaching high levels of expertise in chess. Recent research indicates that factors other than practice are also important. For example, Fernand Gobet and colleagues have shown that stronger players started playing chess at a young age and that experts born in the Northern Hemisphere are more likely to have been born in late winter and early spring. Compared to general population, chess players are more likely to be non-right-handed, though they found no correlation between handedness and skill.\nA relationship between chess skill and intelligence has long been discussed in the literature and popular culture. Academic studies of the relationship date back at least to 1927. Academic opinion has long been split on how strong the relationship is, as some studies find no relationship and others find a relatively strong one.\nComposition.\nChess composition is the art of creating chess problems (also called chess compositions). The creator is known as a chess composer. There are many types of chess problems; the two most important are:\nTournaments for composition and solving of chess problems are organized by the World Federation for Chess Composition, which works cooperatively with but independent of FIDE. The WFCC awards titles for composing and solving chess problems.\nComputer chess.\nThe idea of creating a chess-playing machine dates to the 18th\u00a0century; around 1769, the chess-playing automaton called The Turk became famous before being exposed as a hoax. Serious trials based on automata, such as El Ajedrecista, were too complex and limited to be useful.\nSince the advent of the digital computer in the 1950s, chess enthusiasts, computer engineers, and computer scientists have built, with increasing degrees of seriousness and success, chess-playing machines and computer programs. The groundbreaking paper on computer chess, \"Programming a Computer for Playing Chess\", was published in 1950 by Shannon. He wrote:\nThe chess machine is an ideal one to start with, since: (1) the problem is sharply defined both in allowed operations (the moves) and in the ultimate goal (checkmate); (2) it is neither so simple as to be trivial nor too difficult for satisfactory solution; (3) chess is generally considered to require \"thinking\" for skillful play; a solution of this problem will force us either to admit the possibility of a mechanized thinking or to further restrict our concept of \"thinking\"; (4) the discrete structure of chess fits well into the digital nature of\nmodern computers.\nThe Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) held the first major chess tournament for computers, the North American Computer Chess Championship, in September 1970. CHESS 3.0, a chess program from Northwestern University, won the championship. Nowadays, chess programs compete in the World Computer Chess Championship, held annually since 1974. At first considered only a curiosity, the best chess playing programs have become extremely strong. In 1997, a computer won a chess match using classical time controls against a reigning World Champion for the first time: IBM's Deep Blue beat Garry Kasparov 3\u00bd\u20132\u00bd (it scored two wins, one loss, and three draws). However, the match was controversial, and computers would only win such a match again in 2006.\nIn 2009, a mobile phone won a category 6 tournament with a performance rating 2898: chess engine Hiarcs 13 running on the mobile phone HTC Touch HD won the Copa Mercosur tournament with nine wins and one draw. The best chess programs are now able to consistently beat the strongest human players, to the extent that human\u2013computer matches no longer attract interest from chess players or media. \nWith huge databases of past games and high analytical ability, computers can help players to learn chess and prepare for matches. Internet Chess Servers allow people to find and play opponents worldwide. The presence of computers and modern communication tools have raised concerns regarding cheating during games, most notably the \"bathroom controversy\" during the 2006 World Championship.\nVariants.\nThere are more than two thousand published chess variants, games with similar but different rules. Most of them are of relatively recent origin. They include:\nIn the context of chess variants, regular (i.e. FIDE) chess is commonly referred to as \"Western chess\", \"international chess\", \"orthodox chess\", \"orthochess\", and \"classic chess\"."}
{"id": "5137", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5137", "title": "ClusterSampling", "text": ""}
{"id": "5138", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5138", "title": "CumulativeDistributionFunction", "text": ""}
{"id": "5140", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5140", "title": "Comedy Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "5141", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5141", "title": "Cult Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "5142", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5142", "title": "Charlie Chaplin", "text": "Sir Charles Spencer Chaplin (16 April 188925 December 1977) was an English comic actor, filmmaker, and composer who rose to fame in the era of silent film. He became a worldwide icon through his screen persona, The Tramp, and is considered one of the most important figures in the history of the film industry. His career spanned more than 75 years, from childhood in the Victorian era until a year before his death in 1977, and encompassed both adulation and controversy.\nChaplin's childhood in London was one of poverty and hardship, as his father was absent and his mother struggled financially, and he was sent to a workhouse twice before the age of nine. When he was 14, his mother was committed to a mental asylum. Chaplin began performing at an early age, touring music halls and later working as a stage actor and comedian. At 19, he was signed to the prestigious Fred Karno company, which took him to America. He was scouted for the film industry and began appearing in 1914 for Keystone Studios. He soon developed the Tramp persona and formed a large fan base. He directed his own films and continued to hone his craft as he moved to the Essanay, Mutual, and First National corporations. By 1918, he was one of the best-known figures in the world.\nIn 1919, Chaplin co-founded the distribution company United Artists, which gave him complete control over his films. His first feature-length film was \"The Kid\" (1921), followed by \"A Woman of Paris\" (1923), \"The Gold Rush\" (1925), and \"The Circus\" (1928). He initially refused to move to sound films in the 1930s, instead producing \"City Lights\" (1931) and \"Modern Times\" (1936) without dialogue. He became increasingly political, and his first sound film was \"The Great Dictator\" (1940), which satirised Adolf Hitler. The 1940s were a decade marked with controversy for Chaplin, and his popularity declined rapidly. He was accused of communist sympathies, and some members of the press and public found his involvement in a paternity suit, and marriages to much younger women, scandalous. An FBI investigation was opened, and Chaplin was forced to leave the United States and settle in Switzerland. He abandoned the Tramp in his later films, which include \"Monsieur Verdoux\" (1947), \"Limelight\" (1952), \"A King in New York\" (1957), and \"A Countess from Hong Kong\" (1967).\nChaplin wrote, directed, produced, edited, starred in, and composed the music for most of his films. He was a perfectionist, and his financial independence enabled him to spend years on the development and production of a picture. His films are characterised by slapstick combined with pathos, typified in the Tramp's struggles against adversity. Many contain social and political themes, as well as autobiographical elements. He received an Honorary Academy Award for \"the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century\" in 1972, as part of a renewed appreciation for his work. He continues to be held in high regard, with \"The Gold Rush\", \"City Lights\", \"Modern Times\", and \"The Great Dictator\" often ranked on lists of the greatest films of all time.\nBiography.\n1889\u20131913: Early years.\nBackground and childhood hardship.\nCharles Spencer Chaplin was born on 16 April 1889 to Hannah Chaplin (born Hannah Harriet Pedlingham Hill) and Charles Chaplin Sr. There is no official record of his birth, although Chaplin believed he was born at East Street, Walworth, in South London. His parents had married four years previously, at which time Charles Sr. became the legal guardian of Hannah's illegitimate son, Sydney John Hill. At the time of his birth, Chaplin's parents were both music hall entertainers. Hannah, the daughter of a shoemaker, had a brief and unsuccessful career under the stage name Lily Harley, while Charles Sr., a butcher's son, was a popular singer. Although they never divorced, Chaplin's parents were estranged by around 1891. The following year, Hannah gave birth to a third son, George Wheeler Dryden, fathered by the music hall entertainer Leo Dryden. The child was taken by Dryden at six months old, and did not re-enter Chaplin's life for thirty years.\nChaplin's childhood was fraught with poverty and hardship, making his eventual trajectory \"the most dramatic of all the rags to riches stories ever told\" according to his authorised biographer David Robinson. Chaplin's early years were spent with his mother and brother Sydney in the London district of Kennington; Hannah had no means of income, other than occasional nursing and dressmaking, and Chaplin Sr. provided no financial support. As the situation deteriorated, Chaplin was sent to Lambeth Workhouse when he was seven years old. The council housed him at the Central London District School for paupers, which Chaplin remembered as \"a forlorn existence\". He was briefly reunited with his mother 18 months later, before Hannah was forced to readmit her family to the workhouse in July 1898. The boys were promptly sent to Norwood Schools, another institution for destitute children.\nIn September 1898, Hannah was committed to Cane Hill mental asylum; she had developed a psychosis seemingly brought on by an infection of syphilis and malnutrition. For the two months she was there, Chaplin and his brother Sydney were sent to live with their father, whom the young boys scarcely knew. Charles Sr. was by then a severe alcoholic, and life there was bad enough to provoke a visit from the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. Chaplin's father died two years later, at 38 years old, from cirrhosis of the liver.\nHannah entered a period of remission but, in May 1903, became ill again. Chaplin, then 14, had the task of taking his mother to the infirmary, from where she was sent back to Cane Hill. He lived alone for several days, searching for food and occasionally sleeping rough, until Sydneywho had joined the Navy two years earlierreturned. Hannah was released from the asylum eight months later, but in March 1905, her illness returned, this time permanently. \"There was nothing we could do but accept poor mother's fate,\" Chaplin later wrote, and she remained in care until her death in 1928.\nYoung performer.\nBetween his time in the poor schools and his mother succumbing to mental illness, Chaplin began to perform on stage. He later recalled making his first amateur appearance at the age of five years, when he took over from Hannah one night in Aldershot. This was an isolated occurrence, but by the time he was nine Chaplin had, with his mother's encouragement, grown interested in performing. He later wrote: \"[she] imbued me with the feeling that I had some sort of talent\". Through his father's connections, Chaplin became a member of the Eight Lancashire Lads clog-dancing troupe, with whom he toured English music halls throughout 1899 and 1900. Chaplin worked hard, and the act was popular with audiences, but he was not satisfied with dancing and wished to form a comedy act.\nIn the years Chaplin was touring with the Eight Lancashire Lads, his mother ensured that he still attended school but, by age 13, he had abandoned education. He supported himself with a range of jobs, while nursing his ambition to become an actor. At 14, shortly after his mother's relapse, he registered with a theatrical agency in London's West End. The manager sensed potential in Chaplin, who was promptly given his first role as a newsboy in Harry Arthur Saintsbury's \"Jim, a Romance of Cockayne\". It opened in July 1903, but the show was unsuccessful and closed after two weeks. Chaplin's comic performance, however, was singled out for praise in many of the reviews.\nSaintsbury secured a role for Chaplin in Charles Frohman's production of \"Sherlock Holmes\", where he played Billy the pageboy in three nationwide tours. His performance was so well received that he was called to London to play the role alongside William Gillette, the original Holmes. \"It was like tidings from heaven,\" Chaplin recalled. At 16 years old, Chaplin starred in the play's West End production at the Duke of York's Theatre from October to December 1905. He completed one final tour of \"Sherlock Holmes\" in early 1906, before leaving the play after more than two-and-a-half years.\nStage comedy and vaudeville.\nChaplin soon found work with a new company and went on tour with his brother, who was also pursuing an acting career, in a comedy sketch called \"Repairs\". In May 1906, Chaplin joined the juvenile act Casey's Circus, where he developed popular burlesque pieces and was soon the star of the show. By the time the act finished touring in July 1907, the 18-year-old had become an accomplished comedic performer. He struggled to find more work, however, and a brief attempt at a solo act was a failure.\nMeanwhile, Sydney Chaplin had joined Fred Karno's prestigious comedy company in 1906 and, by 1908, he was one of their key performers. In February, he managed to secure a two-week trial for his younger brother. Karno was initially wary, and considered Chaplin a \"pale, puny, sullen-looking youngster\" who \"looked much too shy to do any good in the theatre\". However, the teenager made an impact on his first night at the London Coliseum and he was quickly signed to a contract. Chaplin began by playing a series of minor parts, eventually progressing to starring roles in 1909. In April 1910, he was given the lead in a new sketch, \"Jimmy the Fearless\". It was a big success, and Chaplin received considerable press attention.\nKarno selected his new star to join the section of the company, one that also included Stan Laurel, that toured North America's vaudeville circuit. The young comedian headed the show and impressed reviewers, being described as \"one of the best pantomime artists ever seen here\". His most successful role was a drunk called the \"Inebriate Swell\", which drew him significant recognition. The tour lasted 21 months, and the troupe returned to England in June 1912. Chaplin recalled that he \"had a disquieting feeling of sinking back into a depressing commonplaceness\" and was, therefore, delighted when a new tour began in October.\n1914\u20131917: Entering films.\nKeystone.\nSix months into the second American tour, Chaplin was invited to join the New York Motion Picture Company. A representative who had seen his performances thought he could replace Fred Mace, a star of their Keystone Studios who intended to leave. Chaplin thought the Keystone comedies \"a crude m\u00e9lange of rough and rumble\", but liked the idea of working in films and rationalised: \"Besides, it would mean a new life.\" He met with the company and signed a $150-per-week contract in September 1913. Chaplin arrived in Los Angeles in early December, and began working for the Keystone studio on 5January 1914.\nChaplin's boss was Mack Sennett, who initially expressed concern that the 24-year-old looked too young. He was not used in a picture until late January, during which time Chaplin attempted to learn the processes of filmmaking. The one-reeler \"Making a Living\" marked his film acting debut and was released on 2February 1914. Chaplin strongly disliked the picture, but one review picked him out as \"a comedian of the first water\". For his second appearance in front of the camera, Chaplin selected the costume with which he became identified. He described the process in his autobiography:\nThe film was \"Mabel's Strange Predicament\", but \"the Tramp\" character, as it became known, debuted to audiences in \"Kid Auto Races at Venice\"shot later than \"Mabel's Strange Predicament\" but released two days earlier on 7February 1914. Chaplin adopted the character as his screen persona and attempted to make suggestions for the films he appeared in. These ideas were dismissed by his directors. During the filming of his eleventh picture, \"Mabel at the Wheel\", he clashed with director Mabel Normand and was almost released from his contract. Sennett kept him on, however, when he received orders from exhibitors for more Chaplin films. Sennett also allowed Chaplin to direct his next film himself after Chaplin promised to pay $1,500 ($ in dollars) if the film was unsuccessful.\n\"Caught in the Rain\", issued 4May 1914, was Chaplin's directorial debut and was highly successful. Thereafter he directed almost every short film in which he appeared for Keystone, at the rate of approximately one per week, a period which he later remembered as the most exciting time of his career. Chaplin's films introduced a slower form of comedy than the typical Keystone farce, and he developed a large fan base. In November 1914, he had a supporting role in the first feature length comedy film, \"Tillie's Punctured Romance\", directed by Sennett and starring Marie Dressler, which was a commercial success and increased his popularity. When Chaplin's contract came up for renewal at the end of the year, he asked for $1,000 a week ($ in dollars)an amount Sennett refused as too large.\nEssanay.\nThe Essanay Film Manufacturing Company of Chicago sent Chaplin an offer of $1,250 a week with a signing bonus of $10,000. He joined the studio in late December 1914, where he began forming a stock company of regular players, actors he worked with again and again, including Ben Turpin, Leo White, Bud Jamison, Paddy McGuire, Fred Goodwins and Billy Armstrong. He soon recruited a leading lady, Edna Purviance, whom Chaplin met in a caf\u00e9 and hired on account of her beauty. She went on to appear in 35 films with Chaplin over eight years; the pair also formed a romantic relationship that lasted into 1917.\nChaplin asserted a high level of control over his pictures and started to put more time and care into each film. There was a month-long interval between the release of his second production, \"A Night Out\", and his third, \"The Champion\". The final seven of Chaplin's 14 Essanay films were all produced at this slower pace. Chaplin also began to alter his screen persona, which had attracted some criticism at Keystone for its \"mean, crude, and brutish\" nature. The character became more gentle and romantic; \"The Tramp\" (April 1915) was considered a particular turning point in his development. The use of pathos was developed further with \"The Bank\", in which Chaplin created a sad ending. Robinson notes that this was an innovation in comedy films, and marked the time when serious critics began to appreciate Chaplin's work. At Essanay, writes film scholar Simon Louvish, Chaplin \"found the themes and the settings that would define the Tramp's world\".\nDuring 1915, Chaplin became a cultural phenomenon. Shops were stocked with Chaplin merchandise, he was featured in cartoons and comic strips, and several songs were written about him. In July, a journalist for \"Motion Picture Magazine\" wrote that \"Chaplinitis\" had spread across America. As his fame grew worldwide, he became the film industry's first international star. When the Essanay contract ended in December 1915, Chaplin, fully aware of his popularity, requested a $150,000 signing bonus from his next studio. He received several offers, including Universal, Fox, and Vitagraph, the best of which came from the Mutual Film Corporation at $10,000 a week.\nMutual.\nA contract was negotiated with Mutual that amounted to $670,000 a year ($ million today), which Robinson says made Chaplinat 26 years oldone of the highest paid people in the world. The high salary shocked the public and was widely reported in the press. John R. Freuler, the studio president, explained: \"We can afford to pay Mr. Chaplin this large sum annually because the public wants Chaplin and will pay for him.\"\nMutual gave Chaplin his own Los Angeles studio to work in, which opened in March 1916. He added two key members to his stock company, Albert Austin and Eric Campbell, and produced a series of elaborate two-reelers: \"The Floorwalker\", \"The Fireman\", \"The Vagabond\", \"One A.M.\", and \"The Count\". For \"The Pawnshop\", he recruited the actor Henry Bergman, who was to work with Chaplin for 30 years. \"Behind the Screen\" and \"The Rink\" completed Chaplin's releases for 1916. The Mutual contract stipulated that he release a two-reel film every four weeks, which he had managed to achieve. With the new year, however, Chaplin began to demand more time. He made only four more films for Mutual over the first ten months of 1917: \"Easy Street\", \"The Cure\", \"The Immigrant\", and \"The Adventurer\". With their careful construction, these films are considered by Chaplin scholars to be among his finest work. Later in life, Chaplin referred to his Mutual years as the happiest period of his career. However, Chaplin also felt that those films became increasingly formulaic over the period of the contract, and he was increasingly dissatisfied with the working conditions encouraging that.\nChaplin was attacked in the British media for not fighting in the First World War. He defended himself, claiming that he would fight for Britain if called and had registered for the American draft, but he was not summoned by either country. Despite this criticism Chaplin was a favourite with the troops, and his popularity continued to grow worldwide. \"Harper's Weekly\" reported that the name of Charlie Chaplin was \"a part of the common language of almost every country\", and that the Tramp image was \"universally familiar\". In 1917, professional Chaplin imitators were so widespread that he took legal action, and it was reported that nine out of ten men who attended costume parties, did so dressed as the Tramp. The same year, a study by the Boston Society for Psychical Research concluded that Chaplin was \"an American obsession\". The actress Minnie Maddern Fiske wrote that \"a constantly increasing body of cultured, artistic people are beginning to regard the young English buffoon, Charles Chaplin, as an extraordinary artist, as well as a comic genius\".\n1918\u20131922: First National.\nIn January 1918, Chaplin was visited by leading British singer and comedian Harry Lauder, and the two acted in a short film together.\nMutual was patient with Chaplin's decreased rate of output, and the contract ended amicably. With his aforementioned concern about the declining quality of his films because of contract scheduling stipulations, Chaplin's primary concern in finding a new distributor was independence; Sydney Chaplin, then his business manager, told the press, \"Charlie [must] be allowed all the time he needs and all the money for producing [films] the way he wants... It is quality, not quantity, we are after.\" In June 1917, Chaplin signed to complete eight films for First National Exhibitors' Circuit in return for $1million ($ million today). He chose to build his own studio, situated on five acres of land off Sunset Boulevard, with production facilities of the highest order. It was completed in January 1918, and Chaplin was given freedom over the making of his pictures.\n\"A Dog's Life\", released April 1918, was the first film under the new contract. In it, Chaplin demonstrated his increasing concern with story construction and his treatment of the Tramp as \"a sort of Pierrot\". The film was described by Louis Delluc as \"cinema's first total work of art\". Chaplin then embarked on the Third Liberty Bond campaign, touring the United States for one month to raise money for the Allies of the First World War. He also produced a short propaganda film at his own expense, donated to the government for fund-raising, called \"The Bond\". Chaplin's next release was war-based, placing the Tramp in the trenches for \"Shoulder Arms\". Associates warned him against making a comedy about the war but, as he later recalled: \"Dangerous or not, the idea excited me.\" He spent four months filming the picture, which was released in October 1918 with great success.\nUnited Artists, Mildred Harris, and \"The Kid\".\nAfter the release of \"Shoulder Arms\", Chaplin requested more money from First National, which was refused. Frustrated with their lack of concern for quality, and worried about rumours of a possible merger between the company and Famous Players-Lasky, Chaplin joined forces with Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford, and D. W. Griffith to form a new distribution company, United Artists, in January 1919. The arrangement was revolutionary in the film industry, as it enabled the four partnersall creative artiststo personally fund their pictures and have complete control. Chaplin was eager to start with the new company and offered to buy out his contract with First National. They refused and insisted that he complete the final six films owed.\nBefore the creation of United Artists, Chaplin married for the first time. The 16-year-old actress Mildred Harris had revealed that she was pregnant with his child, and in September 1918, he married her quietly in Los Angeles to avoid controversy. Soon after, the pregnancy was found to be false. Chaplin was unhappy with the union and, feeling that marriage stunted his creativity, struggled over the production of his film \"Sunnyside\". Harris was by then legitimately pregnant, and on 7July 1919, gave birth to a son. Norman Spencer Chaplin was born malformed and died three days later. The marriage ended in April 1920, with Chaplin explaining in his autobiography that they were \"irreconcilably mismated\".\nLosing the child, plus his own childhood experiences, are thought to have influenced Chaplin's next film, which turned the Tramp into the caretaker of a young boy. For this new venture, Chaplin also wished to do more than comedy and, according to Louvish, \"make his mark on a changed world\". Filming on \"The Kid\" began in August 1919, with four-year-old Jackie Coogan his co-star. \"The Kid\" was in production for nine months until May 1920 and, at 68 minutes, it was Chaplin's longest picture to date. Dealing with issues of poverty and parent\u2013child separation, \"The Kid\" was one of the earliest films to combine comedy and drama. It was released in January 1921 with instant success, and, by 1924, had been screened in over 50 countries.\nChaplin spent five months on his next film, the two-reeler \"The Idle Class\". Work on the picture was for a time delayed by more turmoil in his personal life. First National had on April 12 announced Chaplin's engagement to the actress May Collins, whom he had hired to be his secretary at the studio. By early June, however, Chaplin \"suddenly decided he could scarcely stand to be in the same room\" as Collins, but instead of breaking off the engagement directly, he \"stopped coming in to work, sending word that he was suffering from a bad case of influenza, which May knew to be a lie.\"\nUltimately work on the film resumed, and following its September 1921 release, Chaplin chose to return to England for the first time in almost a decade. He wrote a book about his journey, titled \"My Wonderful Visit\". He then worked to fulfil his First National contract, releasing \"Pay Day\" in February 1922. \"The Pilgrim\", his final short film, was delayed by distribution disagreements with the studio and released a year later.\n1923\u20131938: Silent features.\n\"A Woman of Paris\" and \"The Gold Rush\".\nHaving fulfilled his First National contract, Chaplin was free to make his first picture as an independent producer. In November 1922, he began filming \"A Woman of Paris\", a romantic drama about ill-fated lovers. Chaplin intended it to be a star-making vehicle for Edna Purviance, and did not appear in the picture himself other than in a brief, uncredited cameo. He wished the film to have a realistic feel and directed his cast to give restrained performances. In real life, he explained, \"men and women try to hide their emotions rather than seek to express them\". \"A Woman of Paris\" premiered in September 1923 and was acclaimed for its innovative, subtle approach. The public, however, seemed to have little interest in a Chaplin film without Chaplin, and it was a box office disappointment. The filmmaker was hurt by this failurehe had long wanted to produce a dramatic film and was proud of the resultand soon withdrew \"A Woman of Paris\" from circulation.\nChaplin returned to comedy for his next project. Setting his standards high, he told himself \"This next film must be an epic! The Greatest!\" Inspired by a photograph of the 1898 Klondike Gold Rush, and later the story of the Donner Party of 1846\u20131847, he made what Geoffrey Macnab calls \"an epic comedy out of grim subject matter\". In \"The Gold Rush\", the Tramp is a lonely prospector fighting adversity and looking for love. With Georgia Hale as his leading lady, Chaplin began filming the picture in February 1924. Its elaborate production, costing almost $1million, included location shooting in the Truckee mountains in Nevada with 600 extras, extravagant sets, and special effects. The last scene was shot in May 1925 after 15 months of filming.\nChaplin felt \"The Gold Rush\" was the best film he had made. It opened in August 1925 and became one of the highest-grossing films of the silent era with a U.S. box-office of $5million. The comedy contains some of Chaplin's most famous sequences, such as the Tramp eating his shoe and the \"Dance of the Rolls\". Macnab has called it \"the quintessential Chaplin film\". Chaplin stated at its release, \"This is the picture that I want to be remembered by\".\nLita Grey and \"The Circus\".\nWhile making \"The Gold Rush\", Chaplin married for the second time. Mirroring the circumstances of his first union, Lita Grey was a teenage actress, originally set to star in the film, whose surprise announcement of pregnancy forced Chaplin into marriage. She was 16 and he was 35, meaning Chaplin could have been charged with statutory rape under California law. He therefore arranged a discreet marriage in Mexico on 25 November 1924. They originally met during her childhood and she had previously appeared in his works \"The Kid\" and \"The Idle Class\". Their first son, Charles Spencer Chaplin, Jr., was born on 5May 1925, followed by Sydney Earl Chaplin on 30 March 1926.\nIt was an unhappy marriage, and Chaplin spent long hours at the studio to avoid seeing his wife. In November 1926, Grey took the children and left the family home. A bitter divorce followed, in which Grey's applicationaccusing Chaplin of infidelity, abuse, and of harbouring \"perverted sexual desires\"was leaked to the press. Chaplin was reported to be in a state of nervous breakdown, as the story became headline news and groups formed across America calling for his films to be banned. Eager to end the case without further scandal, Chaplin's lawyers agreed to a cash settlement of $600,000the largest awarded by American courts at that time. His fan base was strong enough to survive the incident, and it was soon forgotten, but Chaplin was deeply affected by it.\nBefore the divorce suit was filed, Chaplin had begun work on a new film, \"The Circus\". He built a story around the idea of walking a tightrope while besieged by monkeys, and turned the Tramp into the accidental star of a circus. Filming was suspended for ten months while he dealt with the divorce scandal, and it was generally a trouble-ridden production. Finally completed in October 1927, \"The Circus\" was released in January 1928 to a positive reception. At the 1st Academy Awards, Chaplin was given a special trophy \"For versatility and genius in acting, writing, directing and producing \"The Circus\"\". Despite its success, he permanently associated the film with the stress of its production; Chaplin omitted \"The Circus\" from his autobiography, and struggled to work on it when he recorded the score in his later years.\n\"City Lights\".\nBy the time \"The Circus\" was released, Hollywood had witnessed the introduction of sound films. Chaplin was cynical about this new medium and the technical shortcomings it presented, believing that \"talkies\" lacked the artistry of silent films. He was also hesitant to change the formula that had brought him such success, and feared that giving the Tramp a voice would limit his international appeal. He, therefore, rejected the new Hollywood craze and began work on a new silent film. Chaplin was nonetheless anxious about this decision and remained so throughout the film's production.\nWhen filming began at the end of 1928, Chaplin had been working on the story for almost a year. \"City Lights\" followed the Tramp's love for a blind flower girl (played by Virginia Cherrill) and his efforts to raise money for her sight-saving operation. It was a challenging production that lasted 21 months, with Chaplin later confessing that he \"had worked himself into a neurotic state of wanting perfection\". One advantage Chaplin found in sound technology was the opportunity to record a musical score for the film, which he composed himself.\nChaplin finished editing \"City Lights\" in December 1930, by which time silent films were an anachronism. A preview before an unsuspecting public audience was not a success, but a showing for the press produced positive reviews. One journalist wrote, \"Nobody in the world but Charlie Chaplin could have done it. He is the only person that has that peculiar something called 'audience appeal' in sufficient quality to defy the popular penchant for movies that talk.\" Given its general release in January 1931, \"City Lights\" proved to be a popular and financial success, eventually grossing over $3million. The British Film Institute cites it as Chaplin's finest accomplishment, and the critic James Agee hails the closing scene as \"the greatest piece of acting and the highest moment in movies\". \"City Lights\" became Chaplin's personal favourite of his films and remained so throughout his life.\nTravels, Paulette Goddard, and \"Modern Times\".\n\"City Lights\" had been a success, but Chaplin was unsure if he could make another picture without dialogue. He remained convinced that sound would not work in his films, but was also \"obsessed by a depressing fear of being old-fashioned\". In this state of uncertainty, early in 1931, the comedian decided to take a holiday and ended up travelling for 16 months. He spent months travelling Western Europe, including extended stays in France and Switzerland, and spontaneously decided to visit Japan. The day after he arrived in Japan, Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi was assassinated by ultra-nationalists in the May 15 Incident. The group's original plan had been to provoke a war with the United States by assassinating Chaplin at a welcome reception organised by the prime minister, but the plan had been foiled due to delayed public announcement of the event's date.\nIn his autobiography, Chaplin recalled that on his return to Los Angeles, \"I was confused and without plan, restless and conscious of an extreme loneliness\". He briefly considered retiring and moving to China. Chaplin's loneliness was relieved when he met 21-year-old actress Paulette Goddard in July 1932, and the pair began a relationship. He was not ready to commit to a film, however, and focused on writing a serial about his travels (published in \"Woman's Home Companion\"). The trip had been a stimulating experience for Chaplin, including meetings with several prominent thinkers, and he became increasingly interested in world affairs. The state of labour in America troubled him, and he feared that capitalism and machinery in the workplace would increase unemployment levels. It was these concerns that stimulated Chaplin to develop his new film.\n\"Modern Times\" was announced by Chaplin as \"a satire on certain phases of our industrial life\". Featuring the Tramp and Goddard as they endure the Great Depression, it took ten and a half months to film. Chaplin intended to use spoken dialogue but changed his mind during rehearsals. Like its predecessor, \"Modern Times\" employed sound effects but almost no speaking. Chaplin's performance of a gibberish song did, however, give the Tramp a voice for the only time on film. After recording the music, Chaplin released \"Modern Times\" in February 1936. It was his first feature in 15 years to adopt political references and social realism, a factor that attracted considerable press coverage despite Chaplin's attempts to downplay the issue. The film earned less at the box-office than his previous features and received mixed reviews, as some viewers disliked the politicising. Today, \"Modern Times\" is seen by the British Film Institute as one of Chaplin's \"great features\", while David Robinson says it shows the filmmaker at \"his unrivalled peak as a creator of visual comedy\".\nFollowing the release of \"Modern Times\", Chaplin left with Goddard for a trip to the Far East. The couple had refused to comment on the nature of their relationship, and it was not known whether they were married or not. Some time later, Chaplin revealed that they married in Canton during this trip. By 1938, the couple had drifted apart, as both focused heavily on their work, although Goddard was again his leading lady in his next feature film, \"The Great Dictator\". She eventually divorced Chaplin in Mexico in 1942, citing incompatibility and separation for more than a year.\n1939\u20131952: Controversies and fading popularity.\n\"The Great Dictator\".\nThe 1940s saw Chaplin face a series of controversies, both in his work and in his personal life, which changed his fortunes and severely affected his popularity in the United States. The first of these was his growing boldness in expressing his political beliefs. Deeply disturbed by the surge of militaristic nationalism in 1930s world politics, Chaplin found that he could not keep these issues out of his work. Parallels between himself and Adolf Hitler had been widely noted: the pair were born four days apart, both had risen from poverty to world prominence, and Hitler wore the same toothbrush moustache as Chaplin. It was this physical resemblance that supplied the plot for Chaplin's next film, \"The Great Dictator\", which directly satirised Hitler and attacked fascism.\nChaplin spent two years developing the script and began filming in September 1939, six days after Britain declared war on Germany. He had submitted to using spoken dialogue, partly out of acceptance that he had no other choice, but also because he recognised it as a better method for delivering a political message. Making a comedy about Hitler was seen as highly controversial, but Chaplin's financial independence allowed him to take the risk. \"I was determined to go ahead,\" he later wrote, \"for Hitler must be laughed at.\" Chaplin replaced the Tramp (while wearing similar attire) with \"A Jewish Barber\", a reference to the Nazi party's belief that he was Jewish. In a dual performance, he also played the dictator \"Adenoid Hynkel\", who parodied Hitler.\n\"The Great Dictator\" spent a year in production and was released in October 1940. The film generated a vast amount of publicity, with a critic for \"The New York Times\" calling it \"the most eagerly awaited picture of the year\", and it was one of the biggest money-makers of the era. The ending was unpopular, however, and generated controversy. Chaplin concluded the film with a five-minute speech in which he abandoned his barber character, looked directly into the camera, and pleaded against war and fascism. Charles J. Maland has identified this overt preaching as triggering a decline in Chaplin's popularity, and writes, \"Henceforth, no movie fan would ever be able to separate the dimension of politics from [his] star image\". Nevertheless, both Winston Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt liked the film, which they saw at private screenings before its release. Roosevelt subsequently invited Chaplin to read the film's final speech over the radio during his January 1941 inauguration, with the speech becoming a \"hit\" of the celebration. Chaplin was often invited to other patriotic functions to read the speech to audiences during the years of the war. \"The Great Dictator\" received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Original Screenplay and Best Actor.\nLegal troubles and Oona O'Neill.\nIn the mid-1940s, Chaplin was involved in a series of trials that occupied most of his time and significantly affected his public image. The troubles stemmed from his affair with an aspirant actress named Joan Barry, with whom he was involved intermittently between June 1941 and the autumn of 1942. Barry, who displayed obsessive behaviour and was twice arrested after they separated, reappeared the following year and announced that she was pregnant with Chaplin's child. As Chaplin denied the claim, Barry filed a paternity suit against him.\nThe director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), J. Edgar Hoover, who had long been suspicious of Chaplin's political leanings, used the opportunity to generate negative publicity about him. As part of a smear campaign to damage Chaplin's image, the FBI named him in four indictments related to the Barry case. Most serious of these was an alleged violation of the Mann Act, which prohibits the transportation of women across state boundaries for sexual purposes. The historian Otto Friedrich has called this an \"absurd prosecution\" of an \"ancient statute\", yet if Chaplin was found guilty, he faced 23 years in jail. Three charges lacked sufficient evidence to proceed to court, but the Mann Act trial began on 21 March 1944. Chaplin was acquitted two weeks later, on4 April. The case was frequently headline news, with \"Newsweek\" calling it the \"biggest public relations scandal since the Fatty Arbuckle murder trial in 1921\".\nBarry's child, Carol Ann, was born in October 1943, and the paternity suit went to court in December 1944. After two arduous trials, in which the prosecuting lawyer accused him of \"moral turpitude\", Chaplin was declared to be the father. Evidence from blood tests which indicated otherwise were not admissible, and the judge ordered Chaplin to pay child support until Carol Ann turned 21. Media coverage of the paternity suit was influenced by the FBI, as information was fed to the prominent gossip columnist Hedda Hopper, and Chaplin was portrayed in an overwhelmingly critical light.\nThe controversy surrounding Chaplin increased whentwo weeks after the paternity suit was filedit was announced that he had married his newest prot\u00e9g\u00e9e, 18-year-old Oona O'Neill, the daughter of American playwright Eugene O'Neill. Chaplin, then 54, had been introduced to her by a film agent seven months earlier. In his autobiography, Chaplin described meeting O'Neill as \"the happiest event of my life\", and claimed to have found \"perfect love\". Chaplin's son, Charles Jr., reported that Oona \"worshipped\" his father. The couple remained married until Chaplin's death, and had eight children over 18 years: Geraldine Leigh (b. July 1944), Michael John (b. March 1946), Josephine Hannah (b. March 1949), Victoria (b. May 1951), Eugene Anthony (b. August 1953), Jane Cecil (b. May 1957), Annette Emily (b. December 1959), and Christopher James (b. July 1962).\n\"Monsieur Verdoux\" and communist accusations.\nChaplin claimed that the Barry trials had \"crippled [his] creativeness\", and it was some time before he began working again. In April 1946, he finally began filming a project that had been in development since 1942. \"Monsieur Verdoux\" was a black comedy, the story of a French bank clerk, Verdoux (Chaplin), who loses his job and begins marrying and murdering wealthy widows to support his family. Chaplin's inspiration for the project came from Orson Welles, who wanted him to star in a film about the French serial killer Henri D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Landru. Chaplin decided that the concept would \"make a wonderful comedy\", and paid Welles $5,000 for the idea.\nChaplin again vocalised his political views in \"Monsieur Verdoux\", criticising capitalism and arguing that the world encourages mass killing through wars and weapons of mass destruction. Because of this, the film met with controversy when it was released in April 1947; Chaplin was booed at the premiere, and there were calls for a boycott. \"Monsieur Verdoux\" was the first Chaplin release that failed both critically and commercially in the United States. It was more successful abroad, and Chaplin's screenplay was nominated at the Academy Awards. He was proud of the film, writing in his autobiography, \"\"Monsieur Verdoux\" is the cleverest and most brilliant film I have yet made.\"\nThe negative reaction to \"Monsieur Verdoux\" was largely the result of changes in Chaplin's public image. Along with damage of the Joan Barry scandal, he was publicly accused of being a communist. His political activity had heightened during World War II, when he campaigned for the opening of a Second Front to help the Soviet Union and supported various Soviet\u2013American friendship groups. He was also friendly with several suspected communists, and attended functions given by Soviet diplomats in Los Angeles. In the political climate of 1940s America, such activities meant Chaplin was considered, as Larcher writes, \"dangerously progressive and amoral\". The FBI wanted him out of the country, and launched an official investigation in early 1947.\nChaplin denied being a communist, instead calling himself a \"peacemonger\", but felt the government's effort to suppress the ideology was an unacceptable infringement of civil liberties. Unwilling to be quiet about the issue, he openly protested against the trials of Communist Party members and the activities of the House Un-American Activities Committee. Chaplin received a subpoena to appear before HUAC but was not called to testify. As his activities were widely reported in the press, and Cold War fears grew, questions were raised over his failure to take American citizenship. Calls were made for him to be deported; in one extreme and widely published example, Representative John E. Rankin, who helped establish HUAC, told Congress in June 1947: \"[Chaplin's] very life in Hollywood is detrimental to the moral fabric of America. [If he is deported]... his loathsome pictures can be kept from before the eyes of the American youth. He should be deported and gotten rid of at once.\"\nIn 2003, declassified British archives belonging to the British Foreign Office have revealed that George Orwell had secretly accused Chaplin of being a secret communist and a friend of the USSR. In 1949 a document known as Orwell's list revealed that Chaplin's name was included among 35 names that Orwell had given to the Information Research Department (IRD), a secret British Cold War propaganda department which worked closely with the CIA. Chaplin was not the only American actor Orwell accused of being a secret communist, as Orwell also described American civil-rights leader and actor Paul Robeson as being \"anti white\".\n\"Limelight\" and banning from the United States.\nAlthough Chaplin remained politically active in the years following the failure of \"Monsieur Verdoux\", his next film, about a forgotten music hall comedian and a young ballerina in Edwardian London, was devoid of political themes. \"Limelight\" was heavily autobiographical, alluding not only to Chaplin's childhood and the lives of his parents, but also to his loss of popularity in the United States. The cast included various members of his family, including his five oldest children and his half-brother, Wheeler Dryden.\nFilming began in November 1951, by which time Chaplin had spent three years working on the story. He aimed for a more serious tone than any of his previous films, regularly using the word \"melancholy\" when explaining his plans to his co-star Claire Bloom. \"Limelight\" featured a cameo appearance from Buster Keaton, whom Chaplin cast as his stage partner in a pantomime scene. This marked the only time the comedians worked together in a feature film.\nChaplin decided to hold the world premiere of \"Limelight\" in London, since it was the setting of the film. As he left Los Angeles, he expressed a premonition that he would not be returning. At New York, he boarded the with his family on 18 September 1952. The next day, United States Attorney General James P. McGranery revoked Chaplin's re-entry permit and stated that he would have to submit to an interview concerning his political views and moral behaviour to re-enter the US. Although McGranery told the press that he had \"a pretty good case against Chaplin\", Maland has concluded, on the basis of the FBI files that were released in the 1980s, that the US government had no real evidence to prevent Chaplin's re-entry. It is likely that he would have gained entry if he had applied for it. However, when Chaplin received a cablegram informing him of the news, he privately decided to cut his ties with the United States:\nBecause all of his property remained in America, Chaplin refrained from saying anything negative about the incident to the press. The scandal attracted vast attention, but Chaplin and his film were warmly received in Europe. In America, the hostility towards him continued, and, although it received some positive reviews, \"Limelight\" was subjected to a wide-scale boycott. Reflecting on this, Maland writes that Chaplin's fall, from an \"unprecedented\" level of popularity, \"may be the most dramatic in the history of stardom in America\".\n1953\u20131977: European years.\nMove to Switzerland and \"A King in New York\".\nChaplin did not attempt to return to the United States after his re-entry permit was revoked, and instead sent his wife to settle his affairs. The couple decided to settle in Switzerland and, in January 1953, the family moved into their permanent home: Manoir de Ban, a estate overlooking Lake Geneva in Corsier-sur-Vevey. Chaplin put his Beverly Hills house and studio up for sale in March, and surrendered his re-entry permit in April. The next year, his wife renounced her US citizenship and became a British citizen. Chaplin severed the last of his professional ties with the United States in 1955, when he sold the remainder of his stock in United Artists, which had been in financial difficulty since the early 1940s.\nChaplin remained a controversial figure throughout the 1950s, especially after he was awarded the International Peace Prize by the communist-led World Peace Council, and after his meetings with Zhou Enlai and Nikita Khrushchev. He began developing his first European film, \"A King in New York\", in 1954. Casting himself as an exiled king who seeks asylum in the United States, Chaplin included several of his recent experiences in the screenplay. His son, Michael, was cast as a boy whose parents are targeted by the FBI, while Chaplin's character faces accusations of communism. The political satire parodied HUAC and attacked elements of 1950s cultureincluding consumerism, plastic surgery, and wide-screen cinema. In a review, the playwright John Osborne called it Chaplin's \"most bitter\" and \"most openly personal\" film. In a 1957 interview, when asked to clarify his political views, Chaplin stated \"As for politics, I am an anarchist. I hate government and rulesand fetters... People must be free.\"\nChaplin founded a new production company, Attica, and used Shepperton Studios for the shooting. Filming in England proved a difficult experience, as he was used to his own Hollywood studio and familiar crew, and no longer had limitless production time. According to Robinson, this had an effect on the quality of the film. \"A King in New York\" was released in September 1957, and received mixed reviews. Chaplin banned American journalists from its Paris premi\u00e8re and decided not to release the film in the United States. This severely limited its revenue, although it achieved moderate commercial success in Europe. \"A King in New York\" was not shown in America until 1973.\nFinal works and renewed appreciation.\nIn the last two decades of his career, Chaplin concentrated on re-editing and scoring his old films for re-release, along with securing their ownership and distribution rights. In an interview he granted in 1959, the year of his 70th birthday, Chaplin stated that there was still \"room for the Little Man in the atomic age\". The first of these re-releases was \"The Chaplin Revue\" (1959), which included new versions of \"A Dog's Life\", \"Shoulder Arms\", and \"The Pilgrim\".\nIn America, the political atmosphere began to change and attention was once again directed to Chaplin's films instead of his views. In July 1962, \"The New York Times\" published an editorial stating that \"we do not believe the Republic would be in danger if yesterday's unforgotten little tramp were allowed to amble down the gangplank of a steamer or plane in an American port\". The same month, Chaplin was invested with the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters by the universities of Oxford and Durham. In November 1963, the Plaza Theater in New York started a year-long series of Chaplin's films, including \"Monsieur Verdoux\" and \"Limelight\", which gained excellent reviews from American critics. September 1964 saw the release of Chaplin's memoirs, \"My Autobiography\", which he had been working on since 1957. The 500-page book became a worldwide best-seller. It focused on his early years and personal life, and was criticised for lacking information on his film career.\nShortly after the publication of his memoirs, Chaplin began work on \"A Countess from Hong Kong\" (1967), a romantic comedy based on a script he had written for Paulette Goddard in the 1930s. Set on an ocean liner, it starred Marlon Brando as an American ambassador and Sophia Loren as a stowaway found in his cabin. The film differed from Chaplin's earlier productions in several aspects. It was his first to use Technicolor and the widescreen format, while he concentrated on directing and appeared on-screen only in a cameo role as a seasick steward. He also signed a deal with Universal Pictures and appointed his assistant, Jerome Epstein, as the producer. Chaplin was paid $600,000 director's fee as well as a percentage of the gross receipts. \"A Countess from Hong Kong\" premiered in January 1967, to unfavourable reviews, and was a box-office failure. Chaplin was deeply hurt by the negative reaction to the film, which turned out to be his last.\nChaplin suffered a series of minor strokes in the late 1960s, which marked the beginning of a slow decline in his health. Despite the setbacks, he was soon writing a new film script, \"The Freak\", a story of a winged girl found in South America, which he intended as a starring vehicle for his daughter, Victoria. His fragile health prevented the project from being realised. In the early 1970s, Chaplin concentrated on re-releasing his old films, including \"The Kid\" and \"The Circus\". In 1971, he was made a Commander of the National Order of the Legion of Honour at the Cannes Film Festival. The following year, he was honoured with a special award by the Venice Film Festival.\nIn 1972, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences offered Chaplin an Honorary Award, which Robinson sees as a sign that America \"wanted to make amends\". Chaplin was initially hesitant about accepting but decided to return to the US for the first time in 20 years. The visit attracted a large amount of press coverage and, at the Academy Awards gala, he was given a 12-minute standing ovation, the longest in the Academy's history. Visibly emotional, Chaplin accepted his award for \"the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century\".\nAlthough Chaplin still had plans for future film projects, by the mid-1970s he was very frail. He experienced several further strokes, which made it difficult for him to communicate, and he had to use a wheelchair. His final projects were compiling a pictorial autobiography, \"My Life in Pictures\" (1974) and scoring \"A Woman of Paris\" for re-release in 1976. He also appeared in a documentary about his life, \"The Gentleman Tramp\" (1975), directed by Richard Patterson. In the 1975 New Year Honours, Chaplin was awarded a knighthood by Queen Elizabeth II, though he was too weak to kneel and received the honour in his wheelchair.\nDeath.\nBy October 1977, Chaplin's health had declined to the point that he needed constant care. In the early morning of 25 December 1977, Chaplin died at home after suffering a stroke in his sleep. He was 88 years old. The funeral, on 27 December, was a small and private Anglican ceremony, according to his wishes. Chaplin was interred in the Corsier-sur-Vevey cemetery. Among the film industry's tributes, director Ren\u00e9 Clair wrote, \"He was a monument of the cinema, of all countries and all times... the most beautiful gift the cinema made to us.\" Actor Bob Hope declared, \"We were lucky to have lived in his time.\"\nOn 1 March 1978, Chaplin's coffin was dug up and stolen from its grave by Roman Wardas and Gantcho Ganev. The body was held for ransom in an attempt to extort money from his widow, Oona Chaplin. The pair were caught in a large police operation in May, and Chaplin's coffin was found buried in a field in the nearby village of Noville. It was re-interred in the Corsier cemetery in a reinforced concrete vault.\nFilmmaking.\nInfluences.\nChaplin believed his first influence to be his mother, who entertained him as a child by sitting at the window and mimicking passers-by: \"it was through watching her that I learned not only how to express emotions with my hands and face, but also how to observe and study people.\" Chaplin's early years in music hall allowed him to see stage comedians at work; he also attended the Christmas pantomimes at Drury Lane, where he studied the art of clowning through performers like Dan Leno. Chaplin's years with the Fred Karno company had a formative effect on him as an actor and filmmaker. Simon Louvish writes that the company was his \"training ground\", and it was here that Chaplin learned to vary the pace of his comedy. The concept of mixing pathos with slapstick was learnt from Karno, who also used elements of absurdity that became familiar in Chaplin's gags. From the film industry, Chaplin drew upon the work of the French comedian Max Linder, whose films he greatly admired. In developing the Tramp costume and persona, he was likely inspired by the American vaudeville scene, where tramp characters were common.\nMethod.\nChaplin never spoke more than cursorily about his filmmaking methods, claiming such a thing would be tantamount to a magician spoiling his own illusion. Little was known about his working process throughout his lifetime, but research from film historiansparticularly the findings of Kevin Brownlow and David Gill that were presented in the three-part documentary \"Unknown Chaplin\" (1983)has since revealed his unique working method.\nUntil he began making spoken dialogue films with \"The Great Dictator\", Chaplin never shot from a completed script. Many of his early films began with only a vague premise, for example \"Charlie enters a health spa\" or \"Charlie works in a pawn shop\". He then had sets constructed and worked with his stock company to improvise gags and \"business\" using them, almost always working the ideas out on film. As ideas were accepted and discarded, a narrative structure would emerge, frequently requiring Chaplin to reshoot an already-completed scene that might have otherwise contradicted the story. From \"A Woman of Paris\" onward Chaplin began the filming process with a prepared plot, but Robinson writes that every film up to \"Modern Times\" \"went through many metamorphoses and permutations before the story took its final form\".\nProducing films in this manner meant Chaplin took longer to complete his pictures than almost any other filmmaker at the time. If he was out of ideas, he often took a break from the shoot, which could last for days, while keeping the studio ready for when inspiration returned. Delaying the process further was Chaplin's rigorous perfectionism. According to his friend Ivor Montagu, \"nothing but perfection would be right\" for the filmmaker. Because he personally funded his films, Chaplin was at liberty to strive for this goal and shoot as many takes as he wished. The number was often excessive, for instance 53 takes for every finished take in \"The Kid\". For \"The Immigrant\", a 20-minute short, Chaplin shot 40,000 feet of filmenough for a feature-length.\nDescribing his working method as \"sheer perseverance to the point of madness\", Chaplin would be completely consumed by the production of a picture. Robinson writes that even in Chaplin's later years, his work continued \"to take precedence over everything and everyone else\". The combination of story improvisation and relentless perfectionismwhich resulted in days of effort and thousands of feet of film being wasted, all at enormous expenseoften proved taxing for Chaplin who, in frustration, would lash out at his actors and crew.\nChaplin exercised complete control over his pictures, to the extent that he would act out the other roles for his cast, expecting them to imitate him exactly. He personally edited all of his films, trawling through the large amounts of footage to create the exact picture he wanted. As a result of his complete independence, he was identified by the film historian Andrew Sarris as one of the first auteur filmmakers. Chaplin did receive help, notably from his long-time cinematographer Roland Totheroh, brother Sydney Chaplin, and various assistant directors such as Harry Crocker and Charles Reisner.\nStyle and themes.\nWhile Chaplin's comedic style is broadly defined as slapstick, it is considered restrained and intelligent, with the film historian Philip Kemp describing his work as a mix of \"deft, balletic physical comedy and thoughtful, situation-based gags\". Chaplin diverged from conventional slapstick by slowing the pace and exhausting each scene of its comic potential, with more focus on developing the viewer's relationship to the characters. Unlike conventional slapstick comedies, Robinson states that the comic moments in Chaplin's films centre on the Tramp's attitude to the things happening to him: the humour does not come from the Tramp bumping into a tree, but from his lifting his hat to the tree in apology. Dan Kamin writes that Chaplin's \"quirky mannerisms\" and \"serious demeanour in the midst of slapstick action\" are other key aspects of his comedy, while the surreal transformation of objects and the employment of in-camera trickery are also common features.\nChaplin's silent films typically follow the Tramp's efforts to survive in a hostile world. The character lives in poverty and is frequently treated badly, but remains kind and upbeat; defying his social position, he strives to be seen as a gentleman. As Chaplin said in 1925, \"The whole point of the Little Fellow is that no matter how down on his ass he is, no matter how well the jackals succeed in tearing him apart, he's still a man of dignity.\" The Tramp defies authority figures and \"gives as good as he gets\", leading Robinson and Louvish to see him as a representative for the underprivilegedan \"everyman turned heroic saviour\". Hansmeyer notes that several of Chaplin's films end with \"the homeless and lonely Tramp [walking] optimistically... into the sunset... to continue his journey.\"\nThe infusion of pathos is a well-known aspect of Chaplin's work, and Larcher notes his reputation for \"[inducing] laughter and tears\". Sentimentality in his films comes from a variety of sources, with Louvish pinpointing \"personal failure, society's strictures, economic disaster, and the elements\". Chaplin sometimes drew on tragic events when creating his films, as in the case of \"The Gold Rush\" (1925), which was inspired by the fate of the Donner Party. Constance B. Kuriyama has identified serious underlying themes in the early comedies, such as greed (\"The Gold Rush\") and loss (\"The Kid\"). Chaplin also touched on controversial issues: immigration (\"The Immigrant\", 1917); illegitimacy (\"The Kid\", 1921); and drug use (\"Easy Street\", 1917). He often explored these topics ironically, making comedy out of suffering.\nSocial commentary was a feature of Chaplin's films from early in his career, as he portrayed the underdog in a sympathetic light and highlighted the difficulties of the poor. Later, as he developed a keen interest in economics and felt obliged to publicise his views, Chaplin began incorporating overtly political messages into his films. \"Modern Times\" (1936) depicted factory workers in dismal conditions, \"The Great Dictator\" (1940) parodied Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini and ended in a speech against nationalism, \"Monsieur Verdoux\" (1947) criticised war and capitalism, and \"A King in New York\" (1957) attacked McCarthyism.\nSeveral of Chaplin's films incorporate autobiographical elements, and the psychologist Sigmund Freud believed that Chaplin \"always plays only himself as he was in his dismal youth\". \"The Kid\" is thought to reflect Chaplin's childhood trauma of being sent into an orphanage, the main characters in \"Limelight\" (1952) contain elements from the lives of his parents, and \"A King in New York\" references Chaplin's experiences of being shunned by the United States. Many of his sets, especially in street scenes, bear a strong similarity to Kennington, where he grew up. Stephen M. Weissman has argued that Chaplin's problematic relationship with his mentally ill mother was often reflected in his female characters and the Tramp's desire to save them.\nRegarding the structure of Chaplin's films, the scholar Gerald Mast sees them as consisting of sketches tied together by the same theme and setting, rather than having a tightly unified storyline. Visually, his films are simple and economic, with scenes portrayed as if set on a stage. His approach to filming was described by the art director Eug\u00e8ne Louri\u00e9: \"Chaplin did not think in 'artistic' images when he was shooting. He believed that action is the main thing. The camera is there to photograph the actors\". In his autobiography, Chaplin wrote, \"Simplicity is best... pompous effects slow up action, are boring and unpleasant... The camera should not intrude.\" This approach has prompted criticism, since the 1940s, for being \"old fashioned\", while the film scholar Donald McCaffrey sees it as an indication that Chaplin never completely understood film as a medium. Kamin, however, comments that Chaplin's comedic talent would not be enough to remain funny on screen if he did not have an \"ability to conceive and direct scenes specifically for the film medium\".\nComposing.\nChaplin developed a passion for music as a child and taught himself to play the piano, violin, and cello. He considered the musical accompaniment of a film to be important, and from \"A Woman of Paris\" onwards he took an increasing interest in this area. With the advent of sound technology, Chaplin began using a synchronised orchestral soundtrackcomposed by himselffor \"City Lights\" (1931). He thereafter composed the scores for all of his films, and from the late 1950s to his death, he scored all of his silent features and some of his short films.\nAs Chaplin was not a trained musician, he could not read sheet music and needed the help of professional composers, such as David Raksin, Raymond Rasch and Eric James, when creating his scores. Musical directors were employed to oversee the recording process, such as Alfred Newman for \"City Lights\". Although some critics have claimed that credit for his film music should be given to the composers who worked with him, Raksinwho worked with Chaplin on \"Modern Times\"stressed Chaplin's creative position and active participation in the composing process. This process, which could take months, would start with Chaplin describing to the composer(s) exactly what he wanted and singing or playing tunes he had improvised on the piano. These tunes were then developed further in a close collaboration among the composer(s) and Chaplin. According to film historian Jeffrey Vance, \"although he relied upon associates to arrange varied and complex instrumentation, the musical imperative is his, and not a note in a Chaplin musical score was placed there without his assent.\"\nChaplin's compositions produced three popular songs. \"Smile\", composed originally for \"Modern Times\" (1936) and later set to lyrics by John Turner and Geoffrey Parsons, was a hit for Nat King Cole in 1954. For \"Limelight\", Chaplin composed \"Terry's Theme\", which was popularised by Jimmy Young as \"Eternally\" (1952). Finally, \"This Is My Song\", performed by Petula Clark for \"A Countess from Hong Kong\" (1967), reached number one on the UK and other European charts. Chaplin also received his only competitive Oscar for his composition work, as the \"Limelight\" theme won an Academy Award for Best Original Score in 1973 following the film's re-release.\nLegacy.\nIn 1998, the film critic Andrew Sarris called Chaplin \"arguably the single most important artist produced by the cinema, certainly its most extraordinary performer and probably still its most universal icon\". He is described by the British Film Institute as \"a towering figure in world culture\", and was included in \"Time\" magazine's list of the \"\" for the \"laughter [he brought] to millions\" and because he \"more or less invented global recognizability and helped turn an industry into an art\".\nThe image of the Tramp has become a part of cultural history; according to Simon Louvish, the character is recognisable to people who have never seen a Chaplin film, and in places where his films are never shown. The critic Leonard Maltin has written of the \"unique\" and \"indelible\" nature of the Tramp, and argued that no other comedian matched his \"worldwide impact\". Praising the character, Richard Schickel suggests that Chaplin's films with the Tramp contain the most \"eloquent, richly comedic expressions of the human spirit\" in movie history. Memorabilia connected to the character still fetches large sums in auctions: in 2006 a bowler hat and a bamboo cane that were part of the Tramp's costume were bought for $140,000 in a Los Angeles auction.\nAs a filmmaker, Chaplin is considered a pioneer and one of the most influential figures of the early twentieth century. He is often credited as one of the medium's first artists. Film historian Mark Cousins has written that Chaplin \"changed not only the imagery of cinema, but also its sociology and grammar\" and claims that Chaplin was as important to the development of comedy as a genre as D.W. Griffith was to drama. He was the first to popularise feature-length comedy and to slow down the pace of action, adding pathos and subtlety to it. Although his work is mostly classified as slapstick, Chaplin's drama \"A Woman of Paris\" (1923) was a major influence on Ernst Lubitsch's film \"The Marriage Circle\" (1924) and thus played a part in the development of \"sophisticated comedy\". According to David Robinson, Chaplin's innovations were \"rapidly assimilated to become part of the common practice of film craft\". Filmmakers who cited Chaplin as an influence include Federico Fellini (who called Chaplin \"a sort of Adam, from whom we are all descended\"), Jacques Tati (\"Without him I would never have made a film\"), Ren\u00e9 Clair (\"He inspired practically every filmmaker\"), Michael Powell, Billy Wilder, Vittorio De Sica, and Richard Attenborough. Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky praised Chaplin as \"the only person to have gone down into cinematic history without any shadow of a doubt. The films he left behind can never grow old.\"\nChaplin also strongly influenced the work of later comedians. Marcel Marceau said he was inspired to become a mime artist after watching Chaplin, while the actor Raj Kapoor based his screen persona on the Tramp. Mark Cousins has also detected Chaplin's comedic style in the French character Monsieur Hulot and the Italian character Tot\u00f2. In other fields, Chaplin helped inspire the cartoon characters Felix the Cat and Mickey Mouse, and was an influence on the Dada art movement. As one of the founding members of United Artists, Chaplin also had a role in the development of the film industry. Gerald Mast has written that although UA never became a major company like MGM or Paramount Pictures, the idea that directors could produce their own films was \"years ahead of its time\".\nIn the 21st century, several of Chaplin's films are still regarded as classics and among the greatest ever made. The 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll, which compiles \"top ten\" ballots from film critics and directors to determine each group's most acclaimed films,\nsaw \"City Lights\" rank among the critics' top 50, \"Modern Times\" inside the top 100, and \"The Great Dictator\" and \"The Gold Rush\" placed in the top 250. The top 100 films as voted on by directors included \"Modern Times\" at number 22, \"City Lights\" at number 30, and \"The Gold Rush\" at number 91. Every one of Chaplin's features received a vote. In 2007, the American Film Institute named \"City Lights\" the 11th greatest American film of all time, while \"The Gold Rush\" and \"Modern Times\" again ranked in the top 100. Books about Chaplin continue to be published regularly, and he is a popular subject for media scholars and film archivists. Many of Chaplin's film have had a DVD and Blu-ray release.\nChaplin's legacy is managed on behalf of his children by the Chaplin office, located in Paris. The office represents Association Chaplin, founded by some of his children \"to protect the name, image and moral rights\" to his body of work, Roy Export SAS, which owns the copyright to most of his films made after 1918, and Bubbles Incorporated S.A., which owns the copyrights to his image and name. Their central archive is held at the archives of Montreux, Switzerland and scanned versions of its contents, including 83,630 images, 118 scripts, 976 manuscripts, 7,756 letters, and thousands of other documents, are available for research purposes at the Chaplin Research Centre at the Cineteca di Bologna. The photographic archive, which includes approximately 10,000 photographs from Chaplin's life and career, is kept at the Mus\u00e9e de l'Elys\u00e9e in Lausanne, Switzerland. The British Film Institute has also established the Charles Chaplin Research Foundation, and the first international Charles Chaplin Conference was held in London in July 2005. Elements for many of Chaplin's films are held by the Academy Film Archive as part of the Roy Export Chaplin Collection.\nCommemoration and tributes.\nChaplin's final home, Manoir de Ban in Corsier-sur-Vevey, Switzerland, has been converted into a museum named \"Chaplin's World\". It opened on 17 April 2016 after fifteen years of development, and is described by Reuters as \"an interactive museum showcasing the life and works of Charlie Chaplin\". On the 128th anniversary of his birth, a record-setting 662 people dressed as the Tramp in an event organised by the museum. Previously, the Museum of the Moving Image in London held a permanent display on Chaplin, and hosted a dedicated exhibition to his life and career in 1988. The London Film Museum hosted an exhibition called \"Charlie ChaplinThe Great Londoner\", from 2010 until 2013.\nIn London, a statue of Chaplin as the Tramp, sculpted by John Doubleday and unveiled in 1981, is located in Leicester Square. The city also includes a road named after him in central London, \"Charlie Chaplin Walk\", which is the location of the BFI IMAX. There are nine blue plaques memorialising Chaplin in London, Hampshire, and Yorkshire. The Swiss town of Vevey named a park in his honour in 1980 and erected a statue there in 1982. In 2011, two large murals depicting Chaplin on two 14-storey buildings were also unveiled in Vevey. Chaplin has also been honoured by the Irish town of Waterville, where he spent several summers with his family in the 1960s. A statue was erected in 1998; since 2011, the town has been host to the annual Charlie Chaplin Comedy Film Festival, which was founded to celebrate Chaplin's legacy and to showcase new comic talent.\nIn other tributes, a minor planet, 3623 Chaplin (discovered by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Karachkina in 1981) is named after Charlie. Throughout the 1980s, the Tramp image was used by IBM to advertise their personal computers. Chaplin's 100th birthday anniversary in 1989 was marked with several events around the world, and on 15 April 2011, a day before his 122nd birthday, Google celebrated him with a special Google Doodle video on its global and other country-wide homepages. Many countries, spanning six continents, have honoured Chaplin with a postal stamp.\nCharacterisations.\nChaplin is the subject of a biographical film, \"Chaplin\" (1992) directed by Richard Attenborough, and starring Robert Downey Jr. in the title role and Geraldine Chaplin playing Hannah Chaplin. He is also a character in the historical drama film \"The Cat's Meow\" (2001), played by Eddie Izzard, and in the made-for-television movie \"The Scarlett O'Hara War\" (1980), played by Clive Revill. A television series about Chaplin's childhood, \"Young Charlie Chaplin\", ran on PBS in 1989, and was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program. The French film \"The Price of Fame\" (2014) is a fictionalised account of the robbery of Chaplin's grave.\nChaplin's life has also been the subject of several stage productions. Two musicals, \"Little Tramp\" and \"Chaplin\", were produced in the early 1990s. In 2006, Thomas Meehan and Christopher Curtis created another musical, \"Limelight: The Story of Charlie Chaplin\", which was first performed at the La Jolla Playhouse in San Diego in 2010. It was adapted for Broadway two years later, re-titled \"ChaplinA Musical\". Chaplin was portrayed by Robert McClure in both productions. In 2013, two plays about Chaplin premiered in Finland: \"Chaplin\" at the Svenska Teatern, and \"Kulkuri\" (\"The Tramp\") at the Tampere Workers' Theatre.\nChaplin has also been characterised in literary fiction. He is the protagonist of Robert Coover's short story \"Charlie in the House of Rue\" (1980; reprinted in Coover's 1987 collection \"A Night at the Movies\"), and of Glen David Gold's \"Sunnyside\" (2009), a historical novel set in the First World War period. A day in Chaplin's life in 1909 is dramatised in the chapter titled \"Modern Times\" in Alan Moore's \"Jerusalem\" (2016), a novel set in the author's home town of Northampton, England.\nChaplin was brought to life in a comic strip bearing his name that ran for 30 years in the British pre-War humourous comic \"Funny Wonder\". The strip was drawn primarily by Bertie Brown. A similar strip, \"Charlie Chaplin's Comic Capers\", by Stuart Carothers and later Elzie C. Segar, was syndicated in the United States from March 29, 1915 until September 16, 1917. It was one of the earliest comic strips inspired by the popularity of a celebrity.\nAwards and recognition.\nChaplin received many awards and honours, especially later in life. In the 1975 New Year Honours, he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE). He was also awarded honorary Doctor of Letters degrees by the University of Oxford and the University of Durham in 1962. In 1965, he and Ingmar Bergman were joint winners of the Erasmus Prize and, in 1971, he was appointed a Commander of the National Order of the Legion of Honour by the French government.\nFrom the film industry, Chaplin received a special Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival in 1972, and a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Lincoln Center Film Society the same year. The latter has since been presented annually to filmmakers as The Chaplin Award. Chaplin was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1972, having been previously excluded because of his political beliefs.\nChaplin received three Academy Awards: an Honorary Award for \"versatility and genius in acting, writing, directing, and producing \"The Circus\"\" in 1929, a second Honorary Award for \"the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century\" in 1972, and a Best Score award in 1973 for \"Limelight\" (shared with Ray Rasch and Larry Russell). He was further nominated in the Best Actor, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Picture (as producer) categories for \"The Great Dictator\", and received another Best Original Screenplay nomination for \"Monsieur Verdoux\". In 1976, Chaplin was made a Fellow of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA).\nSix of Chaplin's films have been selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress: \"The Immigrant\" (1917), \"The Kid\" (1921), \"The Gold Rush\" (1925), \"City Lights\" (1931), \"Modern Times\" (1936), and \"The Great Dictator\" (1940).\nFilmography.\nDirected features:"}
{"id": "5143", "revid": "965141340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5143", "title": "Cryptology", "text": ""}
{"id": "5146", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5146", "title": "CryptographY/Hashfunctions", "text": ""}
{"id": "5149", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5149", "title": "ComputerHardware", "text": ""}
{"id": "5163", "revid": "1011494357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5163", "title": "The World Factbook", "text": "The World Factbook, also known as the CIA World Factbook, is a reference resource produced by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) with almanac-style information about the countries of the world. The official print version is available from the Government Printing Office. Other companies\u2014such as Skyhorse Publishing\u2014also print a paper edition. \"The Factbook\" is available in the form of a website that is partially updated every week. It is also available for download for use off-line. It provides a two- to three-page summary of the demographics, geography, communications, government, economy, and military of each of 267 international entities including U.S.-recognized countries, dependencies, and other areas in the world.\n\"The World Factbook\" is prepared by the CIA for the use of U.S. government officials, and its style, format, coverage, and content are primarily designed to meet their requirements. However, it is frequently used as a resource for academic research papers and news articles. As a work of the U.S. government, it is in the public domain in the United States.\nSources.\nIn researching the \"Factbook\", the CIA uses the sources listed below. Other public and private sources are also consulted.\nCopyright.\nBecause the \"Factbook\" is in the public domain, people are free under United States law to redistribute it or parts of it in any way that they like, without permission of the CIA. However, the CIA requests that it be cited when the \"Factbook\" is used. Copying the official seal of the CIA without permission is prohibited by U.S. federal law\u2014specifically, the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 ().\nFrequency of updates and availability.\nBefore November 2001 \"The World Factbook\" website was updated yearly; from 2004 to 2010 it was updated every two weeks; since 2010 it has been updated weekly. Generally, information currently available as of January 1 of the current year is used in preparing the \"Factbook\".\nGovernment edition.\nThe first classified edition of \"Factbook\" was published in August 1962, and the first unclassified version in June 1971. \"The World Factbook\" was first available to the public in print in 1975. In 2008 the CIA discontinued printing the \"Factbook\" themselves, instead turning printing responsibilities over to the Government Printing Office. This happened due to a CIA decision to \"focus Factbook resources\" on the online edition. The \"Factbook\" has been on the World Wide Web since October 1994. The web version receives an average of six million visits per month; it can also be downloaded. The official printed version is sold by the Government Printing Office and National Technical Information Service. In past years, the \"Factbook\" was available on CD-ROM, microfiche, magnetic tape, and floppy disk.\nReprints and older editions online.\nMany Internet sites use information and images from the CIA \"World Factbook\". Several publishers, including Grand River Books, Potomac Books (formerly known as Brassey's Inc.), and Skyhorse Publishing have published the \"Factbook\" in recent years.\nEntities listed.\nAs of July 2011, \"The World Factbook\" comprises 267 entities, which can be divided into the following categories:\nTerritorial issues and controversies.\nPolitical.\nAreas not covered.\nSpecific regions within a country or areas in dispute among countries, such as Kashmir, are not covered, but other areas of the world whose status is disputed, such as the Spratly Islands, have entries. Subnational areas of countries (such as U.S. states or the Canadian provinces and territories) are not included in the \"Factbook\". Instead, users looking for information about subnational areas are referred to \"a comprehensive encyclopedia\" for their reference needs. This criterion was invoked in the 2007 and 2011 editions with the decision to drop the entries for French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Reunion. They were dropped because besides being overseas departments, they were now overseas regions, and an integral part of France. Since the Trump administration has recognized Morocco\u2019s sovereignty over Western Sahara 2020, most of the Western Sahara data has been merged into Morocco\u2019s page.\nChagos Archipelago.\nSome entries on the World Factbook are known to be in line with the political views and agenda of the United States. The United States is behind both the excision of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritian territory and the forcible expulsion of the Chagossians from their lands to establish a military base on one of the island of the archipelago, namely Diego Garcia. The US does not recognise the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago and the archipelago is listed as the British Indian Ocean Territory on the CIA Website. The website further erroneously mentioned that the Chagos Archipelago is also claimed by the Seychelles, while officially 116 countries including the Seychelles against only 6 countries including the United States voted in favor of a United Nations General Assembly resolution dated 24 May 2019 which called upon the United Kingdom to withdraw its colonial administration from the Chagos Archipelago unconditionally to enable Mauritius to complete the decolonization of its territory as rapidly as possible.&lt;ref name=\"Resolution A/RES/73/295 Vote\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Resolution A/RES/73/295\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nKashmir.\nMaps depicting Kashmir have the Indo-Pakistani border drawn at the Line of Control, but the region of Kashmir administered by China drawn in hash marks.\nNorthern Cyprus.\nNorthern Cyprus, which the U.S. considers part of the Republic of Cyprus, is not given a separate entry because \"territorial occupations/annexations not recognized by the United States Government are not shown on U.S. Government maps.\"\nTaiwan/Republic of China.\nThe name \"Republic of China\" is not listed as Taiwan's official name under the \"Government\" section, due to U.S. acknowledgement of Beijing's One-China policy according to which there is one China and Taiwan is a part of it. The name \"Republic of China\" was briefly added on January 27, 2005, but has since been changed back to \"none\". Of the \"Factbook\"s two maps of China, one highlights the island of Taiwan as part of the country while the other does not. (See also: Political status of Taiwan, Legal status of Taiwan)\nDisputed South China Sea Islands.\nThe Paracel Islands and Spratly Islands, subjects of territorial disputes, have entries in the \"Factbook\" where they are not listed as the territory of any one nation. The disputed claims to the islands are discussed in the entries.\nBurma/Myanmar.\nThe U.S. does not recognize the renaming of Burma by its ruling military junta to \"Myanmar\" and thus keeps its entry for the country under the \"Burma\" name.\nNorth Macedonia.\nThe country was first entered as \"Macedonia\" in the \"Factbook\" upon independence in 1992. In the 1994 edition, the name of the entry was changed to the \"Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia\", as it is recognised by the United Nations (pending resolution of the Macedonia naming dispute). For the next decade, this was the name the nation was listed under. In the 2004 edition of the \"Factbook\", the name of the entry was changed back to \"Macedonia\", following a November 2004 U.S. decision to refer to the country using this name. On February 19, 2019, the entry was renamed to \"North Macedonia\" following the country's name change to the Republic of North Macedonia.\nEuropean Union.\nOn December 16, 2004, the CIA added an entry for the European Union (EU) for the first time. The \"What's New\" section of the 2005 \"Factbook\" states: \"The European Union continues to accrue more nation-like characteristics for itself and so a separate listing was deemed appropriate.\"\nUnited States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges and Iles Eparses.\nIn the 2006 edition of \"The World Factbook\", the entries for Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Kingman Reef, Johnston Atoll, Palmyra Atoll and the Midway Islands were merged into a new United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges entry. The old entries for each individual insular area remain as redirects on the \"Factbook\" website. On September 7, 2006, the CIA also merged the entries for Bassas da India, Europa Island, the Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island into a new Iles Eparses entry. As with the new United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges entry, the old entries for these five islands remained as redirects on the website. On July 19, 2007, the Iles Eparses entry and redirects for each island were dropped due to the group becoming a district of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands in February.\nSerbia and Montenegro/Yugoslavia.\nThe Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) broke apart in 1991. The following year, it was replaced in the \"Factbook\" with entries for each of its former constituent republics. In doing this, the CIA listed the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), proclaimed in 1992, as \"Serbia and Montenegro\", as the U.S. did not recognize the union between the two republics. This was done in accordance with a May 21, 1992, decision by the U.S. not to recognize any of the former Yugoslav republics as successor states to the recently dissolved SFRY.\nThese views were made clear in a disclaimer printed in the \"Factbook\": \"Serbia and Montenegro have asserted the formation of a joint independent state, but this entity has not been recognized as a state by the United States.\" Montenegro and Serbia were treated separately in the \"Factbook\" data, as can be seen on the map. In October 2000, Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 was forced out of office after a disputed election. This event led to democratic elections and U.S. diplomatic recognition. The 2001 edition of the \"Factbook\" thus referred to the state as \"Yugoslavia\". On March 14, 2002, an agreement was signed to transform the FRY into a loose state union called Serbia and Montenegro; it took effect on February 4, 2003. The name of the Yugoslavia entity was altered in the \"Factbook\" the month after the change.\nKosovo.\nOn February 28, 2008, the CIA added an entry for Kosovo, which declared independence on February 17 of the same year. Before this, Kosovo was excluded in the \"Factbook\". Kosovo is the subject of a territorial dispute; Serbia continues to claim Kosovo as part of its own sovereign territory. Kosovo's independence has been out of United Nations member states, including the United States.\nEast Timor/Timor-Leste.\nOn July 19, 2007, the entry for East Timor was renamed \"Timor-Leste\" following a decision of the United States Board on Geographic Names (BGN).\nFactual.\nThe Factbook contains some errors (usually of a minor nature), inaccuracies, and out-of-date information, which are often repeated elsewhere due to the \"Factbook\"s widespread use as a reference. For example, Albania was until recently, described in the \"Factbook\" as Muslim 56.7%, Roman Catholic 10%, Orthodox 6.8%, atheist 2.5%, Bektashi 2.1%, other 5.7%, unspecified 16.2%, which was based on a survey conducted in 1939, before World War II; numerous surveys conducted since the fall of the Communist regime since 1990 have given quite different figures. Another example is Singapore, which the \"Factbook\" states has a total fertility rate of 0.78 children per woman, despite figures in Statistics Singapore which state that the rate has been about 1.2\u20131.3 children per woman for at least the past several years, and it is unclear when, or even whether, it ever dropped as low as 0.78. This low and inaccurate value then gets cited in news articles which state that Singapore has the world's lowest fertility, or at least use the figure for its shock value. Another serious problem is that the Factbook never cites its sources, making verification of the information it presents difficult if not impossible.\nIn June 2009, National Public Radio (NPR), relying on information obtained from the \"CIA World Factbook\", put the number of Israeli Jews living in settlements in the West Bank and Israeli-annexed East Jerusalem at 250,000. However, a better estimate, based on State Department and Israeli sources put the figure at about 500,000. NPR then issued a correction. Chuck Holmes, foreign editor for NPR Digital, said, \"I'm surprised and displeased, and it makes me wonder what other information is out-of-date or incorrect in the CIA \"World Factbook\".\"\nScholars have acknowledged that some entries in the \"Factbook\" are out of date.\nSee also.\nAlternative publications"}
{"id": "5165", "revid": "30842190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5165", "title": "Country", "text": "A country is a distinct territorial body\nor political entity. It is often referred to as the land of an individual's birth, residence or citizenship.\nA country may be an independent sovereign state or part of a larger state, as a non-sovereign or formerly sovereign political division, a physical territory with a government, or a geographic region associated with sets of previously independent or differently associated people with distinct political characteristics. It is not inherently sovereign.\n\"Countries\" can refer both to sovereign states and to other political entities, while other times it can refer only to states. For example, the \"CIA World Factbook\" uses the word in its \"Country name\" field to refer to \"a wide variety of dependencies, areas of special sovereignty, uninhabited islands, and other entities in addition to the traditional countries or independent states\".\nThe largest country in the world by geographical area is Russia, while the most populous is China, followed by India, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan and Brazil. The newest UN member is South Sudan, followed by Montenegro. Admission of new members requires the approval of the General Assembly; and UN membership has since 1991 been reserved to sovereign states.\nEtymology and usage.\nThe word \"country\" comes from Old French \"contr\u00e9e\", which derives from Vulgar Latin (\"terra\") \"contrata\" (\"(land) lying opposite\"; \"(land) spread before\"), derived from \"contra\" (\"against, opposite\"). It most likely entered the English language after the Franco-Norman invasion during the 11th century.\nIn English the word has increasingly become associated with political divisions, so that one sense, associated with the indefinite article \u2013 \"a country\" \u2013 through misuse and subsequent conflation is now a synonym for state, or a former sovereign state, in the sense of sovereign territory or \"district, native land\". Areas much smaller than a political state may be called by names such as the West Country in England, the Black Country (a heavily industrialized part of England), \"Constable Country\" (a part of East Anglia painted by John Constable), the \"big country\" (used in various contexts of the American West), \"coal country\" (used of parts of the US and elsewhere) and many other terms.\nThe equivalent terms in French and other Romance languages (\"pays\" and variants) have not carried the process of being identified with political sovereign states as far as the English \"country\", instead derived from, pagus, which designated the territory controlled by a medieval count, a title originally granted by the Catholic Church. In many European countries the words are used for sub-divisions of the national territory, as in the German Bundesl\u00e4nder, as well as a less formal term for a sovereign state. France has very many \"pays\" that are officially recognized at some level, and are either natural regions, like the Pays de Bray, or reflect old political or economic entities, like the Pays de la Loire.\nA version of \"country\" can be found in the modern French language as \"contr\u00e9e\", based on the word \"cuntr\u00e9e\" in Old French, that is used similarly to the word \"pays\" to define non-state regions, but can also be used to describe a political state in some particular cases. The modern Italian \"contrada\" is a word with its meaning varying locally, but usually meaning a ward or similar small division of a town, or a village or hamlet in the countryside.\nCountry names.\nMost countries have two names, a protocol name and a geographical name or short name. \nThe protocol name (full name, formal name, official name) e.g. \"the Republic of India\", the \"Slovak Republic\", the \"Czech Republic\", the \"Swiss Confederation\", the \"State of Qatar\", the \"Principality of Monaco\", the \"Kingdom of Norway\", the \"Grand Duchy of Luxembourg\", the \"Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia\", the \"People's Democratic Republic of Algeria\", the \"Argentine Republic\", the \"United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland\", the \"United States of America\", the \"United Mexican States\", the \"Commonwealth of Australia\", the \"Socialist Republic of Vietnam\", the \"Union of Soviet Socialist Republics\". The long form (official title) is used when the state is targeted as a legal entity: e.g. \"This Decision is addressed to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\", \"The French Republic is authorised to \u2026\", \"Agreement between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Russian Federation \u2026\". If the recurrence of the name of a state in the text leads to a preference for using the short form, it can be introduced with the phrase \u2018hereinafter referred to as \u2026\u2019.\nThe geographical name (short name) e.g. \"India\", \"Slovakia\", \"Czechia\", \"Switzerland\", \"Qatar\", \"Monaco\", \"Norway\", \"Luxembourg\", \"Ethiopia\", \"Algeria\", \"Argentina\", the \"United Kingdom\", the \"United States\", \"Mexico\", \"Australia\", \"Vietnam\", the \"Soviet Union\". The short form (short name) is used when the state is referred to geographically or economically: \u200ae.g. \"Workers residing in France\", \"Exports from Greece \u2026\".\nFor certain states, the long form and the short form are identical: e.g. the \"Central African Republic\", the \"Democratic Republic of the Congo\", the \"Dominican Republic\", the \"United Arab Emirates\", \"Bosnia and Herzegovina\", \"Canada\", \"Georgia\", \"Hungary\", \"Iceland\", \"Ireland\", \"Jamaica\", \"Japan\", \"Malaysia\", \"Mongolia\", \"Montenegro\", \"New Zealand\", \"Romania\", \"Saint Lucia\", \"Saint Vincent and the Grenadines\", the \"Solomon Islands\", \"Turkmenistan\", \"Tuvalu\", \"Ukraine\".\nSovereignty status.\nThe term \"country\" can refer to a sovereign state. There is no universal agreement on the number of \"countries\" in the world since a number of states have disputed sovereignty status. By one application of the declarative theory of statehood and constitutive theory of statehood, there are 206 sovereign states; of which 193 are members of the United Nations, two have observer status at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) (the Holy See and Palestine), and 11 others are neither a member nor observer at the UNGA. The latest proclaimed state is South Sudan since 2011.\nThe degree of autonomy of non-sovereign countries varies widely. Some are possessions of sovereign states, as several states have overseas territories (such as French Polynesia, a \"pays d'outre-mer\", or the British Virgin Islands), with citizenry at times identical and at times distinct from their own. but may nonetheless be treated as a separate \"country of origin\" in international trade, as Hong Kong is.\nA few states consist of a union of smaller polities which are considered countries:\nCountry classification.\nSeveral organizations seek to identify trends in order to produce country classifications. Countries are often distinguished as developing countries or developed countries.\nThe United Nations.\nThe United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs annually produces the \"World Economic Situation and Prospects\" report that classified states as developed countries, economies in transition, or developing countries. The report classifies country development based on per capita gross national income. Within the broad categories, the United Nations identified subgroups based on geographical location or ad hoc criteria. The UN outlines the geographical regions for developing economies as Africa, East Asia, South Asia, Western Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The 2019 report recognizes only developed countries in North America, Europe, and Asia and the Pacific. The majority of economies in transition and developing countries are found in Africa, Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean.\nThe UN additionally recognizes multiple trends that impact the developmental status of countries in the \"World Economic Situation and Prospects\". The report highlights fuel-exporting and fuel-importing countries, as well as small island developing states and landlocked developing countries. It also identifies heavily indebted poor countries.\nThe World Bank.\nThe World Bank also classifies countries based on GNI per capita. Using the \"World Bank Atlas method\", it classifies countries as low-income economies, lower-middle-income economies, upper-middle-income economies, or high-income economies. For the 2020 fiscal year, the World Bank defines low-income economies as countries with a GNI per capita of $1,025 or less in 2018; lower middle-income economies as countries with a GNI per capita between $1,026 and $3,995; upper middle-income economies as countries with a GNI per capita between $3,996 and $12,375; high-income economies as countries with a GNI per capita of $12,376 or more.\nIt also identifies regional trends. The World Bank defines its regions as East Asia and Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, North America, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Lastly, the World Bank distinguishes countries based on the operational policies of the World Bank. The three categories include International Development Association (IDA) countries, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) countries, and Blend countries."}
{"id": "5166", "revid": "17060767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5166", "title": "Copenhagen", "text": "Copenhagen ( ) is the capital and most populous city of Denmark. As of 1 January 2020, the city had a population of 794,128 with 632,340 in Copenhagen Municipality, 104,305 in Frederiksberg Municipality, 42,989 in T\u00e5rnby Municipality, and 14,494 in Drag\u00f8r Municipality. It forms the core of the wider urban area of Copenhagen (population 1,330,993) and the Copenhagen metropolitan area (population 2,057,142). Copenhagen is situated on the eastern coast of the island of Zealand; another portion of the city is located on Amager, and it is separated from Malm\u00f6, Sweden, by the strait of \u00d8resund. The \u00d8resund Bridge connects the two cities by rail and road.\nOriginally a Viking fishing village established in the 10th century in the vicinity of what is now Gammel Strand, Copenhagen became the capital of Denmark in the early 15th century. Beginning in the 17th century, it consolidated its position as a regional centre of power with its institutions, defences, and armed forces. During the Renaissance the city served as the de facto capital being the seat of government of the Kalmar Union, governing the entire present day Nordic region in a personal union with Sweden and Norway ruled by the Danish monarch serving as the head of state. The city flourished as the cultural and economic center of Scandinavia under the union for well over 120 years, starting in the 15th century up until the beginning of the 16th century when the union was dissolved with Sweden leaving the union through a rebellion. After a plague outbreak and fire in the 18th century, the city underwent a period of redevelopment. This included construction of the prestigious district of Frederiksstaden and founding of such cultural institutions as the Royal Theatre and the Royal Academy of Fine Arts. After further disasters in the early 19th century when Horatio Nelson attacked the Dano-Norwegian fleet and bombarded the city, rebuilding during the Danish Golden Age brought a Neoclassical look to Copenhagen's architecture. Later, following the Second World War, the Finger Plan fostered the development of housing and businesses along the five urban railway routes stretching out from the city centre.\nSince the turn of the 21st century, Copenhagen has seen strong urban and cultural development, facilitated by investment in its institutions and infrastructure. The city is the cultural, economic and governmental centre of Denmark; it is one of the major financial centres of Northern Europe with the Copenhagen Stock Exchange. Copenhagen's economy has seen rapid developments in the service sector, especially through initiatives in information technology, pharmaceuticals and clean technology. Since the completion of the \u00d8resund Bridge, Copenhagen has become increasingly integrated with the Swedish province of Scania and its largest city, Malm\u00f6, forming the \u00d8resund Region. With a number of bridges connecting the various districts, the cityscape is characterised by parks, promenades, and waterfronts. Copenhagen's landmarks such as Tivoli Gardens, \"The Little Mermaid\" statue, the Amalienborg and Christiansborg palaces, Rosenborg Castle Gardens, Frederik's Church, and many museums, restaurants and nightclubs are significant tourist attractions.\nCopenhagen is home to the University of Copenhagen, the Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen Business School and the IT University of Copenhagen. The University of Copenhagen, founded in 1479, is the oldest university in Denmark. Copenhagen is home to the F.C. Copenhagen. The annual Copenhagen Marathon was established in 1980. Copenhagen is one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in the world.\nThe Copenhagen Metro, launched in 2002, serves central Copenhagen. Additionally, the Copenhagen S-train, the Lokaltog (), and the Coast Line network serve and connect central Copenhagen to outlying boroughs. Serving roughly two million passengers a month, Copenhagen Airport, Kastrup, is the busiest airport in the Nordic countries.\nEtymology.\nCopenhagen's name reflects its origin as a harbour and a place of commerce. The original designation in Old Norse, from which Danish descends, was Kaupmannah\u01ebfn [\u02c8kaupman\u02d0ah\u0252vn] (cf. modern Icelandic: \"Kaupmannah\u00f6fn\" [\u02c8k\u02b0\u00f8yhpman\u02d0ah\u0153pn], Faroese \"Keypmannahavn\"), meaning \"merchants' harbour\". By the time Old Danish was spoken, the capital was called K\u00f8pmann\u00e6hafn, with the current name deriving from centuries of subsequent regular sound change. An exact English equivalent would be \"chapman's haven\". However, the English term for the city was adapted from its Low German name, \"Kopenhagen\".\n(English \"chapman\", German \"Kaufmann\", Dutch \"koopman\", Swedish \"k\u00f6pman\", Danish \"k\u00f8bmand\", Icelandic \"kaupma\u00f0ur\": in all these words, the first syllable comes ultimately from Latin \"caupo\", \"tradesman\".) Copenhagen's Swedish name is \"K\u00f6penhamn\", a direct translation of the mutually intelligible Danish name.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAlthough the earliest historical records of Copenhagen are from the end of the 12th century, recent archaeological finds in connection with work on the city's metropolitan rail system revealed the remains of a large merchant's mansion near today's Kongens Nytorv from c. 1020. Excavations in Pilestr\u00e6de have also led to the discovery of a well from the late 12th century. The remains of an ancient church, with graves dating to the 11th century, have been unearthed near where Str\u00f8get meets R\u00e5dhuspladsen.\nThese finds indicate that Copenhagen's origins as a city go back at least to the 11th century. Substantial discoveries of flint tools in the area provide evidence of human settlements dating to the Stone Age. Many historians believe the town dates to the late Viking Age, and was possibly founded by Sweyn I Forkbeard. \nThe natural harbour and good herring stocks seem to have attracted fishermen and merchants to the area on a seasonal basis from the 11th century and more permanently in the 13th century. The first habitations were probably centred on Gammel Strand (literally \"old shore\") in the 11th century or even earlier.\nThe earliest written mention of the town was in the 12th century when Saxo Grammaticus in Gesta Danorum referred to it as \"Portus Mercatorum\", meaning Merchants' Harbour or, in the Danish of the time, \"K\u00f8bmannahavn\". Traditionally, Copenhagen's founding has been dated to Bishop Absalon's construction of a modest fortress on the little island of Slotsholmen in 1167 where Christiansborg Palace stands today. The construction of the fortress was in response to attacks by Wendish pirates who plagued the coastline during the 12th century. Defensive ramparts and moats were completed and by 1177 St. Clemens Church had been built. Attacks by the Wends continued, and after the original fortress was eventually destroyed by the marauders, islanders replaced it with Copenhagen Castle.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 1186, a letter from Pope Urban III states that the castle of \"Hafn\" (Copenhagen) and its surrounding lands, including the town of Hafn, were given to Absalon, Bishop of Roskilde 1158\u20131191 and Archbishop of Lund 1177\u20131201, by King Valdemar I. On Absalon's death, the property was to come into the ownership of the Bishopric of Roskilde. Around 1200, the Church of Our Lady was constructed on higher ground to the northeast of the town, which began to develop around it.\nAs the town became more prominent, it was repeatedly attacked by the Hanseatic League, and in 1368 successfully invaded during the Second Danish-Hanseatic War. As the fishing industry thrived in Copenhagen, particularly in the trade of herring, the city began expanding to the north of Slotsholmen. In 1254, it received a charter as a city under Bishop Jakob Erlandsen who garnered support from the local fishing merchants against the king by granting them special privileges. In the mid 1330s, the first land assessment of the city was published.\nWith the establishment of the Kalmar Union (1397\u20131523) between Denmark, Norway and Sweden, by about 1416 Copenhagen had emerged as the capital of Denmark when Eric of Pomerania moved his seat to Copenhagen Castle. The University of Copenhagen was inaugurated on 1 June 1479 by King Christian I, following approval from Pope Sixtus IV. This makes it the oldest university in Denmark and one of the oldest in Europe. Originally controlled by the Catholic Church, the university's role in society was forced to change during the Reformation in Denmark in the late 1530s.\n16th and 17th centuries.\nIn disputes prior to the Reformation of 1536, the city which had been faithful to Christian II, who was Catholic, was successfully besieged in 1523 by the forces of Frederik I, who supported Lutheranism. Copenhagen's defences were reinforced with a series of towers along the city wall. After an extended siege from July 1535 to July 1536, during which the city supported Christian II's alliance with Malm\u00f6 and L\u00fcbeck, it was finally forced to capitulate to Christian III. During the second half of the century, the city prospered from increased trade across the Baltic supported by Dutch shipping. Christoffer Valkendorff, a high-ranking statesman, defended the city's interests and contributed to its development. The Netherlands had also become primarily Protestant, as were northern German states.\nDuring the reign of Christian IV between 1588 and 1648, Copenhagen had dramatic growth as a city. On his initiative at the beginning of the 17th century, two important buildings were completed on Slotsholmen: the T\u00f8jhus Arsenal and B\u00f8rsen, the stock exchange. To foster international trade, the East India Company was founded in 1616. To the east of the city, inspired by Dutch planning, the king developed the district of Christianshavn with canals and ramparts. It was initially intended to be a fortified trading centre but ultimately became part of Copenhagen. Christian IV also sponsored an array of ambitious building projects including Rosenborg Slot and the Rundet\u00e5rn. In 1658\u201359, the city withstood a siege by the Swedes under Charles X and successfully repelled a major assault.\nBy 1661, Copenhagen had asserted its position as capital of Denmark and Norway. All the major institutions were located there, as was the fleet and most of the army. The defences were further enhanced with the completion of the Citadel in 1664 and the extension of Christianshavns Vold with its bastions in 1692, leading to the creation of a new base for the fleet at Nyholm.\n18th century.\nCopenhagen lost around 22,000 of its population of 65,000 to the plague in 1711. The city was also struck by two major fires that destroyed much of its infrastructure. The Copenhagen Fire of 1728 was the largest in the history of Copenhagen. It began on the evening of 20 October, and continued to burn until the morning of 23 October, destroying approximately 28% of the city, leaving some 20% of the population homeless. No less than 47% of the medieval section of the city was completely lost. Along with the 1795 fire, it is the main reason that few traces of the old town can be found in the modern city.\nA substantial amount of rebuilding followed. In 1733, work began on the royal residence of Christiansborg Palace which was completed in 1745. In 1749, development of the prestigious district of Frederiksstaden was initiated. Designed by Nicolai Eigtved in the Rococo style, its centre contained the mansions which now form Amalienborg Palace. Major extensions to the naval base of Holmen were undertaken while the city's cultural importance was enhanced with the Royal Theatre and the Royal Academy of Fine Arts.\nIn the second half of the 18th century, Copenhagen benefited from Denmark's neutrality during the wars between Europe's main powers, allowing it to play an important role in trade between the states around the Baltic Sea. After Christiansborg was destroyed by fire in 1794 and another fire caused serious damage to the city in 1795, work began on the classical Copenhagen landmark of H\u00f8jbro Plads while Nytorv and Gammel Torv were converged.\n19th century.\nOn 2 April 1801, a British fleet under the command of Admiral Sir Hyde Parker attacked and defeated the neutral Danish-Norwegian fleet anchored near Copenhagen. Vice-Admiral Horatio Nelson led the main attack. He famously disobeyed Parker's order to withdraw, destroying many of the Dano-Norwegian ships before a truce was agreed. Copenhagen is often considered to be Nelson's hardest-fought battle, surpassing even the heavy fighting at Trafalgar. It was during this battle that Lord Nelson was said to have \"put the telescope to the blind eye\" in order not to see Admiral Parker's signal to cease fire.\nThe Second Battle of Copenhagen (or the Bombardment of Copenhagen) (16 August \u2013 5 September 1807) was from a British point of view a preemptive attack on Copenhagen, targeting the civilian population to yet again seize the Dano-Norwegian fleet. But from a Danish point of view, the battle was a terror bombardment on their capital. Particularly notable was the use of incendiary Congreve rockets (containing phosphorus, which cannot be extinguished with water) that randomly hit the city. Few houses with straw roofs remained after the bombardment. The largest church, \"Vor frue kirke\", was destroyed by the sea artillery. Several historians consider this battle the first terror attack against a major European city in modern times.\nThe British landed 30,000 men, they surrounded Copenhagen and the attack continued for the next three days, killing some 2,000 civilians and destroying most of the city. The devastation was so great because Copenhagen relied on an old defence-line whose limited range could not reach the British ships and their longer-range artillery.\nDespite the disasters of the early 19th century, Copenhagen experienced a period of intense cultural creativity known as the Danish Golden Age. Painting prospered under C.W. Eckersberg and his students while C.F. Hansen and Gottlieb Bindesb\u00f8ll brought a Neoclassical look to the city's architecture. In the early 1850s, the ramparts of the city were opened to allow new housing to be built around The Lakes () that bordered the old defences to the west. By the 1880s, the districts of N\u00f8rrebro and Vesterbro developed to accommodate those who came from the provinces to participate in the city's industrialization. This dramatic increase of space was long overdue, as not only were the old ramparts out of date as a defence system but bad sanitation in the old city had to be overcome. From 1886, the west rampart (Vestvolden) was flattened, allowing major extensions to the harbour leading to the establishment of the Freeport of Copenhagen 1892\u201394. Electricity came in 1892 with electric trams in 1897. The spread of housing to areas outside the old ramparts brought about a huge increase in the population. In 1840, Copenhagen was inhabited by approximately 120,000 people. By 1901, it had some 400,000 inhabitants.\n20th century.\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, Copenhagen had become a thriving industrial and administrative city. With its new city hall and railway station, its centre was drawn towards the west. New housing developments grew up in Br\u00f8nsh\u00f8j and Valby while Frederiksberg became an enclave within the city of Copenhagen. The northern part of Amager and Valby were also incorporated into the City of Copenhagen in 1901\u201302.\nAs a result of Denmark's neutrality in the First World War, Copenhagen prospered from trade with both Britain and Germany while the city's defences were kept fully manned by some 40,000 soldiers for the duration of the war.\nIn the 1920s there were serious shortages of goods and housing. Plans were drawn up to demolish the old part of Christianshavn and to get rid of the worst of the city's slum areas. However, it was not until the 1930s that substantial housing developments ensued, with the demolition of one side of Christianhavn's Torvegade to build five large blocks of flats.\nWorld War II.\nIn Denmark during World War II, Copenhagen was occupied by German troops along with the rest of the country from 9 April 1940 until 4 May 1945. German leader Adolf Hitler hoped that Denmark would be \"a model protectorate\" and initially the Nazi authorities sought to arrive at an understanding with the Danish government. The 1943 Danish parliamentary election was also allowed to take place, with only the Communist Party excluded. But in August 1943, after the government's collaboration with the occupation forces collapsed, several ships were sunk in Copenhagen Harbor by the Royal Danish Navy to prevent their use by the Germans. Around that time the Nazis started to arrest Jews, although most managed to escape to Sweden.\nIn 1945 Ole Lippman, leader of the Danish section of the Special Operations Executive, invited the British Royal Air Force to assist their operations by attacking Nazi headquarters in Copenhagen. Accordingly, air vice-marshal Sir Basil Embry drew up plans for a spectacular precision attack on the Sicherheitsdienst and Gestapo building, the former offices of the Shell Oil Company. Political prisoners were kept in the attic to prevent an air raid, so the RAF had to bomb the lower levels of the building.\nThe attack, known as \"Operation Carthage\", came on 22 March 1945, in three small waves. In the first wave, all six planes (carrying one bomb each) hit their target, but one of the aircraft crashed near Frederiksberg Girls School. Because of this crash, four of the planes in the two following waves assumed the school was the military target and aimed their bombs at the school, leading to the death of 123 civilians (of which 87 were schoolchildren). However, 18 of the 26 political prisoners in the Shell Building managed to escape while the Gestapo archives were completely destroyed.\nOn 8 May 1945 Copenhagen was officially liberated by British troops commanded by Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery who supervised the surrender of 30,000 Germans situated around the capital.\nPost-war decades.\nShortly after the end of the war, an innovative urban development project known as the Finger Plan was introduced in 1947, encouraging the creation of new housing and businesses interspersed with large green areas along five \"fingers\" stretching out from the city centre along the S-train routes. With the expansion of the welfare state and women entering the work force, schools, nurseries, sports facilities and hospitals were established across the city. As a result of student unrest in the late 1960s, the former B\u00e5dsmandsstr\u00e6de Barracks in Christianshavn was occupied, leading to the establishment of Freetown Christiania in September 1971.\nMotor traffic in the city grew significantly and in 1972 the trams were replaced by buses. From the 1960s, on the initiative of the young architect Jan Gehl, pedestrian streets and cycle tracks were created in the city centre. Activity in the port of Copenhagen declined with the closure of the Holmen Naval Base. Copenhagen Airport underwent considerable expansion, becoming a hub for the Nordic countries. In the 1990s, large-scale housing developments were realized in the harbour area and in the west of Amager. The national library's Black Diamond building on the waterfront was completed in 1999.\n21st century.\nSince the summer of 2000, Copenhagen and the Swedish city of Malm\u00f6 have been connected by the \u00d8resund Bridge, which carries rail and road traffic. As a result, Copenhagen has become the centre of a larger metropolitan area spanning both nations. The bridge has brought about considerable changes in the public transport system and has led to the extensive redevelopment of Amager. The city's service and trade sectors have developed while a number of banking and financial institutions have been established. Educational institutions have also gained importance, especially the University of Copenhagen with its 35,000 students. Another important development for the city has been the Copenhagen Metro, the railway system which opened in 2002 with additions until 2007, transporting some 54\u00a0million passengers by 2011.\nOn the cultural front, the Copenhagen Opera House, a gift to the city from the shipping magnate M\u00e6rsk Mc-Kinney M\u00f8ller on behalf of the A.P. M\u00f8ller foundation, was completed in 2004. In December 2009 Copenhagen gained international prominence when it hosted the worldwide climate meeting COP15.\nGeography.\nCopenhagen is part of the \u00d8resund Region, which consists of Zealand, Lolland-Falster and Bornholm in Denmark and Scania in Sweden. It is located on the eastern shore of the island of Zealand, partly on the island of Amager and on a number of natural and artificial islets between the two. Copenhagen faces the \u00d8resund to the east, the strait of water that separates Denmark from Sweden, and which connects the North Sea with the Baltic Sea. The Swedish towns of Malm\u00f6 and Landskrona lie on the Swedish side of the sound directly across from Copenhagen. By road, Copenhagen is northwest of Malm\u00f6, Sweden, northeast of N\u00e6stved, northeast of Odense, east of Esbjerg and southeast of Aarhus by sea and road via Sj\u00e6llands Odde.\nThe city centre lies in the area originally defined by the old ramparts, which are still referred to as the Fortification Ring (\"F\u00e6stningsringen\") and kept as a partial green band around it. Then come the late-19th- and early-20th-century residential neighbourhoods of \u00d8sterbro, N\u00f8rrebro, Vesterbro and Amagerbro. The outlying areas of Kongens Enghave, Valby, Vigerslev, Vanl\u00f8se, Br\u00f8nsh\u00f8j, Utterslev and Sundby followed from 1920 to 1960. They consist mainly of residential housing and apartments often enhanced with parks and greenery.\nTopography.\nThe central area of the city consists of relatively low-lying flat ground formed by moraines from the last ice age while the hilly areas to the north and west frequently rise to above sea level. The slopes of Valby and Br\u00f8nsh\u00f8j reach heights of over , divided by valleys running from the northeast to the southwest. Close to the centre are the Copenhagen lakes of Sortedams S\u00f8, Peblinge S\u00f8 and Sankt J\u00f8rgens S\u00f8.\nCopenhagen rests on a subsoil of flint-layered limestone deposited in the Danian period some 60 to 66\u00a0million years ago. Some greensand from the Selandian is also present. There are a few faults in the area, the most important of which is the Carlsberg fault which runs northwest to southeast through the centre of the city. During the last ice age, glaciers eroded the surface leaving a layer of moraines up to thick.\nGeologically, Copenhagen lies in the northern part of Denmark where the land is rising because of post-glacial rebound.\nBeaches.\nAmager Strandpark, which opened in 2005, is a long artificial island, with a total of of beaches. It is located just 15 minutes by bicycle or a few minutes by metro from the city centre. In Klampenborg, about 10 kilometers from downtown Copenhagen, is Bellevue Beach. It is long and has both lifeguards and freshwater showers on the beach.\nThe beaches are supplemented by a system of Harbour Baths along the Copenhagen waterfront. The first and most popular of these is located at Islands Brygge and has won international acclaim for its design.\nClimate.\nCopenhagen is in the oceanic climate zone (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"). Its weather is subject to low-pressure systems from the Atlantic which result in unstable conditions throughout the year. Apart from slightly higher rainfall from July to September, precipitation is moderate. While snowfall occurs mainly from late December to early March, there can also be rain, with average temperatures around the freezing point.\nJune is the sunniest month of the year with an average of about eight hours of sunshine a day. July is the warmest month with an average daytime high of 21\u00a0\u00b0C. By contrast, the average hours of sunshine are less than two per day in November and only one and a half per day from December to February. In the spring, it gets warmer again with four to six hours of sunshine per day from March to May. February is the driest month of the year. Exceptional weather conditions can bring as much as 50\u00a0cm of snow to Copenhagen in a 24-hour period during the winter months while summer temperatures have been known to rise to heights of .\nBecause of Copenhagen's northern latitude, the number of daylight hours varies considerably between summer and winter. On the summer solstice, the sun rises at 04:26 and sets at 21:58, providing 17 hours 32 minutes of daylight. On the winter solstice, it rises at 08:37 and sets at 15:39 with 7 hours and 1 minute of daylight. There is therefore a difference of 10 hours and 31 minutes in the length of days and nights between the summer and winter solstices.\nAdministration.\nAccording to Statistics Denmark, the urban area of Copenhagen () consists of the municipalities of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Albertslund, Br\u00f8ndby, Gentofte, Gladsaxe, Glostrup, Herlev, Hvidovre, Lyngby-Taarb\u00e6k, R\u00f8dovre, T\u00e5rnby and Vallensb\u00e6k as well as parts of Ballerup, Rudersdal and Fures\u00f8 municipalities, along with the cities of Ish\u00f8j and Greve Strand. They are located in the Capital Region (). Municipalities are responsible for a wide variety of public services, which include land-use planning, environmental planning, public housing, management and maintenance of local roads, and social security. Municipal administration is also conducted by a mayor, a council, and an executive.\nCopenhagen Municipality is by far the largest municipality, with the historic city at its core. The seat of Copenhagen's municipal council is the Copenhagen City Hall (\"\"), which is situated on City Hall Square. The second largest municipality is Frederiksberg, an enclave within Copenhagen Municipality.\nCopenhagen Municipality is divided into ten districts (\"bydele\"): Indre By, \u00d8sterbro, N\u00f8rrebro, Vesterbro/Kongens Enghave, Valby, Vanl\u00f8se, Br\u00f8nsh\u00f8j-Husum, Bispebjerg, Amager \u00d8st, and Amager Vest. Neighbourhoods of Copenhagen include Slotsholmen, Frederiksstaden, Islands Brygge, Holmen, Christiania, Carlsberg, Sluseholmen, Sydhavn, Amagerbro, \u00d8restad, Nordhavnen, Bellah\u00f8j, Br\u00f8nsh\u00f8j, Ryparken, and Vigerslev.\nLaw and order.\nMost of Denmark's top legal courts and institutions are based in Copenhagen. A modern style court of justice, \"Hof- og Stadsretten\", was introduced in Denmark, specifically for Copenhagen, by Johann Friedrich Struensee in 1771. Now known as the City Court of Copenhagen (\"K\u00f8benhavns Byret\"), it is the largest of the 24 city courts in Denmark with jurisdiction over the municipalities of Copenhagen, Drag\u00f8r and T\u00e5rnby. With its 42 judges, it has a Probate Division, an Enforcement Division and a Registration and Notorial Acts Division while bankruptcy is handled by the Maritime and Commercial Court of Copenhagen. Established in 1862, the Maritime and Commercial Court (\"S\u00f8- og Handelsretten\") also hears commercial cases including those relating to trade marks, marketing practices and competition for the whole of Denmark. Denmark's Supreme Court (\"H\u00f8jesteret\"), located in Christiansborg Palace on Prins J\u00f8rgens G\u00e5rd in the centre of Copenhagen, is the country's final court of appeal. Handling civil and criminal cases from the subordinate courts, it has two chambers which each hear all types of cases.\nThe Danish National Police and Copenhagen Police headquarters is situated in the Neoclassical-inspired Politig\u00e5rden building built in 1918\u201324 under architects Hack Kampmann and Holger Alfred Jacobsen. The building also contains administration, management, emergency department and radio service offices. In their efforts to deal with drugs, the police have noted considerable success in the two special drug consumption rooms opened by the city where addicts can use sterile needles and receive help from nurses if necessary. Use of these rooms does not lead to prosecution; the city treats drug use as a public health issue, not a criminal one.\nThe Copenhagen Fire Department forms the largest municipal fire brigade in Denmark with some 500 fire and ambulance personnel, 150 administration and service workers, and 35 workers in prevention. The brigade began as the Copenhagen Royal Fire Brigade on 9 July 1687 under King Christian V. After the passing of the Copenhagen Fire Act on 18 May 1868, on 1 August 1870 the Copenhagen Fire Brigade became a municipal institution in its own right. The fire department has its headquarters in the Copenhagen Central Fire Station which was designed by Ludvig Fenger in the Historicist style and inaugurated in 1892.\nEnvironmental planning.\nCopenhagen is recognized as one of the most environmentally friendly cities in the world. As a result of its commitment to high environmental standards, Copenhagen has been praised for its green economy, ranked as the top green city for the second time in the 2014 \"Global Green Economy Index (GGEI)\". In 2001 a large offshore wind farm was built just off the coast of Copenhagen at Middelgrunden. It produces about 4% of the city's energy. Years of substantial investment in sewage treatment have improved water quality in the harbour to an extent that the inner harbour can be used for swimming with facilities at a number of locations.\nCopenhagen aims to be carbon-neutral by 2025. Commercial and residential buildings are to reduce electricity consumption by 20 percent and 10 percent respectively, and total heat consumption is to fall by 20 percent by 2025. Renewable energy features such as solar panels are becoming increasingly common in the newest buildings in Copenhagen. District heating will be carbon-neutral by 2025, by waste incineration and biomass. New buildings must now be constructed according to Low Energy Class ratings and in 2020 near net-zero energy buildings. By 2025, 75% of trips should be made on foot, by bike, or by using public transit. The city plans that 20\u201330% of cars will run on electricity or biofuel by 2025. The investment is estimated at $472\u00a0million public funds and $4.78\u00a0billion private funds.\nThe city's urban planning authorities continue to take full account of these priorities. Special attention is given both to climate issues and efforts to ensure maximum application of low-energy standards. Priorities include sustainable drainage systems, recycling rainwater, green roofs and efficient waste management solutions. In city planning, streets and squares are to be designed to encourage cycling and walking rather than driving. Further, the city administration is working with smart city initiatives to improve how data and technology can be used to implement new solutions that support the transition toward a carbon-neutral economy. These solutions support operations covered by the city administration to improve e.g. public health, district heating, urban mobility and waste management systems. Smart city operations in Copenhagen are maintained by Copenhagen Solutions Lab, the city's official smart-city development unit under the Technical and Environmental Administration.\nDemographics and society.\nCopenhagen is the most populous city in Denmark and one of the most populous in the Nordic countries. For statistical purposes, Statistics Denmark considers the City of Copenhagen (\"Byen K\u00f8benhavn\") to consist of the Municipality of Copenhagen plus three adjacent municipalities: Drag\u00f8r, Frederiksberg, and T\u00e5rnby. Their combined population stands at 763,908 ().\nThe Municipality of Copenhagen is by far the most populous in the country and one of the most populous Nordic municipalities with 601,448 inhabitants (). There was a demographic boom in the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, largely due to immigration to Denmark. According to figures from the first quarter of 2016, approximately 76% of the municipality's population was of Danish descent, defined as having at least one parent who was born in Denmark and has Danish citizenship. Much of the remaining 24% were of a foreign background, defined as immigrants (18%) or descendants of recent immigrants (6%). There are no official statistics on ethnic groups. The adjacent table shows the most common countries of birth of Copenhagen residents.\nAccording to Statistics Denmark, Copenhagen's urban area has a larger population of 1,280,371 (). The urban area consists of the municipalities of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg plus 16 of the 20 municipalities of the former counties Copenhagen and Roskilde, though five of them only partially. Metropolitan Copenhagen has a total of 2,016,285 inhabitants (). The area of Metropolitan Copenhagen is defined by the Finger Plan. Since the opening of the \u00d8resund Bridge in 2000, commuting between Zealand and Scania in Sweden has increased rapidly, leading to a wider, integrated area. Known as the \u00d8resund Region, it has 3.8\u00a0million inhabitants (of whom 2.5\u00a0million live in the Danish part of the region).\nReligion.\nA majority (56.9%) of those living in Copenhagen are members of the Lutheran Church of Denmark which is 0.6% lower than one year earlier according to 2019 figures. The National Cathedral, the Church of Our Lady, is one of the dozens of churches in Copenhagen. There are also several other Christian communities in the city, of which the largest is Roman Catholic.\nForeign migration to Copenhagen, rising over the last three decades, has contributed to increasing religious diversity; the Grand Mosque of Copenhagen, the first in Denmark, opened in 2014. Islam is the second largest religion in Copenhagen, accounting for approximately 10% of the population. While there are no official statistics, a significant portion of the estimated 175,000\u2013200,000 Muslims in the country live in the Copenhagen urban area, with the highest concentration in N\u00f8rrebro and the Vestegnen. There are also some 7,000 Jews in Denmark, most of them in the Copenhagen area where there are several synagogues. There is a long history of Jews in the city, and the first synagogue in Copenhagen was built in 1684. Today, the history of the Jews of Denmark can be explored at the Danish Jewish Museum in Copenhagen.\nQuality of living.\nFor a number of years, Copenhagen has ranked high in international surveys for its quality of life. Its stable economy together with its education services and level of social safety make it attractive for locals and visitors alike. Although it is one of the world's most expensive cities, it is also one of the most liveable with its public transport, facilities for cyclists and its environmental policies. In elevating Copenhagen to \"most liveable city\" in 2013, \"Monocle\" pointed to its open spaces, increasing activity on the streets, city planning in favour of cyclists and pedestrians, and features to encourage inhabitants to enjoy city life with an emphasis on community, culture and cuisine. Other sources have ranked Copenhagen high for its business environment, accessibility, restaurants and environmental planning. However, Copenhagen ranks only 39th for student friendliness in 2012. Despite a top score for quality of living, its scores were low for employer activity and affordability.\nEconomy.\nCopenhagen is the major economic and financial centre of Denmark. The city's economy is based largely on services and commerce. Statistics for 2010 show that the vast majority of the 350,000 workers in Copenhagen are employed in the service sector, especially transport and communications, trade, and finance, while less than 10,000 work in the manufacturing industries. The public sector workforce is around 110,000, including education and healthcare. From 2006 to 2011, the economy grew by 2.5% in Copenhagen, while it fell by some 4% in the rest of Denmark. In 2017, the wider Capital Region of Denmark had a gross domestic product (GDP) of \u20ac120\u00a0billion, and the 15th largest GDP per capita of regions in the European Union.\nSeveral financial institutions and banks have headquarters in Copenhagen, including Alm. Brand, Danske Bank, Nykredit and Nordea Bank Danmark. The Copenhagen Stock Exchange (CSE) was founded in 1620 and is now owned by Nasdaq, Inc.. Copenhagen is also home to a number of international companies including A.P. M\u00f8ller-M\u00e6rsk, Novo Nordisk, Carlsberg and Novozymes. City authorities have encouraged the development of business clusters in several innovative sectors, which include information technology, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, clean technology and smart city solutions.\nLife science is a key sector with extensive research and development activities. Medicon Valley is a leading bi-national life sciences cluster in Europe, spanning the \u00d8resund Region. Copenhagen is rich in companies and institutions with a focus on research and development within the field of biotechnology, and the Medicon Valley initiative aims to strengthen this position and to promote cooperation between companies and academia. Many major Danish companies like Novo Nordisk and Lundbeck, both of which are among the 50 largest pharmaceutical and biotech companies in the world, are located in this business cluster.\nShipping is another import sector with Maersk, the world's largest shipping company, having their world headquarters in Copenhagen. The city has an industrial harbour, Copenhagen Port. Following decades of stagnation, it has experienced a resurgence since 1990 following a merger with Malm\u00f6 harbour. Both ports are operated by Copenhagen Malm\u00f6 Port (CMP). The central location in the \u00d8resund Region allows the ports to act as a hub for freight that is transported onward to the Baltic countries. CMP annually receives about 8,000 ships and handled some 148,000 TEU in 2012.\nCopenhagen has some of the highest gross wages in the world. High taxes mean that wages are reduced after mandatory deduction. A \"beneficial researcher scheme\" with low taxation of foreign specialists has made Denmark an attractive location for foreign labour. It is however also among the most expensive cities in Europe.\nDenmark's Flexicurity model features some of the most flexible hiring and firing legislation in Europe, providing attractive conditions for foreign investment and international companies looking to locate in Copenhagen. In Dansk Industri's 2013 survey of employment factors in the ninety-six municipalities of Denmark, Copenhagen came in first place for educational qualifications and for the development of private companies in recent years, but fell to 86th place in local companies' assessment of the employment climate. The survey revealed considerable dissatisfaction in the level of dialogue companies enjoyed with the municipal authorities.\nTourism.\nTourism is a major contributor to Copenhagen's economy, attracting visitors due to the city's harbour, cultural attractions and award-winning restaurants. Since 2009, Copenhagen has been one of the fastest growing metropolitan destinations in Europe. Hotel capacity in the city is growing significantly. From 2009 to 2013, it experienced a 42% growth in international bed nights (total number of nights spent by tourists), tallying a rise of nearly 70% for Chinese visitors. The total number of bed nights in the Capital Region surpassed 9\u00a0million in 2013, while international bed nights reached 5\u00a0million.\nIn 2010, it is estimated that city break tourism contributed to DKK 2\u00a0billion in turnover. However, 2010 was an exceptional year for city break tourism and turnover increased with 29% in that one year. 680,000 cruise passengers visited the port in 2015. In 2019 Copenhagen was ranked first among Lonely Planet's top ten cities to visit.\nCityscape.\nThe city's appearance today is shaped by the key role it has played as a regional centre for centuries. Copenhagen has a multitude of districts, each with its distinctive character and representing its own period. Other distinctive features of Copenhagen include the abundance of water, its many parks, and the bicycle paths that line most streets.\nArchitecture.\nThe oldest section of Copenhagen's inner city is often referred to as \"Middelalderbyen\" (the medieval city). However, the city's most distinctive district is Frederiksstaden, developed during the reign of Frederick V. It has the Amalienborg Palace at its centre and is dominated by the dome of Frederik's Church (or the Marble Church) and several elegant 18th-century Rococo mansions. The inner city includes Slotsholmen, a little island on which Christiansborg Palace stands and Christianshavn with its canals. B\u00f8rsen on Slotsholmen and Frederiksborg Palace in Hiller\u00f8d are prominent examples of the Dutch Renaissance style in Copenhagen. Around the historical city centre lies a band of congenial residential boroughs (Vesterbro, Inner N\u00f8rrebro, Inner \u00d8sterbro) dating mainly from late 19th century. They were built outside the old ramparts when the city was finally allowed to expand beyond its fortifications.\nSometimes referred to as \"the City of Spires\", Copenhagen is known for its horizontal skyline, broken only by the spires and towers of its churches and castles. Most characteristic of all is the Baroque spire of the Church of Our Saviour with its narrowing external spiral stairway that visitors can climb to the top. Other important spires are those of Christiansborg Palace, the City Hall and the former Church of St. Nikolaj that now houses a modern art venue. Not quite so high are the Renaissance spires of Rosenborg Castle and the \"dragon spire\" of Christian IV's former stock exchange, so named because it resembles the intertwined tails of four dragons.\nCopenhagen is recognised globally as an exemplar of best practice urban planning. Its thriving mixed use city centre is defined by striking contemporary architecture, engaging public spaces and an abundance of human activity. These design outcomes have been deliberately achieved through careful replanning in the second half of the 20th century.\nRecent years have seen a boom in modern architecture in Copenhagen both for Danish architecture and for works by international architects. For a few hundred years, virtually no foreign architects had worked in Copenhagen, but since the turn of the millennium the city and its immediate surroundings have seen buildings and projects designed by top international architects. British design magazine \"Monocle\" named Copenhagen the \"World's best design city 2008\".\nCopenhagen's urban development in the first half of the 20th century was heavily influenced by industrialisation. After World War II, Copenhagen Municipality adopted Fordism and repurposed its medieval centre to facilitate private automobile infrastructure in response to innovations in transport, trade and communication. Copenhagen's spatial planning in this time frame was characterised by the separation of land uses: an approach which requires residents to travel by car to access facilities of different uses.\nThe boom in urban development and modern architecture has brought some changes to the city's skyline. A political majority has decided to keep the historical centre free of high-rise buildings, but several areas will see or have already seen massive urban development. \u00d8restad now has seen most of the recent development. Located near Copenhagen Airport, it currently boasts one of the largest malls in Scandinavia and a variety of office and residential buildings as well as the IT University and a high school.\nParks, gardens and zoo.\nCopenhagen is a green city with many parks, both large and small. King's Garden (\"\"), the garden of Rosenborg Castle, is the oldest and most frequented of them all. It was Christian IV who first developed its landscaping in 1606. Every year it sees more than 2.5\u00a0million visitors and in the summer months it is packed with sunbathers, picnickers and ballplayers. It serves as a sculpture garden with both a permanent display and temporary exhibits during the summer months. Also located in the city centre are the Botanical Gardens noted for their large complex of 19th-century greenhouses donated by Carlsberg founder J. C. Jacobsen. F\u00e6lledparken at is the largest park in Copenhagen.\nIt is popular for sports fixtures and hosts several annual events including a free opera concert at the opening of the opera season, other open-air concerts, carnival and Labour Day celebrations, and the Copenhagen Historic Grand Prix, a race for antique cars. A historical green space in the northeastern part of the city is Kastellet, a well-preserved Renaissance citadel that now serves mainly as a park. Another popular park is the Frederiksberg Gardens, a 32-hectare romantic landscape park. It houses a colony of tame grey herons and other waterfowl. The park offers views of the elephants and the elephant house designed by world-famous British architect Norman Foster of the adjacent Copenhagen Zoo. Langelinie, a park and promenade along the inner \u00d8resund coast, is home to one of Copenhagen's most-visited tourist attractions, the Little Mermaid statue.\nIn Copenhagen, many cemeteries double as parks, though only for the more quiet activities such as sunbathing, reading and meditation. Assistens Cemetery, the burial place of Hans Christian Andersen, is an important green space for the district of Inner N\u00f8rrebro and a Copenhagen institution. The lesser known Vestre Kirkegaard is the largest cemetery in Denmark () and offers a maze of dense groves, open lawns, winding paths, hedges, overgrown tombs, monuments, tree-lined avenues, lakes and other garden features.\nIt is official municipal policy in Copenhagen that by 2015 all citizens must be able to reach a park or beach on foot in less than 15 minutes. In line with this policy, several new parks, including the innovative Superkilen in the N\u00f8rrebro district, have been completed or are under development in areas lacking green spaces.\nLandmarks by district.\nIndre By.\nThe historic centre of the city, Indre By or the Inner City, features many of Copenhagen's most popular monuments and attractions. The area known as Frederiksstaden, developed by Frederik V in the second half of the 18th century in the Rococo style, has the four mansions of Amalienborg, the royal residence, and the wide-domed Marble Church at its centre. Directly across the water from Amalienborg, the recently completed Copenhagen Opera stands on the island of Holmen. To the south of Frederiksstaden, the Nyhavn canal is lined with colourful houses from the 17th and 18th centuries, many now with lively restaurants and bars. The canal runs from the harbour front to the spacious square of Kongens Nytorv which was laid out by Christian V in 1670. Important buildings include Charlottenborg Palace, famous for its art exhibitions, the Thott Palace (now the French embassy), the Royal Danish Theatre and the Hotel D'Angleterre, dated to 1755. Other landmarks in Indre By include the parliament building of Christiansborg, the City Hall and Rundet\u00e5rn, originally an observatory. There are also several museums in the area including Thorvaldsen Museum dedicated to the 18th-century sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen. Closed to traffic since 1964, Str\u00f8get, the world's oldest and longest pedestrian street, runs the from R\u00e5dhuspladsen to Kongens Nytorv. With its speciality shops, caf\u00e9s, restaurants, and buskers, it is always full of life and includes the old squares of Gammel Torv and Amagertorv, each with a fountain. Rosenborg Castle on \u00d8ster Voldgade was built by Christian IV in 1606 as a summer residence in the Renaissance style. It houses the Danish crown jewels and crown regalia, the coronation throne and tapestries illustrating Christian V's victories in the Scanian War.\nChristianshavn.\nChristianshavn lies to the southeast of Indre By on the other side of the harbour. The area was developed by Christian IV in the early 17th century. Impressed by the city of Amsterdam, he employed Dutch architects to create canals within its ramparts which are still well preserved today. The canals themselves, branching off the central Christianshavn Canal and lined with house boats and pleasure craft are one of the area's attractions. Another interesting feature is Freetown Christiania, a fairly large area which was initially occupied by squatters during student unrest in 1971. Today it still maintains a measure of autonomy. The inhabitants openly sell drugs on \"Pusher Street\" as well as their arts and crafts. Other buildings of interest in Christianshavn include the Church of Our Saviour with its spiralling steeple and the magnificent Rococo Christian's Church. Once a warehouse, the North Atlantic House now displays culture from Iceland and Greenland and houses the Noma restaurant, known for its Nordic cuisine.\nVesterbro.\nVesterbro, to the southwest of Indre By, begins with the Tivoli Gardens, the city's top tourist attraction with its fairground atmosphere, its Pantomime Theatre, its Concert Hall and its many rides and restaurants. The Carlsberg neighbourhood has some interesting vestiges of the old brewery of the same name including the Elephant Gate and the Ny Carlsberg Brewhouse. The Tycho Brahe Planetarium is located on the edge of Skt. J\u00f8rgens S\u00f8, one of the Copenhagen lakes. Halmtorvet, the old haymarket behind the Central Station, is an increasingly popular area with its caf\u00e9s and restaurants. The former cattle market \u00d8ksnehallen has been converted into a modern exhibition centre for art and photography. Radisson Blu Royal Hotel, built by Danish architect and designer Arne Jacobsen for the airline Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) between 1956 and 1960 was once the tallest hotel in Denmark with a height of and the city's only skyscraper until 1969. Completed in 1908, Det Ny Teater (the New Theatre) located in a passage between Vesterbrogade and Gammel Kongevej has become a popular venue for musicals since its reopening in 1994, attracting the largest audiences in the country.\nN\u00f8rrebro.\nN\u00f8rrebro to the northwest of the city centre has recently developed from a working-class district into a colourful cosmopolitan area with antique shops, non-Danish food stores and restaurants. Much of the activity is centred on Sankt Hans Torv and around Rantzausgade. Copenhagen's historic cemetery, Assistens Kirkeg\u00e5rd halfway up N\u00f8rrebrogade, is the resting place of many famous figures including S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, Niels Bohr, and Hans Christian Andersen but is also used by locals as a park and recreation area.\n\u00d8sterbro.\nJust north of the city centre, \u00d8sterbro is an upper middle-class district with a number of fine mansions, some now serving as embassies. The district stretches from N\u00f8rrebro to the waterfront where \"The Little Mermaid\" statue can be seen from the promenade known as Langelinie. Inspired by Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale, it was created by Edvard Eriksen and unveiled in 1913. Not far from the Little Mermaid, the old Citadel (\"Kastellet\") can be seen. Built by Christian IV, it is one of northern Europe's best preserved fortifications. There is also a windmill in the area. The large Gefion Fountain (\"Gefionspringvandet\") designed by Anders Bundgaard and completed in 1908 stands close to the southeast corner of Kastellet. Its figures illustrate a Nordic legend.\nFrederiksberg.\nFrederiksberg, a separate municipality within the urban area of Copenhagen, lies to the west of N\u00f8rrebro and Indre By and north of Vesterbro. Its landmarks include Copenhagen Zoo founded in 1869 with over 250 species from all over the world and Frederiksberg Palace built as a summer residence by Frederick IV who was inspired by Italian architecture. Now a military academy, it overlooks the extensive landscaped Frederiksberg Gardens with its follies, waterfalls, lakes and decorative buildings. The wide tree-lined avenue of Frederiksberg All\u00e9 connecting Vesterbrogade with the Frederiksberg Gardens has long been associated with theatres and entertainment. While a number of the earlier theatres are now closed, the Betty Nansen Theatre and Aveny-T are still active.\nAmagerbro.\nAmagerbro (also known as S\u00f8nderbro) is the district located immediately south-east of Christianshavn at northernmost Amager. The old city moats and their surrounding parks constitute a clear border between these districts. The main street is Amagerbrogade which after the harbour bridge Langebro, is an extension of H. C. Andersens Boulevard and has a number of various stores and shops as well as restaurants and pubs. Amagerbro was built up during the two first decades of the twentieth century and is the city's northernmost block built area with typically 4\u20137 floors. Further south follows the Sundby\u00f8ster and Sundbyvester districts.\nOther districts.\nNot far from Copenhagen Airport on the Kastrup coast, The Blue Planet completed in March 2013 now houses the national aquarium. With its 53 aquariums, it is the largest facility of its kind in Scandinavia. Grundtvig's Church, located in the northern suburb of Bispebjerg, was designed by P.V. Jensen Klint and completed in 1940. A rare example of Expressionist church architecture, its striking west fa\u00e7ade is reminiscent of a church organ.\nCulture.\nApart from being the national capital, Copenhagen also serves as the cultural hub of Denmark and wider Scandinavia. Since the late 1990s, it has undergone a transformation from a modest Scandinavian capital into a metropolitan city of international appeal in the same league as Barcelona and Amsterdam. This is a result of huge investments in infrastructure and culture as well as the work of successful new Danish architects, designers and chefs. Copenhagen Fashion Week, the largest fashion event in Northern Europe, takes place every year in February and August.\nMuseums.\nCopenhagen has a wide array of museums of international standing. The National Museum, \"Nationalmuseet\", is Denmark's largest museum of archaeology and cultural history, comprising the histories of Danish and foreign cultures alike. Denmark's National Gallery (\"Statens Museum for Kunst\") is the national art museum with collections dating from the 12th century to the present. In addition to Danish painters, artists represented in the collections include Rubens, Rembrandt, Picasso, Braque, L\u00e9ger, Matisse, Emil Nolde, Olafur Eliasson, Elmgreen and Dragset, Superflex and Jens Haaning.\nAnother important Copenhagen art museum is the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek founded by second generation Carlsberg philanthropist Carl Jacobsen and built around his personal collections. Its main focus is classical Egyptian, Roman and Greek sculptures and antiquities and a collection of Rodin sculptures, the largest outside France. Besides its sculpture collections, the museum also holds a comprehensive collection of paintings of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist painters such as Monet, Renoir, C\u00e9zanne, van Gogh and Toulouse-Lautrec as well as works by the Danish Golden Age painters.\nLouisiana is a Museum of Modern Art situated on the coast just north of Copenhagen. It is located in the middle of a sculpture garden on a cliff overlooking \u00d8resund. Its collection of over 3,000 items includes works by Picasso, Giacometti and Dubuffet. The Danish Design Museum is housed in the 18th-century former Frederiks Hospital and displays Danish design as well as international design and crafts.\nOther museums include: the Thorvaldsens Museum, dedicated to the oeuvre of romantic Danish sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen who lived and worked in Rome; the Cisternerne museum, an exhibition space for contemporary art, located in former cisterns that come complete with stalactites formed by the changing water levels; and the Ordrupgaard Museum, located just north of Copenhagen, which features 19th-century French and Danish art and is noted for its works by Paul Gauguin.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nThe new Copenhagen Concert Hall opened in January 2009. Designed by Jean Nouvel, it has four halls with the main auditorium seating 1,800 people. It serves as the home of the Danish National Symphony Orchestra and along with the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles is the most expensive concert hall ever built. Another important venue for classical music is the Tivoli Concert Hall located in the Tivoli Gardens. Designed by Henning Larsen, the Copenhagen Opera House (\"Operaen\") opened in 2005. It is among the most modern opera houses in the world. The Royal Danish Theatre also stages opera in addition to its drama productions. It is also home to the Royal Danish Ballet. Founded in 1748 along with the theatre, it is one of the oldest ballet troupes in Europe, and is noted for its Bournonville style of ballet. \nCopenhagen has a significant jazz scene that has existed for many years. It developed when a number of American jazz musicians such as Ben Webster, Thad Jones, Richard Boone, Ernie Wilkins, Kenny Drew, Ed Thigpen, Bob Rockwell, Dexter Gordon, and others such as rock guitarist Link Wray came to live in Copenhagen during the 1960s. Every year in early July, Copenhagen's streets, squares, parks as well as caf\u00e9s and concert halls fill up with big and small jazz concerts during the Copenhagen Jazz Festival. One of Europe's top jazz festivals, the annual event features around 900 concerts at 100 venues with over 200,000 guests from Denmark and around the world.\nThe largest venue for popular music in Copenhagen is Vega in the Vesterbro district. It was chosen as \"best concert venue in Europe\" by international music magazine \"Live\". The venue has three concert halls: the great hall, Store Vega, accommodates audiences of 1,550, the middle hall, Lille Vega, has space for 500 and Ideal Bar Live has a capacity of 250. Every September since 2006, the Festival of Endless Gratitude (FOEG) has taken place in Copenhagen. This festival focuses on indie counterculture, experimental pop music and left field music combined with visual arts exhibitions.\nFor free entertainment one can stroll along Str\u00f8get, especially between Nytorv and H\u00f8jbro Plads, which in the late afternoon and evening is a bit like an impromptu three-ring circus with musicians, magicians, jugglers and other street performers.\nLiterature.\nMost of Denmarks's major publishing houses are based in Copenhagen. These include the book publishers Gyldendal and Akademisk Forlag and newspaper publishers Berlingske and Politiken (the latter also publishing books). Many of the most important contributors to Danish literature such as Hans Christian Andersen (1805\u20131875) with his fairy tales, the philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard (1813\u20131855) and playwright Ludvig Holberg (1684\u20131754) spent much of their lives in Copenhagen. Novels set in Copenhagen include \"Baby\" (1973) by Kirsten Thorup, \"The Copenhagen Connection\" (1982) by Barbara Mertz, \"Number the Stars\" (1989) by Lois Lowry, \"Miss Smilla's Feeling for Snow\" (1992) and \"Borderliners\" (1993) by Peter H\u00f8eg, \"Music and Silence\" (1999) by Rose Tremain, \"The Danish Girl\" (2000) by David Ebershoff, and \"Sharpe's Prey\" (2001) by Bernard Cornwell. Michael Frayn's 1998 play \"Copenhagen\" about the meeting between the physicists Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg in 1941 is also set in the city. On 15\u201318 August 1973, an oral literature conference took place in Copenhagen as part of the 9th International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences.\nThe Royal Library, belonging to the University of Copenhagen, is the largest library in the Nordic countries with an almost complete collection of all printed Danish books since 1482. Founded in 1648, the Royal Library is located at four sites in the city, the main one being on the Slotsholmen waterfront. Copenhagen's public library network has over 20 outlets, the largest being the Central Library (\"K\u00f8benhavns Hovedbibliotek\") on Krystalgade in the inner city.\nArt.\nCopenhagen has a wide selection of art museums and galleries displaying both historic works and more modern contributions. They include Statens Museum for Kunst, i.e. the Danish national art gallery, in the \u00d8stre Anl\u00e6g park, and the adjacent Hirschsprung Collection specialising in the 19th and early 20th century. Kunsthal Charlottenborg in the city centre exhibits national and international contemporary art. Den Frie Udstilling near the \u00d8sterport Station exhibits paintings created and selected by contemporary artists themselves rather than by the official authorities. The Arken Museum of Modern Art is located in southwestern Ish\u00f8j. Among artists who have painted scenes of Copenhagen are Martinus R\u00f8rbye (1803\u20131848), Christen K\u00f8bke (1810\u20131848) and the prolific Paul Gustav Fischer (1860\u20131934).\nA number of notable sculptures can be seen in the city. In addition to \"The Little Mermaid\" on the waterfront, there are two historic equestrian statues in the city centre: Jacques Saly's \"Frederik V on Horseback\" (1771) in Amalienborg Square and the statue of Christian V on Kongens Nytorv created by Abraham-C\u00e9sar Lamoureux in 1688 who was inspired by the statue of Louis XIII in Paris. Rosenborg Castle Gardens contains several sculptures and monuments including August Saabye's Hans Christian Andersen, Aksel Hansen's Echo, and Vilhelm Bissen's Dowager Queen Caroline Amalie.\nCopenhagen is believed to have invented the photomarathon photography competition, which has been held in the City each year since 1989.\nCuisine.\n, Copenhagen has 15 Michelin-starred restaurants, the most of any Scandinavian city. The city is increasingly recognized internationally as a gourmet destination. These include Den R\u00f8de Cottage, Formel B Restaurant, Gr\u00f8nbech &amp; Churchill, S\u00f8ller\u00f8d Kro, Kadeau, Kiin Kiin (Denmark's first Michelin-starred Asian gourmet restaurant), the French restaurant Kong Hans K\u00e6lder, Rel\u00e6, Restaurant AOC, Noma (short for Danish: \"no\"rdisk \"ma\"d, English: Nordic food) with two Stars and Geranium with three. Noma, was ranked as the Best Restaurant in the World by \"Restaurant\" in 2010, 2011, 2012, and again in 2014, sparking interest in the New Nordic Cuisine.\nApart from the selection of upmarket restaurants, Copenhagen offers a great variety of Danish, ethnic and experimental restaurants. It is possible to find modest eateries serving open sandwiches, known as sm\u00f8rrebr\u00f8d \u2013 a traditional, Danish lunch dish; however, most restaurants serve international dishes. Danish pastry can be sampled from any of numerous bakeries found in all parts of the city. The Copenhagen Baker's Association dates back to the 1290s and Denmark's oldest confectioner's shop still operating, \"Conditori La Glace\", was founded in 1870 in Skoubogade by Nicolaus Henningsen, a trained master baker from Flensburg.\nCopenhagen has long been associated with beer. Carlsberg beer has been brewed at the brewery's premises on the border between the Vesterbro and Valby districts since 1847 and has long been almost synonymous with Danish beer production. However, recent years have seen an explosive growth in the number of microbreweries so that Denmark today has more than 100 breweries, many of which are located in Copenhagen. Some like \"N\u00f8rrebro Bryghus\" also act as brewpubs where it is also possible to eat on the premises.\nNightlife and festivals.\nCopenhagen has one of the highest number of restaurants and bars per capita in the world. The nightclubs and bars stay open until 5 or 6 in the morning, some even longer. Denmark has a very liberal alcohol culture and a strong tradition for beer breweries, although binge drinking is frowned upon and the Danish Police take driving under the influence very seriously. Inner city areas such as Istedgade and Enghave Plads in Vesterbro, Sankt Hans Torv in N\u00f8rrebro and certain places in Frederiksberg are especially noted for their nightlife. Notable nightclubs include Bakken Kbh, ARCH (previously ZEN), Jolene, The Jane, Chateau Motel, KB3, At Dolores (previously Sunday Club), Rust, Vega Nightclub, Culture Box and Gef\u00e4hrlich, which also serves as a bar, caf\u00e9, restaurant, and art gallery.\nCopenhagen has several recurring community festivals, mainly in the summer. Copenhagen Carnival has taken place every year since 1982 during the Whitsun Holiday in F\u00e6lledparken and around the city with the participation of 120 bands, 2,000 dancers and 100,000 spectators. Since 2010, the old B&amp;W Shipyard at Refshale\u00f8en in the harbour has been the location for Copenhell, a heavy metal rock music festival. Copenhagen Pride is a gay pride festival taking place every year in August. The Pride has a series of different activities all over Copenhagen, but it is at the City Hall Square that most of the celebration takes place. During the Pride the square is renamed Pride Square. Copenhagen Distortion has emerged to be one of the biggest street festivals in Europe with 100,000 people joining to parties in the beginning of June every year.\nAmusement parks.\nCopenhagen has the two oldest amusement parks in the world.\nDyrehavsbakken, a fair-ground and pleasure-park established in 1583, is located in Klampenborg just north of Copenhagen in a forested area known as Dyrehaven. Created as an amusement park complete with rides, games and restaurants by Christian IV, it is the oldest surviving amusement park in the world. Pierrot (), a nitwit dressed in white with a scarlet grin wearing a boat-like hat while entertaining children, remains one of the park's key attractions. In Danish, Dyrehavsbakken is often abbreviated as \"Bakken\". There is no entrance fee to pay and Klampenborg Station on the C-line, is situated nearby.\nThe Tivoli Gardens is an amusement park and pleasure garden located in central Copenhagen between the City Hall Square and the Central Station. It opened in 1843, making it the second oldest amusement park in the world. Among its rides are the oldest still operating rollercoaster \"Rutschebanen\" from 1915 and the oldest ferris wheel still in use, opened in 1943. Tivoli Gardens also serves as a venue for various performing arts and as an active part of the cultural scene in Copenhagen.\nEducation.\nCopenhagen has over 94,000 students enrolled in its largest universities and institutions: University of Copenhagen (38,867 students), Copenhagen Business School (19,999 students), Metropolitan University College and University College Capital (10,000 students each), Technical University of Denmark (7,000 students), KEA (c. 4,500 students), IT University of Copenhagen (2,000 students) and Aalborg University \u2013 Copenhagen (2,300 students).\nThe University of Copenhagen is Denmark's oldest university founded in 1479. It attracts some 1,500 international and exchange students every year. The Academic Ranking of World Universities placed it 30th in the world in 2016.\nThe Technical University of Denmark is located in Lyngby in the northern outskirts of Copenhagen. In 2013, it was ranked as one of the leading technical universities in Northern Europe. The IT University is Denmark's youngest university, a mono-faculty institution focusing on technical, societal and business aspects of information technology.\nThe Danish Academy of Fine Arts has provided education in the arts for more than 250 years. It includes the historic School of Visual Arts, and has in later years come to include a School of Architecture, a School of Design and a School of Conservation. Copenhagen Business School (CBS) is an EQUIS-accredited business\u00a0school located in Frederiksberg.\nThere are also branches of both University College Capital and Metropolitan University College inside and outside Copenhagen.\nSport.\nThe city has a variety of sporting teams. The major football teams are the historically successful FC K\u00f8benhavn and Br\u00f8ndby. FC K\u00f8benhavn plays at Parken in \u00d8sterbro. Formed in 1992, it is a merger of two older Copenhagen clubs, B 1903 (from the inner suburb Gentofte) and KB (from Frederiksberg). Br\u00f8ndby plays at Br\u00f8ndby Stadion in the inner suburb of Br\u00f8ndbyvester. BK Frem is based in the southern part of Copenhagen (Sydhavnen, Valby). Other teams are FC Nordsj\u00e6lland (from suburban Farum), Fremad Amager, B93, AB, Lyngby and Hvidovre IF.\nCopenhagen has several handball teams\u2014a sport which is particularly popular in Denmark. Of clubs playing in the \"highest\" leagues, there are Ajax, Ydun, and HIK (Hellerup). The K\u00f8benhavn H\u00e5ndbold women's club has recently been established. Copenhagen also has ice hockey teams, of which three play in the top league, R\u00f8dovre Mighty Bulls, Herlev Eagles and Hvidovre Ligahockey all inner suburban clubs. Copenhagen Ice Skating Club founded in 1869 is the oldest ice hockey team in Denmark but is no longer in the top league.\nRugby union is also played in the Danish capital with teams such as CSR-Nanok, Copenhagen Business School Sport Rugby, Frederiksberg RK, Exiles RUFC and Rugbyklubben Speed. Rugby league is now played in Copenhagen, with the national team playing out of Gentofte Stadion. The Danish Australian Football League, based in Copenhagen is the largest Australian rules football competition outside of the English-speaking world.\nCopenhagen Marathon, Copenhagen's annual marathon event, was established in 1980.\nRound Christiansborg Open Water Swim Race is a open water swimming competition taking place each year in late August. This amateur event is combined with a Danish championship. In 2009 the event included a FINA World Cup competition in the morning. Copenhagen hosted the 2011 UCI Road World Championships in September 2011, taking advantage of its bicycle-friendly infrastructure. It was the first time that Denmark had hosted the event since 1956, when it was also held in Copenhagen.\nTransport.\nAirport.\nThe greater Copenhagen area has a very well established transportation infrastructure making it a hub in Northern Europe. Copenhagen Airport, opened in 1925, is Scandinavia's largest airport, located in Kastrup on the island of Amager. It is connected to the city centre by metro and main line railway services. October 2013 was a record month with 2.2\u00a0million passengers, and November 2013 figures reveal that the number of passengers is increasing by some 3% annually, about 50% more than the European average.\nRoad, rail and ferry.\nCopenhagen has an extensive road network including motorways connecting the city to other parts of Denmark and to Sweden over the \u00d8resund Bridge. The car is still the most popular form of transport within the city itself, representing two-thirds of all distances travelled. This can however lead to serious congestion in rush hour traffic. The \u00d8resund train links Copenhagen with Malm\u00f6 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. \nCopenhagen is also served by a daily ferry connection to Oslo in Norway. In 2012, Copenhagen Harbour handled 372 cruise ships and 840,000 passengers.\nThe Copenhagen S-Train, Copenhagen Metro and the regional train networks are used by about half of the city's passengers, the remainder using bus services. N\u00f8rreport Station near the city centre serves passengers travelling by main-line rail, S-train, regional train, metro and bus. Some 750,000 passengers make use of public transport facilities every day. Copenhagen Central Station is the hub of the DSB railway network serving Denmark and international destinations.\nThe Copenhagen Metro expanded radically with the opening of the City Circle Line (M3) on September 29, 2019. The new line connects all inner boroughs of the city by metro, including the Central Station, and opens up 17 new stations for Copenhageners. On March 28, 2020, the Nordhavn extension of the Harbour Line (M4) opened. Running from Copenhagen Central Station, the new extension is a branch line of M3 Cityring to Osterport. The M4 Sydhavn branch is expected to open in 2024. The new metro lines are part of the city's strategy to transform mobility towards sustainable modes of transport such as public transport and cycling as opposed to automobility.\nCopenhagen is cited by urban planners for its exemplary integration of public transport and urban development. In implementing its Finger Plan, Copenhagen is considered the world's first example of a transit metropolis, and areas around S-Train stations like Ballerup and Br\u00f8ndby Strand are among the earliest examples of transit-oriented development.\nCycling.\nCopenhagen has been rated as the most bicycle-friendly city in the world since 2015, with bicycles outnumbering its inhabitants. In 2012 some 36% of all working or studying city-dwellers cycled to work, school, or university. With 1.27\u00a0million km covered every working day by Copenhagen's cyclists (including both residents and commuters), and 75% of Copenhageners cycling throughout the year. The city's bicycle paths are extensive and well used, boasting of cycle lanes not shared with cars or pedestrians, and sometimes have their own signal systems \u2013 giving the cyclists a lead of a couple of seconds to accelerate.\nHealthcare.\nPromoting health is an important issue for Copenhagen's municipal authorities. Central to its sustainability mission is its \"Long Live Copenhagen\" (\"L\u00e6nge Leve K\u00f8benhavn\") scheme in which it has the goal of increasing the life expectancy of citizens, improving quality of life through better standards of health, and encouraging more productive lives and equal opportunities. The city has targets to encourage people to exercise regularly and to reduce the number who smoke and consume alcohol.\nCopenhagen University Hospital forms a conglomerate of several hospitals in Region Hovedstaden and Region Sj\u00e6lland, together with the faculty of health sciences at the University of Copenhagen; Rigshospitalet and Bispebjerg Hospital in Copenhagen belong to this group of university hospitals. Rigshospitalet began operating in March 1757 as Frederiks Hospital, and became state-owned in 1903. With 1,120 beds, Rigshospitalet has responsibility for 65,000 inpatients and approximately 420,000 outpatients annually. It seeks to be the number one specialist hospital in the country, with an extensive team of researchers into cancer treatment, surgery and radiotherapy. In addition to its 8,000 personnel, the hospital has training and hosting functions. It benefits from the presence of in-service students of medicine and other healthcare sciences, as well as scientists working under a variety of research grants. The hospital became internationally famous as the location of Lars von Trier's television horror mini-series \"The Kingdom\". Bispebjerg Hospital was built in 1913, and serves about 400,000 people in the Greater Copenhagen area, with some 3,000 employees. Other large hospitals in the city include Amager Hospital (1997), Herlev Hospital (1976), Hvidovre Hospital (1970), and Gentofte Hospital (1927).\nMedia.\nMany Danish media corporations are located in Copenhagen. DR, the major Danish public service broadcasting corporation consolidated its activities in a new headquarters, DR Byen, in 2006 and 2007. Similarly TV2, which is based in Odense, has concentrated its Copenhagen activities in a modern media house in Teglholmen. The two national daily newspapers \"Politiken\" and \"Berlingske Tidende\" and the two tabloids \"Ekstra Bladet\" and \"BT\" are based in Copenhagen. \"Kristeligt Dagblad\" is based in Copenhagen and is published six days a week. Other important media corporations include Aller Media which is the largest publisher of weekly and monthly magazines in Scandinavia, the Egmont media group and Gyldendal, the largest Danish publisher of books.\nCopenhagen has a large film and television industry. Nordisk Film, established in Valby, Copenhagen in 1906 is the oldest continuously operating film production company in the world. In 1992 it merged with the Egmont media group and currently runs the 17-screen Palads Cinema in Copenhagen. Filmbyen (movie city), located in a former military camp in the suburb of Hvidovre, houses several movie companies and studios. Zentropa is a film company, co-owned by Danish director Lars von Trier. He is behind several international movie productions as well and founded the Dogme Movement. is Copenhagen's international feature film festival, established in 2009 as a fusion of the 20-year-old NatFilm Festival and the four-year-old CIFF. The CPH:PIX festival takes place in mid-April. CPH:DOX is Copenhagen's international documentary film festival, every year in November. In addition to a documentary film programme of over 100 films, CPH:DOX includes a wide event programme with dozens of events, concerts, exhibitions and parties all over town.\nTwin towns.\nCopenhagen is twinned or cooperating with the following cities:\nHonorary citizens.\nPeople awarded the honorary citizenship of Copenhagen are:\nWhile honorary citizenship is no longer granted in Copenhagen, three people have been awarded the title of honorary Copenhageners (\"\u00e6resk\u00f8benhavnere\").\nCitations.\nCopenhagen City - Driving in Denmark"}
{"id": "5167", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5167", "title": "Central Tendancy", "text": ""}
{"id": "5168", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5168", "title": "Checkers", "text": ""}
{"id": "5170", "revid": "39286888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5170", "title": "Combinatorics", "text": "Combinatorics is an area of mathematics primarily concerned with counting, both as a means and an end in obtaining results, and certain properties of finite structures. It is closely related to many other areas of mathematics and has many applications ranging from logic to statistical physics, from evolutionary biology to computer science, etc.\nThe full scope of combinatorics is not universally agreed upon. According to H.J. Ryser, a definition of the subject is difficult because it crosses so many mathematical subdivisions. Insofar as an area can be described by the types of problems it addresses, combinatorics is involved with\nLeon Mirsky has said: \"combinatorics is a range of linked studies which have something in common and yet diverge widely in their objectives, their methods, and the degree of coherence they have attained.\" One way to define combinatorics is, perhaps, to describe its subdivisions with their problems and techniques. This is the approach that is used below. However, there are also purely historical reasons for including or not including some topics under the combinatorics umbrella. Although primarily concerned with finite systems, some combinatorial questions and techniques can be extended to an infinite (specifically, countable) but discrete setting.\nCombinatorics is well known for the breadth of the problems it tackles. Combinatorial problems arise in many areas of pure mathematics, notably in algebra, probability theory, topology, and geometry, as well as in its many application areas. Many combinatorial questions have historically been considered in isolation, giving an \"ad hoc\" solution to a problem arising in some mathematical context. In the later twentieth century, however, powerful and general theoretical methods were developed, making combinatorics into an independent branch of mathematics in its own right. One of the oldest and most accessible parts of combinatorics is graph theory, which by itself has numerous natural connections to other areas. Combinatorics is used frequently in computer science to obtain formulas and estimates in the analysis of algorithms.\nA mathematician who studies combinatorics is called a \"\".\nHistory.\nBasic combinatorial concepts and enumerative results appeared throughout the ancient world. In the 6th century BCE, ancient Indian physician Sushruta asserts in Sushruta Samhita that 63 combinations can be made out of 6 different tastes, taken one at a time, two at a time, etc., thus computing all 26\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 possibilities. Greek historian Plutarch discusses an argument between Chrysippus (3rd century BCE) and Hipparchus (2nd century BCE) of a rather delicate enumerative problem, which was later shown to be related to Schr\u00f6der\u2013Hipparchus numbers. In the \"Ostomachion\", Archimedes (3rd century BCE) considers a tiling puzzle.\nIn the Middle Ages, combinatorics continued to be studied, largely outside of the European civilization. The Indian mathematician Mah\u0101v\u012bra (c. 850) provided formulae for the number of permutations and combinations, and these formulas may have been familiar to Indian mathematicians as early as the 6th century CE. The philosopher and astronomer Rabbi Abraham ibn Ezra (c. 1140) established the symmetry of binomial coefficients, while a closed formula was obtained later by the talmudist and mathematician Levi ben Gerson (better known as Gersonides), in 1321.\nThe arithmetical triangle\u2014a graphical diagram showing relationships among the binomial coefficients\u2014was presented by mathematicians in treatises dating as far back as the 10th century, and would eventually become known as Pascal's triangle. Later, in Medieval England, campanology provided examples of what is now known as Hamiltonian cycles in certain Cayley graphs on permutations.\nDuring the Renaissance, together with the rest of mathematics and the sciences, combinatorics enjoyed a rebirth. Works of Pascal, Newton, Jacob Bernoulli and Euler became foundational in the emerging field. In modern times, the works of J.J. Sylvester (late 19th century) and Percy MacMahon (early 20th century) helped lay the foundation for enumerative and algebraic combinatorics. Graph theory also enjoyed an explosion of interest at the same time, especially in connection with the four color problem.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, combinatorics enjoyed a rapid growth, which led to establishment of dozens of new journals and conferences in the subject. In part, the growth was spurred by new connections and applications to other fields, ranging from algebra to probability, from functional analysis to number theory, etc. These connections shed the boundaries between combinatorics and parts of mathematics and theoretical computer science, but at the same time led to a partial fragmentation of the field.\nApproaches and subfields of combinatorics.\nEnumerative combinatorics.\nEnumerative combinatorics is the most classical area of combinatorics and concentrates on counting the number of certain combinatorial objects. Although counting the number of elements in a set is a rather broad mathematical problem, many of the problems that arise in applications have a relatively simple combinatorial description. Fibonacci numbers is the basic example of a problem in enumerative combinatorics. The twelvefold way provides a unified framework for counting permutations, combinations and partitions.\nAnalytic combinatorics.\nAnalytic combinatorics concerns the enumeration of combinatorial structures using tools from complex analysis and probability theory. In contrast with enumerative combinatorics, which uses explicit combinatorial formulae and generating functions to describe the results, analytic combinatorics aims at obtaining asymptotic formulae.\nPartition theory.\nPartition theory studies various enumeration and asymptotic problems related to integer partitions, and is closely related to q-series, special functions and orthogonal polynomials. Originally a part of number theory and analysis, it is now considered a part of combinatorics or an independent field. It incorporates the bijective approach and various tools in analysis and analytic number theory and has connections with statistical mechanics.\nGraph theory.\nGraphs are fundamental objects in combinatorics. Considerations of graph theory range from enumeration (e.g., the number of graphs on \"n\" vertices with \"k\" edges) to existing structures (e.g., Hamiltonian cycles) to algebraic representations (e.g., given a graph \"G\" and two numbers \"x\" and \"y\", does the Tutte polynomial \"T\"\"G\"(\"x\",\"y\") have a combinatorial interpretation?). Although there are very strong connections between graph theory and combinatorics, they are sometimes thought of as separate subjects. While combinatorial methods apply to many graph theory problems, the two disciplines are generally used to seek solutions to different types of problems.\nDesign theory.\nDesign theory is a study of combinatorial designs, which are collections of subsets with certain intersection properties. Block designs are combinatorial designs of a special type. This area is one of the oldest parts of combinatorics, such as in Kirkman's schoolgirl problem proposed in 1850. The solution of the problem is a special case of a Steiner system, which systems play an important role in the classification of finite simple groups. The area has further connections to coding theory and geometric combinatorics.\nFinite geometry.\nFinite geometry is the study of geometric systems having only a finite number of points. Structures analogous to those found in continuous geometries (Euclidean plane, real projective space, etc.) but defined combinatorially are the main items studied. This area provides a rich source of examples for design theory. It should not be confused with discrete geometry (combinatorial geometry).\nOrder theory.\nOrder theory is the study of partially ordered sets, both finite and infinite. Various examples of partial orders appear in algebra, geometry, number theory and throughout combinatorics and graph theory. Notable classes and examples of partial orders include lattices and Boolean algebras.\nMatroid theory.\nMatroid theory abstracts part of geometry. It studies the properties of sets (usually, finite sets) of vectors in a vector space that do not depend on the particular coefficients in a linear dependence relation. Not only the structure but also enumerative properties belong to matroid theory. Matroid theory was introduced by Hassler Whitney and studied as a part of order theory. It is now an independent field of study with a number of connections with other parts of combinatorics.\nExtremal combinatorics.\nExtremal combinatorics studies extremal questions on set systems. The types of questions addressed in this case are about the largest possible graph which satisfies certain properties. For example, the largest triangle-free graph on \"2n\" vertices is a complete bipartite graph \"Kn,n\". Often it is too hard even to find the extremal answer \"f\"(\"n\") exactly and one can only give an asymptotic estimate.\nRamsey theory is another part of extremal combinatorics. It states that any sufficiently large configuration will contain some sort of order. It is an advanced generalization of the pigeonhole principle.\nProbabilistic combinatorics.\nIn probabilistic combinatorics, the questions are of the following type: what is the probability of a certain property for a random discrete object, such as a random graph? For instance, what is the average number of triangles in a random graph? Probabilistic methods are also used to determine the existence of combinatorial objects with certain prescribed properties (for which explicit examples might be difficult to find), simply by observing that the probability of randomly selecting an object with those properties is greater than 0. This approach (often referred to as \"the\" probabilistic method) proved highly effective in applications to extremal combinatorics and graph theory. A closely related area is the study of finite Markov chains, especially on combinatorial objects. Here again probabilistic tools are used to estimate the mixing time.\nOften associated with Paul Erd\u0151s, who did the pioneering work on the subject, probabilistic combinatorics was traditionally viewed as a set of tools to study problems in other parts of combinatorics. However, with the growth of applications to analyze algorithms in computer science, as well as classical probability, additive number theory, and probabilistic number theory, the area recently grew to become an independent field of combinatorics.\nAlgebraic combinatorics.\nAlgebraic combinatorics is an area of mathematics that employs methods of abstract algebra, notably group theory and representation theory, in various combinatorial contexts and, conversely, applies combinatorial techniques to problems in algebra. Algebraic combinatorics is continuously expanding its scope, in both topics and techniques, and can be seen as the area of mathematics where the interaction of combinatorial and algebraic methods is particularly strong and significant.\nCombinatorics on words.\nCombinatorics on words deals with formal languages. It arose independently within several branches of mathematics, including number theory, group theory and probability. It has applications to enumerative combinatorics, fractal analysis, theoretical computer science, automata theory, and linguistics. While many applications are new, the classical Chomsky\u2013Sch\u00fctzenberger hierarchy of classes of formal grammars is perhaps the best-known result in the field.\nGeometric combinatorics.\nGeometric combinatorics is related to convex and discrete geometry, in particular polyhedral combinatorics. It asks, for example, how many faces of each dimension a convex polytope can have. Metric properties of polytopes play an important role as well, e.g. the Cauchy theorem on the rigidity of convex polytopes. Special polytopes are also considered, such as permutohedra, associahedra and Birkhoff polytopes. Combinatorial geometry is an old fashioned name for discrete geometry.\nTopological combinatorics.\nCombinatorial analogs of concepts and methods in topology are used to study graph coloring, fair division, partitions, partially ordered sets, decision trees, necklace problems and discrete Morse theory. It should not be confused with combinatorial topology which is an older name for algebraic topology.\nArithmetic combinatorics.\nArithmetic combinatorics arose out of the interplay between number theory, combinatorics, ergodic theory, and harmonic analysis. It is about combinatorial estimates associated with arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division). Additive number theory (sometimes also called additive combinatorics) refers to the special case when only the operations of addition and subtraction are involved. One important technique in arithmetic combinatorics is the ergodic theory of dynamical systems.\nInfinitary combinatorics.\nInfinitary combinatorics, or combinatorial set theory, is an extension of ideas in combinatorics to infinite sets. It is a part of set theory, an area of mathematical logic, but uses tools and ideas from both set theory and extremal combinatorics.\nGian-Carlo Rota used the name \"continuous combinatorics\" to describe geometric probability, since there are many analogies between \"counting\" and \"measure\".\nRelated fields.\nCombinatorial optimization.\nCombinatorial optimization is the study of optimization on discrete and combinatorial objects. It started as a part of combinatorics and graph theory, but is now viewed as a branch of applied mathematics and computer science, related to operations research, algorithm theory and computational complexity theory.\nCoding theory.\nCoding theory started as a part of design theory with early combinatorial constructions of error-correcting codes. The main idea of the subject is to design efficient and reliable methods of data transmission. It is now a large field of study, part of information theory.\nDiscrete and computational geometry.\nDiscrete geometry (also called combinatorial geometry) also began as a part of combinatorics, with early results on convex polytopes and kissing numbers. With the emergence of applications of discrete geometry to computational geometry, these two fields partially merged and became a separate field of study. There remain many connections with geometric and topological combinatorics, which themselves can be viewed as outgrowths of the early discrete geometry.\nCombinatorics and dynamical systems.\nCombinatorial aspects of dynamical systems is another emerging field. Here dynamical systems can be defined on combinatorial objects. See for example\ngraph dynamical system.\nCombinatorics and physics.\nThere are increasing interactions between combinatorics and physics, particularly statistical physics. Examples include an exact solution of the Ising model, and a connection between the Potts model on one hand, and the chromatic and Tutte polynomials on the other hand."}
{"id": "5173", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5173", "title": "Continuous Random Variable", "text": ""}
{"id": "5176", "revid": "262666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5176", "title": "Calculus", "text": "Calculus, originally called infinitesimal calculus or \"the calculus of infinitesimals\", is the mathematical study of continuous change, in the same way that geometry is the study of shape and algebra is the study of generalizations of arithmetic operations.\nIt has two major branches, differential calculus and integral calculus; the former concerns instantaneous rates of change, and the slopes of curves, while integral calculus concerns accumulation of quantities, and areas under or between curves. These two branches are related to each other by the fundamental theorem of calculus, and they make use of the fundamental notions of convergence of infinite sequences and infinite series to a well-defined limit.\nInfinitesimal calculus was developed independently in the late 17th century by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Today, calculus has widespread uses in science, engineering, and economics.\nIn mathematics education, \"calculus\" denotes courses of elementary mathematical analysis, which are mainly devoted to the study of functions and limits. The word \"calculus\" (plural \"calculi\") is a Latin word, meaning originally \"small pebble\" (this meaning is kept in medicine \u2013 see Calculus (medicine)). Because such pebbles were used for calculation, the meaning of the word has evolved and today usually means a method of computation. It is therefore used for naming specific methods of calculation and related theories, such as propositional calculus, Ricci calculus, calculus of variations, lambda calculus, and process calculus.\nHistory.\nModern calculus was developed in 17th-century Europe by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (independently of each other, first publishing around the same time) but elements of it appeared in ancient Greece, then in China and the Middle East, and still later again in medieval Europe and in India.\nAncient.\nThe ancient period introduced some of the ideas that led to integral calculus, but does not seem to have developed these ideas in a rigorous and systematic way. Calculations of volume and area, one goal of integral calculus, can be found in the Egyptian Moscow papyrus (13th dynasty, \u00a0BC); but the formulas are simple instructions, with no indication as to method, and some of them lack major components.\nFrom the age of Greek mathematics, Eudoxus (\u00a0BC) used the method of exhaustion, which foreshadows the concept of the limit, to calculate areas and volumes, while Archimedes (\u00a0BC) developed this idea further, inventing heuristics which resemble the methods of integral calculus.\nThe method of exhaustion was later discovered independently in China by Liu Hui in the 3rd century AD in order to find the area of a circle. In the 5th century AD, Zu Gengzhi, son of Zu Chongzhi, established a method that would later be called Cavalieri's principle to find the volume of a sphere.\nMedieval.\nIn the Middle East, Hasan Ibn al-Haytham, Latinized as Alhazen (\u00a0CE) derived a formula for the sum of fourth powers. He used the results to carry out what would now be called an integration of this function, where the formulae for the sums of integral squares and fourth powers allowed him to calculate the volume of a paraboloid.\nIn the 14th century, Indian mathematicians gave a non-rigorous method, resembling differentiation, applicable to some trigonometric functions. Madhava of Sangamagrama and the Kerala School of Astronomy and Mathematics thereby stated components of calculus. A complete theory encompassing these components is now well known in the Western world as the \"Taylor series\" or \"infinite series approximations\". However, they were not able to \"combine many differing ideas under the two unifying themes of the derivative and the integral, show the connection between the two, and turn calculus into the great problem-solving tool we have today\".\nModern.\nIn Europe, the foundational work was a treatise written by Bonaventura Cavalieri, who argued that volumes and areas should be computed as the sums of the volumes and areas of infinitesimally thin cross-sections. The ideas were similar to Archimedes' in \"The Method\", but this treatise is believed to have been lost in the 13th century, and was only rediscovered in the early 20th century, and so would have been unknown to Cavalieri. Cavalieri's work was not well respected since his methods could lead to erroneous results, and the infinitesimal quantities he introduced were disreputable at first.\nThe formal study of calculus brought together Cavalieri's infinitesimals with the calculus of finite differences developed in Europe at around the same time. Pierre de Fermat, claiming that he borrowed from Diophantus, introduced the concept of adequality, which represented equality up to an infinitesimal error term. The combination was achieved by John Wallis, Isaac Barrow, and James Gregory, the latter two proving the second fundamental theorem of calculus around 1670.\nThe product rule and chain rule, the notions of higher derivatives and Taylor series, and of analytic functions were used by Isaac Newton in an idiosyncratic notation which he applied to solve problems of mathematical physics. In his works, Newton rephrased his ideas to suit the mathematical idiom of the time, replacing calculations with infinitesimals by equivalent geometrical arguments which were considered beyond reproach. He used the methods of calculus to solve the problem of planetary motion, the shape of the surface of a rotating fluid, the oblateness of the earth, the motion of a weight sliding on a cycloid, and many other problems discussed in his \"Principia Mathematica\" (1687). In other work, he developed series expansions for functions, including fractional and irrational powers, and it was clear that he understood the principles of the Taylor series. He did not publish all these discoveries, and at this time infinitesimal methods were still considered disreputable.\nThese ideas were arranged into a true calculus of infinitesimals by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who was originally accused of plagiarism by Newton. He is now regarded as an independent inventor of and contributor to calculus. His contribution was to provide a clear set of rules for working with infinitesimal quantities, allowing the computation of second and higher derivatives, and providing the product rule and chain rule, in their differential and integral forms. Unlike Newton, Leibniz paid a lot of attention to the formalism, often spending days determining appropriate symbols for concepts.\nToday, Leibniz and Newton are usually both given credit for independently inventing and developing calculus. Newton was the first to apply calculus to general physics and Leibniz developed much of the notation used in calculus today. The basic insights that both Newton and Leibniz provided were the laws of differentiation and integration, second and higher derivatives, and the notion of an approximating polynomial series. By Newton's time, the fundamental theorem of calculus was known.\nWhen Newton and Leibniz first published their results, there was great controversy over which mathematician (and therefore which country) deserved credit. Newton derived his results first (later to be published in his \"Method of Fluxions\"), but Leibniz published his \"Nova Methodus pro Maximis et Minimis\" first. Newton claimed Leibniz stole ideas from his unpublished notes, which Newton had shared with a few members of the Royal Society. This controversy divided English-speaking mathematicians from continental European mathematicians for many years, to the detriment of English mathematics. A careful examination of the papers of Leibniz and Newton shows that they arrived at their results independently, with Leibniz starting first with integration and Newton with differentiation. It is Leibniz, however, who gave the new discipline its name. Newton called his calculus \"the science of fluxions\".\nSince the time of Leibniz and Newton, many mathematicians have contributed to the continuing development of calculus. One of the first and most complete works on both infinitesimal and integral calculus was written in 1748 by Maria Gaetana Agnesi.\nFoundations.\nIn calculus, \"foundations\" refers to the rigorous development of the subject from axioms and definitions. In early calculus the use of infinitesimal quantities was thought unrigorous, and was fiercely criticized by a number of authors, most notably Michel Rolle and Bishop Berkeley. Berkeley famously described infinitesimals as the ghosts of departed quantities in his book \"The Analyst\" in 1734. Working out a rigorous foundation for calculus occupied mathematicians for much of the century following Newton and Leibniz, and is still to some extent an active area of research today.\nSeveral mathematicians, including Maclaurin, tried to prove the soundness of using infinitesimals, but it would not be until 150 years later when, due to the work of Cauchy and Weierstrass, a way was finally found to avoid mere \"notions\" of infinitely small quantities. The foundations of differential and integral calculus had been laid. In Cauchy's \"Cours d'Analyse\", we find a broad range of foundational approaches, including a definition of continuity in terms of infinitesimals, and a (somewhat imprecise) prototype of an (\u03b5, \u03b4)-definition of limit in the definition of differentiation. In his work Weierstrass formalized the concept of limit and eliminated infinitesimals (although his definition can actually validate nilsquare infinitesimals). Following the work of Weierstrass, it eventually became common to base calculus on limits instead of infinitesimal quantities, though the subject is still occasionally called \"infinitesimal calculus\". Bernhard Riemann used these ideas to give a precise definition of the integral. It was also during this period that the ideas of calculus were generalized to Euclidean space and the complex plane.\nIn modern mathematics, the foundations of calculus are included in the field of real analysis, which contains full definitions and proofs of the theorems of calculus. The reach of calculus has also been greatly extended. Henri Lebesgue invented measure theory and used it to define integrals of all but the most pathological functions. Laurent Schwartz introduced distributions, which can be used to take the derivative of any function whatsoever.\nLimits are not the only rigorous approach to the foundation of calculus. Another way is to use Abraham Robinson's non-standard analysis. Robinson's approach, developed in the 1960s, uses technical machinery from mathematical logic to augment the real number system with infinitesimal and infinite numbers, as in the original Newton-Leibniz conception. The resulting numbers are called hyperreal numbers, and they can be used to give a Leibniz-like development of the usual rules of calculus. There is also smooth infinitesimal analysis, which differs from non-standard analysis in that it mandates neglecting higher power infinitesimals during derivations.\nSignificance.\nWhile many of the ideas of calculus had been developed earlier in Greece, China, India, Iraq, Persia, and Japan, the use of calculus began in Europe, during the 17th century, when Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz built on the work of earlier mathematicians to introduce its basic principles. The development of calculus was built on earlier concepts of instantaneous motion and area underneath curves.\nApplications of differential calculus include computations involving velocity and acceleration, the slope of a curve, and optimization. Applications of integral calculus include computations involving area, volume, arc length, center of mass, work, and pressure. More advanced applications include power series and Fourier series.\nCalculus is also used to gain a more precise understanding of the nature of space, time, and motion. For centuries, mathematicians and philosophers wrestled with paradoxes involving division by zero or sums of infinitely many numbers. These questions arise in the study of motion and area. The ancient Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea gave several famous examples of such paradoxes. Calculus provides tools, especially the limit and the infinite series, that resolve the paradoxes.\nPrinciples.\nLimits and infinitesimals.\nCalculus is usually developed by working with very small quantities. Historically, the first method of doing so was by infinitesimals. These are objects which can be treated like real numbers but which are, in some sense, \"infinitely small\". For example, an infinitesimal number could be greater than 0, but less than any number in the sequence 1, 1/2, 1/3, ... and thus less than any positive real number. From this point of view, calculus is a collection of techniques for manipulating infinitesimals. The symbols formula_1 and formula_2 were taken to be infinitesimal, and the derivative formula_3 was simply their ratio.\nThe infinitesimal approach fell out of favor in the 19th century because it was difficult to make the notion of an infinitesimal precise. However, the concept was revived in the 20th century with the introduction of non-standard analysis and smooth infinitesimal analysis, which provided solid foundations for the manipulation of infinitesimals.\nIn the late 19th century, infinitesimals were replaced within academia by the epsilon, delta approach to limits. Limits describe the value of a function at a certain input in terms of its values at nearby inputs. They capture small-scale behavior in the context of the real number system. In this treatment, calculus is a collection of techniques for manipulating certain limits. Infinitesimals get replaced by very small numbers, and the infinitely small behavior of the function is found by taking the limiting behavior for smaller and smaller numbers. Limits were thought to provide a more rigorous foundation for calculus, and for this reason they became the standard approach during the twentieth century.\nDifferential calculus.\nDifferential calculus is the study of the definition, properties, and applications of the derivative of a function. The process of finding the derivative is called \"differentiation\". Given a function and a point in the domain, the derivative at that point is a way of encoding the small-scale behavior of the function near that point. By finding the derivative of a function at every point in its domain, it is possible to produce a new function, called the \"derivative function\" or just the \"derivative\" of the original function. In formal terms, the derivative is a linear operator which takes a function as its input and produces a second function as its output. This is more abstract than many of the processes studied in elementary algebra, where functions usually input a number and output another number. For example, if the doubling function is given the input three, then it outputs six, and if the squaring function is given the input three, then it outputs nine. The derivative, however, can take the squaring function as an input. This means that the derivative takes all the information of the squaring function\u2014such as that two is sent to four, three is sent to nine, four is sent to sixteen, and so on\u2014and uses this information to produce another function. The function produced by deriving the squaring function turns out to be the doubling function.\nIn more explicit terms the \"doubling function\" may be denoted by and the \"squaring function\" by . The \"derivative\" now takes the function , defined by the expression \"\", as an input, that is all the information\u2014such as that two is sent to four, three is sent to nine, four is sent to sixteen, and so on\u2014and uses this information to output another function, the function , as will turn out.\nThe most common symbol for a derivative is an apostrophe-like mark called prime. Thus, the derivative of a function called is denoted by , pronounced \"f prime\". For instance, if is the squaring function, then is its derivative (the doubling function from above). This notation is known as Lagrange's notation.\nIf the input of the function represents time, then the derivative represents change with respect to time. For example, if is a function that takes a time as input and gives the position of a ball at that time as output, then the derivative of is how the position is changing in time, that is, it is the velocity of the ball.\nIf a function is linear (that is, if the graph of the function is a straight line), then the function can be written as , where is the independent variable, is the dependent variable, is the \"y\"-intercept, and:\nThis gives an exact value for the slope of a straight line. If the graph of the function is not a straight line, however, then the change in divided by the change in varies. Derivatives give an exact meaning to the notion of change in output with respect to change in input. To be concrete, let be a function, and fix a point in the domain of . is a point on the graph of the function. If is a number close to zero, then is a number close to . Therefore, is close to . The slope between these two points is\nThis expression is called a \"difference quotient\". A line through two points on a curve is called a \"secant line\", so is the slope of the secant line between and . The secant line is only an approximation to the behavior of the function at the point because it does not account for what happens between and . It is not possible to discover the behavior at by setting to zero because this would require dividing by zero, which is undefined. The derivative is defined by taking the limit as tends to zero, meaning that it considers the behavior of for all small values of and extracts a consistent value for the case when equals zero:\nGeometrically, the derivative is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of at . The tangent line is a limit of secant lines just as the derivative is a limit of difference quotients. For this reason, the derivative is sometimes called the slope of the function .\nHere is a particular example, the derivative of the squaring function at the input 3. Let be the squaring function.\nThe slope of the tangent line to the squaring function at the point (3, 9) is 6, that is to say, it is going up six times as fast as it is going to the right. The limit process just described can be performed for any point in the domain of the squaring function. This defines the \"derivative function\" of the squaring function or just the \"derivative\" of the squaring function for short. A computation similar to the one above shows that the derivative of the squaring function is the doubling function.\nLeibniz notation.\nA common notation, introduced by Leibniz, for the derivative in the example above is\nIn an approach based on limits, the symbol is to be interpreted not as the quotient of two numbers but as a shorthand for the limit computed above. Leibniz, however, did intend it to represent the quotient of two infinitesimally small numbers, being the infinitesimally small change in caused by an infinitesimally small change applied to . We can also think of as a differentiation operator, which takes a function as an input and gives another function, the derivative, as the output. For example:\nIn this usage, the in the denominator is read as \"with respect to \". Another example of correct notation could be:\nformula_10\nEven when calculus is developed using limits rather than infinitesimals, it is common to manipulate symbols like and as if they were real numbers; although it is possible to avoid such manipulations, they are sometimes notationally convenient in expressing operations such as the total derivative.\nIntegral calculus.\n\"Integral calculus\" is the study of the definitions, properties, and applications of two related concepts, the \"indefinite integral\" and the \"definite integral\". The process of finding the value of an integral is called \"integration\". In technical language, integral calculus studies two related linear operators.\nThe \"indefinite integral\", also known as the \"antiderivative\", is the inverse operation to the derivative. is an indefinite integral of when is a derivative of . (This use of lower- and upper-case letters for a function and its indefinite integral is common in calculus.)\nThe \"definite integral\" inputs a function and outputs a number, which gives the algebraic sum of areas between the graph of the input and the x-axis. The technical definition of the definite integral involves the limit of a sum of areas of rectangles, called a Riemann sum.\nA motivating example is the distances traveled in a given time.\nIf the speed is constant, only multiplication is needed, but if the speed changes, a more powerful method of finding the distance is necessary. One such method is to approximate the distance traveled by breaking up the time into many short intervals of time, then multiplying the time elapsed in each interval by one of the speeds in that interval, and then taking the sum (a Riemann sum) of the approximate distance traveled in each interval. The basic idea is that if only a short time elapses, then the speed will stay more or less the same. However, a Riemann sum only gives an approximation of the distance traveled. We must take the limit of all such Riemann sums to find the exact distance traveled.\nWhen velocity is constant, the total distance traveled over the given time interval can be computed by multiplying velocity and time. For example, travelling a steady 50\u00a0mph for 3 hours results in a total distance of 150 miles. In the diagram on the left, when constant velocity and time are graphed, these two values form a rectangle with height equal to the velocity and width equal to the time elapsed. Therefore, the product of velocity and time also calculates the rectangular area under the (constant) velocity curve. This connection between the area under a curve and distance traveled can be extended to \"any\" irregularly shaped region exhibiting a fluctuating velocity over a given time period. If in the diagram on the right represents speed as it varies over time, the distance traveled (between the times represented by and ) is the area of the shaded region\u00a0.\nTo approximate that area, an intuitive method would be to divide up the distance between and into a number of equal segments, the length of each segment represented by the symbol . For each small segment, we can choose one value of the function . Call that value . Then the area of the rectangle with base and height gives the distance (time multiplied by speed ) traveled in that segment. Associated with each segment is the average value of the function above it, . The sum of all such rectangles gives an approximation of the area between the axis and the curve, which is an approximation of the total distance traveled. A smaller value for will give more rectangles and in most cases a better approximation, but for an exact answer we need to take a limit as approaches zero.\nThe symbol of integration is formula_12, an elongated \"S\" (the \"S\" stands for \"sum\"). The definite integral is written as:\nand is read \"the integral from \"a\" to \"b\" of \"f\"-of-\"x\" with respect to \"x\".\" The Leibniz notation is intended to suggest dividing the area under the curve into an infinite number of rectangles, so that their width becomes the infinitesimally small . In a formulation of the calculus based on limits, the notation\nis to be understood as an operator that takes a function as an input and gives a number, the area, as an output. The terminating differential, , is not a number, and is not being multiplied by , although, serving as a reminder of the limit definition, it can be treated as such in symbolic manipulations of the integral. Formally, the differential indicates the variable over which the function is integrated and serves as a closing bracket for the integration operator.\nThe indefinite integral, or antiderivative, is written:\nFunctions differing by only a constant have the same derivative, and it can be shown that the antiderivative of a given function is actually a family of functions differing only by a constant. Since the derivative of the function , where is any constant, is , the antiderivative of the latter is given by:\nThe unspecified constant present in the indefinite integral or antiderivative is known as the constant of integration.\nFundamental theorem.\nThe fundamental theorem of calculus states that differentiation and integration are inverse operations. More precisely, it relates the values of antiderivatives to definite integrals. Because it is usually easier to compute an antiderivative than to apply the definition of a definite integral, the fundamental theorem of calculus provides a practical way of computing definite integrals. It can also be interpreted as a precise statement of the fact that differentiation is the inverse of integration.\nThe fundamental theorem of calculus states: If a function is continuous on the interval and if is a function whose derivative is on the interval , then\nFurthermore, for every in the interval ,\nThis realization, made by both Newton and Leibniz, who based their results on earlier work by Isaac Barrow, was key to the proliferation of analytic results after their work became known. The fundamental theorem provides an algebraic method of computing many definite integrals\u2014without performing limit processes\u2014by finding formulas for antiderivatives. It is also a prototype solution of a differential equation. Differential equations relate an unknown function to its derivatives, and are ubiquitous in the sciences.\nApplications.\nCalculus is used in every branch of the physical sciences, actuarial science, computer science, statistics, engineering, economics, business, medicine, demography, and in other fields wherever a problem can be mathematically modeled and an optimal solution is desired. It allows one to go from (non-constant) rates of change to the total change or vice versa, and many times in studying a problem we know one and are trying to find the other.\nPhysics makes particular use of calculus; all concepts in classical mechanics and electromagnetism are related through calculus. The mass of an object of known density, the moment of inertia of objects, as well as the total energy of an object within a conservative field can be found by the use of calculus. An example of the use of calculus in mechanics is Newton's second law of motion: historically stated it expressly uses the term \"change of motion\" which implies the derivative saying \"The\" change \"of momentum of a body is equal to the resultant force acting on the body and is in the same direction.\" Commonly expressed today as Force\u00a0=\u00a0Mass\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0acceleration, it implies differential calculus because acceleration is the time derivative of velocity or second time derivative of trajectory or spatial position. Starting from knowing how an object is accelerating, we use calculus to derive its path.\nMaxwell's theory of electromagnetism and Einstein's theory of general relativity are also expressed in the language of differential calculus. Chemistry also uses calculus in determining reaction rates and radioactive decay. In biology, population dynamics starts with reproduction and death rates to model population changes.\nCalculus can be used in conjunction with other mathematical disciplines. For example, it can be used with linear algebra to find the \"best fit\" linear approximation for a set of points in a domain. Or it can be used in probability theory to determine the probability of a continuous random variable from an assumed density function. In analytic geometry, the study of graphs of functions, calculus is used to find high points and low points (maxima and minima), slope, concavity and inflection points.\nGreen's Theorem, which gives the relationship between a line integral around a simple closed curve C and a double integral over the plane region D bounded by C, is applied in an instrument known as a planimeter, which is used to calculate the area of a flat surface on a drawing. For example, it can be used to calculate the amount of area taken up by an irregularly shaped flower bed or swimming pool when designing the layout of a piece of property.\nDiscrete Green's Theorem, which gives the relationship between a double integral of a function around a simple closed rectangular curve \"C\" and a linear combination of the antiderivative's values at corner points along the edge of the curve, allows fast calculation of sums of values in rectangular domains. For example, it can be used to efficiently calculate sums of rectangular domains in images, in order to rapidly extract features and detect object; another algorithm that could be used is the summed area table.\nIn the realm of medicine, calculus can be used to find the optimal branching angle of a blood vessel so as to maximize flow. From the decay laws for a particular drug's elimination from the body, it is used to derive dosing laws. In nuclear medicine, it is used to build models of radiation transport in targeted tumor therapies.\nIn economics, calculus allows for the determination of maximal profit by providing a way to easily calculate both marginal cost and marginal revenue.\nCalculus is also used to find approximate solutions to equations; in practice it is the standard way to solve differential equations and do root finding in most applications. Examples are methods such as Newton's method, fixed point iteration, and linear approximation. For instance, spacecraft use a variation of the Euler method to approximate curved courses within zero gravity environments.\nVarieties.\nOver the years, many reformulations of calculus have been investigated for different purposes.\nNon-standard calculus.\nImprecise calculations with infinitesimals were widely replaced with the rigorous (\u03b5, \u03b4)-definition of limit starting in the 1870s. Meanwhile, calculations with infinitesimals persisted and often led to correct results. This led Abraham Robinson to investigate if it were possible to develop a number system with infinitesimal quantities over which the theorems of calculus were still valid. In 1960, building upon the work of Edwin Hewitt and Jerzy \u0141o\u015b, he succeeded in developing non-standard analysis. The theory of non-standard analysis is rich enough to be applied in many branches of mathematics. As such, books and articles dedicated solely to the traditional theorems of calculus often go by the title non-standard calculus.\nSmooth infinitesimal analysis.\nThis is another reformulation of the calculus in terms of infinitesimals. Based on the ideas of F. W. Lawvere and employing the methods of category theory, it views all functions as being continuous and incapable of being expressed in terms of discrete entities. One aspect of this formulation is that the law of excluded middle does not hold in this formulation.\nConstructive analysis.\nConstructive mathematics is a branch of mathematics that insists that proofs of the existence of a number, function, or other mathematical object should give a construction of the object. As such constructive mathematics also rejects the law of excluded middle. Reformulations of calculus in a constructive framework are generally part of the subject of constructive analysis."}
{"id": "5177", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5177", "title": "Communication", "text": "Communication (from Latin \"communicare\", meaning \"to share\") is the act of developing meaning among entities or groups through the use of sufficiently mutually understood signs, symbols, and semiotic conventions.\nThe main elements inherent to communication have been described as:\nThese elements are understood to be broadly overlapping and recursive activities rather than steps in a sequence. For example, communicative actions can commence before a communicator formulates a conscious attempt to do so, as in the case of phatics; likewise, communicators modify their intentions and formulations of a message in response to real-time feedback (e.g., a change in facial expression). Practices of decoding and interpretation are culturally enacted, not just by individuals (genre conventions, for instance, trigger anticipatory expectations for how a message is to be received), and receivers of any message operationalize their own frames of reference in interpretation.\nThe scientific study of communication can be divided into:\nThe channel of communication can be visual, auditory, tactile/haptic (e.g. Braille or other physical means), olfactory, electromagnetic, or biochemical. Human communication is unique for its extensive use of abstract language. Development of civilization has been closely linked with progress in telecommunication.\nNon-verbal communication.\nNonverbal communication explains the processes of conveying a type of information in a form of non-linguistic representations. Examples of nonverbal communication include haptic communication, chronemic communication, gestures, body language, facial expressions, eye contact etc. Nonverbal communication also relates to the intent of a message. Examples of intent are voluntary, intentional movements like shaking a hand or winking, as well as involuntary, such as sweating. Speech also contains nonverbal elements known as paralanguage, e.g. rhythm, intonation, tempo, and stress. It affects communication most at the subconscious level and establishes trust. Likewise, written texts include nonverbal elements such as handwriting style, the spatial arrangement of words and the use of emoticons to convey emotion.\nNonverbal communication demonstrates one of Paul Watzlawick's laws: you cannot not communicate. Once proximity has formed awareness, living creatures begin interpreting any signals received. Some of the functions of nonverbal communication in humans are to complement and illustrate, to reinforce and emphasize, to replace and substitute, to control and regulate, and to contradict the denotative message.\nNonverbal cues are heavily relied on to express communication and to interpret others' communication and can replace or substitute verbal messages. However, non-verbal communication is ambiguous. When verbal messages contradict non-verbal messages, observation of non-verbal behaviour is relied on to judge another's attitudes and feelings, rather than assuming the truth of the verbal message alone.\nThere are several reasons as to why non-verbal communication plays a vital role in communication:\n\"Non-verbal communication is omnipresent.\" They are included in every single communication act. To have total communication, all non-verbal channels such as the body, face, voice, appearance, touch, distance, timing, and other environmental forces must be engaged during face-to-face interaction. Written communication can also have non-verbal attributes. E-mails, web chats, and the social media have options to change text font colours, stationery, add emoticons, capitalization, and pictures in order to capture non-verbal cues into a verbal medium.\n\"Non-verbal behaviours are multifunctional.\" Many different non-verbal channels are engaged at the same time in communication acts and allow the chance for simultaneous messages to be sent and received.\n\"Non-verbal behaviours may form a universal language system.\" Smiling, crying, pointing, caressing, and glaring are non-verbal behaviours that are used and understood by people regardless of nationality. Such non-verbal signals allow the most basic form of communication when verbal communication is not effective due to language barriers.\nVerbal communication.\nVerbal communication is the spoken or written conveyance of a message. Human language can be defined as a system of symbols (sometimes known as lexemes) and the grammars (rules) by which the symbols are manipulated. The word \"language\" also refers to common properties of languages. Language learning normally occurs most intensively during human childhood. Most of the large number of human languages use patterns of sound or gesture for symbols which enable communication with others around them. Languages tend to share certain properties, although there are exceptions. There is no defined line between a language and a dialect. Constructed languages such as Esperanto, programming languages, and various mathematical formalisms are not necessarily restricted to the properties shared by human languages.\nAs previously mentioned, language can be characterized as symbolic. Charles Ogden and I.A Richards developed The Triangle of Meaning model to explain the symbol (the relationship between a word), the referent (the thing it describes), and the meaning (the thought associated with the word and the thing).\nThe properties of language are governed by rules. Language follows phonological rules (sounds that appear in a language), syntactic rules (arrangement of words and punctuation in a sentence), semantic rules (the agreed upon meaning of words), and pragmatic rules (meaning derived upon context).\nThe meanings that are attached to words can be literal, or otherwise known as denotative; relating to the topic being discussed, or, the meanings take context and relationships into account, otherwise known as connotative; relating to the feelings, history, and power dynamics of the communicators.\nContrary to popular belief, signed languages of the world (e.g., American Sign Language) are considered to be verbal communication because their sign vocabulary, grammar, and other linguistic structures abide by all the necessary classifications as spoken languages. There are however, nonverbal elements to signed languages, such as the speed, intensity, and size of signs that are made. A signer might sign \"yes\" in response to a question, or they might sign a sarcastic-large slow yes to convey a different nonverbal meaning. The sign yes is the verbal message while the other movements add nonverbal meaning to the message.\nWritten communication and its historical development.\nOver time the forms of and ideas about communication have evolved through the continuing progression of technology. Advances include communications psychology and media psychology, an emerging field of study.\nThe progression of written communication can be divided into three \"information communication revolutions\":\nCommunication is thus a process by which meaning is assigned and conveyed in an attempt to create shared understanding. Gregory Bateson called it \"the replication of tautologies in the universe. This process, which requires a vast repertoire of skills in interpersonal processing, listening, observing, speaking, questioning, analyzing, gestures, and evaluating enables collaboration and cooperation.\nBusiness/Corporate.\nBusiness communication is used for a wide variety of activities including, but not limited to: strategic communications planning, media relations, internal communications, public relations (which can include social media, broadcast and written communications, and more), brand management, reputation management, speech-writing, customer-client relations, and internal/employee communications.\nCompanies with limited resources may choose to engage in only a few of these activities, while larger organizations may employ a full spectrum of communications. Since it is relatively difficult to develop such a broad range of skills, communications professionals often specialize in one or two of these areas but usually have at least a working knowledge of most of them. By far, the most important qualifications communications professionals must possess are excellent writing ability, good 'people' skills, and the capacity to think critically and strategically.\nBusiness communication could also refer to the style of communication within a given corporate entity, i.e. email conversation styles, or internal communication styles.\nPolitical.\nCommunication is one of the most relevant tools in political strategies, including persuasion and propaganda. In mass media research and online media research, the effort of the strategist is that of getting a precise decoding, avoiding \"message reactance\", that is, message refusal. The reaction to a message is referred also in terms of approach to a message, as follows:\nHolistic approaches are used by communication campaign leaders and communication strategists in order to examine all the options, \"actors\" and channels that can generate change in the semiotic landscape, that is, change in perceptions, change in credibility, change in the \"memetic background\", change in the image of movements, of candidates, players and managers as perceived by key influencers that can have a role in generating the desired \"end-state\".\nThe modern political communication field is highly influenced by the framework and practices of \"information operations\" doctrines that derive their nature from strategic and military studies. According to this view, what is really relevant is the concept of acting on the Information Environment. The information environment is the aggregate of individuals, organizations, and systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act on information. This environment consists of three interrelated dimensions, which continuously interact with individuals, organizations, and systems. These dimensions are known as physical, informational, and cognitive.\nFamily.\nFamily communication is the study of the communication perspective in a broadly defined family, with intimacy and trusting relationship. The main goal of family communication is to understand the interactions of family and the pattern of behaviors of family members in different circumstances. Open and honest communication creates an atmosphere that allows family members to express their differences as well as love and admiration for one another. It also helps to understand the feelings of one another.\nFamily communication study looks at topics such as family rules, family roles or family dialectics and how those factors could affect the communication between family members. Researchers develop theories to understand communication behaviors. Family communication study also digs deep into certain time periods of family life such as marriage, parenthood or divorce and how communication stands in those situations. It is important for family members to understand communication as a trusted way which leads to a well constructed family.\nInterpersonal.\nIn simple terms, interpersonal communication is the communication between one person and another (or others). It is often referred to as face-to-face communication between two (or more) people. Both verbal and nonverbal communication, or body language, play a part in how one person understands another, and attribute to one's own soft skills. In verbal interpersonal communication there are two types of messages being sent: a content message and a relational message. Content messages are messages about the topic at hand and relational messages are messages about the relationship itself. This means that relational messages come across in \"how\" one says something and it demonstrates a person's feelings, whether positive or negative, towards the individual they are talking to, indicating not only how they feel about the topic at hand, but also how they feel about their relationship with the other individual.\nThere are many different aspects of interpersonal communication including:\nBarriers to effectiveness.\nBarriers to effective communication can retard or distort the message or intention of the message being conveyed. This may result in failure of the communication process or cause an effect that is undesirable. These include filtering, selective perception, information overload, emotions, language, silence, communication apprehension, gender differences and political correctness.\nThis also includes a lack of expressing \"knowledge-appropriate\" communication, which occurs when a person uses ambiguous or complex legal words, medical jargon, or descriptions of a situation or environment that is not understood by the recipient.\nCultural aspects.\nCultural differences exist within countries (tribal/regional differences, dialects and so on), between religious groups and in organisations or at an organisational level \u2013 where companies, teams and units may have different expectations, norms and idiolects. Families and family groups may also experience the effect of cultural barriers to communication within and between different family members or groups. For example: words, colours and symbols have different meanings in different cultures. In most parts of the world, nodding your head means agreement, shaking your head means \"no\", but this is not true everywhere.\nCommunication to a great extent is influenced by culture and cultural variables. Understanding \"cultural aspects of communication\" refers to having knowledge of different cultures in order to communicate effectively with cross culture people. Cultural aspects of communication are of great relevance in today's world which is now a global village, thanks to globalisation. Cultural aspects of communication are the cultural differences which influence communication across borders.\nSo in order to have an effective communication across the world it is desirable to have a knowledge of cultural variables effecting communication.\nAccording to Michael Walsh and Ghil'ad Zuckermann, Western conversational interaction is typically \"dyadic\", between two particular people, where eye contact is important and the speaker controls the interaction; and \"contained\" in a relatively short, defined time frame. However, traditional Aboriginal conversational interaction is \"communal\", broadcast to many people, eye contact is not important, the listener controls the interaction; and \"continuous\", spread over a longer, indefinite time frame.\nNonhuman.\nEvery information exchange between living organisms \u2014 i.e. transmission of signals that involve a living sender and receiver can be considered a form of communication; and even primitive creatures such as corals are competent to communicate. Nonhuman communication also include cell signaling, cellular communication, and chemical transmissions between primitive organisms like bacteria and within the plant and fungal kingdoms.\nAnimals.\nThe broad field of animal communication encompasses most of the issues in ethology. Animal communication can be defined as any behavior of one animal that affects the current or future behavior of another animal. The study of animal communication, called \"zoo semiotics\" (distinguishable from anthroposemiotics, the study of human communication) has played an important part in the development of ethology, sociobiology, and the study of animal cognition. Animal communication, and indeed the understanding of the animal world in general, is a rapidly growing field, and even in the 21st century so far, a great share of prior understanding related to diverse fields such as personal symbolic name use, animal emotions, animal culture and learning, and even sexual conduct, long thought to be well understood, has been revolutionized.\nPlants and fungi.\nCommunication is observed within the plant organism, i.e. within plant cells and between plant cells, between plants of the same or related species, and between plants and non-plant organisms, especially in the root zone. Plant roots communicate with rhizome bacteria, fungi, and insects within the soil. Recent research has shown that most of the microorganism plant communication processes are neuron-like. Plants also communicate via volatiles when exposed to herbivory attack behavior, thus warning neighboring plants. In parallel they produce other volatiles to attract parasites which attack these herbivores.\nFungi communicate to coordinate and organize their growth and development such as the formation of Marcelia and fruiting bodies. Fungi communicate with their own and related species as well as with non fungal organisms in a great variety of symbiotic interactions, especially with bacteria, unicellular eukaryote, plants and insects through biochemicals of biotic origin. The biochemicals trigger the fungal organism to react in a specific manner, while if the same chemical molecules are not part of biotic messages, they do not trigger the fungal organism to react. This implies that fungal organisms can differentiate between molecules taking part in biotic messages and similar molecules being irrelevant in the situation. So far five different primary signalling molecules are known to coordinate different behavioral patterns such as filamentation, mating, growth, and pathogenicity. Behavioral coordination and production of signaling substances is achieved through interpretation processes that enables the organism to differ between self or non-self, a biotic indicator, biotic message from similar, related, or non-related species, and even filter out \"noise\", i.e. similar molecules without biotic content.\nBacteria quorum sensing.\nCommunication is not a tool used only by humans, plants and animals, but it is also used by microorganisms like bacteria. The process is called quorum sensing. Through quorum sensing, bacteria can sense the density of cells, and regulate gene expression accordingly. This can be seen in both gram positive and gram negative bacteria.\nThis was first observed by Fuqua \"et al.\" in marine microorganisms like \"V. harveyi\" and \"V. fischeri\".\nModels.\nThe first major model for communication was introduced by Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver for Bell Laboratories in 1949 The original model was designed to mirror the functioning of radio and telephone technologies. Their initial model consisted of three primary parts: sender, channel, and receiver. The sender was the part of a telephone a person spoke into, the channel was the telephone itself, and the receiver was the part of the phone where one could hear the other person. Shannon and Weaver also recognized that often there is static that interferes with one listening to a telephone conversation, which they deemed noise.\nIn a simple model, often referred to as the transmission model or standard view of communication, information or content (e.g. a message in natural language) is sent in some form (as spoken language) from an emitter (\"emisor\" in the picture)/sender/encoder to a destination/receiver/decoder. This common conception of communication simply views communication as a means of sending and receiving information. The strengths of this model are simplicity, generality, and quantifiability. Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver structured this model based on the following elements:\nShannon and Weaver argued that there were three levels of problems for communication within this theory.\nDaniel Chandler critiques the transmission model by stating:\nIn 1960, David Berlo expanded on Shannon and Weaver's (1949) linear model of communication and created the SMCR Model of Communication. The Sender-Message-Channel-Receiver Model of communication separated the model into clear parts and has been expanded upon by other scholars.\nCommunication is usually described along a few major dimensions: message (what type of things are communicated), source/emisor/sender/encoder (from whom), form (in which form), channel (through which medium), destination/receiver/target/decoder (to whom). Wilbur Schram (1954) also indicated that we should also examine the impact that a message has (both desired and undesired) on the target of the message. Between parties, communication includes acts that confer knowledge and experiences, give advice and commands, and ask questions. These acts may take many forms, in one of the various manners of communication. The form depends on the abilities of the group communicating. Together, communication content and form make messages that are sent towards a destination. The target can be oneself, another person or being, another entity (such as a corporation or group of beings).\nCommunication can be seen as processes of information transmission with three levels of semiotic rules:\nTherefore, communication is social interaction where at least two interacting agents share a common set of signs and a common set of semiotic rules. This commonly held rule in some sense ignores autocommunication, including intrapersonal communication via diaries or self-talk, both secondary phenomena that followed the primary acquisition of communicative competences within social interactions.\nIn light of these weaknesses, Barnlund (2008) proposed a transactional model of communication. The basic premise of the transactional model of communication is that individuals are simultaneously engaging in the sending and receiving of messages.\nIn a slightly more complex form a sender and a receiver are linked reciprocally. This second attitude of communication, referred to as the constitutive model or constructionist view, focuses on how an individual communicates as the determining factor of the way the message will be interpreted. Communication is viewed as a conduit; a passage in which information travels from one individual to another and this information becomes separate from the communication itself. A particular instance of communication is called a speech act. The sender's personal filters and the receiver's personal filters may vary depending upon different regional traditions, cultures, or gender; which may alter the intended meaning of message contents. In the presence of \"communication noise\" on the transmission channel (air, in this case), reception and decoding of content may be faulty, and thus the speech act may not achieve the desired effect. One problem with this encode-transmit-receive-decode model is that the processes of encoding and decoding imply that the sender and receiver each possess something that functions as a codebook, and that these two code books are, at the very least, similar if not identical. Although something like code books is implied by the model, they are nowhere represented in the model, which creates many conceptual difficulties.\nTheories of coregulation describe communication as a creative and dynamic continuous process, rather than a discrete exchange of information. Canadian media scholar Harold Innis had the theory that people use different types of media to communicate and which one they choose to use will offer different possibilities for the shape and durability of society. His famous example of this is using ancient Egypt and looking at the ways they built themselves out of media with very different properties stone and papyrus. Papyrus is what he called 'Space Binding'. it made possible the transmission of written orders across space, empires and enables the waging of distant military campaigns and colonial administration. The other is stone and 'Time Binding', through the construction of temples and the pyramids can sustain their authority generation to generation, through this media they can change and shape communication in their society.\nNoise.\nIn any communication model, noise is interference with the decoding of messages sent over the channel by an encoder. There are many examples of noise:\nTo face communication noise, redundancy and acknowledgement must often be used. Acknowledgements are messages from the addressee informing the originator that his/her communication has been received and is understood. Message repetition and feedback about message received are necessary in the presence of noise to reduce the probability of misunderstanding.\nThe act of disambiguation regards the attempt of reducing noise and wrong interpretations, when the semantic value or meaning of a sign can be subject to noise, or in presence of multiple meanings, which makes the sense-making difficult. Disambiguation attempts to decrease the likelihood of misunderstanding. This is also a fundamental skill in communication processes activated by counselors, psychotherapists, interpreters, and in coaching sessions based on colloquium. In Information Technology, the disambiguation process and the automatic disambiguation of meanings of words and sentences has also been an interest and concern since the earliest days of computer treatment of language.\nAs academic discipline.\nThe academic discipline that deals with processes of human communication is communication studies. The discipline encompasses a range of topics, from face-to-face conversation to mass media outlets such as television broadcasting. Communication studies also examines how messages are interpreted through the political, cultural, economic, semiotic, hermeneutic, and social dimensions of their contexts. Statistics, as a quantitative approach to communication science, has also been incorporated into research on communication science in order to help substantiate claims."}
{"id": "5178", "revid": "3062783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5178", "title": "Classics", "text": "Classics or classical studies is the study of classical antiquity, and in the Western world traditionally refers to the study of Classical Greek and Roman literature in their original languages of Ancient Greek and Latin, respectively. It may also include Greco-Roman philosophy, history, and archaeology as secondary subjects. \nIn Western civilization, the study of the Greek and Roman classics was traditionally considered to be the foundation of the humanities, and study of classics has therefore traditionally been the cornerstone of a typical European education.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"classics\" is derived from the Latin adjective \"classicus\", meaning \"belonging to the highest class of citizens.\" The word was originally used to describe the members of the Patricians, the highest class in ancient Rome. By the 2nd century AD the word was used in literary criticism to describe writers of the highest quality. For example, Aulus Gellius, in his \"Attic Nights\", contrasts \"classicus\" and \"proletarius\" writers. By the 6th century AD, the word had acquired a second meaning, referring to pupils at a school. Thus, the two modern meanings of the word, referring both to literature considered to be of the highest quality, and to the standard texts used as part of a curriculum, both derive from Roman use.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, classics and education were tightly intertwined; according to Jan Ziolkowski, there is no era in history in which the link was tighter. Medieval education taught students to imitate earlier classical models, and Latin continued to be the language of scholarship and culture, despite the increasing difference between literary Latin and the vernacular languages of Europe during the period.\nWhile Latin was hugely influential, however, Greek was barely studied, and Greek literature survived almost solely in Latin translation. The works of even major Greek authors such as Hesiod, whose names continued to be known by educated Europeans, were unavailable in the Middle Ages. In the thirteenth century, the English philosopher Roger Bacon wrote that \"there are not four men in Latin Christendom who are acquainted with the Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic grammars.\"\nAlong with the unavailability of Greek authors, there were other differences between the classical canon known today and the works valued in the Middle Ages. Catullus, for instance, was almost entirely unknown in the medieval period. The popularity of different authors also waxed and waned throughout the period: Lucretius, popular during the Carolingian period, was barely read in the twelfth century, while for Quintilian the reverse is true.\nRenaissance.\nThe Renaissance led to the increasing study of both ancient literature and ancient history, as well as a revival of classical styles of Latin. From the 14th century, first in Italy and then increasingly across Europe, Renaissance Humanism, an intellectual movement that \"advocated the study and imitation of classical antiquity\", developed. Humanism saw a reform in education in Europe, introducing a wider range of Latin authors as well as bringing back the study of Greek language and literature to Western Europe. This reintroduction was initiated by Petrarch (1304\u20131374) and Boccaccio (1313\u20131375) who commissioned a Calabrian scholar to translate the Homeric poems. This humanist educational reform spread from Italy, in Catholic countries as it was adopted by the Jesuits, and in countries that became Protestant such as England, Germany, and the Low Countries, in order to ensure that future clerics were able to study the New Testament in the original language.\nNeoclassicism.\nThe late 17th and 18th centuries are the period in Western European literary history which is most associated with the classical tradition, as writers consciously adapted classical models. Classical models were so highly prized that the plays of William Shakespeare were rewritten along neoclassical lines, and these \"improved\" versions were performed throughout the 18th century.\nFrom the beginning of the 18th century, the study of Greek became increasingly important relative to that of Latin.\nIn this period Johann Winckelmann's claims for the superiority of the Greek visual arts influenced a shift in aesthetic judgements, while in the literary sphere, G.E. Lessing \"returned Homer to the centre of artistic achievement\".\nIn the United Kingdom, the study of Greek in schools began in the late 18th century. The poet Walter Savage Landor claimed to have been one of the first English schoolboys to write in Greek during his time at Rugby School.\n19th century.\nThe 19th century saw the influence of the classical world, and the value of a classical education, decline, especially in the United States, where the subject was often criticised for its elitism. By the 19th century, little new literature was still being written in Latin \u2013 a practice which had continued as late as the 18th century \u2013 and a command of Latin declined in importance. Correspondingly, classical education from the 19th century onwards began to increasingly de-emphasise the importance of the ability to write and speak Latin. In the United Kingdom this process took longer than elsewhere. Composition continued to be the dominant classical skill in England until the 1870s, when new areas within the discipline began to increase in popularity.\nIn the same decade came the first challenges to the requirement of Greek at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, though it would not be finally abolished for another 50 years.\nThough the influence of classics as the dominant mode of education in Europe and North America was in decline in the 19th century, the discipline was rapidly evolving in the same period. Classical scholarship was becoming more systematic and scientific, especially with the \"new philology\" created at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century. Its scope was also broadening: it was during the 19th century that ancient history and classical archaeology began to be seen as part of classics, rather than separate disciplines.\n20th century to present.\nDuring the 20th century, the study of classics became less common. In England, for instance, Oxford and Cambridge universities stopped requiring students to have qualifications in Greek in 1920, and in Latin at the end of the 1950s. When the National Curriculum was introduced in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland in 1988, it did not mention the classics. By 2003, only about 10% of state schools in Britain offered any classical subjects to their students at all. In 2016, AQA, the largest exam board for A-Levels and GCSE's in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, announced that it would be scrapping A-Level subjects in Classical Civilization, Archaeology, and Art History. This left just one out of five exam boards in England which still offered Classical Civilization as a subject. The decision was immediately denounced by archaeologists and historians, with Natalie Haynes of the \"Guardian\" stating that the loss of the A-Level would deprive state school students, 93% of all students, the opportunity to study classics while making it once again the exclusive purview of wealthy private-school students.\nHowever, the study of classics has not declined as fast elsewhere in Europe. In 2009, a review of \"Meeting the Challenge\", a collection of conference papers about the teaching of Latin in Europe, noted that though there is opposition to the teaching of Latin in Italy, it is nonetheless still compulsory in most secondary schools. The same can be said in the case of France or Greece, too. Indeed, Ancient Greek is one of the compulsory subjects in Greek secondary education, whereas in France, Latin is one of the optional subjects that can be chosen in a majority of middle schools and high schools. Ancient Greek is also still being taught, but not as much as Latin.\nSub-disciplines.\nOne of the most notable characteristics of the modern study of classics is the diversity of the field. Although traditionally focused on ancient Greece and Rome, the study now encompasses the entire ancient Mediterranean world, thus expanding the studies to Northern Africa as well as parts of the Middle East.\nPhilology.\nPhilology is the study of language preserved in written sources; classical philology is thus concerned with understanding any texts from the classical period written in the classical languages of Latin and Greek.\nThe roots of classical philology lie in the Renaissance, as humanist intellectuals attempted to return to the Latin of the classical period, especially of Cicero, and as scholars attempted to produce more accurate editions of ancient texts. Some of the principles of philology still used today were developed during this period, for instance, the observation that if a manuscript could be shown to be a copy of an earlier extant manuscript, then it provides no further evidence of the original text, was made as early as 1489 by Angelo Poliziano. Other philological tools took longer to be developed: the first statement, for instance, of the principle that a more difficult reading should be preferred over a simpler one, was in 1697 by Jean Le Clerc.\nThe modern discipline of classical philology began in Germany at the turn of the nineteenth century. It was during this period that scientific principles of philology began to be put together into a coherent whole, in order to provide a set of rules by which scholars could determine which manuscripts were most accurate. This \"new philology\", as it was known, centered around the construction of a genealogy of manuscripts, with which a hypothetical common ancestor, closer to the original text than any existing manuscript, could be reconstructed.\nArchaeology.\nClassical archaeology is the oldest branch of archaeology, with its roots going back to J.J. Winckelmann's work on Herculaneum in the 1760s. It was not until the last decades of the 19th century, however, that classical archaeology became part of the tradition of Western classical scholarship. It was included as part of Cambridge University's Classical Tripos for the first time after the reforms of the 1880s, though it did not become part of Oxford's Greats until much later.\nThe second half of the 19th century saw Schliemann's excavations of Troy and Mycenae; the first excavations at Olympia and Delos; and Arthur Evans' work in Crete, particularly on Knossos. This period also saw the foundation of important archaeological associations (e.g. the Archaeological Institute of America in 1879), including many foreign archaeological institutes in Athens and Rome (the American School of Classical Studies at Athens in 1881, British School at Athens in 1886, American Academy in Rome in 1895, and British School at Rome in 1900).\nMore recently, classical archaeology has taken little part in the theoretical changes in the rest of the discipline, largely ignoring the popularity of \"New Archaeology\", which emphasized the development of general laws derived from studying material culture, in the 1960s. New Archaeology is still criticized by traditional minded scholars of classical archaeology despite a wide acceptance of its basic techniques.\nArt history.\nSome art historians focus their study on the development of art in the classical world. Indeed, the art and architecture of Ancient Rome and Greece is very well regarded and remains at the heart of much of our art today. For example, Ancient Greek architecture gave us the Classical Orders: Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. The Parthenon is still the architectural symbol of the classical world.\nGreek sculpture is well known and we know the names of several Ancient Greek artists: for example, Phidias.\nAncient history.\nWith philology, archaeology, and art history, scholars seek understanding of the history and culture of a civilization, through critical study of the extant literary and physical artefacts, in order to compose and establish a continual historic narrative of the Ancient World and its peoples. The task is difficult due to a dearth of physical evidence: for example, Sparta was a leading Greek city-state, yet little evidence of it survives to study, and what is available comes from Athens, Sparta's principal rival; likewise, the Roman Empire destroyed most evidence (cultural artefacts) of earlier, conquered civilizations, such as that of the Etruscans.\nPhilosophy.\nThe English word \"philosophy\" comes from the Greek word \u03c6\u03b9\u03bb\u03bf\u03c3\u03bf\u03c6\u03af\u03b1, meaning \"love of wisdom\", probably coined by Pythagoras. Along with the word itself, the discipline of philosophy as we know it today has its roots in ancient Greek thought, and according to Martin West \"philosophy as we understand it is a Greek creation\". Ancient philosophy was traditionally divided into three branches: logic, physics, and ethics. However, not all of the works of ancient philosophers fit neatly into one of these three branches. For instance, Aristotle's \"Rhetoric\" and \"Poetics\" have been traditionally classified in the West as \"ethics\", but in the Arabic world were grouped with logic; in reality, they do not fit neatly into either category.\nFrom the last decade of the eighteenth century, scholars of ancient philosophy began to study the discipline historically. Previously, works on ancient philosophy had been unconcerned with chronological sequence and with reconstructing the reasoning of ancient thinkers; with what Wolfgang-Ranier Mann calls \"New Philosophy\", this changed.\nReception studies.\nAnother discipline within the classics is \"reception studies\", which developed in the 1960s at the University of Konstanz.\nReception studies is concerned with how students of classical texts have understood and interpreted them.\nAs such, reception studies is interested in a two-way interaction between reader and text, taking place within a historical context.\nThough the idea of an \"aesthetics of reception\" was first put forward by Hans Robert Jauss in 1967, the principles of reception theory go back much earlier than this.\nAs early as 1920, T. S. Eliot wrote that \"the past [is] altered by the present as much as the present is directed by the past\"; Charles Martindale describes this as a \"cardinal principle\" for many versions of modern reception theory.\nClassical Greece.\nAncient Greece was the civilization belonging to the period of Greek history lasting from the Archaic period, beginning in the eighth century BC, to the Roman conquest of Greece after the Battle of Corinth in 146 BC. The Classical period, during the fifth and fourth centuries BC, has traditionally been considered the height of Greek civilisation. The Classical period of Greek history is generally considered to have begun with the first and second Persian invasions of Greece at the start of the Greco-Persian wars, and to have ended with the death of Alexander the Great.\nClassical Greek culture had a powerful influence on the Roman Empire, which carried a version of it to many parts of the Mediterranean region and Europe; thus Classical Greece is generally considered to be the seminal culture which provided the foundation of Western civilization.\nLanguage.\nAncient Greek is the historical stage in the development of the Greek language spanning the Archaic (c. 8th to 6th centuries BC), Classical (c. 5th to 4th centuries BC), and Hellenistic (c. 3rd century BC to 6th century AD) periods of ancient Greece and the ancient world. It is predated in the 2nd millennium BC by Mycenaean Greek. Its Hellenistic phase is known as Koine (\"common\") or Biblical Greek, and its late period mutates imperceptibly into Medieval Greek. Koine is regarded as a separate historical stage of its own, although in its earlier form it closely resembles Classical Greek. Prior to the Koine period, Greek of the classical and earlier periods included several regional dialects.\nAncient Greek was the language of Homer and of classical Athenian historians, playwrights, and philosophers. It has contributed many words to the vocabulary of English and many other European languages, and has been a standard subject of study in Western educational institutions since the Renaissance. Latinized forms of Ancient Greek roots are used in many of the scientific names of species and in other scientific terminology.\nLiterature.\nThe earliest surviving works of Greek literature are epic poetry. Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" are the earliest to survive to us today, probably composed in the eighth century BC. These early epics were oral compositions, created without the use of writing.\nAround the same time that the Homeric epics were composed, the Greek alphabet was introduced; the earliest surviving inscriptions date from around 750 BC.\nEuropean drama was invented in ancient Greece. Traditionally this was attributed to Thespis, around the middle of the sixth century BC, though the earliest surviving work of Greek drama is Aeschylus' tragedy \"The Persians\", which dates to 472 BC. Early Greek tragedy was performed by a chorus and two actors, but by the end of Aeschylus' life, a third actor had been introduced, either by him or by Sophocles. The last surviving Greek tragedies are the \"Bacchae\" of Euripides and Sophocles' Oedipus at Colonus, both from the end of the fifth century BC.\nSurviving Greek comedy begins later than tragedy; the earliest surviving work, Aristophanes' \"Acharnians\", comes from 425 BC. However, comedy dates back as early as 486 BC, when the Dionysia added a competition for comedy to the much earlier competition for tragedy. The comedy of the fifth century is known as Old Comedy, and it comes down to us solely in the eleven surviving plays of Aristophanes, along with a few fragments. Sixty years after the end of Aristophanes' career, the next author of comedies to have any substantial body of work survive is Menander, whose style is known as New Comedy.\nTwo historians flourished during Greece's classical age: Herodotus and Thucydides. Herodotus is commonly called the father of history, and his \"History\" contains the first truly literary use of prose in Western literature. Of the two, Thucydides was the more careful historian. His critical use of sources, inclusion of documents, and laborious research made his History of the Peloponnesian War a significant influence on later generations of historians. The greatest achievement of the 4th century was in philosophy. There were many Greek philosophers, but three names tower above the rest: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. These have had a profound influence on Western society.\nMythology and religion.\nGreek mythology is the body of myths and legends belonging to the ancient Greeks concerning their gods and heroes, the nature of the world, and the origins and significance of their own cult and ritual practices. They were a part of religion in ancient Greece. Modern scholars refer to the myths and study them in an attempt to throw light on the religious and political institutions of Ancient Greece and its civilization, and to gain understanding of the nature of myth-making itself.\nGreek religion encompassed the collection of beliefs and rituals practiced in ancient Greece in the form of both popular public religion and cult practices. These different groups varied enough for it to be possible to speak of Greek religions or \"cults\" in the plural, though most of them shared similarities. Also, the Greek religion extended out of Greece and out to neighbouring islands.\nMany Greek people recognized the major gods and goddesses: Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Apollo, Artemis, Aphrodite, Ares, Dionysus, Hephaestus, Athena, Hermes, Demeter, Hestia and Hera; though philosophies such as Stoicism and some forms of Platonism used language that seems to posit a transcendent single deity. Different cities often worshipped the same deities, sometimes with epithets that distinguished them and specified their local nature.\nPhilosophy.\nThe earliest surviving philosophy from ancient Greece dates back to the 6th century BC, when according to Aristotle Thales of Miletus was considered to have been the first Greek philosopher. Other influential pre-Socratic philosophers include Pythagoras and Heraclitus. The most famous and significant figures in classical Athenian philosophy, from the 5th to the 3rd centuries BC, are Socrates, his student Plato, and Aristotle, who studied at Plato's Academy before founding his own school, known as the Lyceum. Later Greek schools of philosophy, including the Cynics, Stoics, and Epicureans, continued to be influential after the Roman annexation of Greece, and into the post-Classical world.\nGreek philosophy dealt with a wide variety of subjects, including political philosophy, ethics, metaphysics, ontology, and logic, as well as disciplines which are not today thought of as part of philosophy, such as biology and rhetoric.\nClassical Rome.\nLanguage.\nThe language of ancient Rome was Latin, a member of the Italic family of languages. The earliest surviving inscription in Latin comes from the 7th century BC, on a brooch from Palestrina. Latin from between this point and the early 1st century BC is known as Old Latin. Most surviving Latin literature is Classical Latin, from the 1st century BC to the 2nd century AD. Latin then evolved into Late Latin, in use during the late antique period. Late Latin survived long after the end of classical antiquity, and was finally replaced by written Romance languages around the 9th century AD. Along with literary forms of Latin, there existed various vernacular dialects, generally known as Vulgar Latin, in use throughout antiquity. These are mainly preserved in sources such as graffiti and the Vindolanda tablets.\nLiterature.\nLatin literature seems to have started in 240 BC, when a Roman audience saw a play adapted from the Greek by Livius Andronicus. Andronicus also translated Homer's Odyssey into an Saturnian verse. The poets Ennius, Accius, and Patruvius followed. Their work survives only in fragments; the earliest Latin authors whose work we have full examples of are the playwrights Plautus and Terence. Much of the best known and most highly thought of Latin literature comes from the classical period, with poets such as Virgil, Horace, and Ovid; historians such as Julius Caesar and Tacitus; orators such as Cicero; and philosophers such as Seneca the Younger and Lucretius. Late Latin authors include many Christian writers such as Lactantius, Tertullian and Ambrose; non-Christian authors, such as the historian Ammianus Marcellinus, are also preserved.\nHistory.\nAccording to legend, the city of Rome was founded in 753 BC; in reality, there had been a settlement on the site since around 1000 BC, when the Palatine Hill was settled. The city was originally ruled by kings, first Roman, and then Etruscan \u2013 according to Roman tradition, the first Etruscan king of Rome, Tarquinius Priscus, ruled from 616 BC. Over the course of the 6th century BC, the city expanded its influence over the entirety of Latium. Around the end of the 6th century \u2013 traditionally in 510 BC \u2013 the kings of Rome were driven out, and the city became a republic.\nAround 387 BC, Rome was sacked by the Gauls following the Battle of the Allia. It soon recovered from this humiliating defeat, however, and in 381 the inhabitants of Tusculum in Latium were made Roman citizens. This was the first time Roman citizenship was extended in this way. Rome went on to expand its area of influence, until by 269 the entirety of the Italian peninsula was under Roman rule. Soon afterwards, in 264, the First Punic War began; it lasted until 241. The Second Punic War began in 218, and by the end of that year, the Carthaginian general Hannibal had invaded Italy. The war saw Rome's worst defeat to that point at Cannae; the largest army Rome had yet put into the field was wiped out, and one of the two consuls leading it was killed. However, Rome continued to fight, annexing much of Spain and eventually defeating Carthage, ending her position as a major power and securing Roman preeminence in the Western Mediterranean.\nLegacy of the classical world.\nThe classical languages of the Ancient Mediterranean world influenced every European language, imparting to each a learned vocabulary of international application. Thus, Latin grew from a highly developed cultural product of the Golden and Silver eras of Latin literature to become the \"international lingua franca\" in matters diplomatic, scientific, philosophic and religious, until the 17th century. Long before this, Latin had evolved into the Romance languages and Ancient Greek into Modern Greek and its dialects. In the specialised science and technology vocabularies, the influence of Latin and Greek is notable. Ecclesiastical Latin, the Roman Catholic Church's official language, remains a living legacy of the classical world in the contemporary world.\nLatin had an impact far beyond the classical world. It continued to be the pre-eminent language for serious writings in Europe long after the fall of the Roman empire. The modern Romance languages \u2013 such as French, Spanish, and Italian \u2013 all derive from Latin. Latin is still seen as a foundational aspect of European culture.\nThe legacy of the classical world is not confined to the influence of classical languages. The Roman empire was taken as a model by later European empires, such as the Spanish and British empires. Classical art has been taken as a model in later periods \u2013 medieval Romanesque architecture and Enlightenment-era neoclassical literature were both influenced by classical models, to take but two examples, while Joyce's \"Ulysses\" is one of the most influential works of twentieth century literature."}
{"id": "5180", "revid": "4373810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5180", "title": "Chemistry", "text": "Chemistry is the scientific discipline involved with elements and compounds composed of atoms, molecules and ions: their composition, structure, properties, behavior and the changes they undergo during a reaction with other substances.\nIn the scope of its subject, chemistry occupies an intermediate position between physics and biology. It is sometimes called the central science because it provides a foundation for understanding both basic and applied scientific disciplines at a fundamental level. For example, chemistry explains aspects of plant chemistry (botany), the formation of igneous rocks (geology), how atmospheric ozone is formed and how environmental pollutants are degraded (ecology), the properties of the soil on the moon (cosmochemistry), how medications work (pharmacology), and how to collect DNA evidence at a crime scene (forensics).\nChemistry addresses topics such as how atoms and molecules interact via chemical bonds to form new chemical compounds. There are two types of chemical bonds: 1. primary chemical bonds e.g covalent bonds, in which atoms share one or more electron(s); ionic bonds, in which an atom donates one or more electrons to another atom to produce ions (cations and anions); metallic bonds and 2. secondary chemical bonds e.g. hydrogen bonds; Van der Waals force bonds, ion-ion interaction, ion-dipole interaction etc.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"chemistry\" comes from a modification of the word \"alchemy,\" which referred to an earlier set of practices that encompassed elements of chemistry, metallurgy, philosophy, astrology, astronomy, mysticism and medicine. Alchemy is often seen as linked to the quest to turn lead or other base metals into gold, though alchemists were also interested in many of the questions of modern chemistry.\nThe modern word \"alchemy\" in turn is derived from the Arabic word \"al-k\u012bm\u012b\u0101\" (\u0627\u0644\u0643\u06cc\u0645\u06cc\u0627\u0621). This may have Egyptian origins since \"al-k\u012bm\u012b\u0101\" is derived from the Greek \u03c7\u03b7\u03bc\u03af\u03b1, which is in turn derived from the word Kemet, which is the ancient name of Egypt in the Egyptian language. Alternately, \"al-k\u012bm\u012b\u0101\" may derive from \u03c7\u03b7\u03bc\u03b5\u03af\u03b1, meaning \"cast together\".\nModern principles.\nThe current model of atomic structure is the quantum mechanical model. Traditional chemistry starts with the study of elementary particles, atoms, molecules, substances, metals, crystals and other aggregates of matter. Matter can be studied in solid, liquid, gas and plasma states, in isolation or in combination. The interactions, reactions and transformations that are studied in chemistry are usually the result of interactions between atoms, leading to rearrangements of the chemical bonds which hold atoms together. Such behaviors are studied in a chemistry laboratory.\nThe chemistry laboratory stereotypically uses various forms of laboratory glassware. However glassware is not central to chemistry, and a great deal of experimental (as well as applied/industrial) chemistry is done without it.\nA chemical reaction is a transformation of some substances into one or more different substances. The basis of such a chemical transformation is the rearrangement of electrons in the chemical bonds between atoms. It can be symbolically depicted through a chemical equation, which usually involves atoms as subjects. The number of atoms on the left and the right in the equation for a chemical transformation is equal. (When the number of atoms on either side is unequal, the transformation is referred to as a nuclear reaction or radioactive decay.) The type of chemical reactions a substance may undergo and the energy changes that may accompany it are constrained by certain basic rules, known as chemical laws.\nEnergy and entropy considerations are invariably important in almost all chemical studies. Chemical substances are classified in terms of their structure, phase, as well as their chemical compositions. They can be analyzed using the tools of chemical analysis, e.g. spectroscopy and chromatography. Scientists engaged in chemical research are known as chemists. Most chemists specialize in one or more sub-disciplines. Several concepts are essential for the study of chemistry; some of them are:\nMatter.\nIn chemistry, matter is defined as anything that has rest mass and volume (it takes up space) and is made up of particles. The particles that make up matter have rest mass as well \u2013 not all particles have rest mass, such as the photon. Matter can be a pure chemical substance or a mixture of substances.\nAtom.\nThe atom is the basic unit of chemistry. It consists of a dense core called the atomic nucleus surrounded by a space occupied by an electron cloud. The nucleus is made up of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons (together called nucleons), while the electron cloud consists of negatively charged electrons which orbit the nucleus. In a neutral atom, the negatively charged electrons balance out the positive charge of the protons. The nucleus is dense; the mass of a nucleon is approximately 1,836 times that of an electron, yet the radius of an atom is about 10,000 times that of its nucleus.\nThe atom is also the smallest entity that can be envisaged to retain the chemical properties of the element, such as electronegativity, ionization potential, preferred oxidation state(s), coordination number, and preferred types of bonds to form (e.g., metallic, ionic, covalent).\nElement.\nA chemical element is a pure substance which is composed of a single type of atom, characterized by its particular number of protons in the nuclei of its atoms, known as the atomic number and represented by the symbol \"Z\". The mass number is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus. Although all the nuclei of all atoms belonging to one element will have the same atomic number, they may not necessarily have the same mass number; atoms of an element which have different mass numbers are known as isotopes. For example, all atoms with 6 protons in their nuclei are atoms of the chemical element carbon, but atoms of carbon may have mass numbers of 12 or 13.\nThe standard presentation of the chemical elements is in the periodic table, which orders elements by atomic number. The periodic table is arranged in groups, or columns, and periods, or rows. The periodic table is useful in identifying periodic trends.\nCompound.\nA \"compound\" is a pure chemical substance composed of more than one element. The properties of a compound bear little similarity to those of its elements. The standard nomenclature of compounds is set by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Organic compounds are named according to the organic nomenclature system. The names for inorganic compounds are created according to the inorganic nomenclature system. When a compound has more than one component, then they are divided into two classes, the electropositive and the electronegative components. In addition the Chemical Abstracts Service has devised a method to index chemical substances. In this scheme each chemical substance is identifiable by a number known as its CAS registry number.\nMolecule.\nA \"molecule\" is the smallest indivisible portion of a pure chemical substance that has its unique set of chemical properties, that is, its potential to undergo a certain set of chemical reactions with other substances. However, this definition only works well for substances that are composed of molecules, which is not true of many substances (see below). Molecules are typically a set of atoms bound together by covalent bonds, such that the structure is electrically neutral and all valence electrons are paired with other electrons either in bonds or in lone pairs.\nThus, molecules exist as electrically neutral units, unlike ions. When this rule is broken, giving the \"molecule\" a charge, the result is sometimes named a molecular ion or a polyatomic ion. However, the discrete and separate nature of the molecular concept usually requires that molecular ions be present only in well-separated form, such as a directed beam in a vacuum in a mass spectrometer. Charged polyatomic collections residing in solids (for example, common sulfate or nitrate ions) are generally not considered \"molecules\" in chemistry. Some molecules contain one or more unpaired electrons, creating radicals. Most radicals are comparatively reactive, but some, such as nitric oxide (NO) can be stable.\nThe \"inert\" or noble gas elements (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon and radon) are composed of lone atoms as their smallest discrete unit, but the other isolated chemical elements consist of either molecules or networks of atoms bonded to each other in some way. Identifiable molecules compose familiar substances such as water, air, and many organic compounds like alcohol, sugar, gasoline, and the various pharmaceuticals.\nHowever, not all substances or chemical compounds consist of discrete molecules, and indeed most of the solid substances that make up the solid crust, mantle, and core of the Earth are chemical compounds without molecules. These other types of substances, such as ionic compounds and network solids, are organized in such a way as to lack the existence of identifiable molecules \"per se\". Instead, these substances are discussed in terms of formula units or unit cells as the smallest repeating structure within the substance. Examples of such substances are mineral salts (such as table salt), solids like carbon and diamond, metals, and familiar silica and silicate minerals such as quartz and granite.\nOne of the main characteristics of a molecule is its geometry often called its structure. While the structure of diatomic, triatomic or tetra-atomic molecules may be trivial, (linear, angular pyramidal etc.) the structure of polyatomic molecules, that are constituted of more than six atoms (of several elements) can be crucial for its chemical nature.\nSubstance and mixture.\nA chemical substance is a kind of matter with a definite composition and set of properties. A collection of substances is called a mixture. Examples of mixtures are air and alloys.\nMole and amount of substance.\nThe mole is a unit of measurement that denotes an amount of substance (also called chemical amount). One mole is defined to contain exactly particles (atoms, molecules, ions, or electrons), where the number of particles per mole is known as the Avogadro constant. Molar concentration is the amount of a particular substance per volume of solution, and is commonly reported in mol/dm3.\nPhase.\nIn addition to the specific chemical properties that distinguish different chemical classifications, chemicals can exist in several phases. For the most part, the chemical classifications are independent of these bulk phase classifications; however, some more exotic phases are incompatible with certain chemical properties. A \"phase\" is a set of states of a chemical system that have similar bulk structural properties, over a range of conditions, such as pressure or temperature.\nPhysical properties, such as density and refractive index tend to fall within values characteristic of the phase. The phase of matter is defined by the \"phase transition\", which is when energy put into or taken out of the system goes into rearranging the structure of the system, instead of changing the bulk conditions.\nSometimes the distinction between phases can be continuous instead of having a discrete boundary' in this case the matter is considered to be in a supercritical state. When three states meet based on the conditions, it is known as a triple point and since this is invariant, it is a convenient way to define a set of conditions.\nThe most familiar examples of phases are solids, liquids, and gases. Many substances exhibit multiple solid phases. For example, there are three phases of solid iron (alpha, gamma, and delta) that vary based on temperature and pressure. A principal difference between solid phases is the crystal structure, or arrangement, of the atoms. Another phase commonly encountered in the study of chemistry is the \"aqueous\" phase, which is the state of substances dissolved in aqueous solution (that is, in water).\nLess familiar phases include plasmas, Bose\u2013Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates and the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic phases of magnetic materials. While most familiar phases deal with three-dimensional systems, it is also possible to define analogs in two-dimensional systems, which has received attention for its relevance to systems in biology.\nBonding.\nAtoms sticking together in molecules or crystals are said to be bonded with one another. A chemical bond may be visualized as the multipole balance between the positive charges in the nuclei and the negative charges oscillating about them. More than simple attraction and repulsion, the energies and distributions characterize the availability of an electron to bond to another atom.\nA chemical bond can be a covalent bond, an ionic bond, a hydrogen bond or just because of Van der Waals force. Each of these kinds of bonds is ascribed to some potential. These potentials create the interactions which hold atoms together in molecules or crystals. In many simple compounds, valence bond theory, the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion model (VSEPR), and the concept of oxidation number can be used to explain molecular structure and composition.\nAn ionic bond is formed when a metal loses one or more of its electrons, becoming a positively charged cation, and the electrons are then gained by the non-metal atom, becoming a negatively charged anion. The two oppositely charged ions attract one another, and the ionic bond is the electrostatic force of attraction between them. For example, sodium (Na), a metal, loses one electron to become an Na+ cation while chlorine (Cl), a non-metal, gains this electron to become Cl\u2212. The ions are held together due to electrostatic attraction, and that compound sodium chloride (NaCl), or common table salt, is formed.\nIn a covalent bond, one or more pairs of valence electrons are shared by two atoms: the resulting electrically neutral group of bonded atoms is termed a molecule. Atoms will share valence electrons in such a way as to create a noble gas electron configuration (eight electrons in their outermost shell) for each atom. Atoms that tend to combine in such a way that they each have eight electrons in their valence shell are said to follow the octet rule. However, some elements like hydrogen and lithium need only two electrons in their outermost shell to attain this stable configuration; these atoms are said to follow the \"duet rule\", and in this way they are reaching the electron configuration of the noble gas helium, which has two electrons in its outer shell.\nSimilarly, theories from classical physics can be used to predict many ionic structures. With more complicated compounds, such as metal complexes, valence bond theory is less applicable and alternative approaches, such as the molecular orbital theory, are generally used. See diagram on electronic orbitals.\nEnergy.\nIn the context of chemistry, energy is an attribute of a substance as a consequence of its atomic, molecular or aggregate structure. Since a chemical transformation is accompanied by a change in one or more of these kinds of structures, it is invariably accompanied by an increase or decrease of energy of the substances involved. Some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants.\nA reaction is said to be exergonic if the final state is lower on the energy scale than the initial state; in the case of endergonic reactions the situation is the reverse. A reaction is said to be exothermic if the reaction releases heat to the surroundings; in the case of endothermic reactions, the reaction absorbs heat from the surroundings.\nChemical reactions are invariably not possible unless the reactants surmount an energy barrier known as the activation energy. The \"speed\" of a chemical reaction (at given temperature T) is related to the activation energy E, by the Boltzmann's population factor formula_1 \u2013 that is the probability of a molecule to have energy greater than or equal to E at the given temperature T. This exponential dependence of a reaction rate on temperature is known as the Arrhenius equation.\nThe activation energy necessary for a chemical reaction to occur can be in the form of heat, light, electricity or mechanical force in the form of ultrasound.\nA related concept free energy, which also incorporates entropy considerations, is a very useful means for predicting the feasibility of a reaction and determining the state of equilibrium of a chemical reaction, in chemical thermodynamics. A reaction is feasible only if the total change in the Gibbs free energy is negative, formula_2; if it is equal to zero the chemical reaction is said to be at equilibrium.\nThere exist only limited possible states of energy for electrons, atoms and molecules. These are determined by the rules of quantum mechanics, which require quantization of energy of a bound system. The atoms/molecules in a higher energy state are said to be excited. The molecules/atoms of substance in an excited energy state are often much more reactive; that is, more amenable to chemical reactions.\nThe phase of a substance is invariably determined by its energy and the energy of its surroundings. When the intermolecular forces of a substance are such that the energy of the surroundings is not sufficient to overcome them, it occurs in a more ordered phase like liquid or solid as is the case with water (H2O); a liquid at room temperature because its molecules are bound by hydrogen bonds. Whereas hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a gas at room temperature and standard pressure, as its molecules are bound by weaker dipole-dipole interactions.\nThe transfer of energy from one chemical substance to another depends on the \"size\" of energy quanta emitted from one substance. However, heat energy is often transferred more easily from almost any substance to another because the phonons responsible for vibrational and rotational energy levels in a substance have much less energy than photons invoked for the electronic energy transfer. Thus, because vibrational and rotational energy levels are more closely spaced than electronic energy levels, heat is more easily transferred between substances relative to light or other forms of electronic energy. For example, ultraviolet electromagnetic radiation is not transferred with as much efficacy from one substance to another as thermal or electrical energy.\nThe existence of characteristic energy levels for different chemical substances is useful for their identification by the analysis of spectral lines. Different kinds of spectra are often used in chemical spectroscopy, e.g. IR, microwave, NMR, ESR, etc. Spectroscopy is also used to identify the composition of remote objects \u2013 like stars and distant galaxies \u2013 by analyzing their radiation spectra.\nThe term chemical energy is often used to indicate the potential of a chemical substance to undergo a transformation through a chemical reaction or to transform other chemical substances.\nReaction.\nWhen a chemical substance is transformed as a result of its interaction with another substance or with energy, a chemical reaction is said to have occurred. A \"chemical reaction\" is therefore a concept related to the \"reaction\" of a substance when it comes in close contact with another, whether as a mixture or a solution; exposure to some form of energy, or both. It results in some energy exchange between the constituents of the reaction as well as with the system environment, which may be designed vessels\u2014often laboratory glassware.\nChemical reactions can result in the formation or dissociation of molecules, that is, molecules breaking apart to form two or more molecules or rearrangement of atoms within or across molecules. Chemical reactions usually involve the making or breaking of chemical bonds. Oxidation, reduction, dissociation, acid-base neutralization and molecular rearrangement are some of the commonly used kinds of chemical reactions.\nA chemical reaction can be symbolically depicted through a chemical equation. While in a non-nuclear chemical reaction the number and kind of atoms on both sides of the equation are equal, for a nuclear reaction this holds true only for the nuclear particles viz. protons and neutrons.\nThe sequence of steps in which the reorganization of chemical bonds may be taking place in the course of a chemical reaction is called its mechanism. A chemical reaction can be envisioned to take place in a number of steps, each of which may have a different speed. Many reaction intermediates with variable stability can thus be envisaged during the course of a reaction. Reaction mechanisms are proposed to explain the kinetics and the relative product mix of a reaction. Many physical chemists specialize in exploring and proposing the mechanisms of various chemical reactions. Several empirical rules, like the Woodward\u2013Hoffmann rules often come in handy while proposing a mechanism for a chemical reaction.\nAccording to the IUPAC gold book, a chemical reaction is \"a process that results in the interconversion of chemical species.\" Accordingly, a chemical reaction may be an elementary reaction or a stepwise reaction. An additional caveat is made, in that this definition includes cases where the interconversion of conformers is experimentally observable. Such detectable chemical reactions normally involve sets of molecular entities as indicated by this definition, but it is often conceptually convenient to use the term also for changes involving single molecular entities (i.e. 'microscopic chemical events').\nIons and salts.\nAn \"ion\" is a charged species, an atom or a molecule, that has lost or gained one or more electrons. When an atom loses an electron and thus has more protons than electrons, the atom is a positively charged ion or cation. When an atom gains an electron and thus has more electrons than protons, the atom is a negatively charged ion or anion. Cations and anions can form a crystalline lattice of neutral salts, such as the Na+ and Cl\u2212 ions forming sodium chloride, or NaCl. Examples of polyatomic ions that do not split up during acid-base reactions are hydroxide (OH\u2212) and phosphate (PO43\u2212).\nPlasma is composed of gaseous matter that has been completely ionized, usually through high temperature.\nAcidity and basicity.\nA substance can often be classified as an acid or a base. There are several different theories which explain acid-base behavior. The simplest is Arrhenius theory, which states that acid is a substance that produces hydronium ions when it is dissolved in water, and a base is one that produces hydroxide ions when dissolved in water. According to Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid-base theory, acids are substances that donate a positive hydrogen ion to another substance in a chemical reaction; by extension, a base is the substance which receives that hydrogen ion.\nA third common theory is Lewis acid-base theory, which is based on the formation of new chemical bonds. Lewis theory explains that an acid is a substance which is capable of accepting a pair of electrons from another substance during the process of bond formation, while a base is a substance which can provide a pair of electrons to form a new bond. According to this theory, the crucial things being exchanged are charges. There are several other ways in which a substance may be classified as an acid or a base, as is evident in the history of this concept.\nAcid strength is commonly measured by two methods. One measurement, based on the Arrhenius definition of acidity, is pH, which is a measurement of the hydronium ion concentration in a solution, as expressed on a negative logarithmic scale. Thus, solutions that have a low pH have a high hydronium ion concentration and can be said to be more acidic. The other measurement, based on the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition, is the acid dissociation constant (Ka), which measures the relative ability of a substance to act as an acid under the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition of an acid. That is, substances with a higher Ka are more likely to donate hydrogen ions in chemical reactions than those with lower Ka values.\nRedox.\nRedox (\"red\"uction-\"ox\"idation) reactions include all chemical reactions in which atoms have their oxidation state changed by either gaining electrons (reduction) or losing electrons (oxidation). Substances that have the ability to oxidize other substances are said to be oxidative and are known as oxidizing agents, oxidants or oxidizers. An oxidant removes electrons from another substance. Similarly, substances that have the ability to reduce other substances are said to be reductive and are known as reducing agents, reductants, or reducers.\nA reductant transfers electrons to another substance and is thus oxidized itself. And because it \"donates\" electrons it is also called an electron donor. Oxidation and reduction properly refer to a change in oxidation number\u2014the actual transfer of electrons may never occur. Thus, oxidation is better defined as an increase in oxidation number, and reduction as a decrease in oxidation number.\nEquilibrium.\nAlthough the concept of equilibrium is widely used across sciences, in the context of chemistry, it arises whenever a number of different states of the chemical composition are possible, as for example, in a mixture of several chemical compounds that can react with one another, or when a substance can be present in more than one kind of phase.\nA system of chemical substances at equilibrium, even though having an unchanging composition, is most often not static; molecules of the substances continue to react with one another thus giving rise to a dynamic equilibrium. Thus the concept describes the state in which the parameters such as chemical composition remain unchanged over time.\nChemical laws.\nChemical reactions are governed by certain laws, which have become fundamental concepts in chemistry. Some of them are:\nHistory.\nThe history of chemistry spans a period from very old times to the present. Since several millennia BC, civilizations were using technologies that would eventually form the basis of the various branches of chemistry. Examples include extracting metals from ores, making pottery and glazes, fermenting beer and wine, extracting chemicals from plants for medicine and perfume, rendering fat into soap, making glass, and making alloys like bronze. Chemistry was preceded by its protoscience, alchemy, which is an intuitive but non-scientific approach to understanding the constituents of matter and their interactions. It was unsuccessful in explaining the nature of matter and its transformations, but, by performing experiments and recording the results, alchemists set the stage for modern chemistry. Chemistry as a body of knowledge distinct from alchemy began to emerge when a clear differentiation was made between them by Robert Boyle in his work \"The Sceptical Chymist\" (1661). While both alchemy and chemistry are concerned with matter and its transformations, the crucial difference was given by the scientific method that chemists employed in their work. Chemistry is considered to have become an established science with the work of Antoine Lavoisier, who developed a law of conservation of mass that demanded careful measurement and quantitative observations of chemical phenomena. The history of chemistry is intertwined with the history of thermodynamics, especially through the work of Willard Gibbs.\nOf definition.\nThe definition of chemistry has changed over time, as new discoveries and theories add to the functionality of the science. The term \"chymistry\", in the view of noted scientist Robert Boyle in 1661, meant the subject of the material principles of mixed bodies. In 1663, the chemist Christopher Glaser described \"chymistry\" as a scientific art, by which one learns to dissolve bodies, and draw from them the different substances on their composition, and how to unite them again, and exalt them to a higher perfection.\nThe 1730 definition of the word \"chemistry\", as used by Georg Ernst Stahl, meant the art of resolving mixed, compound, or aggregate bodies into their principles; and of composing such bodies from those principles. In 1837, Jean-Baptiste Dumas considered the word \"chemistry\" to refer to the science concerned with the laws and effects of molecular forces. This definition further evolved until, in 1947, it came to mean the science of substances: their structure, their properties, and the reactions that change them into other substances \u2013 a characterization accepted by Linus Pauling. More recently, in 1998, Professor Raymond Chang broadened the definition of \"chemistry\" to mean the study of matter and the changes it undergoes.\nOf discipline.\nEarly civilizations, such as the Egyptians Babylonians and Indians amassed practical knowledge concerning the arts of metallurgy, pottery and dyes, but didn't develop a systematic theory.\nA basic chemical hypothesis first emerged in Classical Greece with the theory of four elements as propounded definitively by Aristotle stating that fire, air, earth and water were the fundamental elements from which everything is formed as a combination. Greek atomism dates back to 440 BC, arising in works by philosophers such as Democritus and Epicurus. In 50 BCE, the Roman philosopher Lucretius expanded upon the theory in his book \"De rerum natura\" (On The Nature of Things). Unlike modern concepts of science, Greek atomism was purely philosophical in nature, with little concern for empirical observations and no concern for chemical experiments.\nAn early form of the idea of conservation of mass is the notion that \"Nothing comes from nothing\" in Ancient Greek philosophy, which can be found in Empedocles (approx. 4th century BC): \"For it is impossible for anything to come to be from what is not, and it cannot be brought about or heard of that what is should be utterly destroyed.\" and Epicurus (3rd century BC), who, describing the nature of the Universe, wrote that \"the totality of things was always such as it is now, and always will be\".\nIn the Hellenistic world the art of alchemy first proliferated, mingling magic and occultism into the study of natural substances with the ultimate goal of transmuting elements into gold and discovering the elixir of eternal life. Work, particularly the development of distillation, continued in the early Byzantine period with the most famous practitioner being the 4th century Greek-Egyptian Zosimos of Panopolis. Alchemy continued to be developed and practised throughout the Arab world after the Muslim conquests, and from there, and from the Byzantine remnants, diffused into medieval and Renaissance Europe through Latin translations.\nThe development of the modern scientific method was slow and arduous, but an early scientific method for chemistry began emerging among early Muslim chemists, beginning with the 9th century Perso-Arab chemist J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n, popularly known as \"the father of chemistry\". The Arabic works attributed to him introduced a systematic classification of chemical substances, and provided instructions for deriving an inorganic compound (sal ammoniac or ammonium chloride) from organic substances (such as plants, blood, and hair) by chemical means. Some Arabic Jabirian works (e.g., the \"Book of Mercy\", and the \"Book of Seventy\") were later translated into Latin under the Latinized name \"Geber\", and in 13th-century Europe an anonymous writer, usually referred to as pseudo-Geber, started to produce alchemical and metallurgical writings under this name. Later influential Muslim philosophers, such as Ab\u016b al-Rayh\u0101n al-B\u012br\u016bn\u012b and Avicenna disputed the theories of alchemy, particularly the theory of the transmutation of metals.\nUnder the influence of the new empirical methods propounded by Sir Francis Bacon and others, a group of chemists at Oxford, Robert Boyle, Robert Hooke and John Mayow began to reshape the old alchemical traditions into a scientific discipline. Boyle in particular is regarded as the founding father of chemistry due to his most important work, the classic chemistry text \"The Sceptical Chymist\" where the differentiation is made between the claims of alchemy and the empirical scientific discoveries of the new chemistry. He formulated Boyle's law, rejected the classical \"four elements\" and proposed a mechanistic alternative of atoms and chemical reactions that could be subject to rigorous experiment.\nThe theory of phlogiston (a substance at the root of all combustion) was propounded by the German Georg Ernst Stahl in the early 18th century and was only overturned by the end of the century by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, the chemical analogue of Newton in physics; who did more than any other to establish the new science on proper theoretical footing, by elucidating the principle of conservation of mass and developing a new system of chemical nomenclature used to this day.\nBefore his work, though, many important discoveries had been made, specifically relating to the nature of 'air' which was discovered to be composed of many different gases. The Scottish chemist Joseph Black (the first experimental chemist) and the Dutchman J.B. van Helmont discovered carbon dioxide, or what Black called 'fixed air' in 1754; Henry Cavendish discovered hydrogen and elucidated its properties and Joseph Priestley and, independently, Carl Wilhelm Scheele isolated pure oxygen.\nEnglish scientist John Dalton proposed the modern theory of atoms; that all substances are composed of indivisible 'atoms' of matter and that different atoms have varying atomic weights.\nThe development of the electrochemical theory of chemical combinations occurred in the early 19th century as the result of the work of two scientists in particular, J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius and Humphry Davy, made possible by the prior invention of the voltaic pile by Alessandro Volta. Davy discovered nine new elements including the alkali metals by extracting them from their oxides with electric current.\nBritish William Prout first proposed ordering all the elements by their atomic weight as all atoms had a weight that was an exact multiple of the atomic weight of hydrogen. J.A.R. Newlands devised an early table of elements, which was then developed into the modern periodic table of elements in the 1860s by Dmitri Mendeleev and independently by several other scientists including Julius Lothar Meyer. The inert gases, later called the noble gases were discovered by William Ramsay in collaboration with Lord Rayleigh at the end of the century, thereby filling in the basic structure of the table.\nAt the turn of the twentieth century the theoretical underpinnings of chemistry were finally understood due to a series of remarkable discoveries that succeeded in probing and discovering the very nature of the internal structure of atoms. In 1897, J.J. Thomson of Cambridge University discovered the electron and soon after the French scientist Becquerel as well as the couple Pierre and Marie Curie investigated the phenomenon of radioactivity. In a series of pioneering scattering experiments Ernest Rutherford at the University of Manchester discovered the internal structure of the atom and the existence of the proton, classified and explained the different types of radioactivity and successfully transmuted the first element by bombarding nitrogen with alpha particles.\nHis work on atomic structure was improved on by his students, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr and Henry Moseley. The electronic theory of chemical bonds and molecular orbitals was developed by the American scientists Linus Pauling and Gilbert N. Lewis.\nThe year 2011 was declared by the United Nations as the International Year of Chemistry. It was an initiative of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, and of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization and involves chemical societies, academics, and institutions worldwide and relied on individual initiatives to organize local and regional activities.\nOrganic chemistry was developed by Justus von Liebig and others, following Friedrich W\u00f6hler's synthesis of urea which proved that living organisms were, in theory, reducible to chemistry. Other crucial 19th century advances were; an understanding of valence bonding (Edward Frankland in 1852) and the application of thermodynamics to chemistry (J. W. Gibbs and Svante Arrhenius in the 1870s).\nPractice.\nSubdisciplines.\nChemistry is typically divided into several major sub-disciplines. There are also several main cross-disciplinary and more specialized fields of chemistry.\nOther disciplines within chemistry are traditionally grouped by the type of matter being studied or the kind of study. These include inorganic chemistry, the study of inorganic matter; organic chemistry, the study of organic (carbon-based) matter; biochemistry, the study of substances found in biological organisms; physical chemistry, the study of chemical processes using physical concepts such as thermodynamics and quantum mechanics; and analytical chemistry, the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure. Many more specialized disciplines have emerged in recent years, e.g. neurochemistry the chemical study of the nervous system (see subdisciplines).\nOther fields include agrochemistry, astrochemistry (and cosmochemistry), atmospheric chemistry, chemical engineering, chemical biology, chemo-informatics, electrochemistry, environmental chemistry, femtochemistry, flavor chemistry, flow chemistry, geochemistry, green chemistry, histochemistry, history of chemistry, hydrogenation chemistry, immunochemistry, marine chemistry, materials science, mathematical chemistry, mechanochemistry, medicinal chemistry, molecular biology, molecular mechanics, nanotechnology, natural product chemistry, oenology, organometallic chemistry, petrochemistry, pharmacology, photochemistry, physical organic chemistry, phytochemistry, polymer chemistry, radiochemistry, solid-state chemistry, sonochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, surface chemistry, synthetic chemistry, thermochemistry, and many others.\nIndustry.\nThe chemical industry represents an important economic activity worldwide. The global top 50 chemical producers in 2013 had sales of US$980.5 billion with a profit margin of 10.3%."}
{"id": "5181", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5181", "title": "Continents", "text": ""}
{"id": "5182", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5182", "title": "ConstitutioN", "text": ""}
{"id": "5184", "revid": "41419081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5184", "title": "Cytoplasm", "text": "In cell biology, the cytoplasm is all of the material within a cell, enclosed by the cell membrane, except for the cell nucleus. The material inside the nucleus and contained within the nuclear membrane is termed the nucleoplasm. The main components of the cytoplasm are cytosol (a gel-like substance), the organelles (the cell's internal sub-structures), and various cytoplasmic inclusions. The cytoplasm is about 80% water and usually colorless.\nThe submicroscopic ground cell substance, or cytoplasmatic matrix which remains after exclusion the cell organelles and particles is groundplasm. It is the hyaloplasm of light microscopy, and high complex, polyphasic system in which all of resolvable cytoplasmic elements of are suspended, including the larger organelles such as the ribosomes, mitochondria, the plant plastids, lipid droplets, and vacuoles.\nMost cellular activities take place within the cytoplasm, such as many metabolic pathways including glycolysis, and processes such as cell division. The concentrated inner area is called the endoplasm and the outer layer is called the cell cortex or the ectoplasm.\nMovement of calcium ions in and out of the cytoplasm is a signaling activity for metabolic processes.\nIn plants, movement of the cytoplasm around vacuoles is known as cytoplasmic streaming.\nHistory.\nThe term was introduced by Rudolf von K\u00f6lliker in 1863, originally as a synonym for protoplasm, but later it has come to mean the cell substance and organelles outside the nucleus.\nThere has been certain disagreement on the definition of cytoplasm, as some authors prefer to exclude from it some organelles, especially the vacuoles and sometimes the plastids.\nPhysical nature.\nThe physical properties of the cytoplasm have been contested in recent years. It remains uncertain how the varied components of the cytoplasm interact to allow movement of particles and organelles while maintaining the cell's structure. The flow of cytoplasmic components plays an important role in many cellular functions which are dependent on the permeability of the cytoplasm. An example of such function is cell signalling, a process which is dependent on the manner in which signaling molecules are allowed to diffuse across the cell. While small signaling molecules like calcium ions are able to diffuse with ease, larger molecules and subcellular structures often require aid in moving through the cytoplasm. The irregular dynamics of such particles have given rise to various theories on the nature of the cytoplasm.\nAs a sol-gel.\nThere has long been evidence that the cytoplasm behaves like a sol-gel. It is thought that the component molecules and structures of the cytoplasm behave at times like a disordered colloidal solution (sol) and at other times like an integrated network, forming a solid mass (gel). This theory thus proposes that the cytoplasm exists in distinct fluid and solid phases depending on the level of interaction between cytoplasmic components, which may explain the differential dynamics of different particles observed moving through the cytoplasm. A papers suggested that at length scale smaller than 100\u00a0nm, the cytoplasm acts like a liquid, while in a larger length scale, it acts like a gel.\nAs a glass.\nRecently it has been proposed that the cytoplasm behaves like a glass-forming liquid approaching the glass transition. In this theory, the greater the concentration of cytoplasmic components, the less the cytoplasm behaves like a liquid and the more it behaves as a solid glass, freezing larger cytoplasmic components in place (it is thought that the cell's metabolic activity is able to fluidize the cytoplasm to allow the movement of such larger cytoplasmic components). A cell's ability to vitrify in the absence of metabolic activity, as in dormant periods, may be beneficial as a defence strategy. A solid glass cytoplasm would freeze subcellular structures in place, preventing damage, while allowing the transmission of very small proteins and metabolites, helping to kickstart growth upon the cell's revival from dormancy.\nOther perspectives.\nThere has been research examining the motion of cytoplasmic particles independent of the nature of the cytoplasm. In such an alternative approach, the aggregate random forces within the cell caused by motor proteins explain the non-Brownian motion of cytoplasmic constituents.\nConstituents.\nThe three major elements of the cytoplasm are the cytosol, organelles and inclusions.\nCytosol.\nThe cytosol is the portion of the cytoplasm not contained within membrane-bound organelles. Cytosol makes up about 70% of the cell volume and is a complex mixture of cytoskeleton filaments, dissolved molecules, and water. The cytosol's filaments include the protein filaments such as actin filaments and microtubules that make up the cytoskeleton, as well as soluble proteins and small structures such as ribosomes, proteasomes, and the mysterious vault complexes. The inner, granular and more fluid portion of the cytoplasm is referred to as endoplasm.\nDue to this network of fibres and high concentrations of dissolved macromolecules, such as proteins, an effect called macromolecular crowding occurs and the cytosol does not act as an ideal solution. This crowding effect alters how the components of the cytosol interact with each other.\nOrganelles.\nOrganelles (literally \"little organs\"), are usually membrane-bound structures inside the cell that have specific functions. Some major organelles that are suspended in the cytosol are the mitochondria, the endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi apparatus, vacuoles, lysosomes, and in plant cells, chloroplasts.\nCytoplasmic inclusions.\nThe inclusions are small particles of insoluble substances suspended in the cytosol. A huge range of inclusions exist in different cell types, and range from crystals of calcium oxalate or silicon dioxide in plants, to granules of energy-storage materials such as starch, glycogen, or polyhydroxybutyrate. A particularly widespread example are lipid droplets, which are spherical droplets composed of lipids and proteins that are used in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes as a way of storing lipids such as fatty acids and sterols. Lipid droplets make up much of the volume of adipocytes, which are specialized lipid-storage cells, but they are also found in a range of other cell types.\nControversy and research.\nThe cytoplasm, mitochondria and most organelles are contributions to the cell from the maternal gamete. Contrary to the older information that disregards any notion of the cytoplasm being active, new research has shown it to be in control of movement and flow of nutrients in and out of the cell by viscoplastic behavior and a measure of the reciprocal rate of bond breakage within the cytoplasmic network.\nThe material properties of the cytoplasm remain an ongoing investigation. A method of determining the mechanical behaviour of living cell mammalian cytoplasm with the aid of optical tweezers has been described."}
{"id": "5185", "revid": "1204118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5185", "title": "Christ (title)", "text": "The concept of the Christ in Christianity originated from the concept of the messiah in Judaism. Christians believe that Jesus is the messiah foretold in the Hebrew Bible and the Christian Old Testament. Although the conceptions of the messiah in each religion are similar, for the most part they are distinct from one another due to the split of early Christianity and Judaism in the 1st century.\n\"Christ\", used by Christians as both a name and a title, is synonymous with Jesus. It is also used as a title, in the reciprocal use \"Christ Jesus\", meaning \"the Messiah Jesus\", and independently as \"the Christ\". The Pauline epistles, the earliest texts of the New Testament, often refer to Jesus as \"Christ Jesus\" or \"Christ\".\nAlthough the original followers of Jesus believed Jesus to be the Jewish messiah, e.g. in the Confession of Peter, Jesus was usually referred to as \"Jesus of Nazareth\" or \"Jesus, son of Joseph\". Jesus came to be called \"Jesus Christ\" (meaning \"Jesus the \"Khrist\u00f3s\"\", i.e. \"Jesus the Messiah\" or \"Jesus the Anointed\") by later Christians, who believe that his crucifixion and resurrection fulfill the messianic prophecies of the Old Testament.\nEtymology.\nChrist comes from the Greek word (\"chr\u012bst\u00f3s\"), meaning \"anointed one\". The word is derived from the Greek verb (\"chr\u012b\u0301\u014d\"), meaning \"to anoint.\" In the Greek Septuagint, \"christos\" was used to translate the Hebrew \u05de\u05b8\u05e9\u05b4\u05c1\u05d9\u05d7\u05b7 (\"Ma\u0161\u00eda\u1e25,\" messiah), meaning \"[one who is] anointed\".\nIn the Old Testament, anointing was reserved to the Kings of Israel, to the High Priest of Israel, and to the prophets (1 Kings 19:16).\nAccording to the \"Summa Theologica\" of Thomas Aquinas, in the singular case of Jesus, the word \"Christ\" has a twofold meaning, which stands for \"both the Godhead anointing and the manhood anointed\". It derives from the twofold human-divine nature of Christ (dyophysitism): the Son of man is anointed in consequence of His incarnated flesh, as well as the Son of God is anointing in consequence of the \"Godhead which He has with the Father\" (ST \"III\", q. 16, a. 5).\nUsage.\nThe word \"Christ\" (and similar spellings) appears in English and in most European languages. English-speakers now often use \"Christ\" as if it were a name, one part of the name \"Jesus Christ\", though it was originally a title (\"the Messiah\"). Its usage in \"Christ Jesus\" emphasizes its nature as a title. Compare the usage \"the Christ\".\nThe spelling \"Christ\" in English became standardized in the 18th century, when, in the spirit of the Enlightenment, the spelling of certain words changed to fit their Greek or Latin origins. Prior to this, scribes writing in Old and Middle English usually used the spelling \"Crist\"\u2014the \"i\" being pronounced either as , preserved in the names of churches such as St Katherine Cree, or as a short , preserved in the modern pronunciation of \"Christmas\". The spelling \"Christ\" in English is attested from the 14th century.\nIn modern and ancient usage, even in secular terminology, \"Christ\" usually refers to Jesus, based on the centuries-old tradition of such usage. Since the Apostolic Age, the[...] use of the definite article before the word Christ and its gradual development into a proper name show the Christians identified the bearer with the promised Messias of the Jews.\nIn the Ancient Greek text of the deuterocanonical books, the term \"Christ\" (\u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2, translit. Christ\u00f3s) is found in 2 Maccabees 1:10 (referring to the anointed High Priest of Israel) and in the Book of Sirach 46:19, in relation to Samuel, prophet and institutor of the kingdom under Saul.\nBackground and New Testament references.\nAt the time of Jesus, there was no single form of Second Temple Judaism, and there were significant political, social, and religious differences among the various Jewish groups. However, for centuries the Jews had used the term \"moshiach\" (\"anointed\") to refer to their expected deliverer. At the time in Roman Judaea, the Jews had been awaiting the \"Messiah\", and many people were wondering who it would be. \nThe New Testament states that the long-awaited messiah had come and describes this savior as \"the Christ\".\nMark (\"The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God\") identifies Jesus as both Christ and the Son of God. uses Christ as a name and Matthew explains it again with: \"Jesus, who is called Christ\". The use of the definite article before the word \"Christ\" and its gradual development into a proper name show that the Christians identified Jesus with the promised messiah of the Jews who fulfilled all the messianic predictions in a fuller and a higher sense than had been given them by the rabbis.\nThe Gospels of Mark and Matthew begin by calling Jesus both Christ and the Son of God, but these are two distinct attributions. They develop in the New Testament along separate paths and have distinct theological implications. When John the Baptist appeared and began preaching, he attracted disciples who assumed that he would be announced as the messiah, or \"the one\" that they had been awaiting.\nThe so-called Confession of Peter, recorded in the Synoptic Gospels as Jesus's foremost apostle Peter saying that Jesus was the Messiah, has become a famous proclamation of faith among Christians since the first century.\nIn Martha told Jesus, \"you are the Christ, the Son of God, who is coming into the world\", signifying that both titles were generally accepted (yet considered distinct) among the followers of Jesus before the raising of Lazarus.\nDuring the Sanhedrin trial of Jesus, it might appear from the narrative of Matthew that Jesus at first refused a direct reply to the high priest Caiaphas's question: \"Are you the Messiah, the Son of God?\", where his answer is given merely as \u03a3\u1f7a \u03b5\u1f36\u03c0\u03b1\u03c2 (\"Su eipas\", \"You [singular] have said it\"). Similarly but differently in Luke, all those present are said to ask Jesus: 'Are you then the Son of God?', to which Jesus reportedly answered: \u1f59\u03bc\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c2 \u03bb\u03ad\u03b3\u03b5\u03c4\u03b5 \u1f45\u03c4\u03b9 \u1f10\u03b3\u03ce \u03b5\u1f30\u03bc\u03b9 (\"Hymeis legete hoti ego eimi\", \"You [plural] say that I am\". In the Gospel of Mark, however, when asked by Caiaphas 'Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?', Jesus tells the Sanhedrin: \u1f18\u03b3\u03ce \u03b5\u1f30\u03bc\u03b9 (\"ego eimi\", \"I am\"). There are instances from Jewish literature in which the expression \"you have said it\" is equivalent to \"you are right\". The Messianic claim was less significant than the claim to divinity, which caused the high priest's horrified accusation of blasphemy and the subsequent call for the death sentence. Before Pilate, on the other hand, it was merely the assertion of his royal dignity which gave grounds for his condemnation.\nThe word \"Christ\" is closely associated with Jesus in the Pauline epistles, which suggests that there was no need for the early Christians to claim that Jesus is Christ because it was considered widely accepted among them. Hence Paul can use the term \"Khrist\u00f3s\" with no confusion as to whom it refers, and he can use expressions such as \"in Christ\" to refer to the followers of Jesus, as in and . Paul proclaimed him as the Last Adam, who restored through obedience what Adam lost through disobedience. The Pauline epistles are a source of some key Christological connections; e.g., relates the love of Christ to the knowledge of Christ, and considers the love of Christ as a necessity for knowing him.\nThere are also implicit claims to him being the Christ in the words and actions of Jesus.\nChristology.\nChristology, literally \"the understanding of Christ,\" is the study of the nature (person) and work (role in salvation) of Jesus in Christianity. It studies Jesus Christ's humanity and divinity, and the relation between these two aspects; and the role he plays in salvation.\nThe earliest Christian writings gave several titles to Jesus, such as Son of Man, Son of God, Messiah, and Kyrios, which were all derived from the Hebrew scriptures. These terms centered around two themes, namely \"Jesus as a preexistent figure who becomes human and then returns to God,\" and \"Jesus as a creature elected and 'adopted' by God.\"\nFrom the second to the fifth centuries, the relation of the human and divine nature of Christ was a major focus of debates in the early church and at the first seven ecumenical councils. The Council of Chalcedon in 451 issued a formulation of the hypostatic union of the two natures of Christ, one human and one divine, \"united with neither confusion nor division\". Most of the major branches of Western Christianity and Eastern Orthodoxy subscribe to this formulation, while many branches of Oriental Orthodox Churches reject it, subscribing to miaphysitism.\nSymbols.\nThe use of \"\u03a7\", derived from Chi, the Greek alphabet initial, as an abbreviation for Christ (most commonly in the abbreviation \"\u03a7mas\") is often misinterpreted as a modern secularization of the term. Thus understood, the centuries-old English word \u03a7mas, is actually a shortened form of CHmas, which is, itself, a shortened form for Christmas. Christians are sometimes referred to as \"Xians\", with the 'X' replacing 'Christ'.\nA very early Christogram is the \"Chi Rho\" symbol formed by superimposing the first two Greek letters in Christ (), chi = ch and rho = r, to produce \u2627."}
{"id": "5186", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5186", "title": "CountriesV", "text": ""}
{"id": "5187", "revid": "15104030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5187", "title": "Capital", "text": "Capital most commonly refers to:\nCapital may also refer to:\nCapital (economics).\n\"See all terms: .\" \nSome common terms include:"}
{"id": "5188", "revid": "1013143859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5188", "title": "Central Europe", "text": "Central Europe is the central region of Europe. Central Europe includes contiguous territories that are sometimes also considered parts of Western Europe, Southern Europe and Eastern Europe. The concept of Central Europe is based on a common historical, social and cultural identity and is a patchwork of territories that are traditionally Catholic and Protestant. The Thirty Years' War between Catholicism and Protestantism was a significant shaping process in the history of Central Europe, and neither side was able to prevail in the region as a whole. \nHistorically, Central Europe comprised most of the territories of the Holy Roman Empire and the territories belonging to the two adjacent kingdoms to the east (Poland and Hungary). Hungary and parts of Poland were later parts of the Habsburg Monarchy, which was also a significant shaping force in its history. Unlike their Western European counterparts, few Central European states had any overseas colonies, owing to both their central location and other factors. This has often been cited as one of the causes of World War I. After World War II, Central Europe was divided by the Iron Curtain to the parts belonging to the West and those of the Eastern bloc. The Berlin Wall was the most visible symbol of that division.\nCentral Europe began a \"strategic awakening\" in the early 21st century, with initiatives such as the Central European Initiative (CEI), Centrope, and the Visegr\u00e1d Four Group. While the region's economies show considerable disparities of income, all Central European countries are listed by the Human Development Index as very highly developed.\nHistorical perspective.\nMiddle Ages and early modern era.\nElements of cultural unity for Northwestern, Southwestern and Central Europe were Catholicism and Latin. However Eastern Europe, which remained Eastern Orthodox, was the area of Graeco-Byzantine cultural influence; after the East-West Schism (1054), Eastern Europe developed cultural unity and resistance to the Catholic (and later also Protestant) Western world within the framework of Orthodox Church, Church Slavonic language and the Cyrillic alphabet.\nAccording to Hungarian historian Jen\u0151 Sz\u0171cs, foundations of Central European history at the first millennium were in close connection with Western European development. He explained that between the 11th and 15th centuries, not only Christianization and its cultural consequences were implemented, but well-defined social features emerged in Central Europe based on Western characteristics. The keyword of Western social development after millennium was the spread of liberties and autonomies in Western Europe. These phenomena appeared in the middle of the 13th century in Central European countries. There were self-governments of towns, counties and parliaments.\nIn 1335, under the rule of the King Charles I of Hungary, the castle of Visegr\u00e1d, the seat of the Hungarian monarchs was the scene of the royal summit of the Kings of Poland, Bohemia and Hungary. They agreed to cooperate closely in the field of politics and commerce, inspiring their post-Cold War successors to launch a successful Central European initiative.\nIn the Middle Ages, countries in Central Europe adopted Magdeburg rights.\nBefore World War I.\nBefore 1870, the industrialization that had started to develop in Northwestern and Central Europe and the United States did not extend in any significant way to the rest of the world. Even in Eastern Europe, industrialization lagged far behind. Russia, for example, remained largely rural and agricultural, and its autocratic rulers kept the peasants in serfdom.\nThe concept of Central Europe was already known at the beginning of the 19th century, but its real life began in the 20th century and immediately became an object of intensive interest. However, the very first concept mixed science, politics and economy \u2013 it was strictly connected with the intensively growing German economy and its aspirations to dominate a part of European continent called \"Mitteleuropa\". The German term denoting Central Europe was so fashionable that other languages started referring to it when indicating territories from Rhine to Vistula, or even Dnieper, and from the Baltic Sea to the Balkans. An example of that-time vision of Central Europe may be seen in Joseph Partsch's book of 1903.\nOn 21 January 1904, \"Mitteleurop\u00e4ischer Wirtschaftsverein\" (Central European Economic Association) was established in Berlin with economic integration of Germany and Austria\u2013Hungary (with eventual extension to Switzerland, Belgium and the Netherlands) as its main aim. Another time, the term Central Europe became connected to the German plans of political, economic and cultural domination. The \"bible\" of the concept was Friedrich Naumann's book \"Mitteleuropa\" in which he called for an economic federation to be established after World War I. Naumann's idea was that the federation would have at its centre Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire but would also include all European nations outside the Triple Entente. The concept failed after the German defeat in World War I and the dissolution of Austria-Hungary. The revival of the idea may be observed during the Hitler era.\nInterwar period.\nAccording to Emmanuel de Martonne, in 1927 the Central European countries included: Austria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Switzerland. The author uses both Human and Physical Geographical features to define Central Europe, but he doesn't take into account the legal development or the social, cultural, economic, infrastructural developments in these countries.\nThe interwar period (1918\u20131939) brought a new geopolitical system, as well as economic and political problems, and the concept of Central Europe took on a different character. The centre of interest was moved to its eastern part \u2013 the countries that have (re)appeared on the map of Europe: Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland. Central Europe ceased to be the area of German aspiration to lead or dominate and became a territory of various integration movements aiming at resolving political, economic and national problems of \"new\" states, being a way to face German and Soviet pressures. However, the conflict of interests was too big and neither Little Entente nor Intermarium (\"Mi\u0119dzymorze\") ideas succeeded.\nThe interwar period brought new elements to the concept of Central Europe. Before World War I, it embraced mainly German states (Germany, Austria), non-German territories being an area of intended German penetration and domination \u2013 German leadership position was to be the natural result of economic dominance. After the war, the Eastern part of Central Europe was placed at the centre of the concept. At that time the scientists took an interest in the idea: the International Historical Congress in Brussels in 1923 was committed to Central Europe, and the 1933 Congress continued the discussions.\nHungarian historian Magda \u00c1d\u00e1m wrote in her study \"Versailles System and Central Europe\" (2006): \"Today we know that the bane of Central Europe was the Little Entente, military alliance of Czechoslovakia, Romania and Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia), created in 1921 not for Central Europe's cooperation nor to fight German expansion, but in a wrong perceived notion that a completely powerless Hungary must be kept down\".\nThe avant-garde movements of Central Europe were an essential part of modernism's evolution, reaching its peak throughout the continent during the 1920s. The \"Sourcebook of Central European avantgards\" (Los Angeles County Museum of Art) contains primary documents of the avant-gardes in Austria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Hungary, and Poland from 1910 to 1930. The manifestos and magazines of Western European radical art circles are well known to Western scholars and are being taught at primary universities of their kind in the western world.\nMitteleuropa.\n\"Mitteleuropa\" may refer to an historical concept, or to a contemporary German definition of Central Europe. As an historical concept, the German term \"Mitteleuropa\" (or alternatively its literal translation into English, \"Middle Europe\") is an ambiguous German concept. It is sometimes used in English to refer to an area somewhat larger than most conceptions of 'Central Europe'; it refers to territories under Germanic cultural hegemony until World War I (encompassing Austria\u2013Hungary and Germany in their pre-war formations but usually excluding the Baltic countries north of East Prussia). According to Fritz Fischer \"Mitteleuropa\" was a scheme in the era of the Reich of 1871\u20131918 by which the old imperial elites had allegedly sought to build a system of German economic, military and political domination from the northern seas to the Near East and from the Low Countries through the steppes of Russia to the Caucasus. Later on, professor Fritz Epstein argued the threat of a Slavic \"Drang nach Westen\" (Western expansion) had been a major factor in the emergence of a \"Mitteleuropa\" ideology before the Reich of 1871 ever came into being.\nIn Germany the connotation was also sometimes linked to the pre-war German provinces east of the Oder-Neisse line.\nThe term \"Mitteleuropa\" conjures up negative historical associations among some elderly people, although the Germans have not played an exclusively negative role in the region. Most Central European Jews embraced the enlightened German humanistic culture of the 19th century. German-speaking Jews from turn of the 20th century Vienna, Budapest and Prague became representatives of what many consider to be Central European culture at its best, though the Nazi version of \"Mitteleuropa\" destroyed this kind of culture instead. However, the term \"Mitteleuropa\" is now widely used again in German education and media without negative meaning, especially since the end of communism. In fact, many people from the new states of Germany do not identify themselves as being part of Western Europe and therefore prefer the term \"Mitteleuropa\".\nCentral Europe during World War II.\nDuring World War II, Central Europe was largely occupied by Nazi Germany. Many areas were a battle area and were devastated. The mass murder of the Jews depopulated many of their centuries-old settlement areas or settled other people there and their culture was wiped out. Both Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin diametrically opposed the centuries-old Habsburg principles of \"live and let live\" with regard to ethnic groups, peoples, minorities, religions, cultures and languages and tried to assert their own ideologies and power interests in Central Europe. There were various Allied plans for state order in Central Europe for post-war. While Stalin tried to get as many states under his control as possible, Winston Churchill preferred a Central European Danube Confederation to counter these countries against Germany and Russia. There were also plans to add Bavaria and W\u00fcrttemberg to an enlarged Austria. There were also various resistance movements around Otto von Habsburg that pursued this goal. The group around the Austrian priest Heinrich Maier also planned in this direction, which also successfully helped the Allies to wage war by, among other things, forwarding production sites and plans for V-2 rockets, Tiger tanks and aircraft to the USA. So Otto von Habsburg also tried to detach Hungary from its grasp by Nazi Germany and the USSR. There were various considerations to prevent German power in Europe after the war. Churchill's idea of reaching the area around Vienna and Budapest before the Russians via an operation from the Adriatic had not been approved by the Western Allied chiefs of staff. As a result of the military situation at the end of the war, Stalin's plans prevailed and much of Central Europe came under Russian control.\nCentral Europe behind the Iron Curtain.\nFollowing World War II, large parts of Europe that were culturally and historically Western became part of the Eastern bloc. Czech author Milan Kundera (emigrant to France) thus wrote in 1984 about the \"Tragedy of Central Europe\" in the New York Review of Books. The boundary between the two blocks was called the Iron Curtain. Consequently, the English term \"Central Europe\" was increasingly applied only to the westernmost former Warsaw Pact countries (East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary) to specify them as communist states that were culturally tied to Western Europe. This usage continued after the end of the Warsaw Pact when these countries started to undergo transition.\nThe post-World War II period brought blocking of research on Central Europe in the Eastern Bloc countries, as its every result proved the dissimilarity of Central Europe, which was inconsistent with the Stalinist doctrine. On the other hand, the topic became popular in Western Europe and the United States, much of the research being carried out by immigrants from Central Europe. At the end of communism, publicists and historians in Central Europe, especially the anti-communist opposition, returned to their research.\nAccording to Karl A. Sinnhuber (\"Central Europe: Mitteleuropa: Europe Centrale: An Analysis of a Geographical Term\") most Central European states were unable to preserve their political independence and became Soviet Satellite Europe. Besides Austria, only the marginal European states of Finland and Yugoslavia preserved their political sovereignty to a certain degree, being left out of any military alliances in Europe.\nThe opening of the Iron Curtain between Austria and Hungary at the Pan-European Picnic on 19 August 1989 then set in motion a peaceful chain reaction, at the end of which there was no longer an East Germany and the Eastern Bloc had disintegrated. It was the largest escape movement from East Germany since the Berlin Wall was built in 1961. After the picnic, which was based on an idea by Otto von Habsburg to test the reaction of the USSR and Mikhail Gorbachev to an opening of the border, tens of thousands of media-informed East Germans set off for Hungary. The leadership of the GDR in East Berlin did not dare to completely block the borders of their own country and the USSR did not respond at all. \nThis broke the bracket of the Eastern Bloc and Central Europe subsequently became free from communism.\nRoles.\nAccording to American professor Ronald Tiersky, the 1991 summit held in Visegr\u00e1d, Hungary and attended by the Polish, Hungarian and Czechoslovak presidents was hailed at the time as a major breakthrough in Central European cooperation, but the Visegr\u00e1d Group became a vehicle for coordinating Central Europe's road to the European Union, while development of closer ties within the region languished. \nAmerican professor Peter J. Katzenstein described Central Europe as a way station in a Europeanization process that marks the transformation process of the Visegr\u00e1d Group countries in different, though comparable ways. According to him, in Germany's contemporary public discourse \"Central European identity\" refers to the civilizational divide between Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy. He says there's no precise, uncontestable way to decide whether the Balkan states, Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Romania, and Bulgaria are parts of Central Europe or not.\nDefinitions.\nRather than a physical entity, Central Europe is a concept of shared history that contrasts with that of the surrounding regions. The issue of how to name and define the Central European area is subject to debates. Very often, the definition depends on the nationality and historical perspective of its author.\nAcademic.\nThe main proposed regional definitions, gathered by Polish historian Jerzy K\u0142oczowski, include:\nFormer University of Vienna professor Lonnie R. Johnson points out criteria to distinguish Central Europe from Western, Eastern and Southeast Europe:\nHe also thinks that Central Europe is a dynamic historical concept, not a static spatial one. For example, Lithuania, a fair share of Belarus and western Ukraine are in Eastern Europe today, but years ago they were in Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Johnson's study on Central Europe received acclaim and positive reviews in the scientific community. However, according to Romanian researcher Maria Bucur this very ambitious project suffers from the weaknesses imposed by its scope (almost 1600 years of history).\nEncyclopedias, gazetteers, dictionaries.\n\"The Columbia Encyclopedia\" defines Central Europe as: Germany, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Austria, Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Hungary. The World Factbook uses a similar definition and adds also Slovenia. Encarta Encyclopedia and Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica do not clearly define the region, but Encarta places the same countries into Central Europe in its individual articles on countries, adding Slovenia in \"south central Europe\".\nThe German Encyclopaedia \"Meyers Grosses Taschenlexikon\" (\"Meyers Big Pocket Encyclopedia\"), 1999, defines Central Europe as the central part of Europe with no precise borders to the East and West. The term is mostly used to denominate the territory between the Schelde to Vistula and from the Danube to the Moravian Gate. Usually the countries considered to be Central European are Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland; in the broader sense Romania and Serbia too, occasionally also Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.\nAccording to \"Meyers Enzyklop\u00e4disches Lexikon\", Central Europe is a part of Europe composed of Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Hungary, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Romania and Switzerland, and northern marginal regions of Italy and Yugoslavia (northern states \u2013 Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia), as well as northeastern France.\nThe German (Standing Committee on Geographical Names), which develops and recommends rules for the uniform use of geographical names, proposes two sets of boundaries. The first follows international borders of current countries. The second subdivides and includes some countries based on cultural criteria. In comparison to some other definitions, it is broader, including Luxembourg, Croatia, the Baltic states, and in the second sense, parts of Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Romania, Serbia, Italy, and France.\nGeographical.\nThere is no general agreement either on what geographic area constitutes Central Europe, nor on how to further subdivide it geographically.\nAt times, the term \"Central Europe\" denotes a geographic definition as the Danube region in the heart of the continent, including the language and culture areas which are today included in the states of Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and usually also Austria and Germany, but \"never\" Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union towards the Ural mountains.\nGovernmental and standards organisations.\nThe terminology EU11 countries refer the Central, Eastern and Baltic European member states which accessed in 2004 and after: in 2004 the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia, and the Slovak Republic; in 2007 Bulgaria, Romania; and in 2013 Croatia.\nStates.\nThe comprehension of the concept of \"Central Europe\" is an ongoing source of controversy, though the Visegr\u00e1d Group constituents are almost always included as \"de facto\" Central European countries. Although views on which countries belong to Central Europe are vastly varied, according to many sources (see section Definitions) the region includes the states listed in the sections below.\nDepending on context, Central European countries are sometimes grouped as Eastern or Western European countries, collectively or individually but some place them in Eastern Europe instead: for instance Austria can be referred to as Central European, as well as Eastern European or Western European.\nOther countries and regions.\nSome sources also add neighbouring countries for historical reasons (the former Austro-Hungarian and German Empires, and modern Baltic states), or based on geographical and/or cultural reasons:\nThe Baltic states, geographically in Northern Europe, have been considered part of Central Europe in the German tradition of the term, \"Mitteleuropa\". Benelux countries are generally considered a part of Western Europe, rather than Central Europe. Nevertheless, they are occasionally mentioned in the Central European context due to cultural, historical and linguistic ties.\nThe following states or some of their regions may sometimes be included in Central Europe:\nGeography.\nGeography defines Central Europe's natural borders with the neighbouring regions to the north across the Baltic Sea, namely Northern Europe (or Scandinavia), and to the south across the Alps, the Apennine peninsula (or Italy), and the Balkan peninsula across the So\u010da-Krka-Sava-Danube line. The borders to Western Europe and Eastern Europe are geographically less defined, and for this reason the cultural and historical boundaries migrate more easily west\u2013east than south\u2013north. The river Rhine, which runs south\u2013north through Western Germany, is an exception.\nSouthwards, the Pannonian Plain is bounded by the rivers Sava and Danube \u2013 and their respective floodplains. The Pannonian Plain stretches over the following countries: Austria, Croatia, Hungary, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia and Slovenia, and touches borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Ukraine (\"peri- Pannonian states\").\nAs southeastern division of the Eastern Alps, the Dinaric Alps extend for 650 kilometres along the coast of the Adriatic Sea (northwest-southeast), from the Julian Alps in the northwest down to the \u0160ar-Korab massif, north\u2013south. According to the Freie Universit\u00e4t Berlin, this mountain chain is classified as South Central European. The city of Trieste in this area, for example, expressly sees itself as a citt\u00e0 mitteleuropea. This is particularly because it lies at the interface between the Latin, Slavic, Germanic, Greek and Jewish culture on the one hand and the geographical area of the Mediterranean and the Alps on the other. A geographical and cultural assignment is made.\nThe Central European flora region stretches from Central France (the Massif Central) to Central Romania (Carpathians) and Southern Scandinavia.\nDemography.\nCentral Europe is one of the continent's most populous regions. It includes countries of varied sizes, ranging from tiny Liechtenstein to Germany, the largest European country by population (that is entirely placed in Europe). Demographic figures for countries entirely located within notion of Central Europe (\"the core countries\") number around 165 million people, out of which around 82 million are residents of Germany. Other populations include: Poland with around 38.5 million residents, Czech Republic at 10.5 million, Hungary at 10 million, Austria with 8.8 million, Switzerland with 8.5 million, Slovakia at 5.4 million, and Liechtenstein at a bit less than 40,000.\nIf the countries which are occasionally included in Central Europe were counted in, partially or in whole \u2013 Croatia (4.3 million), Slovenia (2 million, 2014 estimate), Romania (20 million), Lithuania (2.9 million), Latvia (2 million), Estonia (1.3 million), Serbia (7.1 million) \u2013 it would contribute to the rise of between 25 and 35 million, depending on whether regional or integral approach was used. If smaller, western and eastern historical parts of Central Europe would be included in the demographic corpus, further 20 million people of different nationalities would also be added in the overall count, it would surpass the 200 million people figure.\nEconomy.\nCurrencies.\nCurrently, the members of the Eurozone include Austria, Germany, Luxembourg, Slovakia, and Slovenia. Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland use their currencies (Croatian kuna, Czech koruna, Hungarian forint, Polish z\u0142oty), but are obliged to adopt the Euro. Switzerland uses its own currency \u2013 Swiss franc, Serbia too (Serbian dinar), as well as Romania (Romanian leu).\nHuman Development Index.\nIn 2018, Switzerland topped the HDI list among Central European countries, also ranking #2 in the world. Serbia rounded out the list at #11 (67 world).\nGlobalisation.\nThe index of globalization in Central European countries (2016 data):\nSwitzerland topped this list as well (#1 world).\nProsperity Index.\nLegatum Prosperity Index demonstrates an average and high level of prosperity in Central Europe (2018 data). Switzerland topped the index (#4 world).\nCorruption.\nMost countries in Central Europe tend to score above the average in the Corruption Perceptions Index (2018 data), led by Switzerland, Germany, and Austria.\nInfrastructure.\nIndustrialisation occurred early in Central Europe. That caused construction of rail and other types of infrastructure.\nRail.\nCentral Europe contains the continent's earliest railway systems, whose greatest expansion was recorded in Austro-Hungarian and German territories between 1860-1870s. By the mid-19th century Berlin, Vienna, and Buda/Pest were focal points for network lines connecting industrial areas of Saxony, Silesia, Bohemia, Moravia and Lower Austria with the Baltic (Kiel, Szczecin) and Adriatic (Rijeka, Trieste). Rail infrastructure in Central Europe remains the densest in the world. Railway density, with total length of lines operated (km) per 1,000 km2, is the highest in the Czech Republic (198.6), Poland (121.0), Slovenia (108.0), Germany (105.5), Hungary (98.7), Serbia (87.3), Slovakia (73.9) and Croatia (72.5). when compared with most of Europe and the rest of the world.\nRiver transport and canals.\nBefore the first railroads appeared in the 1840s, river transport constituted the main means of communication and trade. Earliest canals included Plauen Canal (1745), Finow Canal, and also Bega Canal (1710) which connected Timi\u0219oara to Novi Sad and Belgrade via Danube. The most significant achievement in this regard was the facilitation of navigability on Danube from the Black sea to Ulm in the 19th century.\nBranches.\nCompared to most of Europe, the economies of Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia and Switzerland tend to demonstrate high complexity. Industrialisation has reached Central Europe relatively early: Luxembourg and Germany by 1860, Czechia, Poland, Slovakia and Switzerland by 1870, Austria, Croatia, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia by 1880.\nAgriculture.\nCentral European countries are some of the most significant food producers in the world. Germany is the world's largest hops producer with 34.27% share in 2010, third producer of rye and barley, 5th rapeseed producer, sixth largest milk producer, and fifth largest potato producer. Poland is the world's largest triticale producer, second largest producer of raspberries, currants, third largest of rye, the fifth apple and buckwheat producer, and seventh largest producer of potatoes. The Czech Republic is world's fourth largest hops producer and 8th producer of triticale. Hungary is world's fifth hops and seventh largest triticale producer. Serbia is world's second largest producer of plums and second largest of raspberries. Slovenia is world's sixth hops producer.\nBusiness.\nCentral European business has a regional organisation, Central European Business Association (CEBA), founded in 1996 in New York as a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting business opportunities within Central Europe and supporting the advancement of professionals in America with a Central European background.\nTourism.\nCentral European countries, especially Austria, Croatia, Germany and Switzerland are some of the most competitive tourism destinations. Poland is presently a major destination for outsourcing.\nOutsourcing destination.\nKrak\u00f3w, Warsaw, and Wroc\u0142aw (Poland), Prague and Brno (Czech Republic), Budapest (Hungary), Bucharest (Romania), Bratislava (Slovakia), Ljubljana (Slovenia), Belgrade (Serbia) and Zagreb (Croatia) are among the world's top 100 outsourcing destinations.\nEducation.\nLanguages.\nVarious languages are taught in Central Europe, with certain languages being more popular in different countries.\nEducation performance.\nStudent performance has varied across Central Europe, according to the Programme for International Student Assessment. In the 2012 study, countries scored medium, below or over the average scores in three fields studied.\nHigher education.\nUniversities.\nThe first university east of France and north of the Alps was the Charles University in Prague established in 1347 or 1348 by Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor and modeled on the University of Paris, with the full number of faculties (law, medicine, philosophy and theology).\nCentral European University.\nThe Central European University (CEU) is a graduate-level, English-language university promoting a distinctively Central European perspective. It was established in 1991 by the Hungarian philanthropist George Soros, who has provided an endowment of US$880 million, making the university one of the wealthiest in Europe. In the academic year 2013/2014, the CEU had 1,381 students from 93 countries and 388 faculty members from 58 countries.\nCulture and society.\nResearch centres of Central European literature include Harvard (Cambridge, MA), and Purdue University.\nReligion.\nCentral European countries are mostly Catholic (Austria, Croatia, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia) or mixed Catholic and Protestant, (Germany and Switzerland). Large Protestant groups include Lutheran and Calvinist. Significant populations of Eastern Catholicism and Old Catholicism are also prevalent throughout Central Europe. Central Europe has been a centre of Protestantism in the past; however, it has been mostly eradicated by the Counterreformation. Czechia (Bohemia) was historically the first Protestant country, then forcibly recatholised, and now overwhelmingly non-religious, nevertheless the largest number of religious people are Catholic (10.3%). Romania and Serbia are mostly Eastern Orthodox with significant Protestant and Catholic minorities.\nBefore the Holocaust (1941\u201345), there was also a sizeable Ashkenazi Jewish community in the region, numbering approximately 16.7 million people.\nIn some of these countries, there is a number of atheists, undeclared and non-religious people: the Czech Republic (non-religious 34.2% and undeclared 45.2%), Germany (non-religious 38%), Slovenia (atheist 14.7%), Luxembourg (23.4 non-religious), Switzerland (20.1%), Hungary (27.2% undeclared, 16.7% \"non-religious\" and 1.5% atheists), Slovakia (atheists and non-religious 13.4%, \"not specified\" 10.6%) Austria (19.7% of \"other or none\"), Liechtenstein (10.6% with no religion), Croatia (4%) and Poland (3% of non-believers/agnostics and 1% of undeclared).\nCuisine.\nCentral European cuisine has evolved through centuries due to social and political change. Most countries share many dishes. The most popular dishes typical to Central Europe are sausages and cheeses, where the earliest evidence of cheesemaking in the archaeological record dates back to 5,500 BCE (Kujawy, Poland). Other foods widely associated with Central Europe are goulash and beer. List of countries by beer consumption per capita is led by the Czech Republic, followed by Germany and Austria. Poland comes 5th, Croatia 7th and Slovenia 13th.\nHuman rights.\nGenerally, the countries in the region are progressive on the issue of human rights: death penalty is illegal in all of them, corporal punishment is outlawed in most of them and people of both genders can vote in elections. Nevertheless, Central European countries struggle to adopt new generations of human rights, such as same-sex marriage. Austria, the Czech Republic, Germany, and Poland also have a history of participation in the CIA's extraordinary rendition and detention program, according to the Open Society Foundation.\nLiterature.\nRegional writing tradition revolves around the turbulent history of the region, as well as its cultural diversity. Its existence is sometimes challenged. Specific courses on Central European literature are taught at Stanford University, Harvard University and Jagiellonian University The as well as cultural magazines dedicated to regional literature. Angelus Central European Literature Award is an award worth 150,000.00 PLN (about $50,000 or \u00a330,000) for writers originating from the region. Likewise, the Vilenica International Literary Prize is awarded to a Central European author for \"outstanding achievements in the field of literature and essay writing.\"\nSport.\nThere is a number of Central European Sport events and leagues. They include:\nFootball is one of the most popular sports. Countries of Central Europe had many great national teams throughout history and hosted several major competitions.\nYugoslavia hosted UEFA Euro 1976 before the competition expanded to 8 teams and Germany (at that times as West Germany) hosted UEFA Euro 1988. Recently, 2008 and 2012 UEFA European Championships were held in Austria &amp; Switzerland and Poland &amp; Ukraine respectively.\nGermany hosted 2 FIFA World Cups (1974 and 2006) and are the current champions (as of 2014).\nPolitics.\nOrganisations.\nCentral Europe is a birthplace of regional political organisations:\nDemocracy Index.\nCentral Europe is a home to some of world's oldest democracies. However, most of them have been impacted by totalitarianism, particularly Fascism and Nazism. Germany and Italy occupied all Central European countries, except Switzerland. In all occupied countries, the Axis powers suspended democracy and installed puppet regimes loyal to the occupation forces. Also, they forced conquered countries to apply racial laws and formed military forces for helping German and Italian struggle against Communists. After World War II, almost the whole of Central Europe (the Eastern and Middle part) was occupied by Communists. Communism also banned democracy and free elections, and human rights did not exist in Communist countries. Most of Central Europe had been occupied and later allied with the Soviet Union, often against their will through forged referendum (e.g., Polish people's referendum in 1946) or force (northeast Germany, Poland, Hungary et alia). Nevertheless, these experiences have been dealt in most of them. Most of Central European countries score very highly in the Democracy Index.\nGlobal Peace Index.\nIn spite of its turbulent history, Central Europe is currently one of world's safest regions. Most Central European countries are in top 20%.\nCentral European Time.\nThe time zone used in most parts of the European Union is a standard time which is 1 hour ahead of Coordinated Universal Time. It is commonly called Central European Time because it has been first adopted in central Europe (by year):\nIn popular culture.\nCentral Europe is mentioned in the 35th episode of Lovejoy, entitled \"The Prague Sun\", filmed in 1992. While walking over the famous Charles Bridge, the main character, Lovejoy says: \" I've never been to Prague before. Well, it is one of the great unspoiled cities in Central Europe. Notice: I said: \"Central\", not \"Eastern\"! The Czechs are a bit funny about that, they think of Eastern Europeans as \"turnip heads\".\"\nWes Anderson's Oscar-winning film The Grand Budapest Hotel is regarded as a fictionalised celebration of the 1930s in Central Europe, and the region's musical tastes."}
{"id": "5192", "revid": "160367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5192", "title": "Geography of Canada", "text": "Canada has a vast geography that occupies much of the continent of North America, sharing land borders with the contiguous United States to the south and the U.S. state of Alaska to the northwest. Canada stretches from the Atlantic Ocean in the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west; to the north lies the Arctic Ocean. Greenland is to the northeast and to the southeast Canada shares a maritime boundary with France's overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, the last vestige of New France. By total area (including its waters), Canada is the second-largest country in the world, after Russia. By land area alone, however, Canada ranks fourth, the difference being due to it having the world's largest proportion of fresh water lakes. Of Canada's thirteen provinces and territories, only two are landlocked (Alberta and Saskatchewan) while the other eleven all directly border one of three oceans.\nCanada is home to the world's northernmost settlement, Canadian Forces Station Alert, on the northern tip of Ellesmere Island\u2014latitude 82.5\u00b0N\u2014which lies from the North Pole. Much of the Canadian Arctic is covered by ice and permafrost. Canada has the longest coastline in the world, with a total length of ; additionally, its border with the United States is the world's longest land border, stretching . Three of Canada's Arctic islands, Baffin Island, Victoria Island and Ellesmere Island, are among the ten largest in the world.\nCanada is divided into fifteen terrestrial and five marine ecozones, encompassing over 80,000 classified species of life. Since the end of the last glacial period, Canada has consisted of eight distinct forest regions, including extensive boreal forest on the Canadian Shield; 42 percent of the land acreage of Canada is covered by forests (approximately 8 percent of the world's forested land), made up mostly of spruce, poplar and pine. Canada has over 2,000,000 lakes\u2014563 greater than \u2014which is more than any other country, containing much of the world's fresh water. There are also freshwater glaciers in the Canadian Rockies, the Coast Mountains and the Arctic Cordillera. Protected areas of Canada and National Wildlife Areas have been established to preserve ecosystems. \nCanada is geologically active, having many earthquakes and potentially active volcanoes, notably the Mount Meager massif, Mount Garibaldi, the Mount Cayley massif, and the Mount Edziza volcanic complex. Average winter and summer high temperatures across Canada range from Arctic weather in the north, to hot summers in the southern regions, with four distinct seasons.\nPhysiography.\nCanada covers and a panoply of various geoclimatic regions, of which there are 8 main regions. Canada also encompasses vast maritime terrain, with the world's longest coastline of . The physical geography of Canada is widely varied. Boreal forests prevail throughout the country, ice is prominent in northerly Arctic regions and through the Rocky Mountains, and the relatively flat Canadian Prairies in the southwest facilitate productive agriculture. The Great Lakes feed the St. Lawrence River (in the southeast) where lowlands host much of Canada's population.\nAppalachian Mountains.\nThe Appalachian mountain range extends from Alabama through the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula and the Atlantic Provinces, creating rolling hills indented by river valleys. It also runs through parts of southern Quebec.\nThe Appalachian mountains (more specifically the Chic-Choc Mountains, Notre Dame, and Long Range Mountains) are an old and eroded range of mountains, approximately 380 million years in age. Notable mountains in the Appalachians include Mount Jacques-Cartier (Quebec, ), Mount Carleton (New Brunswick, ), The Cabox (Newfoundland, ). Parts of the Appalachians are home to a rich endemic flora and fauna and are considered to have been nunataks during the last glaciation era.\nGreat Lakes and St. Lawrence Lowlands.\nThe southern parts of Quebec and Ontario, in the section of the Great Lakes (bordered entirely by Ontario on the Canadian side) and St. Lawrence basin (often called St. Lawrence Lowlands), is another particularly rich sedimentary plain. Prior to its colonization and heavy urban sprawl of the 20th century, this Eastern Great Lakes lowland forests area was home to large mixed forests covering a mostly flat area of land between the Appalachian Mountains and the Canadian Shield. Most of this forest has been cut down through agriculture and logging operations, but the remaining forests are for the most part heavily protected. In this part of Canada begins one of the world's largest estuaries, the Estuary of Saint Lawrence (see Gulf of St. Lawrence lowland forests).\nWhile the relief of these lowlands is particularly flat and regular, a group of batholites known as the Monteregian Hills are spread along a mostly regular line across the area. The most notable are Montreal's Mount Royal and Mont Saint-Hilaire. These hills are known for a great richness in precious minerals.\nCanadian Shield.\nThe northeastern part of Alberta, northern parts of Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec, all of Labrador and the Great Northern Peninsula of Newfoundland, eastern mainland Northwest Territories, most of Nunavut's mainland and, of its Arctic Archipelago, Baffin Island and significant bands through Somerset, Southampton, Devon and Ellesmere islands are located on a vast rock base known as the Canadian Shield. The Shield mostly consists of eroded hilly terrain and contains many lakes and important rivers used for hydroelectric production, particularly in northern Quebec and Ontario. The shield also encloses an area of wetlands, the Hudson Bay lowlands. Some particular regions of the Shield are referred to as mountain ranges, including the Torngat and Laurentian Mountains.\nThe Shield cannot support intensive agriculture, although there is subsistence agriculture and small dairy farms in many of the river valleys and around the abundant lakes, particularly in the southern regions. Boreal forest covers much of the shield, with a mix of conifers that provide valuable timber resources in areas such as the Central Canadian Shield forests ecoregion that covers much of Northern Ontario. The region is known for its extensive mineral reserves.\nThe Canadian Shield is known for its vast minerals, such as emeralds, diamonds and copper. The Canadian shield is also called the mineral house.\nCanadian Interior Plains.\nThe Canadian Prairies are part of a vast sedimentary plain covering much of Alberta, southern Saskatchewan, and southwestern Manitoba, as well as much of the region between the Rocky Mountains and the Great Slave and Great Bear lakes in Northwest Territories. The plains generally describes the expanses of (largely flat) arable agricultural land which sustain extensive grain farming operations in the southern part of the provinces. Despite this, some areas such as the Cypress Hills and the Alberta Badlands are quite hilly and the prairie provinces contain large areas of forest such as the Mid-Continental Canadian forests. The size is roughly ~.\nCanadian Arctic.\nWhile the largest part of the Canadian Arctic is composed of seemingly endless permafrost and tundra north of the tree line, it encompasses geological regions of varying types: the Arctic Cordillera (with the British Empire Range and the United States Range on Ellesmere Island) contains the northernmost mountain system in the world. The Arctic Lowlands and Hudson Bay lowlands comprise a substantial part of the geographic region often designated as the Canadian Shield (in contrast to the sole geologic area). The ground in the Arctic is mostly composed of permafrost, making construction difficult and often hazardous, and agriculture virtually impossible.\nThe Arctic, when defined as everything north of the tree line, covers most of Nunavut and the northernmost parts of Northwest Territories, Yukon, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and Labrador.\nWestern Cordillera.\nThe Coast Mountains run from the lower Fraser River and the Fraser Canyon northwestward, separating the Interior Plateau from the Pacific Ocean. Their coastal flank is characterized by an intense network of fjords and associated islands, very similar to the Norwegian coastline, while their inland side against the plateau they transition to the high plateau in dryland valleys notable for a series of large lakes similar to the alpine lakes of southern Switzerland, beginning in deep mountains and ending in flatland. They are subdivided in three main groupings, the Pacific Ranges between the Fraser and Bella Coola, the Kitimat Ranges from there northwards to the Nass River and the Boundary Ranges from there to their terminus in the Yukon Territory at Champagne Pass and Chilkat Pass northwest of Haines, Alaska. The Saint Elias Mountains lie to their west and northwest, while the Yukon Ranges and Yukon Basin lie to their north. On the inland side of the Boundary Ranges are the Tahltan and Tagish Highlands and also the Skeena Mountains, part of the Interior Mountains system, which also extend southwards on the inland side of the Kitimat Ranges.\nThe terrain of the main spine of the Coast Mountains is typified by heavy glaciation, including several very large icefields of varying elevation. Of the three subdivisions, the Pacific Ranges are the highest and are crowned by Mount Waddington, while the Boundary Ranges contain the largest icefields, the Juneau Icefield being the largest. The Kitimat Ranges are lower and less glacier-covered than either of the other two groupings, but are extremely rugged and dense.\nThe Coast Mountains are made of igneous and metamorphic rock from an episode of arc volcanism related to subduction of the Kula and Farallon Plates during the Laramide orogeny about 100 million years ago. The widespread granite forming the Coast Mountains formed when magma intruded and cooled at depth beneath volcanoes of the Coast Range Arc whereas the metamorphic formed when intruding magma heated the surrounding rock to produce schist.\nThe Insular Mountains extend from Vancouver Island in the south to the Queen Charlotte Islands in the north on the British Columbia Coast. It contains two main mountain ranges, the Vancouver Island Ranges on Vancouver Island and the Queen Charlotte Mountains on the Queen Charlotte Islands.\nExtreme points.\nThe northernmost point of land within the boundaries of Canada is Cape Columbia, Ellesmere Island, Nunavut . The northernmost point of the Canadian mainland is Zenith Point on Boothia Peninsula, Nunavut . The southernmost point is Middle Island, in Lake Erie, Ontario (41\u00b041\u2032N 82\u00b040\u2032W); the southernmost water point lies just south of the island, on the Ontario\u2013Ohio border (41\u00b040\u203235\u2033N). The southernmost point of the Canadian mainland is Point Pelee, Ontario . The lowest point is sea level at 0 m, whilst the highest point is Mount Logan, Yukon, at 5,959 m\u00a0/\u00a019,550\u00a0ft .\nThe westernmost point is Boundary Peak 187 (60\u00b018\u203222.929\u2033N 141\u00b000\u20327.128\u2033W) at the southern end of the Yukon\u2013Alaska border, which roughly follows 141\u00b0W but leans very slightly east as it goes North . The easternmost point is Cape Spear, Newfoundland (47\u00b031\u2032N 52\u00b037\u2032W) . The easternmost point of the Canadian mainland is Elijah Point, Cape St. Charles, Labrador (52\u00b013\u2032N 55\u00b037\u2032W) . \nThe Canadian pole of inaccessibility is allegedly near Jackfish River, Alberta (59\u00b02\u2032N 112\u00b049\u2032W). The furthest straight-line distance that can be travelled to Canadian points of land is between the southwest tip of Kluane National Park and Reserve (next to Mount Saint Elias) and Cripple Cove, Newfoundland (near Cape Race) at a distance of .\nClimatology.\nCanada has a diverse climate. The climate varies from temperate on the west coast of British Columbia to a subarctic climate in the north. Extreme northern Canada can have snow for most of the year with a Polar climate. Landlocked areas tend to have a warm summer continental climate zone with the exception of Southwestern Ontario which has a hot summer humid continental climate. Parts of Western Canada have a semi-arid climate, and parts of Vancouver Island can even be classified as a warm-summer Mediterranean climate. Temperature extremes in Canada range from in Midale and Yellow Grass, Saskatchewan, on 5 July 1937, to in Snag, Yukon, on 3 February 1947.\nBiogeography.\nCanada is divided into fifteen major terrestrial and five marine ecozones, that are further subdivided into 53 ecoprovinces, 194 ecoregions, and 1,027 ecodistricts. These eco-areas encompass over 80,000 classified species of Canadian wildlife, with an equal number yet to be formally recognized or discovered. Due to pollution, loss of biodiversity, over-exploitation of commercial species, invasive species, and habitat loss, there are currently more than 800 wild life species at risk of being lost. \nCanada's major biomes are the tundra, boreal forest, grassland, and temperate deciduous forest. British Columbia contains several smaller biomes, including; mountain forest which extends to Alberta, and a small temperate rainforest along the Pacific coast, the semi arid desert located in the Okanagan and alpine tundra in the higher mountainous regions. \nOver half of Canada's landscape is intact and relatively free of human development. Approximately half of Canada is covered by forest, totaling around . The boreal forest of Canada is considered to be the largest intact forest on earth, with around undisturbed by roads, cities or industry. The Canadian Arctic tundra is the second-largest vegetation region in the country consisting of dwarf shrubs, sedges and grasses, mosses and lichens. \nApproximately 12.1 percent of the nation's landmass and freshwater are conservation areas, including 11.4 percent designated as protected areas. Approximately 13.8 percent of its territorial waters are conserved, including 8.9 percent designated as protected areas.\nPalaeogeography.\nWestern Canada has many volcanoes and is part of the Pacific Ring of Fire, a system of volcanoes found around the margins of the Pacific Ocean. There are over 200 young volcanic centres that stretch northward from the Cascade Range to Yukon. They are grouped into five volcanic belts with different volcano types and tectonic settings. The Northern Cordilleran Volcanic Province was formed by faulting, cracking, rifting, and the interaction between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate. The Garibaldi Volcanic Belt was formed by subduction of the Juan de Fuca Plate beneath the North American Plate. The Anahim Volcanic Belt was formed as a result of the North American Plate sliding westward over the Anahim hotspot. The Chilcotin Group is believed to have formed as a result of back-arc extension behind the Cascadia subduction zone. The Wrangell Volcanic Field formed as a result of subduction of the Pacific Plate beneath the North American Plate at the easternmost end of the Aleutian Trench. The volcanic eruption of the Tseax Cone in 1775 was among Canada's worst natural disasters, killing an estimated 2,000 Nisga'a people and destroying their village in the Nass River valley of northern British Columbia. The eruption produced a lava flow, and, according to Nisga'a legend, blocked the flow of the Nass River.\nVolcanism has also occurred in the Canadian Shield. It contains over 150 volcanic belts (now deformed and eroded down to nearly flat plains) that range from 600 million to 2.8\u00a0billion years old. Many of Canada's major ore deposits are associated with Precambrian volcanoes. There are pillow lavas in the Northwest Territories that are about 2.6\u00a0billion years old and are preserved in the Cameron River Volcanic Belt. The pillow lavas in rocks over 2\u00a0billion years old in the Canadian Shield signify that great oceanic volcanoes existed during the early stages of the formation of the Earth's crust. Ancient volcanoes play an important role in estimating Canada's mineral potential. Many of the volcanic belts bear ore deposits that are related to the volcanism.\nHydrography.\nCanada holds vast reserves of water: its rivers discharge nearly 7% of the world's renewable water supply, Canada has over 2,000,000 lakes\u2014563 greater than \u2014which is more than any other country and has the third largest amount of glacier water. Canada is also home to about twenty five percent (134.6 million ha) of the world's wetlands that support a vast array of local ecosystems. \nCanada's waterways host forty seven rivers of at least in length, with the two longest being the Mackenzie River, that begins at Great Slave Lake and ends in the Arctic Ocean, with its drainage basin covering a large part of northwestern Canada, and the Saint Lawrence River, which drains the Great Lakes into the Gulf of St. Lawrence ending in the Atlantic Ocean. The Mackenzie, including its tributaries is over in length and lies within the second largest drainage basin of North America, while the St. Lawrence in length, drains the world's largest system of freshwater lakes.\nThe Atlantic watershed drains the entirety of the Atlantic provinces (parts of the Quebec-Labrador border are fixed at the Atlantic Ocean-Arctic Ocean continental divide), most of inhabited Quebec and large parts of southern Ontario. It is mostly drained by the economically important St. Lawrence River and its tributaries, notably the Saguenay, Manicouagan and Ottawa rivers. The Great Lakes and Lake Nipigon are also drained by the St. Lawrence. The Churchill River and Saint John River are other important elements of the Atlantic watershed in Canada.\nThe Hudson Bay watershed drains over a third of Canada. It covers Manitoba, northern Ontario and Quebec, most of Saskatchewan, southern Alberta, southwestern Nunavut and the southern half of Baffin Island. This basin is most important in fighting drought in the prairies and producing hydroelectricity, especially in Manitoba, northern Ontario and Quebec. Major elements of this watershed include Lake Winnipeg, Nelson River, the North Saskatchewan and South Saskatchewan Rivers, Assiniboine River, and Nettilling Lake on Baffin Island. Wollaston Lake lies on the boundary between the Hudson Bay and Arctic Ocean watersheds and drains into both. It is the largest lake in the world that naturally drains in two directions.\nThe continental divide in the Rockies separates the Pacific watershed in British Columbia and Yukon from the Arctic and Hudson Bay watersheds. This watershed irrigates the agriculturally important areas of inner British Columbia (such as the Okanagan and Kootenay valleys), and is used to produce hydroelectricity. Major elements are the Yukon, Columbia and Fraser rivers.\nThe northern parts of Alberta, Manitoba and British Columbia, most of Northwest Territories and Nunavut, and parts of Yukon are drained by the Arctic watershed. This watershed has been little used for hydroelectricity, with the exception of the Mackenzie River. The Peace, Athabasca and Liard Rivers, as well as Great Bear Lake and Great Slave Lake (respectively the largest and second largest lakes wholly enclosed by Canada) are significant elements of the Arctic watershed. Each of these elements eventually merges with the Mackenzie, thereby draining the vast majority of the Arctic watershed.\nThe southernmost part of Alberta drains into the Gulf of Mexico through the Milk River and its tributaries. The Milk River originates in the Rocky Mountains of Montana, then flows into Alberta, then returns into the United States, where it is drained by the Missouri River. A small area of southwestern Saskatchewan is drained by Battle Creek, which empties into the Milk River.\nNatural resources.\nCanada's abundance of natural resources is reflected in their continued importance in the economy of Canada. Major resource-based industries are fisheries, forestry, agriculture, petroleum products and mining.\nThe fisheries industry has historically been one of Canada's strongest. Unmatched cod stocks on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland launched this industry in the 16th century. Today these stocks are nearly depleted, and their conservation has become a preoccupation of the Atlantic Provinces. On the West Coast, tuna stocks are now restricted. The less depleted (but still greatly diminished) salmon population continues to drive a strong fisheries industry. Canada claims of territorial sea, a contiguous zone of , an exclusive economic zone of with and a continental shelf of or to the edge of the continental margin.\nFive per cent of Canada's land area is arable, none of which is for permanent crops. Three per cent of Canada's land area is covered by permanent pastures. Canada has 7,200 square kilometres (2,800\u00a0mi2) of irrigated land (1993 estimate). Agricultural regions in Canada include the Canadian Prairies, the Lower Mainland and various regions within the Interior of British Columbia, the St. Lawrence Basin and the Canadian Maritimes. Main crops in Canada include flax, oats, wheat, maize, barley, sugar beets and rye in the prairies; flax and maize in Western Ontario; Oats and potatoes in the Maritimes. Fruit and vegetables are grown primarily in the Annapolis Valley of Nova Scotia, Southwestern Ontario, the Golden Horseshoe region of Ontario, along the south coast of Georgian Bay and in the Okanagan Valley of British Columbia. Cattle and sheep are raised in the valleys and plateaus of British Columbia. Cattle, sheep and hogs are raised on the prairies, cattle and hogs in Western Ontario, sheep and hogs in Quebec, and sheep in the Maritimes. There are significant dairy regions in central Nova Scotia, southern New Brunswick, the St. Lawrence Valley, northeastern Ontario, southwestern Ontario, the Red River valley of Manitoba and the valleys in the British Columbia Interior, on Vancouver Island and in the Lower Mainland.\nFossil fuels are a more recently developed resource in Canada, with oil and gas being extracted from deposits in the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin since the mid 1900s. While Canada's crude oil deposits are fewer, technological developments in recent decades have opened up oil production in Alberta's Oil Sands to the point where Canada now has some of the largest reserves of oil in the world. In other forms, Canadian industry has a long history of extracting large coal and natural gas reserves.\nCanada's mineral resources are diverse and extensive. Across the Canadian Shield and in the north there are large iron, nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, and uranium reserves. Large diamond concentrations have been recently developed in the Arctic, making Canada one of the world's largest producers. Throughout the Shield there are many mining towns extracting these minerals. The largest, and best known, is Sudbury, Ontario. Sudbury is an exception to the normal process of forming minerals in the Shield since there is significant evidence that the Sudbury Basin is an ancient meteorite impact crater. The nearby, but less known Temagami Magnetic Anomaly has striking similarities to the Sudbury Basin. Its magnetic anomalies are very similar to the Sudbury Basin, and so it could be a second metal-rich impact crater. The Shield is also covered by vast boreal forests that support an important logging industry.\nCanada's many rivers have afforded extensive development of hydroelectric power. Extensively developed in British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec and Labrador, the many dams have long provided a clean, dependable source of energy.\nEnvironmental issues.\nAir pollution and resulting acid rain severely affects lakes and damages forests. Metal smelting, coal-burning utilities, and vehicle emissions impact agricultural and forest productivity. Ocean waters are also becoming contaminated by agricultural, industrial, mining, and forestry activities.\nGlobal climate change and the warming of the polar region will likely cause significant changes to the environment, including loss of the polar bear, the exploration for resource then the extraction of these resources and an alternative transport route to the Panama Canal through the Northwest Passage.\nCanada is currently warming at twice the global average, and this is effectively irreversible. \nPolitical geography.\nCanada is divided into ten provinces and three territories. According to Statistics Canada, 72.0 percent of the population is concentrated within of the nation's southern border with the United States, 70.0% live south of the 49th parallel, and over 60 percent of the population lives along the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River between Windsor, Ontario, and Quebec City. This leaves the vast majority of Canada's territory as sparsely populated wilderness; Canada's population density is 3.5 people/km2 (9.1/mi2), among the lowest in the world. Despite this, 79.7 percent of Canada's population resides in urban areas, where population densities are increasing.\nCanada shares with the U.S. the world's longest binational border at ; are with Alaska. The Danish island dependency of Greenland lies to Canada's northeast, separated from the Canadian Arctic islands by Baffin Bay and Davis Strait. The French islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon lie off the southern coast of Newfoundland in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and have a maritime territorial enclave within Canada's exclusive economic zone.\nCanada's geographic proximity to the United States has historically bound the two countries together in the political world as well. Canada's position between the Soviet Union (now Russia) and the U.S. was strategically important during the Cold War since the route over the North Pole and Canada was the fastest route by air between the two countries and the most direct route for intercontinental ballistic missiles. Since the end of the Cold War, there has been growing speculation that Canada's Arctic maritime claims may become increasingly important if global warming melts the ice enough to open the Northwest Passage."}
{"id": "5193", "revid": "28991092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5193", "title": "Demographics of Canada", "text": "Statistics Canada conducts a country-wide census that collects demographic data every five years on the first and sixth year of each decade. The 2016 Canadian Census enumerated a total population of 35,151,728, an increase of around 5.0 percent over the 2011 figure. Between 2011 and May 2016, Canada's population grew by 1.7\u00a0million people, with immigrants accounting for two-thirds of the increase. Between 1990 and 2008, the population increased by 5.6\u00a0million, equivalent to 20.4 percent overall growth. The main drivers of population growth are immigration and, to a lesser extent, natural growth.\nCanada has one of the highest per-capita immigration rates in the world, driven mainly by economic policy and, to a lesser extent, family reunification. In 2019, a total of 341,180 immigrants were admitted to Canada, mainly from Asia. New immigrants settle mostly in major urban areas such as Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver. Canada also accepts large numbers of refugees, accounting for over 10 percent of annual global refugee resettlements.\nPopulation.\nThe Canada 2016 Census had a total population count of 35,151,728 individuals, making up approximately 0.5% of the world's total population.\nPopulation growth rates.\nAccording to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)/World Bank, the population in Canada increased from 1990 to 2008 with 5.6\u00a0million and 20.4% growth in population, compared to 21.7% growth in the United States and 31.2% growth in Mexico. According to the OECD/World Bank population statistics, for the same period the world population growth was 27%, a total of 1,423\u00a0million people. However, over the same period, the population of France grew by 8.0%. And from 1991 to 2011, the population of the UK increased by 10.0%.\nTotal Fertility Rates in the 19th century.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. Source: Statistics Canada.\nLife expectancy at birth from 1831 to 2015.\nSources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.\n1831\u20131911\n1921\u20131950\n1950\u20132015\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nOther demographics statistics.\n58.9% of Canadians reported being members of a single ethnic group in the 2016 Census. 31.7% of them stated \u201cCanadian\u201d as their single ethnic origin, followed by Chinese (7.1%), English (5.4%), East Indian (5.4%), French (5.0%), Italian (3.4%), Filipino (3.2%), German (2.8%), First Nations (North American Indian) (2.6%), Scottish (2.3%), and Irish (2.3%).\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.\nDemographic statistics according to the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nTotal: 40.6\nCanadian 32.3%, English 18.3%, Scottish 13.9%, French 13.6%, Irish 13.4%, German 9.6%, Chinese 5.1%, Italian 4.6%, North American Indian 4.4%, East Indian 4%, other 51.6% (2016 est.)\nNote: percentages add up to more than 100% because respondents were able to identify more than one ethnic origin (2016 est.)\nCanadian 32.2%, English 19.8%, French 15.5%, Scottish 14.4%, Irish 13.8%, German 9.8%, Italian 4.5%, Chinese 4.5%, North American Indian 4.2%, other 50.9%\nNote: percentages add up to more than 100% because respondents were able to identify more than one ethnic origin (2011 est.)\nEnglish (official) 58.7%, French (official) 22%, Punjabi 1.4%, Italian 1.3%, Spanish 1.3%, German 1.3%, Cantonese 1.2%, Tagalog 1.2%, Arabic 1.1%, other 10.5% (2011 est.)\nvast majority of Canadians are positioned in a discontinuous band within approximately 300\u00a0km of the southern border with the United States; the most populated province is Ontario, followed by Quebec and British Columbia\nCatholic 39% (includes Roman Catholic 38.8%, other Catholic .2%), Protestant 20.3% (includes United Church 6.1%, Anglican 5%, Baptist 1.9%, Lutheran 1.5%, Pentecostal 1.5%, Presbyterian 1.4%, other Protestant 2.9%), Orthodox 1.6%, other Christian 6.3%, Muslim 3.2%, Hindu 1.5%, Sikh 1.4%, Buddhist 1.1%, Jewish 1%, other 0.6%, none 23.9% (2011 est.)\nSex ratio:\nEthnicity.\nEthnic origin.\nAs data is completely self-reported, and reporting individuals may have varying definitions of \"Ethnic origin\" (or may not know their ethnic origin), these figures should not be considered an exact record of the relative prevalence of different ethno-cultural ancestries but rather how Canadians self-identify.\nStatistics Canada projects that immigrants will represent between 24.5% and 30.0% of Canada's population in 2036, compared with 20.7% in 2011. Statistics Canada further projects that visible minorities among the working-age population (15 to 64 years) will make up 33.7\u201334.3% of Canada's total population, compared to 22.3% in 2016.\nCounting both single and multiple responses, the most commonly identified ethnic origins were (2016):\nThe most common ethnic origins per province are as follows in 2006 (total responses; only percentages 10% or higher shown; ordered by percentage of \"Canadian\"):\nBold indicates either that this response is dominant within this province, or that this province has the highest ratio (percentage) of this response among provinces.\nAboriginal population.\n\"Note: Inuit, other Aboriginal and mixed Aboriginal groups are not listed as their own, but they are all accounted for in total Aboriginal\"\nBy province and territory.\nAll statistics are from the Canada 2011 Census.\nLanguages.\nLanguage used most often at work:\nLanguages by language used most often at home:\nLanguages by mother tongue:\nReligion.\nStatistics Canada (StatCan) grouped responses to the 2011 National Household Survey (NHS) question on religion into nine core religious categories \u2013 Buddhist, Christian, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim, Sikh, Traditional (Aboriginal) Spirituality, other religions and no religious affiliation. Among these, of Canadians were self-identified as Christians in 2011. The second, third, and fourth-largest categories were of Canadians with no religious affiliation at , Canadian Muslims at , and Canadian Hindus at .\nWithin the 2011 NHS results, StatCan further subcategorized Christianity in nine groups of its own \u2013 Anglican, Baptist, Catholic, Christian Orthodox, Lutheran, Pentecostal, Presbyterian, United Church and Other Christian. Among these, of Canadians were self-identified as Catholic in 2011. The second and third-largest ungrouped subcategories of Christian Canadians were United at and Anglican at , while of Christians were grouped into the Other Christian subcategory comprising numerous denominations.\nOf the 3,036,785 or of Canadians identified as Other Christians:"}
{"id": "5194", "revid": "8729451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5194", "title": "Politics of Canada", "text": "The politics of Canada function within a framework of parliamentary democracy and a federal system of parliamentary government with strong democratic traditions. Canada is a constitutional monarchy, in which the monarch is head of state. In practice, the executive powers are directed by the Cabinet, a committee of ministers of the Crown responsible to the elected House of Commons of Canada and chosen and headed by the Prime Minister of Canada.\nCanada is described as a \"full democracy\", with a tradition of liberalism, and an egalitarian, moderate political ideology. Far-left and far-right politics have never been a prominent force in Canadian society. Peace, order, and good government, alongside an implied bill of rights are founding principles of the Canadian government. An emphasis on social justice has been a distinguishing element of Canada's political culture. Canada has placed emphasis on equality and inclusiveness for all its people.\nThe country has a multi-party system in which many of its legislative practices derive from the unwritten conventions of and precedents set by the Westminster parliament of the United Kingdom. The two dominant political parties in Canada have historically been the current Liberal Party of Canada and the Conservative Party of Canada (as well as its numerous predecessors). Parties like the New Democratic Party, the Quebec nationalist Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois and the Green Party of Canada have grown in prominence, exerting their own influence to the political process.\nCanada has evolved variations: party discipline in Canada is stronger than in the United Kingdom, and more parliamentary votes are considered motions of confidence, which tends to diminish the role of non-Cabinet members of parliament (MPs). Such members, in the government caucus, and junior or lower-profile members of opposition caucuses, are known as backbenchers. Backbenchers can, however, exert their influence by sitting in parliamentary committees, like the Public Accounts Committee or the National Defence Committee.\nContext.\nCanada's governmental structure was originally established by the British Parliament through the \"British North America Act\" (now known as the \"Constitution Act, 1867\"), but the federal model and division of powers were devised by Canadian politicians. Particularly after World War I, citizens of the self-governing Dominions, such as Canada, began to develop a strong sense of identity, and, in the Balfour Declaration of 1926, the British government expressed its intent to grant full autonomy to these regions.\nThus in 1931, the British Parliament passed the Statute of Westminster, giving legal recognition to the autonomy of Canada and other Dominions. Following this, Canadian politicians were unable to obtain consensus on a process for amending the constitution until 1982, meaning amendments to Canada's constitution continued to require the approval of the British parliament until that date. Similarly, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Britain continued to make the final decision on criminal appeals until 1933 and on civil appeals until 1949.\nPolitical culture.\nCanada's egalitarian approach to governance has emphasized social welfare, economic freedom, and multiculturalism, which is based on selective economic migrants, social integration, and suppression of far-right politics, that has wide public and political support. Its broad range of constituent nationalities and policies that promote a \"just society\" are constitutionally protected. Individual rights, equality and inclusiveness (social equality) have risen to the forefront of political and legal importance for most Canadians, as demonstrated through support for the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, a relatively free economy, and social liberal attitudes toward women's rights (like pregnancy termination), homosexuality, euthanasia or cannabis use. There is also a sense of collective responsibility in Canadian political culture, as is demonstrated in general support for universal health care, multiculturalism, gun control, foreign aid, and other social programs.\nAt the federal level, Canada has been dominated by two relatively centrist parties practicing \"brokerage politics\", the centre-left Liberal Party of Canada and the centre-right Conservative Party of Canada. \"The traditional \"brokerage\" model of Canadian politics leaves little\nroom for ideology\" - as the Canadian catch-all party system requires support from a broad spectrum of voters. The historically predominant Liberals position themselves at the centre of the political scale, with the Conservatives sitting on the right and the New Democratic Party occupying the left. Five parties had representatives elected to the federal parliament in the 2019 election: the Liberal Party who currently form the government, the Conservative Party who are the Official Opposition, the New Democratic Party, the Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois, and the Green Party of Canada.\nGovernmental organization.\nLegislative power.\nThe bicameral Parliament of Canada consists of three parts: the monarch, the Senate, and the House of Commons.\nCurrently, the Senate, which is frequently described as providing \"regional\" representation, has 105 members appointed by the Governor-General on the advice of the Prime Minister to serve until age 75. It was created with equal representation from each of Ontario, Quebec, the Maritime region and the Western Provinces. However, it is currently the product of various specific exceptions, additions and compromises, meaning that regional equality is not observed, nor is representation-by-population. The normal number of senators can be exceeded by the monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister, as long as the additional senators are distributed equally with regard to region (up to a total of eight additional Senators). This power of additional appointment has only been used once, when Prime Minister Brian Mulroney petitioned Queen Elizabeth II to add eight seats to the Senate so as to ensure the passage of the Goods and Services Tax legislation.\nThe House of Commons currently has 338 members elected in single-member districts in a plurality voting system (first past the post), meaning that members must attain only a plurality (the most votes of any candidate) rather than a majority (50 percent plus one). The electoral districts are also known as ridings.\nMandates cannot exceed five years; an election must occur by the end of this time. This fixed mandate has been exceeded only once, when Prime Minister Robert Borden perceived the need to do so during World War I. The size of the House and apportionment of seats to each province is revised after every census, conducted every five years, and is based on population changes and approximately on representation-by-population.\nMajority and minority governments.\nCanadians vote for their local Member of Parliament (MP) only. An MP need not be a member of any political party: such MPs are known as independents. When a number of MPs share political opinions they may form a body known as a political party.\nThe \"Canada Elections Act\" defines a political party as \"an organization one of whose fundamental purposes is to participate in public affairs by endorsing one or more of its members as candidates and supporting their election.\" Forming and registering a federal political party are two different things. There is no legislation regulating the formation of federal political parties. Elections Canada cannot dictate how a federal political party should be formed or how its legal, internal and financial structures should be established.\nParties elect their leaders in run-off elections to ensure that the winner receives more than 50% of the votes. Normally the party leader stands as a candidate to be an MP during an election. Canada's parliamentary system empowers political parties and their party leaders. Where one party gets a majority of the seats in the House of Commons, that party is said to have a \"majority government.\" Through party discipline, the party leader, who is elected in only one riding, exercises a great deal of control over the cabinet and the parliament.\nHistorically the prime minister and senators are selected by the governor general as a representative of the Queen, though in modern practice the monarch's duties are ceremonial. Consequently, the prime minister, while technically selected by the governor general, is for all practical purposes selected by the party with the majority of seats. That is, the party that gets the most seats normally forms the government, with that party's leader becoming prime minister. The prime minister is not directly elected by the general population, although the prime minister is almost always directly elected as an MP within his or her constituency. Again senators while technically selected at the pleasure of the monarch, are ceremonially selected by the governor general at the advice (and for most practical purposes authority) of the prime minister.\nA minority government situation occurs when the party that holds the most seats in the House of Commons holds fewer seats than the opposition parties combined. In this scenario usually the party leader whose party has the most seats in the House is selected by the governor general to lead the government, however, to create stability, the leader chosen must have the support of the majority of the House, meaning they need the support of at least one other party.\nFederal-provincial relations.\nIn Canada, the provinces are considered co-sovereign; sovereignty of the provinces is passed on, not by the Governor General or the Canadian parliament, but through the Crown itself. This means that the Crown is \"divided\" into 11 legal jurisdictions or 11 \"Crowns\" \u2013 one federal (the Crown in right of Canada), and ten provincial (an example being the Crown in right of British Columbia).\nFederal-provincial (or intergovernmental, formerly Dominion-provincial) relations is a regular issue in Canadian politics: Quebec wishes to preserve and strengthen its distinctive nature, western provinces desire more control over their abundant natural resources, especially energy reserves; industrialized Central Canada is concerned with its manufacturing base, and the Atlantic provinces strive to escape from being less affluent than the rest of the country.\nIn order to ensure that social programs such as health care and education are funded consistently throughout Canada, the \"have-not\" (poorer) provinces receive a proportionately greater share of federal \"transfer (equalization) payments\" than the richer, or \"have\", provinces do; this has been somewhat controversial. The richer provinces often favour freezing transfer payments, or rebalancing the system in their favour, based on the claim that they already pay more in taxes than they receive in federal government services, and the poorer provinces often favour an increase on the basis that the amount of money they receive is not sufficient for their existing needs.\nParticularly in the past decade, some scholars have argued that the federal government's exercise of its unlimited constitutional spending power has contributed to strained federal-provincial relations. This power, which allows the federal government to spend the revenue it raises in any way that it pleases, allows it to overstep the constitutional division of powers by creating programs that encroach on areas of provincial jurisdiction. The federal spending power is not expressly set out in the \"Constitution Act, 1867\"; however, in the words of the Court of Appeal for Ontario the power \"can be inferred\" from s. 91(1A), \"the public debt and property\".\nA prime example of an exercise of the spending power is the \"Canada Health Act\", which is a conditional grant of money to the provinces. Regulation of health services is, under the Constitution, a provincial responsibility. However, by making the funding available to the provinces under the \"Canada Health Act\" contingent upon delivery of services according to federal standards, the federal government has the ability to influence health care delivery. This spending power, coupled with Supreme Court rulings\u2014such as Reference re Canada Assistance Plan (B.C.)\u2014that have held that funding delivered under the spending power can be reduced unilaterally at any time, has contributed to strained federal-provincial relations.\nQuebec and Canadian politics.\nExcept for three short-lived transitional or minority governments, prime ministers from Quebec led Canada continuously from 1968 to early 2006. Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois led both Liberal and Progressive Conservative governments in this period.\nMonarchs, governors general, and prime ministers are now expected to be at least functional, if not fluent, in both English and French. In selecting leaders, political parties give preference to candidates who are fluently bilingual.\nAlso, by law, three of the nine positions on the Supreme Court of Canada must be held by judges from Quebec. This representation makes sure that at least three judges have sufficient experience with the civil law system to treat cases involving Quebec laws.\nNational unity.\nCanada has a long and storied history of secessionist movements (see Secessionist movements of Canada). National unity has been a major issue in Canada since the forced union of Upper and Lower Canada in 1840.\nThe predominant and lingering issue concerning Canadian national unity has been the ongoing conflict between the French-speaking majority in Quebec and the English-speaking majority in the rest of Canada. Quebec's continued demands for recognition of its \"distinct society\" through special political status has led to attempts for constitutional reform, most notably with the failed attempts to amend the constitution through the Meech Lake Accord and the Charlottetown Accord (the latter of which was rejected through a national referendum).\nSince the Quiet Revolution, sovereigntist sentiments in Quebec have been variably stoked by the patriation of the Canadian constitution in 1982 (without Quebec's consent) and by the failed attempts at constitutional reform. Two provincial referenda, in 1980 and 1995, rejected proposals for sovereignty with majorities of 60% and 50.6% respectively. Given the narrow federalist victory in 1995, a reference was made by the Chr\u00e9tien government to the Supreme Court of Canada in 1998 regarding the legality of unilateral provincial secession. The court decided that a unilateral declaration of secession would be unconstitutional. This resulted in the passage of the \"Clarity Act\" in 2000.\nThe Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois, a sovereigntist party which runs candidates exclusively in Quebec, was started by a group of MPs who left the Progressive Conservative (PC) party (along with several disaffected Liberal MPs), and first put forward candidates in the 1993 federal election. With the collapse of the PCs in that election, the Bloc and Liberals were seen as the only two viable parties in Quebec. Thus, prior to the 2006 election, any gain by one party came at the expense of the other, regardless of whether national unity was really at issue. The Bloc, then, benefited (with a significant increase in seat total) from the impressions of corruption that surrounded the Liberal Party in the lead-up to the 2004 election. However, the newly unified Conservative party re-emerged as a viable party in Quebec by winning 10 seats in the 2006 election. In the 2011 election, the New Democratic Party succeeded in winning 59 of Quebec's 75 seats, successfully reducing the number of seats of every other party substantially. The NDP surge nearly destroyed the Bloc, reducing them to 4 seats, far below the minimum requirement of 12 seats for Official party status.\nNewfoundland and Labrador is also a problem regarding national unity. As the Dominion of Newfoundland was a self-governing country equal to Canada until 1949, there are large, though unco-ordinated, feelings of Newfoundland nationalism and anti-Canadian sentiment among much of the population. This is due in part to the perception of chronic federal mismanagement of the fisheries, forced resettlement away from isolated settlements in the 1960s, the government of Quebec still drawing inaccurate political maps whereby they take parts of Labrador, and to the perception that mainland Canadians look down upon Newfoundlanders. In 2004, the Newfoundland and Labrador First Party contested provincial elections and in 2008 in federal ridings within the province. In 2004, then-premier Danny Williams ordered all federal flags removed from government buildings as a result of lost offshore revenues to equalization clawbacks. On December 23, 2004, premier Williams made this statement to reporters in St. John's,\nWestern alienation is another national-unity-related concept that enters into Canadian politics. Residents of the four western provinces, particularly Alberta, have often been unhappy with a lack of influence and a perceived lack of understanding when residents of Central Canada consider \"national\" issues. While this is seen to play itself out through many avenues (media, commerce, and so on.), in politics, it has given rise to a number of political parties whose base constituency is in western Canada. These include the United Farmers of Alberta, who first won federal seats in 1917, the Progressives (1921), the Social Credit Party (1935), the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (1935), the Reconstruction Party (1935), New Democracy (1940) and most recently the Reform Party (1989).\nThe Reform Party's slogan \"The West Wants In\" was echoed by commentators when, after a successful merger with the PCs, the successor party to both parties, the Conservative Party won the 2006 election. Led by Stephen Harper, who is an MP from Alberta, the electoral victory was said to have made \"The West IS In\" a reality. However, regardless of specific electoral successes or failures, the concept of western alienation continues to be important in Canadian politics, particularly on a provincial level, where opposing the federal government is a common tactic for provincial politicians. For example, in 2001, a group of prominent Albertans produced the Alberta Agenda, urging Alberta to take steps to make full use of its constitutional powers, much as Quebec has done.\nPolitical conditions.\nCanada is considered by most sources to be a very stable democracy. In 2006, \"The Economist\" ranked Canada the third-most democratic nation in its Democracy Index, ahead of all other nations in the Americas and ahead of every nation more populous than itself. In 2008, Canada was ranked World No. 11 and again ahead of all countries more populous and ahead of other states in the Americas. (In 2008, the United States was ranked World No. 18, Uruguay World No. 23, and Costa Rica World No. 27.)\nThe Liberal Party of Canada, under the leadership of Paul Martin, won a minority victory in the June 2004 general elections. In December 2003, Martin had succeeded fellow Liberal Jean Chr\u00e9tien, who had, in 2000, become the first prime minister to lead three consecutive majority governments since 1945. However, in 2004 the Liberals lost seats in Parliament, going from 172 of 301 parliamentary seats to 135 of 308, and from 40.9% to 36.7% in the popular vote. The Canadian Alliance, which did well in western Canada in the 2000 election but was unable to make significant inroads in the East, merged with the Progressive Conservative Party to form the Conservative Party of Canada in late 2003.\nThey proved to be moderately successful in the 2004 campaign, gaining seats from a combined Alliance-PC total of 78 in 2000 to 99 in 2004. However, the new Conservatives lost in popular vote, going from 37.7% in 2000 down to 29.6%. In 2006, the Conservatives, led by Stephen Harper, won a minority government with 124 seats. They improved their percentage from 2004, garnering 36.3% of the vote. During this election, the Conservatives also made major breakthroughs in Quebec. They gained 10 seats here, whereas in 2004 they had no seats.\nAt the 2011 federal election, the Conservatives won a majority government with 167 seats. For the first time, the NDP became the Official Opposition, with 102 seats; the Liberals finished in third place with 34 seats. This was the first election in which the Green Party won a seat, that of leader Elizabeth May; the Bloc won 4 seats, losing official party status.\nRealignment: Conservatives in power.\nThe Liberal Party, after dominating Canadian politics since the 1920s, was in decline in early years of the 21st century. As Lang (2010) concluded, they lost their majority in Parliament in the 2004 election, were defeated in 2006, and in 2008 became little more than a \"rump\", falling to their lowest seat count in decades and a mere 26% of the popular vote. Furthermore, said Lang (a Liberal himself), its prospects \"are as bleak as they have ever been.\" In the 2011 election, the Liberals suffered a crushing defeat, managing to secure only 18.9% of the vote share and only 34 seats. As a result, the Liberals lost their status as official opposition to the NDP.\nIn explaining those trends, Behiels (2010) synthesized major studies and reported that \"a great many journalists, political advisors, and politicians argue that a new political party paradigm is emerging\" She claimed they saw a new power configuration based on a right-wing political party capable of sharply changing the traditional role of the state (federal and provincial) in the twenty-first-century. Behiels said that, unlike Brian Mulroney who tried but failed to challenge the long-term dominance of the Liberals, Harper's attempt had proven to be more determined, systematic and successful.\nMany commentators thought it signalled a major realignment. The \"Economist\" said, \"the election represents the biggest realignment of Canadian politics since 1993.\" Lawrence Martin, commentator for the \"Globe and Mail\" said, \"Harper has completed a remarkable reconstruction of a Canadian political landscape that endured for more than a century. The realignment saw both old parties of the moderate middle, the Progressive Conservatives and the Liberals, either eliminated or marginalized.\" \"Maclean's\" said, the election marked \"an unprecedented realignment of Canadian politics\" as \"the Conservatives are now in a position to replace the Liberals as the natural governing party in Canada.\"\nDespite the grim outlook and poor early poll numbers, when the 2015 election was held, the Liberals under Justin Trudeau had an unprecedented comeback and the realignment was proved only temporary. Gaining 148 seats, they won a majority government for the first time since 2000. The \"Toronto Star\" claimed the comeback was \"headed straight for the history books\" and that Harper's name would \"forever be joined with that of his Liberal nemesis in Canada\u2019s electoral annals\". Spencer McKay for the \"National Post\" suggested that \"maybe we\u2019ve witnessed a revival of Canada\u2019s 'natural governing party'\".\nParty funding.\nThe rules governing the funding of parties are designed to ensure reliance on personal contributions. Personal donations to federal parties and campaigns benefit from tax credits, although the amount of tax relief depends on the amount given. Also only people paying income taxes receive any benefit from this.\nThe rules are based on the belief that union or business funding should not be allowed to have as much impact on federal election funding as these are not contributions from citizens and are not evenly spread out between parties. They are still allowed to contribute to the election but only in a minor fashion. The new rules stated that a party had to receive 2% of the vote nationwide in order to receive the general federal funding for parties. Each vote garnered a certain dollar amount for a party (approximately $1.75) in future funding. For the initial disbursement, approximations were made based on previous elections. The NDP received more votes than expected (its national share of the vote went up) while the new Conservative Party of Canada received fewer votes than had been estimated and was asked to refund the difference. Quebec was the first province to implement a similar system of funding many years before the changes to funding of federal parties.\nFederal funds are disbursed quarterly to parties, beginning at the start of 2005. For the moment, this disbursement delay leaves the NDP and the Green Party in a better position to fight an election, since they rely more on individual contributors than federal funds. The Green Party now receives federal funds, since it for the first time received a sufficient share of the vote in the 2004 election.\nIn 2007, news emerged of a funding loophole that \"could cumulatively exceed the legal limit by more than $60,000,\" through anonymous recurrent donations of $200 to every riding of a party from corporations or unions. At the time, for each individual, the legal annual donation limit was $1,100 for each party, $1,100 combined total for each party's associations, and in an election year, an additional $1,100 combined total for each party's candidates. All three limits increase on 1 April every year based on the inflation rate.\nTwo of the biggest federal political parties in Canada experienced a drop in donations in 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic impact on the global economy.\nLeaders\u2019 debates.\nLeaders\u2019 debates in Canada consist of two debates, one English and one French, both produced by a consortium of Canada's five major television broadcasters (CBC/SRC, CTV, Global and TVA) and usually consist of the leaders of all parties with representation in the House of Commons.\nThese debates air on the networks of the producing consortium as well as the public affairs and parliamentary channel CPAC and the American public affairs network C-SPAN.\nJudiciary.\nThe highest court in Canada is the Supreme Court of Canada and is the final court of appeal in the Canadian justice system. The court is composed of nine judges: eight Puisne Justices and the Chief Justice of Canada. Justices of the Supreme Court of Canada are appointed by the Governor-in-Council. The \"Supreme Court Act\" limits eligibility for appointment to persons who have been judges of a superior court, or members of the bar for ten or more years. Members of the bar or superior judge of Quebec, by law, must hold three of the nine positions on the Supreme Court of Canada.\nGovernment departments and structure.\nThe Canadian government operates the public service using departments, smaller agencies (for example, commissions, tribunals, and boards), and crown corporations. There are two types of departments: central agencies such as Finance, Privy Council Office, and Treasury Board Secretariat have an organizing and oversight role for the entire public service; line departments are departments that perform tasks in a specific area or field, such as the departments of Agriculture, Environment, or Defence.\nScholar Peter Aucoin, writing about the Canadian Westminster system, raised concerns in the early 2000s about the centralization of power; an increased number, role and influence of partisan-political staff; personal-politicization of appointments to the senior public service; and the assumption that the public service is promiscuously partisan for the government of the day.\nImmigration.\nIn 1967, Canada established a point-based system to determine if immigrants should be eligible to enter the country, using meritorious qualities such as the applicant's ability to speak both French and English, their level of education, and other details that may be expected of someone raised in Canada. This system was considered ground-breaking at the time since prior systems were slanted on the basis of ethnicity. However, many foreign nationals still found it challenging to secure work after emigrating, resulting in a higher unemployment rate amongst the immigrant population. After winning power at the 2006 federal election, the Conservative Party sought to curb this issue by placing weight on whether or not the applicant has a standing job offer in Canada. The change has been a source of some contention as opponents argue that businesses use this change to suppress wages, with corporate owners leveraging the knowledge that an immigrant should hold a job to successfully complete the immigration process.\nSee also.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "5195", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5195", "title": "Economy of Canada", "text": " \nThe economy of Canada is a highly developed market economy. It is the 9th largest GDP by nominal and 15th largest GDP by PPP in the world. As with other developed nations, the country's economy is dominated by the service industry which employs about three quarters of Canadians. Canada has the third highest total estimated value of natural resources, valued at US$33.2 trillion in 2019. It has the world's third largest proven petroleum reserves and is the fourth largest exporter of petroleum. It is also the fourth largest exporter of natural gas. Canada is considered an \"energy superpower\" due to its abundant natural resources and a small population of 37 million inhabitants relative to its land area.\nAccording to the Corruption Perceptions Index, Canada is one of the least corrupt countries in the world, and is one of the world's top ten trading nations, with a highly globalized economy. Canada historically ranks above the U.S. and most western European nations on The Heritage Foundation's index of economic freedom, and experiencing a relatively low level of income disparity. The country's average household disposable income per capita is \"well above\" the OECD average. The Toronto Stock Exchange is the eighth-largest stock exchange in the world by market capitalization, listing over 1,500 companies with a combined market capitalization of over US$3\u00a0trillion.\nIn 2018, Canadian trade in goods and services reached \u00a0trillion. Canada's exports totalled over \u00a0billion, while its imported goods were worth over \u00a0billion, of which approximately \u00a0billion originated from the United States, \u00a0billion from non-U.S. sources. In 2018, Canada had a trade deficit in goods of \u00a0billion and a trade deficit in services of \u00a0billion.\nCanada is unusual among developed countries in the importance of the primary sector, with the logging and energy industries being two of Canada's most important. Canada also has a sizable manufacturing sector, based in Central Canada, with the automobile industry and aircraft industry being especially important. With the world's longest coastline, Canada has the 8th largest commercial fishing and seafood industry in the world. Canada is one of the global leaders of the entertainment software industry. It is a member of the APEC, G7, G20, OECD and WTO, and was formerly a member of NAFTA until the USMCA came into force in 2020.\nOverview.\nWith the exception of a few island nations in the Caribbean, Canada is the only major parliamentary system in North America. As a result, Canada has developed its own social and political institutions, distinct from most other countries in the world. Though the Canadian economy is closely integrated with the American economy, it has developed unique economic institutions.\nThe Canadian economic system generally combines elements of private enterprise and public enterprise. Many aspects of public enterprise, most notably the development of an extensive social welfare system to redress social and economic inequities, were adopted after the end of World War II in 1945.\nApproximately 89% of Canada's land is Crown land. Canada has one of the highest levels of economic freedom in the world. Today Canada closely resembles the U.S. in its market-oriented economic system and pattern of production. As of 2019, Canada has 56 companies in the Forbes Global 2000 list, ranking ninth just behind South Korea and ahead of Saudi Arabia.\nInternational trade makes up a large part of the Canadian economy, particularly of its natural resources. In 2009, agriculture, energy, forestry and mining exports accounted for about 58% of Canada's total exports. Machinery, equipment, automotive products and other manufactures accounted for a further 38% of exports in 2009. In 2009, exports accounted for about 30% of Canada's GDP. The United States is by far its largest trading partner, accounting for about 73% of exports and 63% of imports as of 2009. Canada's combined exports and imports ranked 8th among all nations in 2006.\nAbout 4% of Canadians are directly employed in primary resource fields, and they account for 6.2% of GDP. They are still paramount in many parts of the country. Many, if not most, towns in northern Canada, where agriculture is difficult, exist because of a nearby mine or source of timber. Canada is a world leader in the production of many natural resources such as gold, nickel, uranium, diamonds, lead, and in recent years, crude petroleum, which, with the world's second-largest oil reserves, is taking an increasingly prominent position in natural resources extraction. Several of Canada's largest companies are based in natural resource industries, such as Encana, Cameco, Goldcorp, and Barrick Gold. The vast majority of these products are exported, mainly to the United States. There are also many secondary and service industries that are directly linked to primary ones. For instance one of Canada's largest manufacturing industries is the pulp and paper sector, which is directly linked to the logging business.\nThe reliance on natural resources has several effects on the Canadian economy and Canadian society. While manufacturing and service industries are easy to standardize, natural resources vary greatly by region. This ensures that differing economic structures developed in each region of Canada, contributing to Canada's strong regionalism. At the same time the vast majority of these resources are exported, integrating Canada closely into the international economy. Howlett and Ramesh argue that the inherent instability of such industries also contributes to greater government intervention in the economy, to reduce the social impact of market changes.\nNatural resource industries also raise important questions of sustainability. Despite many decades as a leading producer, there is little risk of depletion. Large discoveries continue to be made, such as the massive nickel find at Voisey's Bay. Moreover, the far north remains largely undeveloped as producers await higher prices or new technologies as many operations in this region are not yet cost effective. In recent decades Canadians have become less willing to accept the environmental destruction associated with exploiting natural resources. High wages and Aboriginal land claims have also curbed expansion. Instead, many Canadian companies have focused their exploration, exploitation and expansion activities overseas where prices are lower and governments more amenable. Canadian companies are increasingly playing important roles in Latin America, Southeast Asia, and Africa.\nThe depletion of renewable resources has raised concerns in recent years. After decades of escalating overutilization the cod fishery all but collapsed in the 1990s, and the Pacific salmon industry also suffered greatly. The logging industry, after many years of activism, has in recent years moved to a more sustainable model, or to other countries.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132018. Inflation under 2 % is in green.\nExport trade.\nExport trade from Canada measured in US dollars. In 2018, Canada exported over US$450 billion.\nImport trade.\nImport trade in 2017 measured in US dollars.\nMeasuring productivity.\nProductivity measures are key indicators of economic performance and a key source of economic growth and competitiveness. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)'s \"Compendium of Productivity Indicators\", published annually, presents a broad overview of productivity levels and growth in member nations, highlighting key measurement issues. It analyses the role of \"productivity as the main driver of economic growth and convergence\" and the \"contributions of labour, capital and MFP in driving economic growth\". According to the definition above \"MFP is often interpreted as the contribution to economic growth made by factors such as technical and organisational innovation\" (OECD 2008,11). Measures of productivity include Gross Domestic Product (GDP)(OECD 2008,11) and multifactor productivity.\nMultifactor productivity.\nAnother productivity measure, used by the OECD, is the long-term trend in multifactor productivity (MFP) also known as total factor productivity (TFP). This indicator assesses an economy's \"underlying productive capacity ('potential output'), itself an important measure of the growth possibilities of economies and of inflationary pressures\". MFP measures the residual growth that cannot be explained by the rate of change in the services of labour, capital and intermediate outputs, and is often interpreted as the contribution to economic growth made by factors such as technical and organisational innovation. (OECD 2008,11)\nAccording to the OECD's annual economic survey of Canada in June 2012, Canada has experienced weak growth of multi-factor productivity (MFP) and has been declining further since 2002. One of the ways MFP growth is raised is by boosting innovation and Canada's innovation indicators such as business R&amp;D and patenting rates were poor. Raising MFP growth is \"needed to sustain rising living standards, especially as the population ages\".\nBank of Canada.\nThe mandate of the central bank\u2014the Bank of Canada is to conduct monetary policy that \"preserves the value of money by keeping inflation low and stable\".\nMonetary Policy Report.\nThe Bank of Canada issues its bank rate announcement through its Monetary Policy Report which is released eight times a year. The Bank of Canada, a federal crown corporation, has the responsibility of Canada's monetary system. Under the inflation-targeting monetary policy that has been the cornerstone of Canada's monetary and fiscal policy since the early 1990s, the Bank of Canada sets an inflation target The inflation target was set at 2 per cent, which is the midpoint of an inflation range of 1 to 3 per cent. They established a set of inflation-reduction targets to keep inflation \"low, stable and predictable\" and to foster \"confidence in the value of money\", contribute to Canada's sustained growth, employment gains and improved standard of living.\nIn a January 9, 2019 statement on the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Bank of Canada Governor Stephen S. Poloz summarized major events since the October report, such as \"negative economic consequences\" of the US-led trade war with China. In response to the ongoing trade war \"bond yields have fallen, yield curves have flattened even more and stock markets have repriced significantly\" in \"global financial markets\". In Canada, low oil prices will impact Canada's \"macroeconomic outlook\". Canada's housing sector is not stabilizing as quickly as anticipated.\nInflation targeting.\nDuring the period that John Crow was Governor of the Bank of Canada\u20141987 to 1994\u2014 there was a worldwide recession and the bank rate rose to around 14% and unemployment topped 11%. Although since that time inflation-targeting has been adopted by \"most advanced-world central banks\", in 1991 it was innovative and Canada was an early adopter when the then-Finance Minister Michael Wilson approved the Bank of Canada's first inflation-targeting in the 1991 federal budget. The inflation target was set at 2 per cent. Inflation is measured by the total consumer price index (CPI). In 2011 the Government of Canada and the Bank of Canada extended Canada's inflation-control target to December 31, 2016. The Bank of Canada uses three unconventional instruments to achieve the inflation target: \"a conditional statement on the future path of the policy rate\", quantitative easing, and credit easing.\nAs a result, interest rates and inflation eventually came down along with the value of the Canadian dollar. From 1991 to 2011 the inflation-targeting regime kept \"price gains fairly reliable\".\nFollowing the Financial crisis of 2007\u201308 the narrow focus of inflation-targeting as a means of providing stable growth in the Canadian economy was questioned. By 2011, the then-Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney argued that the central bank's mandate would allow for a more flexible inflation-targeting in specific situations where he would consider taking longer \"than the typical six to eight quarters to return inflation to 2 per cent\".\nOn July 15, 2015, the Bank of Canada announced that it was lowering its target for the overnight rate by another one-quarter percentage point, to 0.5 per cent \"to try to stimulate an economy that appears to have failed to rebound meaningfully from the oil shock woes that dragged it into decline in the first quarter\". According to the Bank of Canada announcement, in the first quarter of 2015, the total Consumer price index (CPI) inflation was about 1 per cent. This reflects \"year-over-year price declines for consumer energy products\". Core inflation in the first quarter of 2015 was about 2 per cent with an underlying trend in inflation at about 1.5 to 1.7 per cent.\nIn response to the Bank of Canada's July 15, 2015 rate adjustment, Prime Minister Stephen Harper explained that the economy was \"being dragged down by forces beyond Canadian borders such as global oil prices, the European debt crisis, and China's economic slowdown\" which has made the global economy \"fragile\".\nThe Chinese stock market had lost about US$3 trillion of wealth by July 2015 when panicked investors sold stocks, which created declines in the commodities markets, which in turn negatively impacted resource-producing countries like Canada.\nThe Bank's main priority has been to keep inflation at a moderate level. As part of that strategy, interest rates were kept at a low level for almost seven years. Since September 2010, the key interest rate (overnight rate) was 0.5%. Since September 2010, the key interest rate (overnight rate) was 0.5%. In mid 2017, inflation remained below the Bank's 2% target, (at 1.6%) mostly because of reductions in the cost of energy, food and automobiles; as well, the economy was in a continuing spurt with a predicted GDP growth of 2.8 percent by year end. Early on July 12, 2017, the bank issued a statement that the benchmark rate would be increased to 0.75%.\nKey industries.\nIn 2017, the Canadian economy had the following relative weighting by industry, as percentage value of GDP:\nService sector.\nThe service sector in Canada is vast and multifaceted, employing about three quarters of Canadians and accounting for 70% of GDP. The largest employer is the retail sector, employing almost 12% of Canadians. The retail industry is concentrated mainly in a small number of chain stores clustered together in shopping malls. In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of big-box stores, such as Wal-Mart (of the United States), Real Canadian Superstore, and Best Buy (of the United States). This has led to fewer workers in this sector and a migration of retail jobs to the suburbs.\nThe second largest portion of the service sector is the business service and it employs only a slightly smaller percentage of the population. This includes the financial services, real estate, and communications industries. This portion of the economy has been rapidly growing in recent years. It is largely concentrated in the major urban centres, especially Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver (see Banking in Canada).\nThe education and health sectors are two of Canada's largest, but both are largely under the influence of the government. The health care industry has been quickly growing, and is the third largest in Canada. Its rapid growth has led to problems for governments who must find money to fund it.\nCanada has an important high tech industry, and a burgeoning film, television, and entertainment industry creating content for local and international consumption (see Media in Canada). Tourism is of ever increasing importance, with the vast majority of international visitors coming from the United States. Casino gaming is currently the fastest-growing component of the Canadian tourism industry, contributing $5 billion in profits for Canadian governments and employing 41,000 Canadians as of 2001.\nManufacturing.\nThe general pattern of development for wealthy nations was a transition from a raw material production based economy to a manufacturing based one, and then to a service based economy. At its World War II peak in 1944, Canada's manufacturing sector accounted for 29% of GDP, declining to 10.37% in 2017. Canada has not suffered as greatly as most other rich, industrialized nations from the pains of the relative decline in the importance of manufacturing since the 1960s. A 2009 study by Statistics Canada also found that, while manufacturing declined as a relative percentage of GDP from 24.3% in the 1960s to 15.6% in 2005, manufacturing volumes between 1961 and 2005 kept pace with the overall growth in the volume index of GDP. Manufacturing in Canada was especially hit hard by the financial crisis of 2007\u201308. As of 2017, manufacturing accounts for 10% of Canada's GDP, a relative decline of more than 5% of GDP since 2005.\nCentral Canada is home to branch plants to all the major American and Japanese automobile makers and many parts factories owned by Canadian firms such as Magna International and Linamar Corporation.\nSteel.\nCanada was the world's nineteenth-largest steel exporter in 2018. In year-to-date 2019 (through March), further referred to as YTD 2019, Canada exported 1.39 million metric tons of steel, a 22 percent decrease from 1.79 million metric tons in YTD 2018. Canada's exports represented about 1.5 percent of all steel exported globally in 2017, based on available data. By volume, Canada's 2018 steel exports represented just over one-tenth the volume of the world's largest exporter, China. In value terms, steel represented 1.4 percent of the total goods Canada exported in 2018. The growth in exports in the decade since 2009 has been 29%. The largest producers in 2018 were ArcelorMittal, Essar Steel Algoma, and the first of those alone accounted for roughly half of Canadian steel production through its two subsidiaries. The top two markets for Canada's exports were its NAFTA partners, and by themselves accounted for 92 percent of exports by volume. Canada sent 83 percent of its steel exports to the United States in YTD 2019. The gap between domestic demand and domestic production increased to -2.4 million metric tons, up from -0.2 million metric tons in YTD 2018. In YTD 2019, exports as a share of production decreased to 41.6 percent from 53 percent in YTD 2018. \nIn 2017, heavy industry accounted for 10.2% of Canada's Greenhouse gas emissions.\nEnergy.\nCanada has access to cheap sources of energy because of its geography. This has enabled the creation of several important industries, such as the large aluminum industries in British Columbia and Quebec. Canada is also one of the world's highest per capita consumers of energy.\nElectricity.\nThe electricity sector in Canada has played a significant role in the economic and political life of the country since the late 19th century. The sector is organized along provincial and territorial lines. In a majority of provinces, large government-owned integrated public utilities play a leading role in the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. Ontario and Alberta have created electricity markets in the last decade in order to increase investment and competition in this sector of the economy. In 2017, the electricity sector accounted for 10% of total national greenhouse gas emissions. Canada has substantial electricity trade with the neighbouring United States amounting to 72 TWh exports and 10 TWh imports in 2017.\nHydroelectricity accounted for 59% of all electric generation in Canada in 2016, making Canada the world's second-largest producer of hydroelectricity after China. Since 1960, large hydroelectric projects, especially in Quebec, British Columbia, Manitoba and Newfoundland and Labrador, have significantly increased the country's generation capacity.\nThe second-largest single source of power (15% of the total) is nuclear power, with several plants in Ontario generating more than half of that province's electricity, and one generator in New Brunswick. This makes Canada the world's sixth-largest producer of electricity generated by nuclear power, producing 95 TWh in 2017.\nFossil fuels provide 19% of Canadian electric power, about half as coal (9% of the total) and the remainder a mix of natural gas and oil. Only five provinces use coal for electricity generation. Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Nova Scotia rely on coal for nearly half their generation while other provinces and territories use little or none. Alberta and Saskatchewan also use a substantial amount of natural gas. Remote communities including all of Nunavut and much of the Northwest Territories produce most of their electricity from diesel generators, at high economic and environmental cost. The federal government has set up initiatives to reduce dependence on diesel-fired electricity.\nNon-hydro renewables are a fast-growing portion of the total, at 7% in 2016.\nOil and Gas.\nCanada possesses large oil and gas resources centred in Alberta and the Northern Territories, but also present in neighbouring British Columbia and Saskatchewan. The vast Athabasca oil sands give Canada the world's third largest reserves of oil after Saudi Arabia and Venezuela according to USGS. As such, the oil and gas industry represents 27% of Canada's total greenhouse gas emissions, an increase of 84% since 1990, mostly due to the development of the oil sands.\nHistorically, an important issue in Canadian politics is the interplay between the oil and energy industry in Western Canada and the industrial heartland of Southern Ontario. Foreign investment in Western oil projects has fueled Canada's rising dollar. This has raised the price of Ontario's manufacturing exports and made them less competitive, a problem similar to the decline of the manufacturing sector in the Netherlands.\nThe National Energy Policy of the early 1980s attempted to make Canada oil-sufficient and to ensure equal supply and price of oil in all parts of Canada, especially for the eastern manufacturing base. This policy proved deeply divisive as it forced Alberta to sell low-priced oil to eastern Canada. The policy was eliminated 5 years after it was first announced amid a collapse of oil prices in 1985. The new Prime Minister Brian Mulroney had campaigned against the policy in the 1984 Canadian federal election. One of the most controversial sections of the Canada\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement of 1988 was a promise that Canada would never charge the United States more for energy than fellow Canadians.\nAgriculture.\nCanada is also one of the world's largest suppliers of agricultural products, particularly of wheat and other grains. Canada is a major exporter of agricultural products, to the United States and Asia. As with all other developed nations the proportion of the population and GDP devoted to agriculture fell dramatically over the 20th century. The agriculture and agri-food manufacturing sector created $49.0 billion to Canada's GDP in 2015, accounting for 2.6% of total GDP. This sector also accounts for 8.4% of Canada's Greenhouse gas emissions.\nAs with other developed nations, the Canadian agriculture industry receives significant government subsidies and supports. However, Canada has been a strong supporter of reducing market influencing subsidies through the World Trade Organization. In 2000, Canada spent approximately CDN$4.6 billion on supports for the industry. Of this, $2.32 billion was classified under the WTO designation of \"green box\" support, meaning it did not directly influence the market, such as money for research or disaster relief. All but $848.2 million were subsidies worth less than 5% of the value of the crops they were provided for.\nFree-trade agreements.\nOngoing free-trade agreements negotiations.\nCanada is negotiating bilateral FTAs with the following countries respectively trade blocs:\nCanada has been involved in negotiations to create the following regional trade blocks:\nPolitical issues.\nRelations with the U.S..\nCanada and the United States share a common trading relationship. Canada's job market continues to perform well along with the US, reaching a 30-year low in the unemployment rate in December 2006, following 14 consecutive years of employment growth.\nThe United States is by far Canada's largest trading partner, with more than $1.7 billion CAD in trade per day in 2005. In 2009, 73% of Canada's exports went to the United States, and 63% of Canada's imports were from the United States. Trade with Canada makes up 23% of the United States' exports and 17% of its imports. By comparison, in 2005 this was more than U.S. trade with all countries in the European Union combined, and well over twice U.S. trade with all the countries of Latin America combined. Just the two-way trade that crosses the Ambassador Bridge between Michigan and Ontario equals all U.S. exports to Japan. Canada's importance to the United States is not just a border-state phenomenon: Canada is the leading export market for 35 of 50 U.S. states, and is the United States' largest foreign supplier of energy.\nBilateral trade increased by 52% between 1989, when the U.S.\u2013Canada Free Trade Agreement (FTA) went into effect, and 1994, when the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) superseded it. Trade has since increased by 40%. NAFTA continues the FTA's moves toward reducing trade barriers and establishing agreed-upon trade rules. It also resolves some long-standing bilateral irritants and liberalizes rules in several areas, including agriculture, services, energy, financial services, investment, and government procurement. NAFTA forms the largest trading area in the world, embracing the 405 million people of the three North American countries.\nThe largest component of U.S.\u2013Canada trade is in the commodity sector.\nThe U.S. is Canada's largest agricultural export market, taking well over half of all Canadian food exports. Nearly two-thirds of Canada's forest products, including pulp and paper, are exported to the United States; 72% of Canada's total newsprint production also is exported to the U.S.\nAt $73.6 billion in 2004, U.S.-Canada trade in energy is the largest U.S. energy trading relationship, with the overwhelming majority ($66.7 billion) being exports from Canada. The primary components of U.S. energy trade with Canada are petroleum, natural gas, and electricity. Canada is the United States' largest oil supplier and the fifth-largest energy producing country in the world. Canada provides about 16% of U.S. oil imports and 14% of total U.S. consumption of natural gas. The United States and Canada's national electricity grids are linked, and both countries share hydropower facilities on the western borders.\nWhile most of U.S.-Canada trade flows smoothly, there are occasionally bilateral trade disputes, particularly in the agricultural and cultural fields. Usually these issues are resolved through bilateral consultative forums or referral to World Trade Organization (WTO) or NAFTA dispute resolution. In May 1999, the U.S. and Canadian governments negotiated an agreement on magazines that provides increased access for the U.S. publishing industry to the Canadian market. The United States and Canada also have resolved several major issues involving fisheries. By common agreement, the two countries submitted a Gulf of Maine boundary dispute to the International Court of Justice in 1981; both accepted the court's October 12, 1984 ruling which demarcated the territorial sea boundary. A current issue between the United States and Canada is the ongoing softwood lumber dispute, as the U.S. alleges that Canada unfairly subsidizes its forestry industry.\nIn 1990, the United States and Canada signed a bilateral Fisheries Enforcement Agreement, which has served to deter illegal fishing activity and reduce the risk of injury during fisheries enforcement incidents. The U.S. and Canada signed a Pacific Salmon Agreement in June 1999 that settled differences over implementation of the 1985 Pacific Salmon Treaty for the next decade.\nCanada and the United States signed an aviation agreement during Bill Clinton's visit to Canada in February 1995, and air traffic between the two countries has increased dramatically as a result. The two countries also share in operation of the St. Lawrence Seaway, connecting the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe U.S remains Canada's largest foreign investor and the most popular destination for Canadian foreign investments.\u00a0 In 2018, the stock of U.S. direct investment in Canada totaled $406 billion, while the stock of Canadian investment in the U.S totaled $595 billion, or 46% of the overall CDIA stock for 2018. This made Canada the second largest investing country in the U.S for 2018 US investments are primarily directed at Canada's mining and smelting industries, petroleum, chemicals, the manufacture of machinery and transportation equipment, and finance, while Canadian investment in the United States is concentrated in manufacturing, wholesale trade, real estate, petroleum, finance, and insurance and other services.\nDebt issue.\nCentral Government Debt.\nThe OECD reports the Central Government Debt as percentage of the GDP. In 2000 Canada's was 40.9 percent, in 2007 it was 25.2 percent, in 2008 it was 28.6 percent and by 2010 it was 36.1 percent. The OECD reports net financial liabilities measure used by the OECD, reports the net number at 25.2%, as of 2008, making Canada's total government debt burden as the lowest in the G8. The gross number was 68% in 2011.\nThe CIA World Factbook, updated weekly, measures financial liabilities by using gross general government debt, as opposed to net federal debt used by the OECD and the Canadian federal government. Gross general government debt includes both \"intragovernmental debt and the debt of public entities at the sub-national level\". For example, the CIA measured Canada's public debt as 84.1% of GDP in 2012 and 87.4% of GDP in 2011 making it 22nd in the world.\nHousehold Debt.\nHousehold debt, the amount of money that all adults in the household owe financial institutions, includes consumer debt and mortgage loans. In March 2015, the International Monetary Fund reported that Canada's high household debt was one of two vulnerable domestic areas in Canada's economy; the second is its overheated housing market.\nAccording to Statistics Canada, total household credit as of July 2019 was CAD$2.2 trillion. According to Philip Cross of the Fraser Institute, in May 2015, while the Canadian household debt-to-income ratio is similar to that in the US, however lending standards in Canada are tighter than those in the United States to protect against high-risk borrowers taking out unsustainable debt.\nMergers and Acquisition.\nSince 1985, 63,755 deals in- and outbound Canada have been announced, with an overall value of US$3.7 billion. Almost 50% of the targets of Canadian companies (outbound deals) have a parent company in the US. Inbound deals are 82% percent from the US.\nHere is a list of the biggest deals in Canadian history:"}
{"id": "5196", "revid": "1005431269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5196", "title": "Telecommunications in Canada", "text": "Present-day telecommunications in Canada include telephone, radio, television, and internet usage. In the past, telecommunications included telegraphy available through Canadian Pacific and Canadian National.\nHistory.\nThe history of telegraphy in Canada dates back to the Province of Canada. While the first telegraph company was the Toronto, Hamilton and Niagara Electro-Magnetic Telegraph Company, founded in 1846, it was the Montreal Telegraph Company, controlled by Hugh Allan and founded a year later, that dominated in Canada during the technology's early years.\nFollowing the 1852 Telegraph Act, Canada's first permanent transatlantic telegraph link was a submarine cable built in 1866 between Ireland and Newfoundland. Telegrams were sent through networks built by Canadian Pacific and Canadian National.\nIn 1868 Montreal Telegraph began facing competition from the newly established Dominion Telegraph Company. 1880 saw the Great North Western Telegraph Company established to connect Ontario and Manitoba but within a year it was taken over by Western Union, leading briefly to that company's control of almost all telegraphy in Canada. In 1882, Canadian Pacific transmitted its first commercial telegram over telegraph lines they had erected alongside its tracks, breaking Western Union's monopoly. Great North Western Telegraph, facing bankruptcy, was taken over in 1915 by Canadian Northern.\nBy the end of World War II, Canadians communicated by telephone, more than any other country. In 1967 the CP and CN networks were merged to form CNCP Telecommunications.\nAs of 1951, approximately 7000 messages were sent daily from the United States to Canada. An agreement with Western Union required that U.S. company to route messages in a specified ratio of 3:1, with three telegraphic messages transmitted to Canadian National for every message transmitted to Canadian Pacific. The agreement was complicated by the fact that some Canadian destinations were served by only one of the two networks.\nFixed-line telephony.\nTelephones - fixed lines: total subscriptions: 14,987,520 (July 2016 est.)\nTelephones - mobile cellular: 30.45 million (July 2016 est.)\nTelephone system: (2016)\nCall signs.\nITU prefixes: Letter combinations available for use in Canada as the first two letters of a television or radio station's call sign are CF, CG, CH, CI, CJ, CK, CY, CZ, VA, VB, VC, VD, VE, VF, VG, VO, VX, VY, XJ, XK, XL, XM, XN and XO. Only CF, CH, CI, CJ and CK are currently in common use, although four radio stations in St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador retained call letters beginning with VO when Newfoundland joined Canadian Confederation in 1949. Stations owned by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation use CB through a special agreement with the government of Chile. Some codes beginning with VE and VF are also in use to identify radio repeater transmitters.\nRadio.\nAs of 2016, there were over 1,100 radio stations and audio services broadcasting in Canada. Of these, 711 are private commercial radio stations. These commercial stations account for over three quarters of radio stations in Canada. The remainder of the radio stations are a mix of public broadcasters, such as CBC Radio, as well as campus, community, and Aboriginal stations.\nTelevision.\nAs of 2016, 780 TV services were broadcasting in Canada.\nCable and satellite television services are available throughout Canada. The largest cable providers are Bell Canada, Rogers Cable, Shaw Cable, Vid\u00e9otron, Telus and Cogeco, while the two licensed satellite providers are Bell Satellite TV and Shaw Direct.\nInternet.\nBell, Rogers, Telus, and Shaw are among the bigger ISPs in Canada. Depending on your location, Bell and Rogers would be the big internet service providers in Ontario, while Shaw and Telus are the main players competing in western provinces.\nMobile networks.\nThe three major mobile network operators are Rogers Wireless (10.6 million subscribers), Bell Mobility (9.0 million) and Telus Mobility (8.8 million), which have a combined 91% of market share.\nAdministration and Government.\nFederally, telecommunications are overseen by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission ()\u2013CRTC as outlined under the provisions of both the Telecommunications Act and Radiocommunication Acts. CRTC further works with Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (formerly Industry Canada) on various technical aspects including: allocating frequencies and call signs, managing the broadcast spectrum, and regulating other technical issues such as interference with electronics equipment. As Canada comprises a part of the North American Numbering Plan for area codes, the Canadian Numbering Administration Consortium within Canada is responsible for allocating and managing area codes in Canada."}
{"id": "5197", "revid": "191757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5197", "title": "Transportation in Canada", "text": "Transportation in Canada, the world's second-largest country in total area, is dedicated to having an efficient, high-capacity multimodal transport spanning often vast distances between natural resource extraction sites, agricultural and urban areas. Canada's transportation system includes more than of roads, 10 major international airports, 300 smaller airports, of functioning railway track, and more than 300 commercial ports and harbours that provide access to the Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic oceans as well as the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence Seaway. In 2005, the transportation sector made up 4.2% of Canada's GDP, compared to 3.7% for Canada's mining and oil and gas extraction industries.\nTransport Canada oversees and regulates most aspects of transportation within federal jurisdiction, including interprovincial transport. This primarily includes rail, air and maritime transportation. Transport Canada is under the direction of the federal government's Minister of Transport. The Transportation Safety Board of Canada is responsible for maintaining transportation safety in Canada by investigating accidents and making safety recommendations.\nRoads.\nThere is a total of of roads in Canada, of which are paved, including of expressways (the third-longest collection in the world, behind the Interstate Highway System of the United States and China's National Trunk Highway System). As of 2008, were unpaved.\nIn 2009, there were 20,706,616 road vehicles registered in Canada, of which 96% were vehicles under , 2.4% were vehicles between and 1.6% were or greater. These vehicles travelled a total of 333.29\u00a0billion kilometres, of which 303.6\u00a0billion was for vehicles under 4.5 tonnes, 8.3\u00a0billion was for vehicles between 4.5 and 15 tonnes and 21.4\u00a0billion was for vehicles over 15 tonnes. For the 4.5- to 15-tonne trucks, 88.9% of vehicle-kilometres were intra-province trips, 4.9% were inter-province, 2.8% were between Canada and the US and 3.4% made outside of Canada. For the trucks over 15 tonnes, 59.1% of vehicle-kilometres were intra-province trips, 20% inter-province trips, 13.8% Canada-US trips and 7.1% trips made outside of Canada.\nCanada's vehicles consumed a total of of gasoline and of diesel. Trucking generated 35% of the total GDP from transport, compared to 25% for rail, water and air combined (the remainder being generated by the industry's transit, pipeline, scenic and support activities). Hence roads are the dominant means of passenger and freight transport in Canada.\nRoads and highways were managed by provincial and municipal authorities until construction of the Northwest Highway System (the Alaska Highway) and the Trans-Canada Highway project initiation. The Alaska Highway of 1942 was constructed during World War II for military purposes connecting Fort St. John, British Columbia with Fairbanks, Alaska. The transcontinental highway, a joint national and provincial expenditure, was begun in 1949 under the initiation of the Trans Canada Highway Act on December 10, 1949. The highway was completed in 1962 at a total expenditure of $1.4\u00a0billion.\nInternationally, Canada has road links with both the lower 48 US states and Alaska. The Ministry of Transportation maintains the road network in Ontario and also employs Ministry of Transport Enforcement Officers for the purpose of administering the Canada Transportation Act and related regulations. The Department of Transportation in New Brunswick performs a similar task in that province as well.\nRegulations enacted in regards to Canada highways are the 1971 Motor Vehicle Safety Act and the 1990 Highway Traffic Act.\nThe safety of Canada's roads is moderately good by international standards, and is improving both in terms of accidents per head of population and per billion vehicle kilometers.\nAir transport.\nAir transportation made up 9% of the transport sector's GDP generation in 2005. Canada's largest air carrier and its flag carrier is Air Canada, which had 34\u00a0million customers in 2006 and, as of April 2010, operates 363 aircraft (including Air Canada Jazz). CHC Helicopter, the largest commercial helicopter operator in the world, is second with 142 aircraft and WestJet, a low-cost carrier formed in 1996, is third with 100 aircraft. Canada's airline industry saw significant change following the signing of the US-Canada open skies agreement in 1995, when the marketplace became less regulated and more competitive.\nThe Canadian Transportation Agency employs transportation enforcement officers to maintain aircraft safety standards, and conduct periodic aircraft inspections, of all air carriers. The Canadian Air Transport Security Authority is charged with the responsibility for the security of air traffic within Canada. In 1994 the National Airports Policy was enacted\nPrincipal airports.\nOf over 1,800 registered Canadian aerodromes, certified airports, heliports, and floatplane bases, 26 are specially designated under Canada's National Airports System (NAS): these include all airports that handle 200,000 or more passengers each year, as well as the principal airport serving each federal, provincial, and territorial capital. However, since the introduction of the policy only one, Iqaluit Airport, has been added and no airports have been removed despite dropping below 200,000 passengers. The Government of Canada, with the exception of the three territorial capitals, retains ownership of these airports and leases them to local authorities. The next tier consists of 64 regional/local airports formerly owned by the federal government, most of which have now been transferred to other owners (most often to municipalities).\nBelow is a table of Canada's ten biggest airports by passenger traffic in 2019.\nRailways.\nIn 2007, Canada had a total of of freight and passenger railway, of which is electrified. While intercity passenger transportation by rail is now very limited, freight transport by rail remains common. Total revenues of rail services in 2006 was $10.4\u00a0billion, of which only 2.8% was from passenger services. In a year are usually earned about $11\u00a0billion, of which 3.2% is from passengers and the rest from freight. The Canadian National and Canadian Pacific Railway are Canada's two major freight railway companies, each having operations throughout North America. In 2007, 357\u00a0billion tonne-kilometres of freight were transported by rail, and 4.33\u00a0million passengers travelled 1.44\u00a0billion passenger-kilometres (an almost negligible amount compared to the 491\u00a0billion passenger-kilometres made in light road vehicles). 34,281 people were employed by the rail industry in the same year.\nNationwide passenger services are provided by the federal crown corporation Via Rail. Three Canadian cities have commuter rail services: in the Montreal area by AMT, in the Toronto area by GO Transit, and in the Vancouver area by West Coast Express. Smaller railways such as Ontario Northland, Rocky Mountaineer, and Algoma Central also run passenger trains to remote rural areas.\nIn Canada railways are served by standard gauge, , rails. See also track gauge in Canada.\nCanada has railway links with the lower 48 US States, but no connection with Alaska other than a train ferry service from Prince Rupert, British Columbia, although a line has been proposed. There are no other international rail connections.\nWaterways.\nIn 2005, of cargo was loaded and unloaded at Canadian ports. The Port of Vancouver is the busiest port in Canada, moving or 15% of Canada's total in domestic and international shipping in 2003.\nTransport Canada oversees most of the regulatory functions related to marine registration, safety of large vessel, and port pilotage duties. Many of Canada's port facilities are in the process of being divested from federal responsibility to other agencies or municipalities.\nInland waterways comprise , including the St. Lawrence Seaway. Transport Canada enforces acts and regulations governing water transportation and safety.\nCanals.\nThe St. Lawrence waterway was at one time the world's greatest inland water navigation system. The main route canals of Canada are those of the St. Lawrence River and the Great Lakes. The others are subsidiary canals.\nPorts and harbours.\nThe National Harbours Board administered Halifax, Saint John, Chicoutimi, Trois-Rivi\u00e8res, Churchill, and Vancouver until 1983. At one time, over 300 harbours across Canada were supervised by the Department of Transport. A program of divestiture was implemented around the turn of the millennium, and as of 2014, 493 of the 549 sites identified for divestiture in 1995 have been sold or otherwise transferred, as indicated by a DoT list. The government maintains an active divestiture programme, and after divestiture Transport Canada oversees only 17 Canada Port Authorities for the 17 largest shipping ports.\nMerchant marine.\nCanada's merchant marine comprised a \"total\" of 173 ships ( or over) or at the end of 2007.\nPipelines.\nPipelines are part of the energy extraction and transportation network of Canada and are used to transport natural gas, natural gas liquids, crude oil, synthetic crude and other petroleum based products. Canada has of pipeline for transportation of crude and refined oil, and for liquefied petroleum gas.\nPublic transit.\nMost Canadian cities have public transport, if only a bus system. Three Canadian cities have rapid transit systems, four have light rail systems, and three have commuter rail systems (see below). In 2016, 12.4% of Canadians used public transportation to get to work. This compares to 79.5% that got to work using a car (67.4% driving alone, 12.1% as part of a carpool), 5.5% that walked and 1.4% that rode a bike.\nGovernment organizations across Canada owned 17,852 buses of various types in 2016. Organizations in Ontario (38.8%) and Quebec (21.9%) accounted for just over three-fifths of the country's total bus fleet. Urban municipalities owned more than 85% of all buses.\nin 2016, diesel buses were the leading bus type in Canada (65.9%), followed by bio-diesel (18.1%) and hybrid (9.4%) buses. Electric, natural gas and other buses collectively accounted for the remaining 6.6%.\nRapid transit systems.\nThere are three rapid transit systems operating in Canada: the Montreal Metro, the Toronto subway, and the Vancouver SkyTrain.\nThere is also an airport circulator, the Link Train, at Toronto Pearson International Airport. It operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and is wheelchair-accessible. It is free of cost.\nLight rail systems.\nThere are light rail systems in four cities \u2013 the Calgary CTrain, the Edmonton LRT, the Ottawa O-Train, and Waterloo Region's Ion \u2013 while Toronto has an extensive streetcar system.\nThe 2016 Canada's Core Public Infrastructure Survey from Statistics Canada found that all of Canada's 247 streetcars were owned by the City of Toronto. The vast majority (87.9%) of these streetcars were purchased from 1970 to 1999, while 12.1% were purchased in 2016. Reflecting the age of the streetcars, 88.0% were reported to be in very poor condition, while 12.0% were reported to be in good condition.\nCommuter train systems.\nCommuter trains serve the cities and surrounding areas of Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver:\nHistory.\nThe standard history covers the French regime, fur traders, the canals, and early roads, and gives extensive attention to the railways.\nEuropean contact.\nPrior to the arrival of European settlers, Aboriginal peoples in Canada walked. They also used canoes, kayaks, umiaks and Bull Boats, in addition to the snowshoe, toboggan and sled in winter. They had no wheeled vehicles, and no animals larger than dogs.\nEuropeans adopted canoes as they pushed deeper into the continent's interior, and were thus able to travel via the waterways that fed from the St. Lawrence River and Hudson Bay.\nIn the 19th century and early 20th century transportation relied on harnessing oxen to \"Red River ox carts\" or horse to wagon. Maritime transportation was via manual labour such as canoe or wind on sail. Water or land travel speeds was approximately .\nSettlement was along river routes. Agricultural commodities were perishable, and trade centres were within . Rural areas centred around villages, and they were approximately apart. The advent of steam railways and steamships connected resources and markets of vast distances in the late 19th century. Railways also connected city centres, in such a way that the traveller went by sleeper, railway hotel, to the cities. Crossing the country by train took four or five days, as it still does by car. People generally lived within of the downtown core thus the train could be used for inter-city travel and the tram for commuting.\nThe advent of the interstate or Trans-Canada Highway in Canada in 1963 established ribbon development, truck stops, and industrial corridors along throughways.\nEvolution.\nThe Federal Department of Transport (established 2 November 1936) supervised railways, canals, harbours, marine and shipping, civil aviation, radio and meteorology. The Transportation Act of 1938 and the amended Railway Act, placed control and regulation of carriers in the hands of the Board of Transport commissioners for Canada. The Royal Commission on Transportation was formed 29 December 1948, to examine transportation services to all areas of Canada to eliminate economic or geographic disadvantages. The Commission also reviewed the Railway Act to provide uniform yet competitive freight-rates."}
{"id": "5198", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5198", "title": "Military of Canada", "text": ""}
{"id": "5199", "revid": "1013121259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5199", "title": "Canada\u2013United States relations", "text": "Canada\u2013United States relations (), also referred to Canadian-American relations, covers the bilateral relations between Canada and the United States. Relations between the countries has historically been extensive, given the longest shared border in the world and ever-increasing close cultural, economical ties and similarities. The shared historical and cultural heritage has resulted in one of the most stable and mutually beneficial international relationships in the world. \nFor both countries, the level of trade with the other is at the top of the annual combined import-export total. Tourism and migration between the two nations have increased rapport, but border security was heightened after the September 11 terrorist attacks on the United States in 2001. The U.S. is approximately 9.25 times larger in population and has the dominant cultural and economic influence. Starting with the American Revolution, when anti-American Loyalists fled to Canada, a vocal element in Canada has warned against US dominance or annexation. The War of 1812 saw invasions across the border. In 1815, the war ended with the border unchanged and demilitarized, as were the Great Lakes. The British ceased aiding Native American attacks on the United States, and the United States never again attempted to invade Canada. Apart from minor raids, it has remained peaceful.\nAs Britain decided to disengage, fears of an American takeover played a role in Canadian Confederation (1867), and Canada's rejection of free trade (1911). Military collaboration was close during World War II and continued throughout the Cold War, bilaterally through NORAD and multilaterally through NATO. A very high volume of trade and migration continues between the two nations, as well as a heavy overlapping of popular and elite culture, a dynamic which has generated closer ties, especially after the signing of the Canada\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement in 1988.\nThe two nations have the world's longest shared border (), and also have significant interoperability within the defense sphere. Recent difficulties have included repeated trade disputes, environmental concerns, Canadian concern for the future of oil exports, and issues of illegal immigration and the threat of terrorism. Trade has continued to expand, especially following the 1988 FTA, the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and the 2020 United States\u2013Mexico\u2013Canada Agreement (USMCA), which has progressively merged the two economies.\nCo-operation on many fronts, such as the ease of the flow of goods, services, and people across borders are to be even more extended, as well as the establishment of joint border inspection agencies, relocation of U.S. food inspectors agents to Canadian plants and vice versa, greater sharing of intelligence, and harmonizing regulations on everything from food to manufactured goods, thus further increasing the American-Canadian assemblage.\nThe foreign policies of the countries have been closely aligned since the Cold War. A diplomatic debate has been underway in recent years on whether the Northwest Passage is in international waters or under Canadian sovereignty.\nHistory.\nColonial wars.\nBefore the British conquest of French Canada in 1760, there had been a series of wars between the British and the French which were fought out in the colonies as well as in Europe and the high seas. In general, the British heavily relied on American colonial militia units, while the French heavily relied on their First Nation allies. The Iroquois Nation were important allies of the British. Much of the fighting involved ambushes and small-scale warfare in the villages along the border between New England and Quebec. The New England colonies had a much larger population than Quebec, so major invasions came from south to north. The First Nation allies, only loosely controlled by the French, repeatedly raided New England villages to kidnap women and children, and torture and kill the men. Those who survived were brought up as Francophone Catholics. The tension along the border was exacerbated by religion, the French Catholics and English Protestants had a deep mutual distrust. There was a naval dimension as well, involving privateers attacking enemy merchant ships.\nEngland seized Quebec from 1629 to 1632, and Acadia in 1613 and again from 1654 to 1670; These territories were returned to France by the peace treaties. The major wars were (to use American names), King William's War (1689\u20131697); Queen Anne's War (1702\u20131713); King George's War (1744\u20131748), and the French and Indian War (1755\u20131763). In Canada, as in Europe, this era is known as the Seven Years' War.\nNew England soldiers and sailors were critical to the successful British campaign to capture the French fortress of Louisbourg in 1745, and (after it had been returned by treaty) to capture it again in 1758.\nAmerican Revolutionary War.\nAt the outset of the American Revolutionary War, the American revolutionaries hoped the French Canadians in Quebec and the Colonists in Nova Scotia would join their rebellion and they were pre-approved for joining the United States in the Articles of Confederation. \nWhen Canada was invaded, thousands joined the American cause and formed regiments that fought during the war; however most remained neutral and some joined the British effort. Britain advised the French Canadians that the British Empire already enshrined their rights in the Quebec Act, which the American colonies had viewed as one of the Intolerable Acts. The American invasion was a fiasco and Britain tightened its grip on its northern possessions; in 1777, a major British invasion into New York led to the surrender of the entire British army at Saratoga, and led France to enter the war as an ally of the U.S. The French Canadians largely ignored France's appeals for solidarity. After the war Canada became a refuge for about 75,000 Loyalists who either wanted to leave the U.S., or were compelled by Patriot reprisals to do so.\nAmong the original Loyalists there were 3,500 free African Americans. Most went to Nova Scotia and in 1792, 1200 migrated to Sierra Leone. About 2000 black slaves were brought in by Loyalist owners; they remained slaves in Canada until the Empire abolished slavery in 1833. Before 1860, about 30,000\u201340,000 black people entered Canada; many were already free and others were escaped slaves who came through the Underground Railroad.\nWar of 1812.\nThe Treaty of Paris, which ended the war, called for British forces to vacate all their forts south of the Great Lakes border. Britain refused to do so, citing failure of the United States to provide financial restitution for Loyalists who had lost property in the war. The Jay Treaty in 1795 with Great Britain resolved that lingering issue and the British departed the forts. Thomas Jefferson saw the nearby British presence as a threat to the United States, and so he opposed the Jay Treaty, and it became one of the major political issues in the United States at the time. Thousands of Americans immigrated to Upper Canada (Ontario) from 1785 to 1812 to obtain cheaper land and better tax rates prevalent in that province; despite expectations that they would be loyal to the U.S. if a war broke out, in the event they were largely non-political.\nTensions mounted again after 1805, erupting into the War of 1812, when the United States declared war on Britain. The Americans were angered by British harassment of U.S. ships on the high seas and seizure of 6,000 sailors from American ships, severe restrictions against neutral American trade with France, and British support for hostile Native American tribes in Ohio and territories the U.S. had gained in 1783. American \"honor\" was an implicit issue. While the Americans could not hope to defeat the Royal Navy and control the seas, they could call on an army much larger than the British garrison in Canada, and so a land invasion of Canada was proposed as the most advantageous means of attacking the British Empire. Americans on the western frontier also hoped an invasion would bring an end to British support of Native American resistance to American expansion, typified by Tecumseh's coalition of tribes. Americans may also have wanted to acquire Canada.\nOnce war broke out, the American strategy was to seize Canada. There was some hope that settlers in western Canada\u2014most of them recent immigrants from the U.S.\u2014would welcome the chance to overthrow their British rulers. However, the American invasions were defeated primarily by British regulars with support from Native Americans and Upper Canada militia. Aided by the large Royal Navy, a series of British raids on the American coast were highly successful, culminating with an attack on Washington that resulted in the British burning of the White House, the Capitol, and other public buildings. However, the later battles of Baltimore, Plattsburg, and New Orleans all ended in defeat for the British. At the end of the war, Britain's American Indian allies had largely been defeated, and the Americans controlled a strip of Western Ontario centered on Fort Malden. However, Britain held much of Maine, and, with the support of their remaining American Indian allies, huge areas of the Old Northwest, including Wisconsin and much of Michigan and Illinois. With the surrender of Napoleon in 1814, Britain ended naval policies that angered Americans; with the defeat of the Indian tribes the threat to American expansion was ended. The upshot was both the United States and Canada asserted their sovereignty, Canada remained under British rule, and London and Washington had nothing more to fight over. The war was ended by the Treaty of Ghent, which took effect in February 1815. A series of postwar agreements further stabilized peaceful relations along the Canadian-US border. Canada reduced American immigration for fear of undue American influence, and built up the Anglican Church of Canada as a counterweight to the largely American Methodist and Baptist churches.\nIn later years, Anglophone Canadians, especially in Ontario, viewed the War of 1812 as a heroic and successful resistance against invasion and as a victory that defined them as a people. The myth that the Canadian militia had defeated the invasion almost single-handed, known logically as the \"militia myth\", became highly prevalent after the war, having been propounded by John Strachan, Anglican Bishop of York. Meanwhile, the United States celebrated victory in its \"Second War of Independence,\" and war heroes such as Andrew Jackson and William Henry Harrison headed to the White House.\nPost War of 1812 and mid-19th century.\nIn the aftermath of the War of 1812, pro-British conservatives led by Anglican Bishop John Strachan took control in Ontario (\"Upper Canada\"), and promoted the Anglican religion as opposed to the more republican Methodist and Baptist churches. A small interlocking elite, known as the Family Compact took full political control. Democracy, as practiced in the US, was ridiculed. The policies had the desired effect of deterring immigration from United States. Revolts in favor of democracy in Ontario and Quebec (\"Lower Canada\") in 1837 were suppressed; many of the leaders fled to the US. The American policy was to largely ignore the rebellions, and indeed ignore Canada generally in favor of westward expansion of the American Frontier.\nAmerican Civil War.\nThe British Empire and Canada were neutral in the American Civil War, and about 40,000 Canadian citizens volunteered for the Union Army\u2014many already lived in the U.S., and a few for the Confederate Army. However, hundreds of Americans who were called up in the draft fled to Canada. In 1864 the Confederate government tried to use Canada as a base to attack American border towns. They raided the town St. Albans, Vermont on October 19, 1864, killing an American citizen and robbing three banks of over US$200,000. The three Confederates escaped to Canada where they were arrested, but then released. Many Americans suspected \u2013 falsely \u2013 that the Canadian government knew of the raid ahead of time. There was widespread anger when the raiders were released by a local court in Canada. The American Secretary of State William H. Seward let the British government know, \"it is impossible to consider those proceedings as either legal, just or friendly towards the United States.\"\nAlabama claims.\nAmericans were angry at the British role during the American Civil War. Some leaders demanded for a huge payment, on the premise that British involvement had lengthened the war. Senator Charles Sumner, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, originally wanted to ask for $2 billion, or alternatively the ceding of all of Canada to the United States.\nWhen American Secretary of State William H. Seward negotiated the Alaska Purchase with Russia in 1867, he intended it as the first step in a comprehensive plan to gain control of the entire northwest Pacific Coast. Seward was a firm believer in Manifest Destiny, primarily for its commercial advantages to the U.S., Seward expected British Columbia to seek annexation to the U.S. and thought Britain might accept this in exchange for the \"Alabama\" claims. Soon other elements endorsed annexation, Their plan was to annex British Columbia, Red River Colony (Manitoba), and Nova Scotia, in exchange for dropping the damage claims. The idea reached a peak in the spring and summer of 1870, with American expansionists, Canadian separatists, and Pro-American Englishmen seemingly combining forces. The plan was dropped for multiple reasons. London continued to stall, American commercial and financial groups pressed Washington for a quick settlement of the dispute on a cash basis, growing Canadian nationalist sentiment in British Columbia called for staying inside the British Empire, Congress became preoccupied with Reconstruction, and most Americans showed little interest in territorial expansion. The \"Alabama Claims\" dispute went to international arbitration. In one of the first major cases of arbitration, the tribunal in 1872 supported the American claims and ordered Britain to pay $15.5 million. Britain paid and the episode ended in peaceful relations.\nLate 19th century.\nCanada became a self-governing dominion in 1867 in internal affairs while Britain controlled diplomacy and defence policy. Prior to Confederation, there was an Oregon boundary dispute in which the Americans claimed the 54th degree latitude. That issue was resolved by splitting the disputed territory; the northern half became British Columbia, and the southern half the states of Washington and Oregon. \nStrained relations with America continued, however, due to a series of small-scale armed incursions named the Fenian raids by Irish-American Civil War veterans across the border from 1866 to 1871 in an attempt to trade Canada for Irish independence. The American government, angry at Canadian tolerance of Confederate raiders during the American Civil War, moved very slowly to disarm the Fenians. The Fenian raids were small-scale attacks carried out by the Fenian Brotherhood, an Irish Republican organization based among Irish Catholics in the United States. Targets were British Army forts, customs posts and other locations near the border. The raids were small, unsuccessful episodes in 1866, and again from 1870 to 1871. The goal was to bring pressure on Great Britain to withdraw from Ireland. None of these raids achieved their aims and all were quickly defeated by local Canadian forces.\nThe British government, in charge of diplomatic relations, protested cautiously, as Anglo-American relations were tense. Much of the tension was relieved as the Fenians faded away and in 1872 by the settlement of the Alabama Claims, when Britain paid the U.S. $15.5 million for war losses caused by warships built in Britain and sold to the Confederacy.\nDisputes over ocean boundaries on Georges Bank and over fishing, whaling, and sealing rights in the Pacific were settled by international arbitration, setting an important precedent.\nEarly 20th century.\nAlaska boundary.\nA short-lived controversy was the Alaska boundary dispute, settled in favor of the United States in 1903. The issue was unimportant until the Klondike Gold Rush brought tens of thousands of men to Canada's Yukon, and they had to arrive through American ports. Canada needed its port and claimed that it had a legal right to a port near the present American town of Haines, Alaska. It would provide an all-Canadian route to the rich goldfields. The dispute was settled by arbitration, and the British delegate voted with the Americans\u2014to the astonishment and disgust of Canadians who suddenly realized that Britain considered its relations with the United States paramount compared to those with Canada. The arbitration validated the status quo, but made Canada angry at London.\n1907 saw a minor controversy over USS \"Nashville\" sailing into the Great Lakes via Canada without Canadian permission. To head off future embarrassments, in 1909 the two sides signed the International Boundary Waters Treaty and the International Joint Commission was established to manage the Great Lakes and keep them disarmed. It was amended in World War II to allow the building and training of warships.\nFree trade.\nAnti-Americanism reached a shrill peak in 1911 in Canada. The Liberal government in 1911 negotiated a Reciprocity treaty with the U.S. that would lower trade barriers. Canadian manufacturing interests were alarmed that free trade would allow the bigger and more efficient American factories to take their markets. The Conservatives made it a central campaign issue in the 1911 election, warning that it would be a \"sell out\" to the United States with economic annexation a special danger. The Conservative slogan was \"No truck or trade with the Yankees\", as they appealed to Canadian nationalism and nostalgia for the British Empire to win a major victory.\nPost-First World War.\nCanada demanded and received permission from London to send its own delegation to the Versailles Peace Talks in 1919, with the proviso that it sign the treaty under the British Empire. Canada subsequently took responsibility for its own foreign and military affairs in the 1920s. Its first ambassador to the United States, Vincent Massey, was named in 1927. The United States first ambassador to Canada was William Phillips. Canada became an active member of the British Commonwealth, the League of Nations, and the World Court, none of which included the U.S.\nIn July 1923, as part of his Pacific Northwest tour and a week before his death, US President Warren Harding visited Vancouver, making him the first head of state of the United States to visit confederated Canada. The then Premier of British Columbia, John Oliver, and then mayor of Vancouver, Charles Tisdall, hosted a lunch in his honor at the Hotel Vancouver. Over 50,000 people heard Harding speak in Stanley Park. A monument to Harding designed by Charles Marega was unveiled in Stanley Park in 1925.\nRelations with the United States were cordial until 1930, when Canada vehemently protested the new Smoot\u2013Hawley Tariff Act by which the U.S. raised tariffs (taxes) on products imported from Canada. Canada retaliated with higher tariffs of its own against American products, and moved toward more trade within the British Commonwealth. U.S.\u2013Canadian trade fell 75% as the Great Depression dragged both countries down.\nDown to the 1920s the war and naval departments of both nations designed hypothetical war game scenarios on paper with the other as an enemy. These were routine training exercises; the departments were never told to get ready for a real war. In 1921, Canada developed Defence Scheme No. 1 for an attack on American cities and for forestalling invasion by the United States until British reinforcements arrived. Through the later 1920s and 1930s, the United States Army War College developed a plan for a war with the British Empire waged largely on North American territory, in War Plan Red.\nHerbert Hoover meeting in 1927 with British Ambassador Sir Esme Howard agreed on the \"absurdity of contemplating the possibility of war between the United States and the British Empire.\"\nIn 1938, as the roots of World War II were set in motion, U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt gave a public speech at Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, declaring that the United States would not sit idly by if another power tried to dominate Canada. Diplomats saw it as a clear warning to Germany not to attack Canada.\nSecond World War.\nThe two nations cooperated closely in World War II, as both nations saw new levels of prosperity and a determination to defeat the Axis powers. Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King and President Franklin D. Roosevelt were determined not to repeat the mistakes of their predecessors. They met in August 1940 at Ogdensburg, issuing a declaration calling for close cooperation, and formed the Permanent Joint Board on Defense (PJBD).\nKing sought to raise Canada's international visibility by hosting the August 1943 Quadrant conference in Quebec on military and political strategy; he was a gracious host but was kept out of the important meetings by Winston Churchill and Roosevelt.\nCanada allowed the construction of the Alaska Highway and participated in the building of the atomic bomb. 49,000 Americans joined the RCAF (Canadian) or RAF (British) air forces through the Clayton Knight Committee, which had Roosevelt's permission to recruit in the U.S. in 1940\u201342.\nAmerican attempts in the mid-1930s to integrate British Columbia into a united West Coast military command had aroused Canadian opposition. Fearing a Japanese invasion of Canada's vulnerable British Columbia Coast, American officials urged the creation of a united military command for an eastern Pacific Ocean theater of war. Canadian leaders feared American imperialism and the loss of autonomy more than a Japanese invasion. In 1941, Canadians successfully argued within the PJBD for mutual cooperation rather than unified command for the West Coast.\nNewfoundland.\nThe United States built large military bases in Newfoundland during World War II. At the time it was a British crown colony, having lost dominion status. The American spending ended the depression and brought new prosperity; Newfoundland's business community sought closer ties with the United States as expressed by the Economic Union Party. Ottawa took notice and wanted Newfoundland to join Canada, which it did after hotly contested referenda. There was little demand in the United States for the acquisition of Newfoundland, so the United States did not protest the British decision not to allow an American option on the Newfoundland referendum.\nCold War.\nPrime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, working closely with his Foreign Minister Louis St. Laurent, handled foreign relations 1945\u201348 in cautious fashion. Canada donated money to the United Kingdom to help it rebuild; was elected to the UN Security Council; and helped design NATO. However, Mackenzie King rejected free trade with the United States, and decided not to play a role in the Berlin airlift. Canada had been actively involved in the League of Nations, primarily because it could act separately from Britain. It played a modest role in the postwar formation of the United Nations, as well as the International Monetary Fund. It played a somewhat larger role in 1947 in designing the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. \nAfter the mid-20th century onwards, Canada and the United States became extremely close partners. Canada was a close ally of the United States during the Cold War.\nVietnam War resisters.\nWhile Canada openly accepted draft evaders and later deserters from the United States, there was never serious international dispute due to Canada's actions, while Sweden's acceptance was heavily criticized by the United States. The issue of accepting American exiles became a local political debate in Canada that focused on Canada's sovereignty in its immigration law. The United States did not become involved because American politicians viewed Canada as geographically close ally not worth disturbing.\nNixon Shock 1971.\nThe United States had become Canada's largest market, and after the war the Canadian economy became dependent on smooth trade flows with the United States so much that in 1971 when the United States enacted the \"Nixon Shock\" economic policies (including a 10% tariff on all imports) it put the Canadian government into a panic. Washington refused to exempt Canada from its 1971 New Economic Policy, so Trudeau saw a solution in closer economic ties with Europe. Trudeau proposed a \"Third Option\" policy of diversifying Canada's trade and downgrading the importance of the American market. In a 1972 speech in Ottawa, Nixon declared the \"special relationship\" between Canada and the United States dead.\nRelations deteriorated on many points in the Nixon years (1969\u201374), including trade disputes, defense agreements, energy, fishing, the environment, cultural imperialism, and foreign policy. They changed for the better when Trudeau and President Jimmy Carter (1977-1981) found a better rapport. The late 1970s saw a more sympathetic American attitude toward Canadian political and economic needs, the pardoning of draft evaders who had moved to Canada, and the passing of old such as the Watergate scandal and the Vietnam War. Canada more than ever welcomed American investments during \"the stagflation\" that hurt both nations.\n1990s.\nThe main issues in Canada\u2013U.S. relations in the 1990s focused on the North American Free Trade Agreement, which was signed in 1994. It created a common market that by 2014 was worth $19 trillion, encompassed 470 million people, and had created millions of jobs. Wilson says, \"Few dispute that NAFTA has produced\nlarge and measurable gains for Canadian consumers, workers, and businesses.\" However, he adds, \"NAFTA has fallen well short of expectations.\"\nMigration history.\nFrom the 1750s to the 21st century, there has been extensive mingling of the Canadian and American populations, with large movements in both directions.\nNew England Yankees settled large parts of Nova Scotia before 1775, and were neutral during the American Revolution. At the end of the American Revolution, about 75,000 United Empire Loyalists moved out of the new United States to Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and the lands of Quebec, east and south of Montreal. From 1790 to 1812 many farmers moved from New York and New England into Upper Canada (mostly to Niagara, and the north shore of Lake Ontario). In the mid and late 19th century gold rushes attracted American prospectors, mostly to British Columbia after the Cariboo Gold Rush, Fraser Canyon Gold Rush, and later to the Yukon Territory. In the early 20th century, the opening of land blocks in the Prairie Provinces attracted many farmers from the American Midwest. Many Mennonites immigrated from Pennsylvania and formed their own colonies. In the 1890s some Mormons went north to form communities in Alberta after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints rejected plural marriage. The 1960s saw the arrival of about 50,000 draft-dodgers who opposed the Vietnam War.\nCanada was a way-station through which immigrants from other lands stopped for a while, ultimately heading to the U.S. In 1851\u20131951, 7.1 million people arrived in Canada (mostly from Continental Europe), and 6.6 million left Canada, most of them to the U.S. After 1850, the pace of industrialization and urbanization was much faster in the United States, drawing a wide range of immigrants from the North. By 1870, 1/6 of all the people born in Canada had moved to the United States, with the highest concentrations in New England, which was the destination of Francophone emigrants from Quebec and Anglophone emigrants from the Maritimes. It was common for people to move back and forth across the border, such as seasonal lumberjacks, entrepreneurs looking for larger markets, and families looking for jobs in the textile mills that paid much higher wages than in Canada.\nThe southward migration slacked off after 1890, as Canadian industry began a growth spurt. By then, the American frontier was closing, and thousands of farmers looking for fresh land moved from the United States north into the Prairie Provinces. The net result of the flows were that in 1901 there were 128,000 American-born residents in Canada (3.5% of the Canadian population) and 1.18 million Canadian-born residents in the United States (1.6% of the U.S. population).\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, about 900,000 French Canadians moved to the U.S., with 395,000 residents there in 1900. Two-thirds went to mill towns in New England, where they formed distinctive ethnic communities. By the late 20th century, most had abandoned the French language (see New England French), but most kept the Catholic religion. About twice as many English Canadians came to the U.S., but they did not form distinctive ethnic settlements.\nRelations between political executives.\nThe executive of each country is represented differently. The President of the United States serves as both the head of state and head of government, and his \"administration\" is the executive, while the Prime Minister of Canada is head of government only, and his or her \"government\" or \"ministry\" directs the executive.\nW.L. Mackenzie King and Franklin D. Roosevelt (October 1935 \u2013 April 1945).\nIn 1940, W.L. Mackenzie King and Franklin D. Roosevelt signed a defense pact, known as the Ogdensburg Agreement.\nLouis St. Laurent and Harry S. Truman (November 1948 \u2013 January 1953).\nPrime Minister Laurent and President Truman were both anti-communist during the early years of the Cold War.\nJohn G. Diefenbaker and John F. Kennedy (January 1961 \u2013 April 1963).\nDiefenbaker and Kennedy did not get along well personally. This was evident in Diefenbaker's response to the Cuban Missile Crisis, where he did not support the United States. However, Diefenbaker's Minister of Defence went behind Diefenbaker's back and did set Canada's military to high alert in order to try and appease Kennedy.\nLester B. Pearson and Lyndon B. Johnson (November 1963 \u2013 April 1968).\nIn 1965 Lester B. Pearson gave a speech in Philadelphia criticizing the US involvement in the Vietnam War. This infuriated Lyndon B. Johnson, who gave him a harsh talk, saying \"You don't come here and piss on my rug\".\nBrian Mulroney and Ronald Reagan (September 1984 \u2013 January 1989).\nRelations between Brian Mulroney and Ronald Reagan were famously close. This relationship resulted in negotiations for the Canada\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement, and the U.S.\u2013Canada Air Quality Agreement to reduce acid-rain-causing emissions, both major policy goals of Mulroney, that would be finalized under the presidency of George H. W. Bush.\nJean Chr\u00e9tien and Bill Clinton (November 1993 \u2013 January 2001).\nAlthough Jean Chr\u00e9tien was wary of appearing too close to President Bill Clinton, both men had a passion for golf. During a news conference with Prime Minister Chr\u00e9tien in April 1997, President Clinton quipped \"I don't know if any two world leaders have played golf together more than we have, but we meant to break a record\". Their governments had many small trade quarrels over the Canadian content of American magazines, softwood lumber, and so on, but on the whole were quite friendly. Both leaders had run on reforming or abolishing NAFTA, but the agreement went ahead with the addition of environmental and labor side agreements. Crucially, the Clinton administration lent rhetorical support to Canadian unity during the 1995 referendum in Quebec on separation from Canada.\nJean Chr\u00e9tien and George W. Bush (January 2001 \u2013 December 2003).\nRelations between Chr\u00e9tien and George W. Bush were strained throughout their overlapping times in office. After the September 11 attacks terror attacks, Jean Chr\u00e9tien publicly mused that U.S. foreign policy might be part of the \"root causes\" of terrorism. Some Americans criticized his \"smug moralism\", and Chr\u00e9tien's public refusal to support the 2003 Iraq war was met with negative responses in the United States, especially among conservatives.\nStephen Harper and George W. Bush (February 2006 \u2013 January 2009).\nStephen Harper and George W. Bush were thought to share warm personal relations and also close ties between their administrations. Because Bush was so unpopular among liberals in Canada (particularly in the media), this was underplayed by the Harper government.\nShortly after being congratulated by Bush for his victory in February 2006, Harper rebuked U.S. ambassador to Canada David Wilkins for criticizing the Conservatives' plans to assert Canada's sovereignty over the Arctic Ocean waters with military force.\nStephen Harper and Barack Obama (January 2009 \u2013 November 2015).\nPresident Barack Obama's first international trip was to Canada on February 19, 2009, thereby sending a strong message of peace and cooperation. With the exception of Canadian lobbying against \"Buy American\" provisions in the U.S. stimulus package, relations between the two administrations were smooth.\nThey also held friendly bets on hockey games during the Winter Olympic season. In the 2010 Winter Olympics hosted by Canada in Vancouver, Canada defeated the US in both gold medal matches, entitling Stephen Harper to receive a case of Molson Canadian beer from Barack Obama; in reverse, if Canada had lost, Harper would have provided a case of Yuengling beer to Obama. During the 2014 Winter Olympics, alongside U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry &amp; Minister of Foreign Affairs John Baird, Stephen Harper was given a case of Samuel Adams beer by Obama for the Canadian gold medal victory over the US in women's hockey, and the semi-final victory over the US in men's hockey.\nCanada-United States Regulatory Cooperation Council (RCC) (2011).\nOn February 4, 2011, Harper and Obama issued a \"Declaration on a Shared Vision for Perimeter Security and Economic Competitiveness\" and announced the creation of the Canada\u2013United States Regulatory Cooperation Council (RCC) \"to increase regulatory transparency and coordination between the two countries.\"\nHealth Canada and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) under the RCC mandate, undertook the \"first of its kind\" initiative by selecting \"as its first area of alignment common cold indications for certain over-the-counter antihistamine ingredients (GC 2013-01-10).\"\nOn December 7, 2011, Harper flew to Washington, met with Obama and signed an agreement to implement the joint action plans that had been developed since the initial meeting in February. The plans called on both countries to spend more on border infrastructure, share more information on people who cross the border, and acknowledge more of each other's safety and security inspection on third-country traffic. An editorial in \"The Globe and Mail\" praised the agreement for giving Canada the ability to track whether failed refugee claimants have left Canada via the U.S. and for eliminating \"duplicated baggage screenings on connecting flights\". The agreement is not a legally binding treaty, and relies on the political will and ability of the executives of both governments to implement the terms of the agreement. These types of executive agreements are routine\u2014on both sides of the Canada\u2013U.S. border.\nJustin Trudeau and Barack Obama (November 2015 \u2013 January 2017).\nPresident Barack Obama and Prime Minister Justin Trudeau first met formally at the APEC summit meeting in Manila, Philippines in November 2015, nearly a week after the latter was sworn into the office. Both leaders expressed eagerness for increased cooperation and coordination between the two countries during the course of Trudeau's government with Trudeau promising an \"enhanced Canada\u2013U.S. partnership\".\nOn November 6, 2015, Obama announced the U.S. State Department's rejection of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline, the fourth phase of the Keystone oil pipeline system running between Canada and the United States, to which Trudeau expressed disappointment but said that the rejection would not damage Canada\u2013U.S. relations and would instead provide a \"fresh start\" to strengthening ties through cooperation and coordination, saying that \"the Canada\u2013U.S. relationship is much bigger than any one project.\" Obama has since praised Trudeau's efforts to prioritize the reduction of climate change, calling it \"extraordinarily helpful\" to establish a worldwide consensus on addressing the issue.\nAlthough Trudeau has told Obama his plans to withdraw Canada's McDonnell Douglas CF-18 Hornet jets assisting in the American-led intervention against ISIL, Trudeau said that Canada will still \"do more than its part\" in combating the terrorist group by increasing the number of Canadian special forces members training and fighting on ground in Iraq and Syria.\nTrudeau visited the White House for an official visit and state dinner on March 10, 2016. Trudeau and Obama were reported to have shared warm personal relations during the visit, making humorous remarks about which country was better at hockey and which country had better beer. Obama complimented Trudeau's 2015 election campaign for its \"message of hope and change\" and \"positive and optimistic vision\". Obama and Trudeau also held \"productive\" discussions on climate change and relations between the two countries, and Trudeau invited Obama to speak in the Canadian parliament in Ottawa later in the year.\nJustin Trudeau and Donald Trump (January 2017 \u2013 January 2021).\nFollowing the victory of Donald Trump in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, Trudeau congratulated him and invited him to visit Canada at the \"earliest opportunity.\" Prime Minister Trudeau and President Trump formally met for the first time at the White House on February 13, 2017, nearly a month after Trump was sworn into the office. Trump has ruffled relations with Canada with tariffs on softwood lumber. Diafiltered Milk was brought up by Trump as an area that needed negotiating. \nIn 2018, Trump and Trudeau negotiated the United States\u2013Mexico\u2013Canada Agreement (USMCA), a free trade agreement concluded between Canada, Mexico, and the United States that succeeded the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The agreement has been characterized as \"NAFTA 2.0,\" or \"New NAFTA,\" since many provisions from NAFTA were incorporated and its changes were seen as largely incremental. On July 1, 2020, the USMCA entered into force in all member states.\nIn June 2018, after Trudeau explained that Canadians would not be \"pushed around\" by the Trump tariffs on Canada's aluminum and steel, Trump labelled Trudeau as \"dishonest\" and \"meek\", and accused Trudeau of making \"false statements\", although it is unclear which statements Trump was referring to. Trump's adviser on trade, Peter Navarro, said that there was a \"special place in hell\" for Trudeau as he employed \"bad faith diplomacy with President Donald J. Trump and then tries to stab him in the back on the way out the door ... that comes right from Air Force One.\" Days later, Trump said that Trudeau's comments are \"going to cost a lot of money for the people of Canada\".\nIn June 2019, the U.S. State Department spokesperson Morgan Ortagus said the US \"view Canada\u2019s claim that the waters of the Northwest Passage are internal waters of Canada as inconsistent with international law.\"\nJustin Trudeau and Joe Biden (January 2021\u2013present).\nFollowing the victory of Joe Biden in the 2020 U.S. presidential election, Trudeau congratulated him.\nOn January 22, 2021, Biden and Trudeau held their first phone call. Trudeau was the first foreign leader to receive a phone call from Biden as President.\nOn February 23, 2021, Biden and Trudeau held their first bilateral meeting. Although virtual, the bilateral meeting was Biden's first as President. The two leaders discussed \"COVID-19, economic recovery, climate change, and refugees and migration\" among other subjects.\nMilitary and security.\nThe Canadian military, like forces of other NATO countries, fought alongside the United States in most major conflicts since World War II, including the Korean War, the Gulf War, the Kosovo War, and most recently the war in Afghanistan. The main exceptions to this were the Canadian government's opposition to the Vietnam War and the Iraq War, which caused some brief diplomatic tensions. Despite these issues, military relations have remained close.\nAmerican defense arrangements with Canada are more extensive than with any other country. The Permanent Joint Board of Defense, established in 1940, provides policy-level consultation on bilateral defense matters. The United States and Canada share North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) mutual security commitments. In addition, American and Canadian military forces have cooperated since 1958 on continental air defense within the framework of the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD). Canadian forces have provided indirect support for the American invasion of Iraq that began in 2003. Moreover, interoperability with the American armed forces has been a guiding principle of Canadian military force structuring and doctrine since the end of the Cold War. Canadian navy frigates, for instance, integrate seamlessly into American carrier battle groups.\nIn commemoration of the 200th Anniversary of the War of 1812 ambassadors from Canada and the US, and naval officers from both countries gathered at the Pritzker Military Library on August 17, 2012, for a panel discussion on Canada-US relations with emphasis on national security-related matters. Also as part of the commemoration, the navies of both countries sailed together throughout the Great Lakes region.\nWar in Afghanistan.\nCanada's elite JTF2 unit joined American special forces in Afghanistan shortly after the al-Qaida attacks on September 11, 2001. Canadian forces joined the multinational coalition in Operation Anaconda in January 2002. On April 18, 2002, an American pilot bombed Canadian forces involved in a training exercise, killing four and wounding eight Canadians. A joint American-Canadian inquiry determined the cause of the incident to be pilot error, in which the pilot interpreted ground fire as an attack; the pilot ignored orders that he felt were \"second-guessing\" his field tactical decision. Canadian forces assumed a six-month command rotation of the International Security Assistance Force in 2003; in 2005, Canadians assumed operational command of the multi-national Brigade in Kandahar, with 2,300 troops, and supervises the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Kandahar, where al-Qaida forces are most active. Canada has also deployed naval forces in the Persian Gulf since 1991 in support of the UN Gulf Multinational Interdiction Force.\nThe Canadian Embassy in Washington, D.C. maintains a public relations website named CanadianAlly.com, which is intended \"to give American citizens a better sense of the scope of Canada's role in North American and Global Security and the War on Terror\".\nThe New Democratic Party and some recent Liberal leadership candidates have expressed opposition to Canada's expanded role in the Afghan conflict on the ground that it is inconsistent with Canada's historic role (since the Second World War) of peacekeeping operations.\n2003 Invasion of Iraq.\nAccording to contemporary polls, 71% of Canadians were opposed to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Many Canadians, and the former Liberal Cabinet headed by Paul Martin (as well as many Americans such as Bill Clinton and Barack Obama), made a policy distinction between conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, unlike the Bush Doctrine, which linked these together in a \"Global war on terror\".\nResponding to ISIS/Daesh.\nCanada has been involved in international responses to the threats from Daesh/ISIS/ISIL in Syria and Iraq, and is a member of the Global Coalition to Counter Daesh. In October 2016, Foreign Affairs Minister Dion and National Defence Minister Sajjan meet U.S. special envoy for this coalition. The Americans thanked Canada \"for the role of Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) in providing training and assistance to Iraqi security forces, as well as the CAF's role in improving essential capacity-building capabilities with regional forces.\"\nIllicit drugs.\nIn 2003, the American government became concerned when members of the Canadian government announced plans to decriminalize marijuana. David Murray, an assistant to U.S. Drug Czar John P. Walters, said in a CBC interview that, \"We would have to respond. We would be forced to respond.\" However, the election of the Conservative Party in early 2006 halted the liberalization of marijuana laws until the Liberal Party of Canada leglised recreational cannabis use in 2018.\nA 2007 joint report by American and Canadian officials on cross-border drug smuggling indicated that, despite their best efforts, \"drug trafficking still occurs in significant quantities in both directions across the border. The principal illicit substances smuggled across our shared border are MDMA (\"Ecstasy\"), cocaine, and marijuana.\" The report indicated that Canada was a major producer of \"Ecstasy\" and marijuana for the U.S. market, while the U.S. was a transit country for cocaine entering Canada.\nTrade.\nCanada and the United States have the world's second largest trading relationship, with huge quantities of goods and people flowing across the border each year. Since the 1987 Canada\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement, there have been no tariffs on most goods passed between the two countries.\nIn the course of the softwood lumber dispute, the U.S. has placed tariffs on Canadian softwood lumber because of what it argues is an unfair Canadian government subsidy, a claim which Canada disputes. The dispute has cycled through several agreements and arbitration cases. Other notable disputes include the Canadian Wheat Board, and Canadian cultural \"restrictions\" on magazines and television (See CRTC, CBC, and National Film Board of Canada). Canadians have been criticized about such things as the ban on beef since a case of Mad Cow disease was discovered in 2003 in cows from the United States (and a few subsequent cases) and the high American agricultural subsidies. Concerns in Canada also run high over aspects of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) such as Chapter 11.\nEnvironmental issues.\nA principal instrument of this cooperation is the International Joint Commission (IJC), established as part of the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909 to resolve differences and promote international cooperation on boundary waters. The Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement of 1972 is another historic example of joint cooperation in controlling trans-border water pollution. However, there have been some disputes. Most recently, the Devil's Lake Outlet, a project instituted by North Dakota, has angered Manitobans who fear that their water may soon become polluted as a result of this project.\nBeginning in 1986 the Canadian government of Brian Mulroney began pressing the Reagan administration for an \"Acid Rain Treaty\" in order to do something about U.S. industrial air pollution causing acid rain in Canada. The Reagan administration was hesitant, and questioned the science behind Mulroney's claims. However, Mulroney was able to prevail. The product was the signing and ratification of the Air Quality Agreement of 1991 by the first Bush administration. Under that treaty, the two governments consult semi-annually on trans-border air pollution, which has demonstrably reduced acid rain, and they have since signed an annex to the treaty dealing with ground level ozone in 2000. Despite this, trans-border air pollution remains an issue, particularly in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence watershed during the summer. The main source of this trans-border pollution results from coal-fired power stations, most of them located in the Midwestern United States. As part of the negotiations to create NAFTA, Canada and the U.S. signed, along with Mexico, the North American Agreement On Environmental Cooperation which created the Commission for Environmental Cooperation which monitors environmental issues across the continent, publishing the North American Environmental Atlas as one aspect of its monitoring duties.\nCurrently neither of the countries' governments support the Kyoto Protocol, which set out time scheduled curbing of greenhouse gas emissions. Unlike the United States, Canada has ratified the agreement. Yet after ratification, due to internal political conflict within Canada, the Canadian government does not enforce the Kyoto Protocol, and has received criticism from environmental groups and from other governments for its climate change positions. In January 2011, the Canadian minister of the environment, Peter Kent, explicitly stated that the policy of his government with regards to greenhouse gas emissions reductions is to wait for the United States to act first, and then try to harmonize with that action \u2013 a position that has been condemned by environmentalists and Canadian nationalists, and as well as scientists and government think-tanks.\nNewfoundland fisheries dispute.\nThe United States and Britain had a long-standing dispute about the rights of Americans fishing in the waters near Newfoundland. Before 1776, there was no question that American fishermen, mostly from Massachusetts, had rights to use the waters off Newfoundland. In the peace treaty negotiations of 1783, the Americans insisted on a statement of these rights. However, France, an American ally, disputed the American position because France had its own specified rights in the area and wanted them to be exclusive. The Treaty of Paris (1783) gave the Americans not rights, but rather \"liberties\" to fish within the territorial waters of British North America and to dry fish on certain coasts.\nAfter the War of 1812, the Convention of 1818 between the United States and Britain specified exactly what liberties were involved. Canadian and Newfoundland fishermen contested these liberties in the 1830s and 1840s. The Canadian\u2013American Reciprocity Treaty of 1854, and the Treaty of Washington of 1871 spelled-out the liberties in more detail. However the Treaty of Washington expired in 1885, and there was a continuous round of disputes over jurisdictions and liberties. Britain and the United States sent the issue to the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague in 1909. It produced a compromise settlement that permanently ended the problems.\nDiplomacy.\nDiplomatic missions.\nCanadian missions in the United States.\nCanada's chief diplomatic mission to the United States is the Canadian Embassy in Washington, D.C.. It is further supported by many consulates located through United States.\nThe Canadian Government maintains consulates-general in several major U.S. cities including: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Los Angeles, Miami, Minneapolis, New York City, San Francisco and Seattle. Canadian consular services are also available in Honolulu at the consulate of Australia through the Canada\u2013Australia Consular Services Sharing Agreement.\nThere are also Canadian trade offices located in Houston, Palo Alto and San Diego.\nU.S. missions in Canada.\nThe United States's chief diplomatic mission to Canada is the United States Embassy in Ottawa. It is supported by many consulates located throughout Canada.\nThe U.S government maintains consulates-general in several major Canadian cities including:\nCalgary, Halifax, Montreal, Quebec City, Toronto, Vancouver and Winnipeg.\nThe United States also maintains Virtual Presence Posts (VPP) in the: Northwest Territories, Nunavut, Southwestern Ontario and Yukon.\nCommon memberships.\nCanada and the United States both hold membership in a number of multinational organizations such as:\nTerritorial disputes.\nThe two countries have had a number of territorial disputes throughout their histories. Current maritime territorial disputes between the two countries include the Beaufort Sea, Dixon Entrance, Strait of Juan de Fuca, San Juan Islands, Machias Seal Island and North Rock. Additionally, the United States is one of several countries that contends the Northwest Passage is international waters; whereas the Canadian government asserts it forms Canadian Internal Waters. The Inside Passage is also disputed as international waters by the United States.\nHistorical boundary disputes include the Aroostook War at the Maine-New Brunswick border; the Oregon boundary dispute at the present day British Columbia-Washington border; and the Alaska Boundary Dispute at the Alaska-British Columbia border. Maine-New Brunswick boundary dispute was resolved through the Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty in 1842, the Oregon boundary dispute through the Oregon Treaty of 1846, and the Alaska boundary dispute through arbitration in 1903.\nNorthwest Passage.\nA long-simmering dispute between Canada and the U.S. involves the issue of Canadian sovereignty over the Northwest Passage (the sea passages in the Arctic). Canada's assertion that the Northwest Passage represents internal (territorial) waters has been challenged by other countries, especially the U.S., which argue that these waters constitute an international strait (international waters). Canadians were alarmed when Americans drove the reinforced oil tanker through the Northwest Passage in 1969, followed by the icebreaker Polar Sea in 1985, which actually resulted in a minor diplomatic incident. In 1970, the Canadian parliament enacted the Arctic Waters Pollution Prevention Act, which asserts Canadian regulatory control over pollution within a 100-mile zone. In response, the United States in 1970 stated, \"We cannot accept the assertion of a Canadian claim that the Arctic waters are internal waters of Canada. ... Such acceptance would jeopardize the freedom of navigation essential for United States naval activities worldwide.\" A compromise of sorts was reached in 1988, by an agreement on \"Arctic Cooperation,\" which pledges that voyages of American icebreakers \"will be undertaken with the consent of the Government of Canada.\" However the agreement did not alter either country's basic legal position. Paul Cellucci, the American ambassador to Canada, in 2005 suggested to Washington that it should recognize the straits as belonging to Canada. His advice was rejected and Harper took opposite positions. The U.S. opposes Harper's proposed plan to deploy military icebreakers in the Arctic to detect interlopers and assert Canadian sovereignty over those waters.\nViews of presidents and prime ministers.\nPresidents and prime ministers typically make formal or informal statements that indicate the diplomatic policy of their administration. Diplomats and journalists at the time\u2014and historians since\u2014dissect the nuances and tone to detect the warmth or coolness of the relationship.\nCanada's first Prime Minister also said:\nPublic opinion.\nToday there remain cross-border cultural ties and according to Gallup's annual public opinion polls, Canada has consistently been Americans' favorite nation, with 96% of Americans viewing Canada favorably in 2012. As of spring 2013, 64% of Canadians had a favorable view of the U.S. and 81% expressed confidence in then-US President Obama to do the right thing in international matters. According to the same poll, 30% viewed the U.S. negatively. Also, according to a 2014 BBC World Service Poll, 86% of Americans view Canada's influence positively, with only 5% expressing a negative view. However, according to the same poll, 43% of Canadians view U.S. influence positively, with 52% expressing a negative view. In addition, according to Spring 2017 Global Attitudes Survey, 43% of Canadians view the U.S. positively, while 51% hold a negative view. More recently, however, a poll in January 2018 showed Canadians' approval of U.S. leadership dropped by over 40 percentage points under President Donald Trump, in line with the view of residents of many other U.S. allied and neutral countries.\nAnti-Americanism.\nSince the arrival of the Loyalists as refugees from the American Revolution in the 1780s, historians have identified a constant theme of Canadian fear of the United States and of \"Americanization\" or a cultural takeover. In the War of 1812, for example, the enthusiastic response by French militia to defend Lower Canada reflected, according to Heidler and Heidler (2004), \"the fear of Americanization.\" Scholars have traced this attitude over time in Ontario and Quebec.\nCanadian intellectuals who wrote about the U.S. in the first half of the 20th century identified America as the world center of modernity, and deplored it. Anti-American Canadians (who admired the British Empire) explained that Canada had narrowly escaped American conquest with its rejection of tradition, its worship of \"progress\" and technology, and its mass culture; they explained that Canada was much better because of its commitment to orderly government and societal harmony. There were a few ardent defenders of the nation to the south, notably liberal and socialist intellectuals such as F. R. Scott and Jean-Charles Harvey (1891\u20131967).\nLooking at television, Collins (1990) finds that it is in Anglophone Canada that fear of cultural Americanization is most powerful, for there the attractions of the U.S. are strongest. Meren (2009) argues that after 1945, the emergence of Quebec nationalism and the desire to preserve French-Canadian cultural heritage led to growing anxiety regarding American cultural imperialism and Americanization. In 2006 surveys showed that 60 percent of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois had a fear of Americanization, while other surveys showed they preferred their current situation to that of the Americans in the realms of health care, quality of life as seniors, environmental quality, poverty, educational system, racism and standard of living. While agreeing that job opportunities are greater in America, 89 percent disagreed with the notion that they would rather be in the United States, and they were more likely to feel closer to English Canadians than to Americans. However, there is evidence that the elites and Quebec are much less fearful of Americanization, and much more open to economic integration than the general public.\nThe history has been traced in detail by a leading Canadian historian J.L. Granatstein in \"Yankee Go Home: Canadians and Anti-Americanism\" (1997). Current studies report the phenomenon persists. Two scholars report, \"Anti-Americanism is alive and well in Canada today, strengthened by, among other things, disputes related to NAFTA, American involvement in the Middle East, and the ever-increasing Americanization of Canadian culture.\" Jamie Glazov writes, \"More than anything else, Diefenbaker became the tragic victim of Canadian anti-Americanism, a sentiment the prime minister had fully embraced by 1962. [He was] unable to imagine himself (or his foreign policy) without enemies.\" Historian J. M. Bumsted says, \"In its most extreme form, Canadian suspicion of the United States has led to outbreaks of overt anti-Americanism, usually spilling over against American residents in Canada.\" John R. Wennersten writes, \"But at the heart of Canadian anti-Americanism lies a cultural bitterness that takes an American expatriate unaware. Canadians fear the American media's influence on their culture and talk critically about how Americans are exporting a culture of violence in its television programming and movies.\" However Kim Nossal points out that the Canadian variety is much milder than anti-Americanism in some other countries. By contrast Americans show very little knowledge or interest one way or the other regarding Canadian affairs. Canadian historian Frank Underhill, quoting Canadian playwright Merrill Denison summed it up: \"Americans are benevolently ignorant about Canada, whereas Canadians are malevolently informed about the United States.\"\nCanadian public opinion on U.S. presidents.\nUnited States President George W. Bush was \"deeply disliked\" by a majority of Canadians according to the \"Arizona Daily Sun\". A 2004 poll found that more than two thirds of Canadians favoured Democrat John Kerry over Bush in the 2004 presidential election, with Bush's lowest approval ratings in Canada being in the province of Quebec where just 11% of the population supported him. Canadian public opinion of Barack Obama was significantly more positive. A 2012 poll found that 65% of Canadians would vote for Obama in the 2012 presidential election \"if they could\" while only 9% of Canadians would vote for his Republican opponent Mitt Romney. The same study found that 61% of Canadians felt that the Obama administration had been \"good\" for America, while only 12% felt it had been \"bad\". Similarly, a Pew Research poll conducted in June 2016 found that 83% of Canadians were \"confident in Obama to do the right thing regarding world affairs\". The study also found that a majority of members of all three major Canadian political parties supported Obama, and also found that Obama had slightly higher approval ratings in Canada in 2012 than he did in 2008. John Ibbitson of \"The Globe and Mail\" stated in 2012 that Canadians generally supported Democratic presidents over Republican presidents, citing how President Richard Nixon was \"never liked\" in Canada and that Canadians generally did not approve of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's friendship with President Ronald Reagan.\nA November 2016 poll found 82% of Canadians preferred Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump. A January 2017 poll found that 66% of Canadians \"disapproved\" of Donald Trump, with 23% approving of him and 11% being \"unsure\". The poll also found that only 18% of Canadians believed Trump's presidency would have a positive impact on Canada, while 63% believed it would have a negative effect. A July 2019 poll found 79% of Canadians preferred Joe Biden or Bernie Sanders over Trump."}
{"id": "5202", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5202", "title": "Canada/cities", "text": ""}
{"id": "5206", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5206", "title": "Computer-generated art", "text": ""}
{"id": "5208", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5208", "title": "CountriesW", "text": ""}
{"id": "5209", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5209", "title": "CIAWorldFactbook", "text": ""}
{"id": "5210", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5210", "title": "C.S. Lewis", "text": ""}
