{"id": "9067", "revid": "1013104981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9067", "title": "Division ring", "text": "In algebra, a division ring, also called a skew field, is a ring in which division is possible. Specifically, it is a nonzero ring in which every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse, that is, an element generally denoted , such that . So, \"division\" may be defined as , but this notation is generally avoided, as one may have .\nA division ring is generally a noncommutative ring. It is commutative, if and only if it is a field, in which case the term \"division ring\" is rarely used, except for properties of division rings that are true even if they are commutative or in the proof that a specific division ring is commutative. For example, Wedderburn's little theorem asserts that all finite division rings are commutative and therefore finite fields. \nHistorically, division rings were sometimes referred to as fields, while fields were called \"commutative fields\". In some languages, such as French, the word equivalent to \"field\" (\"corps\") is used for both commutative and noncommutative cases, and the distinction between the two cases is made by adding qualificatives such as \"corps commutatif\" (commutative field) or \"corps gauche\" (skew field).\nAll division rings are simple, i.e. have no two-sided ideal besides the zero ideal and itself.\nRelation to fields and linear algebra.\nAll fields are division rings; more interesting examples are the non-commutative division rings. The best known example is the ring of quaternions H. If we allow only rational instead of real coefficients in the constructions of the quaternions, we obtain another division ring. In general, if \"R\" is a ring and \"S\" is a simple module over \"R\", then, by Schur's lemma, the endomorphism ring of \"S\" is a division ring; every division ring arises in this fashion from some simple module.\nMuch of linear algebra may be formulated, and remains correct, for modules over a division ring \"D\" instead of vector spaces over a field. Doing so it must be specified whether one is considering right or left modules, and some care is needed in properly distinguishing left and right in formulas. Working in coordinates, elements of a finite dimensional right module can be represented by column vectors, which can be multiplied on the right by scalars, and on the left by matrices (representing linear maps); for elements of a finite dimensional left module, row vectors must be used, which can be multiplied on the left by scalars, and on the right by matrices. The dual of a right module is a left module, and vice versa. The transpose of a matrix must be viewed as a matrix over the opposite division ring \"D\"op in order for the rule to remain valid.\nEvery module over a division ring is free; i.e., has a basis, and all bases of a module have the same number of elements. Linear maps between finite-dimensional modules over a division ring can be described by matrices; the fact that linear maps by definition commute with scalar multiplication is most conveniently represented in notation by writing them on the \"opposite\" side of vectors as scalars are. The Gaussian elimination algorithm remains applicable. The column rank of a matrix is the dimension of the right module generated by the columns, and the row rank is dimension of the left module generated by the rows; the same proof as for the vector space case can be used to show that these ranks are the same, and define the rank of a matrix.\nIn fact the converse is also true and this gives a \"characterization of division rings\" via their module category: A unital ring \"R\" is a division ring if and only if every R-module is free.\nThe center of a division ring is commutative and therefore a field. Every division ring is therefore a division algebra over its center. Division rings can be roughly classified according to whether or not they are finite-dimensional or infinite-dimensional over their centers. The former are called \"centrally finite\" and the latter \"centrally infinite\". Every field is, of course, one-dimensional over its center. The ring of Hamiltonian quaternions forms a 4-dimensional algebra over its center, which is isomorphic to the real numbers.\nMain theorems.\nWedderburn's little theorem: All finite division rings are commutative and therefore finite fields. (Ernst Witt gave a simple proof.)\nFrobenius theorem: The only finite-dimensional associative division algebras over the reals are the reals themselves, the complex numbers, and the quaternions.\nRelated notions.\nDivision rings \"used to be\" called \"fields\" in an older usage. In many languages, a word meaning \"body\" is used for division rings, in some languages designating either commutative or non-commutative division rings, while in others specifically designating commutative division rings (what we now call fields in English). A more complete comparison is found in the article on fields.\nThe name \"Skew field\" has an interesting semantic feature: a modifier (here \"skew\") \"widens\" the scope of the base term (here \"field\"). Thus a field is a particular type of skew field, and not all skew fields are fields.\nWhile division rings and algebras as discussed here are assumed to have associative multiplication, nonassociative division algebras such as the octonions are also of interest.\nA near-field is an algebraic structure similar to a division ring, except that it has only one of the two distributive laws."}
{"id": "9069", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9069", "title": "Dia (software)", "text": "Dia ()\nis free and open source general-purpose diagramming software, developed originally by Alexander Larsson. Dia uses a controlled single document interface (SDI) similar to GIMP and Inkscape.\nFeatures.\nDia has a modular design with several shape packages available for different needs: flowchart, network diagrams, circuit diagrams, and more. It does not restrict symbols and connectors from various categories from being placed together.\nDia has special objects to help draw entity-relationship models (obsoleted tedia2sql or newer parsediasql can be used to create the SQL DDL), Unified Modeling Language (UML) diagrams, flowcharts, network diagrams, and simple electrical circuits. It is also possible to add support for new shapes by writing simple XML files, using a subset of Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) to draw the shape.\nDia loads and saves diagrams in a custom XML format which is, by default, gzipped to save space. It can print large diagrams spanning multiple pages and can also be scripted using the Python programming language.\nExports.\nDia can export diagrams to various formats including the following:\nDevelopment.\nDia was originally created by Alexander Larsson but he moved on to work on GNOME and other projects. James Henstridge then took over as the lead developer, but he also moved on to other projects. He was followed by Cyrille Chepelov and Lars R\u00e6der Clausen in turn.\nDia is maintained by a group of developers: Hans Breuer, Steffen Macke, and Sameer Sahasrabuddhe.\nDia is written in C, and has an extension system, which also supports writing extensions in Python."}
{"id": "9070", "revid": "19647793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9070", "title": "Deep Space 1", "text": "Deep Space 1 (DS1) was a NASA technology demonstration spacecraft which flew by an asteroid and a comet. It was part of the New Millennium Program, dedicated to testing advanced technologies.\nLaunched on 24 October 1998, the \"Deep Space 1\" spacecraft carried out a flyby of asteroid 9969 Braille, which was its primary science target. The mission was extended twice to include an encounter with comet 19P/Borrelly and further engineering testing. Problems during its initial stages and with its star tracker led to repeated changes in mission configuration. While the flyby of the asteroid was only a partial success, the encounter with the comet retrieved valuable information. Three of twelve technologies on board had to work within a few minutes of separation from the carrier rocket for the mission to continue.\nThe Deep Space series was continued by the \"Deep Space 2\" probes, which were launched in January 1999 piggybacked on the Mars Polar Lander and were intended to strike the surface of Mars (though contact was lost and the mission failed). \"Deep Space 1\" was the first NASA spacecraft to use ion propulsion rather than the traditional chemical-powered rockets.\nTechnologies.\nThe purpose of \"Deep Space 1\" was technology development and validation for future missions; 12 technologies were tested:\nAutonav.\nThe Autonav system, developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, takes images of known bright asteroids. The asteroids in the inner Solar System move in relation to other bodies at a noticeable, predictable speed. Thus a spacecraft can determine its relative position by tracking such asteroids across the star background, which appears fixed over such timescales. Two or more asteroids let the spacecraft triangulate its position; two or more positions in time let the spacecraft determine its trajectory. Existing spacecraft are tracked by their interactions with the transmitters of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN), in effect an inverse GPS. However, DSN tracking requires many skilled operators, and the DSN is overburdened by its use as a communications network. The use of Autonav reduces mission cost and DSN demands.\nThe Autonav system can also be used in reverse, tracking the position of bodies relative to the spacecraft. This is used to acquire targets for the scientific instruments. The spacecraft is programmed with the target's coarse location. After initial acquisition, Autonav keeps the subject in frame, even commandeering the spacecraft's attitude control. The next spacecraft to use Autonav was \"Deep Impact\".\nSCARLET concentrating solar array.\nPrimary power for the mission was produced by a new solar array technology, the Solar Concentrator Array with Refractive Linear Element Technology (SCARLET), which uses linear Fresnel lenses made of silicone to concentrate sunlight onto solar cells. ABLE Engineering developed the concentrator technology and built the solar array for DS1, with Entech Inc, who supplied the Fresnel optics, and the NASA Glenn Research Center. The activity was sponsored by the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. The concentrating lens technology was combined with dual-junction solar cells, which had considerably better performance than the GaAs solar cells that were the state of the art at the time of the mission launch.\nThe SCARLET arrays generated 2.5 kilowatts at 1 AU, with less size and weight than conventional arrays.\nNSTAR ion engine.\nAlthough ion engines had been developed at NASA since the late 1950s, with the exception of the SERT missions in the 1960s, the technology had not been demonstrated in flight on United States spacecraft, though hundreds of Hall-effect engines had been used on Soviet and Russian spacecraft. This lack of a performance history in space meant that despite the potential savings in propellant mass, the technology was considered too experimental to be used for high-cost missions. Furthermore, unforeseen side effects of ion propulsion might in some way interfere with typical scientific experiments, such as fields and particle measurements. Therefore, it was a primary mission of the \"Deep Space 1\" demonstration to show long-duration use of an ion thruster on a scientific mission.\nThe NASA Solar Technology Application Readiness (NSTAR) electrostatic ion thruster, developed at NASA Glenn, achieves a specific impulse of 1000\u20133000 seconds. This is an order of magnitude higher than traditional space propulsion methods, resulting in a mass savings of approximately half. This leads to much cheaper launch vehicles. Although the engine produces just thrust at maximal power (2,100 W on DS1), the craft achieved high speeds because ion engines thrust continuously for long periods.\nThe next spacecraft to use NSTAR engines was \"Dawn\", with three redundant units.\nRemote Agent.\nRemote Agent (RAX), remote intelligent self-repair software developed at NASA's Ames Research Center and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was the first artificial-intelligence control system to control a spacecraft without human supervision. Remote Agent successfully demonstrated the ability to plan onboard activities and correctly diagnose and respond to simulated faults in spacecraft components through its built-in REPL environment. Autonomous control will enable future spacecraft to operate at greater distances from Earth and to carry out more sophisticated science-gathering activities in deep space. Components of the Remote Agent software have been used to support other NASA missions. Major components of Remote Agent were a robust planner (EUROPA), a plan-execution system (EXEC) and a model-based diagnostic system (Livingstone). EUROPA was used as a ground-based planner for the Mars Exploration Rovers. EUROPA II was used to support the \"Phoenix\" Mars lander and the Mars Science Laboratory. Livingstone2 was flown as an experiment aboard Earth Observing-1 and on an F/A-18 Hornet at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center.\nBeacon Monitor.\nAnother method for reducing DSN burdens is the Beacon Monitor experiment. During the long cruise periods of the mission, spacecraft operations are essentially suspended. Instead of data, the craft emits a carrier signal on a predetermined frequency. Without data decoding, the carrier can be detected by much simpler ground antennas and receivers. If the spacecraft detects an anomaly, it changes the carrier between four tones, based on urgency. Ground receivers then signal operators to divert DSN resources. This prevents skilled operators and expensive hardware from babysitting an unburdened mission operating nominally. A similar system was used on the \"New Horizons\" Pluto probe to keep costs down during its ten-year cruise from Jupiter to Pluto.\nSDST.\nThe Small Deep Space Transponder (SDST) is a compact and lightweight radio-communications system. Aside from using miniaturized components, the SDST is capable of communicating over the Ka band. Because this band is higher in frequency than bands currently in use by deep-space missions, the same amount of data can be sent by smaller equipment in space and on the ground. Conversely, existing DSN antennas can split time among more missions. At the time of launch, the DSN had a small number of Ka receivers installed on an experimental basis; Ka operations and missions are increasing.\nThe SDST was later used on other space missions such as the Mars Science Laboratory (the Mars rover \"Curiosity\").\nPEPE.\nOnce at a target, DS1 senses the particle environment with the PEPE (Plasma Experiment for Planetary Exploration) instrument. This instrument measured the flux of ions and electrons as a function of their energy and direction. The composition of the ions was determined by using a time-of-flight mass spectrometer.\nMICAS.\nThe MICAS (Miniature Integrated Camera And Spectrometer) instrument combined visible light imaging with infrared and ultraviolet spectroscopy to determine chemical composition. All channels share a telescope, which uses a silicon carbide mirror.\nBoth PEPE and MICAS were similar in capabilities to larger instruments or suites of instruments on other spacecraft. They were designed to be smaller and require lower power than those used on previous missions.\nMission overview.\nPrior to launch, \"Deep Space 1\" was intended to visit comet 76P/West\u2013Kohoutek\u2013Ikemura and asteroid 3352 McAuliffe. Because of the delayed launch, the targets were changed to asteroid 9969 Braille (at the time called 1992\u00a0KD) and comet 107P/Wilson\u2013Harrington. It achieved an impaired flyby of Braille and, due to problems with the star tracker, was re-tasked to fly by comet 19P/Borrelly, which was successful. An August 2002 flyby of asteroid as another extended mission was considered, but ultimately was not advanced due to cost concerns. During the mission, high quality infrared spectra of Mars were also taken.\nResults and achievements.\nThe ion propulsion engine initially failed after 4.5 minutes of operation. However, it was later restored to action and performed excellently. Early in the mission, material ejected during launch vehicle separation caused the closely spaced ion extraction grids to short-circuit. The contamination was eventually cleared, as the material was eroded by electrical arcing, sublimed by outgassing, or simply allowed to drift out. This was achieved by repeatedly restarting the engine in an engine repair mode, arcing across trapped material.\nIt was thought that the ion engine exhaust might interfere with other spacecraft systems, such as radio communications or the science instruments. The PEPE detectors had a secondary function to monitor such effects from the engine. No interference was found although the flux of ions from the thruster prevented PEPE from observing ions below approximately 20 eV.\nAnother failure was the loss of the star tracker. The star tracker determines spacecraft orientation by comparing the star field to its internal charts. The mission was saved when the MICAS camera was reprogrammed to substitute for the star tracker. Although MICAS is more sensitive, its field-of-view is an order of magnitude smaller, creating a greater information processing burden. Ironically, the star tracker was an off-the-shelf component, expected to be highly reliable.\nWithout a working star tracker, ion thrusting was temporarily suspended. The loss of thrust time forced the cancellation of a flyby past comet 107P/Wilson\u2013Harrington.\nThe Autonav system required occasional manual corrections. Most problems were in identifying objects that were too dim, or were difficult to identify because of brighter objects causing diffraction spikes and reflections in the camera, causing Autonav to misidentify targets.\nThe Remote Agent system was presented with three simulated failures on the spacecraft and correctly handled each event.\nOverall this constituted a successful demonstration of fully autonomous planning, diagnosis, and recovery.\nThe MICAS instrument was a design success, but the ultraviolet channel failed due to an electrical fault. Later in the mission, after the star tracker failure, MICAS assumed this duty as well. This caused continual interruptions in its scientific use during the remaining mission, including the Comet Borrelly encounter.\nThe flyby of the asteroid 9969 Braille was only a partial success. \"Deep Space 1\" was intended to perform the flyby at at only from the asteroid. Due to technical difficulties, including a software crash shortly before approach, the craft instead passed Braille at a distance of . This, plus Braille's lower albedo, meant that the asteroid was not bright enough for the Autonav to focus the camera in the right direction, and the picture shoot was delayed by almost an hour. The resulting pictures were disappointingly indistinct.\nHowever, the flyby of Comet Borrelly was a great success and returned extremely detailed images of the comet's surface. Such images were of higher resolution than the only previous pictures of a comet -- Halley's Comet, taken by the \"Giotto\" spacecraft. The PEPE instrument reported that the comet's solar wind interaction was offset from the nucleus. This is believed to be due to emission of jets, which were not distributed evenly across the comet's surface.\nDespite having no debris shields, the spacecraft survived the comet passage intact. Once again, the sparse comet jets did not appear to point towards the spacecraft. \"Deep Space 1\" then entered its second extended mission phase, focused on retesting the spacecraft's hardware technologies. The focus of this mission phase was on the ion engine systems. The spacecraft eventually ran out of hydrazine fuel for its attitude control thrusters. The highly efficient ion thruster had a sufficient amount of propellant left to perform attitude control in addition to main propulsion, thus allowing the mission to continue.\nDuring late October and early November 1999, during the spacecraft's post-Braille encounter coast phase, \"Deep Space 1\" observed Mars with its MICAS instrument. Although this was a very distant flyby, the instrument did succeed in taking multiple infrared spectra of the planet.\nCurrent status.\n\"Deep Space 1\" succeeded in its primary and secondary objectives, returning valuable science data and images. DS1's ion engines were shut down on 18 December 2001 at approximately 20:00:00\u00a0UTC, signaling the end of the mission. On-board communications were set to remain in active mode in case the craft should be needed in the future. However, attempts to resume contact in March 2002 were unsuccessful. It remains within the Solar System, in orbit around the Sun."}
{"id": "9071", "revid": "875069828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9071", "title": "King David (disambiguation)", "text": "David was the third king of the united Kingdom of Israel and Judeah\nKing David may also refer to:"}
{"id": "9072", "revid": "16376315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9072", "title": "Jacques-Louis David", "text": "Jacques-Louis David (; 30 August 174829 December 1825) was a French painter in the Neoclassical style, considered to be the preeminent painter of the era. In the 1780s his cerebral brand of history painting marked a change in taste away from Rococo frivolity toward classical austerity and severity and heightened feeling, harmonizing with the moral climate of the final years of the Ancien R\u00e9gime.\nDavid later became an active supporter of the French Revolution and friend of Maximilien Robespierre (1758\u20131794), and was effectively a dictator of the arts under the French Republic. Imprisoned after Robespierre's fall from power, he aligned himself with yet another political regime upon his release: that of Napoleon, the First Consul of France. At this time he developed his Empire style, notable for its use of warm Venetian colours. After Napoleon's fall from Imperial power and the Bourbon revival, David exiled himself to Brussels, then in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, where he remained until his death. David had , making him the strongest influence in French art of the early 19th century, especially academic Salon painting.\nEarly life.\nJacques-Louis David was born into a prosperous French family in Paris on 30 August 1748. When he was about nine his father was killed in a duel and his mother left him with his well-off architect uncles. They saw to it that he received an excellent education at the Coll\u00e8ge des Quatre-Nations, University of Paris, but he was never a good student\u2014he had a facial tumor that impeded his speech, and he was always preoccupied with drawing. He covered his notebooks with drawings, and he once said, \"I was always hiding behind the instructor's chair, drawing for the duration of the class\". Soon, he desired to be a painter, but his uncles and mother wanted him to be an architect. He overcame the opposition, and went to learn from Fran\u00e7ois Boucher (1703\u20131770), the leading painter of the time, who was also a distant relative. Boucher was a Rococo painter, but tastes were changing, and the fashion for Rococo was giving way to a more classical style. Boucher decided that instead of taking over David's tutelage, he would send David to his friend, Joseph-Marie Vien (1716\u20131809), a painter who embraced the classical reaction to Rococo. There, David attended the Royal Academy, based in what is now the Louvre.\nEach year the Academy awarded an outstanding student the prestigious Prix de Rome, which funded a 3- to 5-year stay in the Eternal City. Since artists were now revisiting classical styles, the trip to Rome provided its winners the opportunity to study the remains of classical antiquity and the works of the Italian Renaissance masters at first hand. Each \"pensionnaire\" was lodged in the French Academy's Roman outpost, which from the years 1737 to 1793 was the Palazzo Mancini in the Via del Corso. David competed for, and failed to win, the prize for three consecutive years (with \"Minerva Fighting Mars\", \"Diana and Apollo Killing Niobe's Children\" and \"The Death of Seneca\"). Each failure contributed to his lifelong grudge against the institution. After his second loss in 1772, David went on a hunger strike, which lasted two and a half days before the faculty encouraged him to continue painting. Confident he now had the support and backing needed to win the prize, he resumed his studies with great zeal\u2014only to fail to win the Prix de Rome again the following year. Finally, in 1774, David was awarded the Prix de Rome on the strength of his painting of \"Erasistratus Discovering the Cause of Antiochus' Disease\", a subject set by the judges. In October 1775 he made the journey to Italy with his mentor, Joseph-Marie Vien, who had just been appointed director of the French Academy at Rome.\nWhile in Italy, David mostly studied the works of 17th-century masters such as Poussin, Caravaggio, and the Carracci. Although he declared, \"the Antique will not seduce me, it lacks animation, it does not move\", David filled twelve sketchbooks with drawings that he and his studio used as model books for the rest of his life. He was introduced to the painter Raphael Mengs (1728\u20131779), who opposed the Rococo tendency to sweeten and trivialize ancient subjects, advocating instead the rigorous study of classical sources and close adherence to ancient models. Mengs' principled, historicizing approach to the representation of classical subjects profoundly influenced David's pre-revolutionary painting, such as \"The Vestal Virgin\", probably from the 1780s. Mengs also introduced David to the theoretical writings on ancient sculpture by Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717\u20131768), the German scholar held to be the founder of modern art history. As part of the Prix de Rome, David toured the newly excavated ruins of Pompeii in 1779, which deepened his belief that the persistence of classical culture was an index of its eternal conceptual and formal power. During the trip David also assiduously studied the High Renaissance painters, Raphael making a profound and lasting impression on the young French artist.\nEarly work.\nAlthough David's fellow students at the academy found him difficult to get along with, they recognized his genius. David's stay at the French Academy in Rome was extended by a year. In July 1780, he returned to Paris. There, he found people ready to use their influence for him, and he was made an official member of the Royal Academy. He sent the Academy two paintings, and both were included in the Salon of 1781, a high honor. He was praised by his famous contemporary painters, but the administration of the Royal Academy was very hostile to this young upstart. After the Salon, the King granted David lodging in the Louvre, an ancient and much desired privilege of great artists. When the contractor of the King's buildings, M. P\u00e9coul, was arranging with David, he asked the artist to marry his daughter, Marguerite Charlotte. This marriage brought him money and eventually four children. David had about 50 of his own pupils and was commissioned by the government to paint \"\"Horace defended by his Father\", but he soon decided, \"Only in Rome can I paint Romans.\"\" His father-in-law provided the money he needed for the trip, and David headed for Rome with his wife and three of his students, one of whom, Jean-Germain Drouais (1763\u20131788), was the Prix de Rome winner of that year.\nIn Rome, David painted his famous \"Oath of the Horatii\", 1784. In this piece, the artist references Enlightenment values while alluding to Rousseau's social contract. The republican ideal of the general became the central focus of the painting with all three sons positioned in compliance with the father. The Oath between the characters can be read as an act of unification of men to the binding of the state. The issue of gender roles also becomes apparent in this piece, as the women in Horatii greatly contrast the group of brothers. David depicts the father with his back to the women, shutting them out of the oath. They also appear to be smaller in scale and physically isolated from the male figures. The masculine virility and discipline displayed by the men's rigid and confident stances is also severely contrasted to the slouching, swooning female softness created in the other half of the composition. Here we see the clear division of male-female attributes that confined the sexes to specific roles under Rousseau's popularized doctrine of \"separate spheres\".\nThese revolutionary ideals are also apparent in the \"Distribution of Eagles\". While \"Oath of the Horatii\" and \"The Tennis Court Oath\" stress the importance of masculine self-sacrifice for one's country and patriotism, the \"Distribution of Eagles\" would ask for self-sacrifice for one's Emperor (Napoleon) and the importance of battlefield glory.\nIn 1787, David did not become the Director of the French Academy in Rome, which was a position he wanted dearly. The Count in charge of the appointments said David was too young, but said he would support him in 6 to 12 years. This situation would be one of many that would cause him to lash out at the Academy in years to come.\nFor the Salon of 1787, David exhibited his famous \"Death of Socrates\". \"Condemned to death, Socrates, strong, calm and at peace, discusses the immortality of the soul. Surrounded by Crito, his grieving friends and students, he is teaching, philosophizing, and in fact, thanking the God of Health, Asclepius, for the hemlock brew which will ensure a peaceful death... The wife of Socrates can be seen grieving alone outside the chamber, dismissed for her weakness. Plato is depicted as an old man seated at the end of the bed.\" Critics compared the Socrates with Michelangelo's Sistine Ceiling and Raphael's Stanze, and one, after ten visits to the Salon, described it as \"in every sense perfect\". Denis Diderot said it looked like he copied it from some ancient bas-relief. The painting was very much in tune with the political climate at the time. For this painting, David was not honored by a royal \"works of encouragement\".\nFor his next painting, David created \"The Lictors Bring to Brutus the Bodies of His Sons\". The work had tremendous appeal for the time. Before the opening of the Salon, the French Revolution had begun. The National Assembly had been established, and the Bastille had fallen. The royal court did not want propaganda agitating the people, so all paintings had to be checked before being hung. David's portrait of Lavoisier, who was a chemist and physicist as well as an active member of the Jacobin party, was banned by the authorities for such reasons. When the newspapers reported that the government had not allowed the showing of \"The Lictors Bring to Brutus the Bodies of His Sons\", the people were outraged, and the royals were forced to give in. The painting was hung in the exhibition, protected by art students. The painting depicts Lucius Junius Brutus, the Roman leader, grieving for his sons. Brutus's sons had attempted to overthrow the government and restore the monarchy, so the father ordered their death to maintain the republic. Brutus was the heroic defender of the republic, sacrificing his own family for the good of the republic. On the right, the mother holds her two daughters, and the nurse is seen on the far right, in anguish. Brutus sits on the left, alone, brooding, seemingly dismissing the dead bodies of his sons. Knowing what he did was best for his country, but the tense posture of his feet and toes reveals his inner turmoil. The whole painting was a Republican symbol, and obviously had immense meaning during these times in France. It exemplified civic virtue, a value highly regarded during the Revolution.\nThe French Revolution.\nIn the beginning, David was a supporter of the Revolution, a friend of Robespierre, and a member of the Jacobin Club. While others were leaving the country for new and greater opportunities, David stayed behind to help destroy the old order; he was a regicide who voted in the National Convention for the Execution of Louis XVI. It is uncertain why he did this, as there were many more opportunities for him under the King than the new order; some people suggest David's love for the classical made him embrace everything about that period, including a republican government.\nOthers believed that they found the key to the artist's revolutionary career in his personality. Undoubtedly, David's artistic sensibility, mercurial temperament, volatile emotions, ardent enthusiasm, and fierce independence might have been expected to help turn him against the established order but they did not fully explain his devotion to the republican regime. Nor did the vague statements of those who insisted upon his \"powerful ambition...and unusual energy of will\" actually account for his revolutionary connections. Those who knew him maintained that \"generous ardor\", high-minded idealism and well-meaning though sometimes fanatical enthusiasm, rather than opportunism and jealousy, motivated his activities during this period.\nSoon, David turned his critical sights on the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture. This attack was probably caused primarily by the hypocrisy of the organization and their personal opposition against his work, as seen in previous episodes in David's life. The Royal Academy was controlled by royalists, who opposed David's attempts at reform; so the National Assembly finally ordered it to make changes to conform to the new constitution.\nDavid then began work on something that would later hound him: propaganda for the new republic. David's painting of Brutus was shown during the play \"Brutus\" by Voltaire.\nIn 1789, Jacques-Louis David attempted to leave his artistic mark on the historical beginnings of the French Revolution with his painting of \"The Oath of the Tennis Court\". David undertook this task not out of personal political conviction but rather because he was commissioned to do so. The painting was meant to commemorate the event of the same name but was never completed. A meeting of the Estates General was convened in May to address reforms of the monarchy. Dissent arose over whether the three estates would meet separately, as had been tradition, or as one body. The King's acquiescence with the demands of the upper orders led to the deputies of the Third Estate renaming themselves as the National Assembly on 17 June. They were locked out of the meeting hall three days later when they attempted to meet, and forced to reconvene to the royal indoor tennis court. Presided over by Jean-Sylvain Bailly, they made a 'solemn oath never to separate' until a national constitution had been created. In 1789 this event was seen as a symbol of the national unity against the \"ancien regime\". Rejecting the current conditions, the oath signified a new transition in human history and ideology. David was enlisted by the Society of Friends of the Constitution, the body that would eventually form the Jacobins, to enshrine this symbolic event.\nThis instance is notable in more ways than one because it eventually led David to finally become involved in politics as he joined the Jacobins. The picture was meant to be massive in scale; the figures in the foreground were to be life-sized portraits of the counterparts, including Jean-Sylvain Bailly, the President of the Constituent Assembly. Seeking additional funding, David turned to the Society of Friends of the Constitution. The funding for the project was to come from over three thousand subscribers hoping to receive a print of the image. However, when the funding was insufficient, the state ended up financing the project.\nDavid set out in 1790 to transform the contemporary event into a major historical picture which would appear at the Salon of 1791 as a large pen-and-ink drawing. As in the \"Oath of the Horatii\", David represents the unity of men in the service of a patriotic ideal. The outstretched arms which are prominent in both works betray David's deeply held belief that acts of republican virtue akin to those of the Romans were being played out in France. In what was essentially an act of intellect and reason, David creates an air of drama in this work. The very power of the people appears to be \"blowing\" through the scene with the stormy weather, in a sense alluding to the storm that would be the revolution.\nSymbolism in this work of art closely represents the revolutionary events taking place at the time. The figure in the middle is raising his right arm making the oath that they will never disband until they have reached their goal of creating a \"constitution of the realm fixed upon solid foundations\". The importance of this symbol is highlighted by the fact that the crowd's arms are angled to his hand forming a triangular shape. Additionally, the open space in the top half contrasted to the commotion in the lower half serves to emphasize the magnitude of the Tennis Court Oath.\nIn his attempt to depict political events of the Revolution in \"real time\", David was venturing down a new and untrodden path in the art world. However, Thomas Crow argues that this path \"proved to be less a way forward than a cul-de-sac for history painting\". Essentially, the history of the demise of David's \"The Tennis Court Oath\" illustrates the difficulty of creating works of art that portray current and controversial political occurrences. Political circumstances in France proved too volatile to allow the completion of the painting. The unity that was to be symbolized in \"The Tennis Court Oath\" no longer existed in radicalized 1792. The National Assembly had split between conservatives and radical Jacobins, both vying for political power. By 1792 there was no longer consensus that all the revolutionaries at the tennis court were \"heroes\". A sizeable number of the heroes of 1789 had become the villains of 1792. In this unstable political climate David's work remained unfinished. With only a few nude figures sketched onto the massive canvas, David abandoned \"The Oath of the Tennis Court\". To have completed it would have been politically unsound. After this incident, when David attempted to make a political statement in his paintings, he returned to the less politically charged use of metaphor to convey his message.\nWhen Voltaire died in 1778, the church denied him a church burial, and his body was interred near a monastery. A year later, Voltaire's old friends began a campaign to have his body buried in the Panth\u00e9on, as church property had been confiscated by the French Government. In 1791, David was appointed to head the organizing committee for the ceremony, a parade through the streets of Paris to the Panth\u00e9on. Despite rain and opposition from conservatives due to the amount of money spent, the procession went ahead. Up to 100,000 people watched the \"Father of the Revolution\" being carried to his resting place. This was the first of many large festivals organized by David for the republic. He went on to organize festivals for martyrs that died fighting royalists. These funerals echoed the religious festivals of the pagan Greeks and Romans and are seen by many as Saturnalian.\nDavid incorporated many revolutionary symbols into these theatrical performances and orchestrated ceremonial rituals, in effect radicalizing the applied arts themselves. The most popular symbol for which David was responsible as propaganda minister was drawn from classical Greek images; changing and transforming them with contemporary politics. In an elaborate festival held on the anniversary of the revolt that brought the monarchy to its knees, David's Hercules figure was revealed in a procession following the Goddess of Liberty (Marianne). Liberty, the symbol of Enlightenment ideals was here being overturned by the Hercules symbol; that of strength and passion for the protection of the Republic against disunity and factionalism. In his speech during the procession, David \"explicitly emphasized the opposition between people and monarchy; Hercules was chosen, after all, to make this opposition more evident\". The ideals that David linked to his Hercules single-handedly transformed the figure from a sign of the old regime into a powerful new symbol of revolution. \"David turned him into the representation of a collective, popular power. He took one of the favorite signs of monarchy and reproduced, elevated, and monumentalized it into the sign of its opposite.\" Hercules, the image, became to the revolutionaries, something to rally around.\nIn June 1791, the King made an ill-fated attempt to flee the country, but was apprehended short of his goal on the Austrian Netherlands border and was forced to return under guard to Paris. Louis XVI had made secret requests to Emperor Leopold II of Austria, Marie-Antoinette's brother, to restore him to his throne. This was granted and Austria threatened France if the royal couple were hurt. In reaction, the people arrested the King. This led to an Invasion after the trials and execution of Louis and Marie-Antoinette. The Bourbon monarchy was destroyed by the French people in 1792\u2014it would be restored after Napoleon, then destroyed again with the Restoration of the House of Bonaparte. When the new National Convention held its first meeting, David was sitting with his friends Jean-Paul Marat and Robespierre. In the convention, David soon earned the nickname \"ferocious terrorist\". Robespierre's agents discovered a secret vault containing the King's correspondence which proved he was trying to overthrow the government, and demanded his execution. The National Convention held the trial of Louis XVI; David voted for the death of the King, causing his wife, a royalist, to divorce him.\nWhen Louis XVI was executed on 21 January 1793, another man had already died as well\u2014Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau. Le Peletier was killed on the preceding day by a royal bodyguard in revenge for having voted for the death of the King. David was called upon to organize a funeral, and he painted \"Le Peletier Assassinated\". In it, the assassin's sword was seen hanging by a single strand of horsehair above Le Peletier's body, a concept inspired by the proverbial ancient tale of the sword of Damocles, which illustrated the insecurity of power and position. This underscored the courage displayed by Le Peletier and his companions in routing an oppressive king. The sword pierces a piece of paper on which is written \"I vote the death of the tyrant\", and as a tribute at the bottom right of the picture David placed the inscription \"David to Le Peletier. 20 January 1793\". The painting was later destroyed by Le Peletier's royalist daughter, and is known by only a drawing, an engraving, and contemporary accounts. Nevertheless, this work was important in David's career because it was the first completed painting of the French Revolution, made in less than three months, and a work through which he initiated the regeneration process that would continue with \"The Death of Marat\", David's masterpiece.\nOn 13 July 1793, David's friend Marat was assassinated by Charlotte Corday with a knife she had hidden in her clothing. She gained entrance to Marat's house on the pretense of presenting him a list of people who should be executed as enemies of France. Marat thanked her and said that they would be guillotined next week upon which Corday immediately fatally stabbed him. She was guillotined shortly thereafter. Corday was of an opposing political party, whose name can be seen in the note Marat holds in David's subsequent painting, \"The Death of Marat\". Marat, a member of the National Convention and a journalist, had a skin disease that caused him to itch horribly. The only relief he could get was in his bath over which he improvised a desk to write his list of suspect counter-revolutionaries who were to be quickly tried and, if convicted, guillotined. David once again organized a spectacular funeral, and Marat was buried in the Panth\u00e9on. Marat's body was to be placed upon a Roman bed, his wound displayed and his right arm extended holding the pen which he had used to defend the Republic and its people. This concept was to be complicated by the fact that the corpse had begun to putrefy. Marat's body had to be periodically sprinkled with water and vinegar as the public crowded to see his corpse prior to the funeral on 15 and 16 July. The stench became so bad however that the funeral had to be brought forward to the evening of 16 July.\n\"The Death of Marat\", perhaps David's most famous painting, has been called the Piet\u00e0 of the revolution. Upon presenting the painting to the convention, he said \"Citizens, the people were again calling for their friend; their desolate voice was heard: David, take up your brushes..., avenge Marat... I heard the voice of the people. I obeyed.\" David had to work quickly, but the result was a simple and powerful image.\n\"The Death of Marat\", 1793, became the leading image of the Terror and immortalized both Marat and David in the world of the revolution. This piece stands today as \"a moving testimony to what can be achieved when an artist's political convictions are directly manifested in his work\". A political martyr was instantly created as David portrayed Marat with all the marks of the real murder, in a fashion which greatly resembles that of Christ or his disciples. The subject although realistically depicted remains lifeless in a rather supernatural composition. With the surrogate tombstone placed in front of him and the almost holy light cast upon the whole scene; alluding to an out of this world existence. \"Atheists though they were, David and Marat, like so many other fervent social reformers of the modern world, seem to have created a new kind of religion.\" At the very center of these beliefs, there stood the republic.\nAfter the King's execution, war broke out between the new Republic and virtually every major power in Europe. David, as a member of the Committee of General Security, contributed directly to the Reign of Terror. David organized his last festival: the festival of the Supreme Being. Robespierre had realized what a tremendous propaganda tool these festivals were, and he decided to create a new religion, mixing moral ideas with the Republic and based on the ideas of Rousseau. This process had already begun by confiscating church lands and requiring priests to take an oath to the state. The festivals, called f\u00eates, would be the method of indoctrination. On the appointed day, 20 Prairial by the revolutionary calendar, Robespierre spoke, descended steps, and with a torch presented to him by David, incinerated a cardboard image symbolizing atheism, revealing an image of wisdom underneath.\nSoon, the war began to go well; French troops marched across the southern half of the Netherlands (which would later become Belgium), and the emergency that had placed the Committee of Public Safety in control was no more. Then plotters seized Robespierre at the National Convention and he was later guillotined, in effect ending the Reign of Terror. As Robespierre was arrested, David yelled to his friend \"if you drink hemlock, I shall drink it with you.\" After this, he supposedly fell ill, and did not attend the evening session because of \"stomach pain\", which saved him from being guillotined along with Robespierre. David was arrested and placed in prison, first from 2 August to 28 December 1794 and then from 29 May to 3 August 1795. There he painted his own portrait, showing him much younger than he actually was, as well as that of his jailer.\nPost-revolution.\nAfter David's wife visited him in jail, he conceived the idea of telling the story of The rape of the Sabine women. \"The Sabine Women Enforcing Peace by Running between the Combatants\", also called \"The Intervention of the Sabine Women\" is said to have been painted to honor his wife, with the theme being love prevailing over conflict. The painting was also seen as a plea for the people to reunite after the bloodshed of the revolution.\nDavid conceived a new style for this painting, one which he called the \"Pure Greek Style\", as opposed to the \"Roman style\" of his earlier historical paintings. The new style was influenced heavily by the work of art historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann. In David's words, \"the most prominent general characteristics of the Greek masterpieces are a noble simplicity and silent greatness in pose as well as in expression.\" Instead of the muscularity and angularity of the figures of his past works, these were more air-brushed, feminine, and painterly.\nThis work also brought him to the attention of Napoleon. The story for the painting is as follows: \"The Romans have abducted the daughters of their neighbors, the Sabines. To avenge this abduction, the Sabines attacked Rome, although not immediately\u2014since Hersilia, the daughter of Tatius, the leader of the Sabines, had been married to Romulus, the Roman leader, and then had two children by him in the interim. Here we see Hersilia between her father and husband as she adjures the warriors on both sides not to take wives away from their husbands or mothers away from their children. The other Sabine Women join in her exhortations.\" During this time, the martyrs of the Revolution were taken from the Pantheon and buried in common ground, and revolutionary statues were destroyed. When David was finally released to the country, France had changed. His wife managed to get him released from prison, and he wrote letters to his former wife, and told her he never ceased loving her. He remarried her in 1796. Finally, wholly restored to his position, he retreated to his studio, took pupils and for the most part, retired from politics.\nIn August 1796, David and many other artists signed a petition orchestrated by Quatrem\u00e8re de Quincy which questioned the wisdom of the planned seizure of works of art from Rome. The Director Barras believed that David was \"tricked\" into signing, although one of David's students recalled that in 1798 his master lamented the fact that masterpieces had been imported from Italy.\nNapoleon.\nDavid's close association with the Committee of Public Safety during the Terror resulted in his signing of the death warrant for Alexandre de Beauharnais, a minor noble. Beauharnais's widow, Jos\u00e9phine, went on to marry Napoleon Bonaparte and became his empress; David himself depicted their coronation in the \"Coronation of Napoleon and Josephine, 2\u00a0December 1804\".\nDavid had been an admirer of Napoleon from their first meeting, struck by Bonaparte's classical features. Requesting a sitting from the busy and impatient general, David was able to sketch Napoleon in 1797. David recorded the face of the conqueror of Italy, but the full composition of Napoleon holding the peace treaty with Austria remains unfinished. This was likely a decision by Napoleon himself after considering the current political situation. He may have considered the publicity the portrait would bring about to be ill-timed. Bonaparte had high esteem for David, and asked him to accompany him to Egypt in 1798, but David refused, seemingly unwilling to give up the material comfort, safety, and peace of mind he had obtained through the years. Draftsman and engraver Dominique Vivant Denon went to Egypt instead, providing mostly documentary and archaeological work.\nAfter Napoleon's successful coup d'\u00e9tat in 1799, as First Consul he commissioned David to commemorate his daring crossing of the Alps. The crossing of the St. Bernard Pass had allowed the French to surprise the Austrian army and win victory at the Battle of Marengo on 14 June 1800. Although Napoleon had crossed the Alps on a mule, he requested that he be portrayed \"calm upon a fiery steed\". David complied with \"Napoleon Crossing the Saint-Bernard.\" After the proclamation of the Empire in 1804, David became the official court painter of the regime. During this period he took students, one of whom was the Belgian painter Pieter van Hanselaere.\nOne of the works David was commissioned for was \"The Coronation of Napoleon\" (1805-1807). David was permitted to watch the event. He had plans of Notre Dame delivered and participants in the coronation came to his studio to pose individually, though never the Emperor (the only time David obtained a sitting from Napoleon had been in 1797). David did manage to get a private sitting with the Empress Jos\u00e9phine and Napoleon's sister, Caroline Murat, through the intervention of erstwhile art patron Marshal Joachim Murat, the Emperor's brother-in-law. For his background, David had the choir of Notre Dame act as his fill-in characters. Pope Pius VII came to sit for the painting, and actually blessed David. Napoleon came to see the painter, stared at the canvas for an hour and said \"David, I salute you.\" David had to redo several parts of the painting because of Napoleon's various whims, and for this painting, he received twenty-four thousand Francs.\nDavid was made a Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 1803. He was promoted to an Officier in 1808. And, in 1815, he was promoted to a Commandant (now Commandeur) de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur.\nExile and death.\nOn the Bourbons returning to power, David figured in the list of proscribed former revolutionaries and Bonapartists\u2014for having voted execution for the deposed King Louis XVI; and for participating in the death of Louis XVII. Mistreated and starved, the imprisoned Louis XVII was forced into a false confession of incest with his mother, Queen Marie-Antoinette. This was untrue, as the son was separated from his mother early and was not allowed communication with her; nevertheless, the allegation helped earn her the guillotine. The newly restored Bourbon King, Louis XVIII, however, granted amnesty to David and even offered him the position of court painter. David refused, preferring self-exile in Brussels. There, he trained and influenced Brussels artists like Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph Navez and Ignace Brice, painted \"Cupid and Psyche\" and quietly lived the remainder of his life with his wife (whom he had remarried). In that time, he painted smaller-scale mythological scenes, and portraits of citizens of Brussels and Napoleonic \u00e9migr\u00e9s, such as the Baron Gerard.\nDavid created his last great work, \"Mars Being Disarmed by Venus and the Three Graces\", from 1822 to 1824. In December 1823, he wrote: \"This is the last picture I want to paint, but I want to surpass myself in it. I will put the date of my seventy-five years on it and afterwards I will never again pick up my brush.\" The finished painting\u2014evoking painted porcelain because of its limpid coloration\u2014was exhibited first in Brussels, then in Paris, where his former students flocked to view it.\nThe exhibition was profitable\u201413,000 francs, after deducting operating costs, thus, more than 10,000 people visited and viewed the painting. In his later years, David remained in full command of his artistic faculties, even after a stroke in the spring of 1825 disfigured his face and slurred his speech. In June 1825, he resolved to embark on an improved version of his \"Anger of Achilles\" (also known as the \"Sacrifice of Iphigenie\"); the earlier version was completed in 1819 and is now in the collection of the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas. David remarked to his friends who visited his studio \"this [painting] is what is killing me\" such was his determination to complete the work, but by October it must have already been well advanced, as his former pupil Gros wrote to congratulate him, having heard reports of the painting's merits. By the time David died, the painting had been completed and the commissioner Ambroise Firmin-Didot brought it back to Paris to include it in the exhibition \"Pour les grecs\" that he had organised and which opened in Paris in April 1826.\nWhen David was leaving a theater, a carriage struck him, and he later died, on 29 December 1825. At his death, some portraits were auctioned in Paris, they sold for little; the famous \"Death of Marat\" was exhibited in a secluded room, to avoid outraging public sensibilities. Disallowed return to France for burial, for having been a regicide of King Louis XVI, the body of the painter Jacques-Louis David was buried in Brussels and moved in 1882 to Brussels Cemetery, while some say his heart was buried with his wife at P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery, Paris.\nFreemasonry.\nThe theme of the oath found in several works like \"The Oath of the Tennis Court\", \"The Distribution of the Eagles\", and \"Leonidas at Thermopylae\", was perhaps inspired by the rituals of Freemasonry. In 1989 during the \"David against David\" conference Albert Boime was able to prove, on the basis of a document dated in 1787, the painter's membership in the \"La Moderation\" Masonic Lodge.\nMedical analysis of David's face.\nJacques-Louis David's facial abnormalities were traditionally reported to be a consequence of a deep facial sword wound after a fencing incident. These left him with a noticeable asymmetry during facial expression and resulted in his difficulty in eating or speaking (he could not pronounce some consonants such as the letter 'r'). A sword scar wound on the left side of his face is present in his self-portrait and sculptures and corresponds to some of the buccal branches of the facial nerve. An injury to this nerve and its branches are likely to have resulted in the difficulties with his left facial movement.\nFurthermore, as a result of this injury, he suffered from a growth on his face that biographers and art historians have defined as a benign tumor. These, however, may have been a granuloma, or even a post-traumatic neuroma. As historian Simon Schama has pointed out, witty banter and public speaking ability were key aspects of the social culture of 18th-century France. In light of these cultural keystones, David's tumor would have been a heavy obstacle in his social life. David was sometimes referred to as \"David of the Tumor\".\nPortraiture.\nIn addition to his history paintings, David completed a number of privately commissioned portraits. Warren Roberts, among others, has pointed out the contrast between David's \"public style\" of painting, as shown in his history paintings, and his \"private style\", as shown in his portraits. His portraits were characterized by a sense of truth and realism. He focused on defining his subjects' features and characters without idealizing them. This is different from the style seen in his historical paintings, in which he idealizes his figures' features and bodies to align with Greek and Roman ideals of beauty. He puts a great deal of detail into his portraits, defining smaller features like hands and fabric. The compositions of his portraits remain simple with blank backgrounds that allow the viewer to focus on the details of the subject.\nThe portrait he did of his wife (1813) is an example of his typical portrait style. The background is dark and simple without any clues as to the setting, which forces the viewer to focus entirely on her. Her features are un-idealized and truthful to her appearance. There is a great amount of detail that can be seen in his attention to portraying the satin material of the dress she wears, the drapery of the scarf around her, and her hands which rest in her lap.\nIn the painting of Brutus (1789), the man and his wife are separated, both morally and physically. Paintings like these, depicting the great strength of patriotic sacrifice, made David a popular hero of the revolution.\nIn the \"Portrait of Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier and his wife\" (1788), the man and his wife are tied together in an intimate pose. She leans on his shoulder while he pauses from his work to look up at her. David casts them in a soft light, not in the sharp contrast of Brutus or of the Horatii. Also of interest\u2014Lavoisier was a tax collector, as well as a famous chemist. Though he spent some of his money trying to clean up swamps and eradicate malaria, he was nonetheless sent to the guillotine during the Reign of Terror as an enemy of the people. David, then a powerful member of the National Assembly, stood idly by and watched.\nOther portraits include paintings of his sister-in-law and her husband, Madame and Monsieur Seriziat. The picture of Monsieur Seriziat depicts a man of wealth, sitting comfortably with his horse-riding equipment. The picture of the Madame shows her wearing an unadorned white dress, holding her young child's hand as they lean against a bed. David painted these portraits of Madame and Monsieur Seriziat out of gratitude for letting him stay with them after he was in jail.\nTowards the end of David's life, he painted a portrait of his old friend \"Abb\u00e9 Siey\u00e8s\". Both had been involved in the Revolution, both had survived the purging of political radicals that followed the reign of terror.\nShift in attitude.\nThe shift in David's perspective played an important role in the paintings of David's later life, including this one of Siey\u00e8s. During the height of The Terror, David was an ardent supporter of radicals such as Robespierre and Marat, and twice offered up his life in their defense. He organized revolutionary festivals and painted portraits of martyrs of the revolution, such as Lepeletier, who was assassinated for voting for the death of the king. David was an impassioned speaker at times in the National Assembly. In speaking to the Assembly about the young boy named Bara, another martyr of the revolution, David said, \"O Bara! O Viala! The blood that you have spread still smokes; it rises toward Heaven and cries for vengeance.\"\nAfter Robespierre was sent to the guillotine, however, David was imprisoned and changed the attitude of his rhetoric. During his imprisonment he wrote many letters, pleading his innocence. In one he wrote, \"I am prevented from returning to my atelier, which, alas, I should never have left. I believed that in accepting the most honorable position, but very difficult to fill, that of legislator, that a righteous heart would suffice, but I lacked the second quality, understanding.\"\nLater, while explaining his developing \"Grecian style\" for paintings such as \"The Intervention of the Sabine Women\", David further commented on a shift in attitude: \"In all human activity the violent and transitory develops first; repose and profundity appear last. The recognition of these latter qualities requires time; only great masters have them, while their pupils have access only to violent passions.\"\nLegacy.\nJacques-Louis David was, in his time, regarded as the leading painter in France, and arguably all of Western Europe; many of the painters honored by the restored Bourbons following the French Revolution had been David's pupils. David's student Antoine-Jean Gros for example, was made a Baron and honored by Napoleon Bonaparte's court. Another pupil of David's, Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres became the most important artist of the restored Royal Academy and the figurehead of the Neoclassical school of art, engaging the increasingly popular Romantic school of art that was beginning to challenge Neoclassicism. David invested in the formation of young artists for the Rome Prize, which was also a way to pursue his old rivalry with other contemporary painters such as Joseph-Beno\u00eet Suv\u00e9e, who had also started teaching classes. To be one of David's students was considered prestigious and earned his students a lifetime reputation. He also called on the more advanced students, such as J\u00e9r\u00f4me-Martin Langlois, to help him paint his large canvases.\nDespite David's reputation, he was more fiercely criticized right after his death than at any point during his life. His style came under the most serious criticism for being static, rigid, and uniform throughout all his work. David's art was also attacked for being cold and lacking warmth. David, however, made his career precisely by challenging what he saw as the earlier rigidity and conformity of the French Royal Academy's approach to art. David's later works also reflect his growth in the development of the Empire style, notable for its dynamism and warm colors. It is likely that much of the criticism of David following his death came from David's opponents; during his lifetime David made a great many enemies with his competitive and arrogant personality as well as his role in the Terror. David sent many people to the guillotine and personally signed the death warrants for King Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette. One significant episode in David's political career that earned him a great deal of contempt was the execution of Emilie Chalgrin. A fellow painter Carle Vernet had approached David, who was on the Committee of Public Safety, requesting him to intervene on behalf of his sister, Chalgrin. She had been accused of crimes against the Republic, most notably possessing stolen items. David refused to intervene in her favor, and she was executed. Vernet blamed David for her death, and the episode followed him for the rest of his life and after.\nIn the last 50 years David has enjoyed a revival in popular favor and in 1948 his two-hundredth birthday was celebrated with an exhibition at the Mus\u00e9e de l'Orangerie in Paris and at Versailles showing his life's works. Following World War II, Jacques-Louis David was increasingly regarded as a symbol of French national pride and identity, as well as a vital force in the development of European and French art in the modern era.\nThe birth of Romanticism is traditionally credited to the paintings of eighteenth-century French artists such as Jacques-Louis David.\nFilmography.\n\"Danton\" (Andrzej Wajda, France, 1982) \u2013 Historical drama. Many scenes include David as a silent character watching and drawing. The film focuses on the period of the Terror."}
{"id": "9073", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9073", "title": "Denary", "text": ""}
{"id": "9074", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9074", "title": "Design Science License", "text": "Design Science License (DSL) is a copyleft license for any type of free content such as text, images, music. Unlike other open source licenses, the DSL was intended to be used on any type of copyrightable work, including documentation and source code. It was the first \"generalized copyleft\" license. The DSL was written by Michael Stutz.\nThe DSL came out in the 1990s, before the formation of the Creative Commons. Once the Creative Commons arrived, Stutz considered the DSL experiment \"over\" and no longer recommended its use."}
{"id": "9075", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9075", "title": "David Bowman (Space Odyssey)", "text": ""}
{"id": "9079", "revid": "34064275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9079", "title": "Drum kit", "text": "A drum kit \u2013 also called a drum set, trap set (an abbreviation of the word \"contraption\") or simply drums \u2013 is a collection of drums, cymbals and other percussion instruments, which are set up on stands to be played by a single player, with drumsticks held in both hands and the feet operating pedals that control the hi-hat cymbal and the beater for the bass drum. A drum kit consists of a mix of drums (categorized classically as membranophones, Hornbostel-Sachs high-level classification 2) and idiophones\u200a\u2060\u2013\u200a\u2060most significantly cymbals, but can also include the woodblock and cowbell (classified as Hornbostel-Sachs high-level classification 1). In the 2000s, some kits also include electronic instruments (Hornbostel-Sachs classification 53). Also, both hybrid (mixing acoustic instruments and electronic drums) and entirely electronic kits are used.\nA standard modern kit (for a right-handed player), as used in popular music and taught in music schools, contains:\nAll of these are classified as non-pitched percussion, allowing the music to be scored using percussion notation, for which a loose semi-standardized form exists for both the drum kit and electronic drums. The drum kit is usually played while seated on a stool known as a throne. While many instruments like the guitar or piano are capable of performing melodies and chords, most drum kits are unable to achieve this as they produce sounds of indeterminate pitch. The drum kit is a part of the standard rhythm section, used in many types of popular and traditional music styles, ranging from rock and pop to blues and jazz. Other standard instruments used in the rhythm section include the piano, electric guitar, electric bass, and keyboards.\nMany drummers extend their kits from this basic configuration, adding more drums, more cymbals, and many other instruments including pitched percussion. In some styles of music, particular extensions are normal. For example, some rock and heavy metal drummers make use of double bass drums, which can be achieved with either a second bass drum or a remote double foot pedal. Some progressive drummers may include orchestral percussion such as gongs and tubular bells in their rig. Some performers, such as some rockabilly drummers, play small kits that omit elements from the basic setup.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nBefore the development of the drum set, drums and cymbals used in military and orchestral music settings were played separately by different percussionists; if the score called for bass drum, triangle and cymbals, three percussionists would be hired to play these three instruments. In the 1840s, percussionists began to experiment with foot pedals as a way to enable them to play more than one instrument, but these devices would not be mass-produced for another 75 years. By the 1860s, percussionists started combining multiple drums into a set. The bass drum, snare drum, cymbals, and other percussion instruments were all struck with hand-held drum sticks. Drummers in musical theater shows and stage shows, where the budget for pit orchestras was often limited, contributed to the creation of the drum set by developing techniques and devices that would enable them to cover the roles of multiple percussionists.\nDouble-drumming was developed to enable one person to play the bass and snare with sticks, while the cymbals could be played by tapping the foot on a \"low-boy\". With this approach, the bass drum was usually played on beats one and three (in time). While the music was first designed to accompany marching soldiers, this simple and straightforward drumming approach led to the birth of ragtime music when the simplistic marching beats became more syncopated. This resulted in a greater swing and dance feel. The drum set was initially referred to as a \"trap set\", and from the late 1800s to the 1930s, drummers were referred to as \"trap drummers\". By the 1870s, drummers were using an \"overhang pedal\". Most drummers in the 1870s preferred to do double drumming without any pedal to play multiple drums, rather than use an overhang pedal. Companies patented their pedal systems such as Dee Dee Chandler of New Orleans 1904\u201305. Liberating the hands for the first time, this evolution saw the bass drum played with the foot of a standing percussionist (thus the term \"kick drum\"). The bass drum became the central piece around which every other percussion instrument would later revolve.\nWilliam F. Ludwig, Sr., and his brother, Theobald Ludwig, founded the Ludwig &amp; Ludwig Co. in 1909 and patented the first commercially successful bass drum pedal system, paving the way for the modern drum kit. Wire brushes for use with drums and cymbals were introduced in 1912. The need for brushes arose due to the problem of the drum sound overshadowing the other instruments on stage. Drummers began using metal fly swatters to reduce the volume on stage next to the other acoustic instruments. Drummers could still play the rudimentary snare figures and grooves with brushes that they would normally play with drumsticks.\n20th century.\nBy World War I, drum kits were often marching band-style military bass drums with many percussion items suspended on and around them. Drum kits became a central part of jazz, especially Dixieland. The modern drum kit was developed in the vaudeville era during the 1920s in New Orleans.\nIn 1917, a New Orleans band called \"The Original Dixieland Jazz Band \" recorded jazz tunes that became hits all over the country. These were the first official jazz recordings. Drummers such as Baby Dodds, Zutty Singleton and Ray Bauduc had taken the idea of marching rhythms, combining the bass drum and snare drum and \"traps\", a term used to refer to the percussion instruments associated with immigrant groups, which included miniature cymbals, tom toms, cowbells and woodblocks. They started incorporating these elements with ragtime, which had been popular for a couple of decades, creating an approach which evolved into a jazz drumming style.\nBudget constraints and space considerations in musical theatre pit orchestras led bandleaders to pressure fewer percussionists to cover more percussion parts. Metal consoles were developed to hold Chinese tom-toms, with swing-out stands for snare drums and cymbals. On top of the console was a \"contraption\" tray (shortened to \"trap\"), used to hold items like whistles, klaxons, and cowbells, so these drums/kits were dubbed \"trap kits\". Hi-hat stands became available around 1926.\nIn 1918 Baby Dodds, playing on riverboats with Louis Armstrong on the Mississippi, was modifying the military marching set-up and experimenting with playing the drum rims instead of woodblocks, hitting cymbals with sticks (1919), which was not yet common, and adding a side cymbal above the bass drum, what became known as the ride cymbal. Drum maker William Ludwig developed the \"sock\" or early low-mounted high-hat after observing Dodd's drumming. Ludwig noticed that Dodd tapped his left foot all the time. Dodds asked Ludwig to raise the newly produced low hats nine inches higher to make it easier to play, thus creating the modern hi-hat cymbal. Dodds was one of the first drummers to play the broken-triplet beat that became the standard pulse and roll of modern ride cymbal playing. He also popularized the use of Chinese cymbals. Recording technology was crude, which meant that loud sounds could distort the recording. In order to get around this, Dodds used woodblocks and the drums as quieter alternatives to cymbals and drum skins respectively.\nIn the 1920s, freelance drummers were hired to play at shows, concerts, theaters, clubs and support dancers and musicians of various genres. Some drummers in the 1920s worked as foley artists. During silent films, an orchestra was hired to accompany the silent film and the drummer was responsible for providing all the sound effects. Drummers played instruments to imitate gun shots, planes flying overhead, a train coming into a train station, and galloping horses etc.\nSheet music from the 1920s provides evidence that the drummer's sets were starting to evolve in size and sound to support the various acts mentioned above. However, by 1930, \"talkies\" (films with audio) were more popular, and many were accompanied with pre-recorded soundtracks. This technological breakthrough put thousands of drummers who served as sound effect specialists out of work. A similar panic was felt by drummers in the 1980s, when electronic drum machines were first released.\nPlaying.\nGrooves.\nKit drumming, whether playing accompaniment of voices and other instruments or doing a drum solo, consists of two elements:\nFills.\nA \"fill\" is a departure from the repetitive rhythm pattern in a song. A drum fill is used to \"fill in\" the space between the end of one verse and the beginning of another verse or chorus. Fills vary from a simple few strokes on a tom or snare, to a distinctive rhythm played on the hi-hat, to sequences several bars long that are short virtuosic drum solos. As well as adding interest and variation to the music, fills serve an important function in preparing and indicating significant changes of sections in songs and linking sections. A \"vocal cue\" is a short drum fill that introduces a vocal entry. A fill ending with a cymbal crash on beat one is often used to lead into a chorus or verse.\nDrum solos.\nA drum solo is an instrumental section that highlights the virtuosity, skill, and musical creativity of the drummer. While other instrument solos such as guitar solos are typically accompanied by the other rhythm section instruments (e.g., bass guitar and electric guitar), for most drum solos, all the band members stop playing so that all of the audience's focus will be on the drummer. In some drum solos, the other rhythm section instrumentalists may play \"punches\" at certain pointssudden, loud chords of a short duration. Drum solos are common in jazz, but they are also used in several rock genres, such as heavy metal and progressive rock. During drum solos, drummers have a degree of creative freedom that allows them to employ complex polyrhythms that would otherwise be unsuitable with an ensemble. In live concerts, drummers may be given extended drum solos, even in genres where drum solos are rare on singles.\nGrip.\nMost drummers hold the drumsticks in one of two types of grip:\nWithin these two types, there is still considerable variation, and even disagreements as to exactly how the stick is held in a particular method. For example, Jim Chapin, an early and influential exponent of the Moeller method, asserts that the technique does not rely on rebound, while Dave Weckl asserts that it does rely on rebound.\nComponents.\nTerminology.\nBreakables, shells, extensions, hardware.\nThe drum kit may be loosely divided into four parts:\nThere are several reasons for this division. When more than one band plays in a single performance, the drum kit is often considered part of the backline (the key rhythm section equipment that stays on stage all night, which often also includes bass amps and a stage piano), and is shared between/among the drummers. Oftentimes, the main \"headlining\" act will provide the drums, as they are being paid more, possibly have the better gear, and in any case have the prerogative of using their own. Sticks, snare drum and cymbals, and sometimes other components, are commonly swapped though, each drummer bringing their own. The term \"breakables\" in this context refers to whatever basic components the \"guest\" drummer is expected to bring. Similar considerations apply if using a \"house kit\" (a drum kit owned by the venue, which is rare), even if there is only one band at the performance.\nThe snare drum and cymbals are the core of the \"breakables\", as they are particularly critical and individual components of the standard kit, in several related ways.\nMuch the same considerations apply to bass drum pedals and the stool, but these are not always considered \"breakables\", particularly if changeover time between bands is very limited. Swapping the snare drum in a standard kit can be done very quickly. Replacing cymbals on stands takes longer, particularly if there are many of them, and cymbals are easily damaged by incorrect mounting, so many drummers prefer to bring their own cymbal stands.\nDrums.\nBass drum.\nThe bass drum (also known as the \"kick drum\") provides a regular but often-varied foundation to the rhythm. The bass drum is the lowest pitched drum and usually provides the basic beat or timing element with basic pulse patterns. Some drummers may use two or more bass drums or use a double bass drum pedal with a single bass drum. Double bass drumming is an important technique in many heavy metal genres. Using a double bass drum pedal enables a drummer to play a double bass drum style with only one bass drum, saving space in recording/performance areas and reducing time and effort during set-up, taking down, and transportation.\nSnare drum.\nThe snare drum is the heart of the drum kit, particularly in rock, due its utility of providing the backbeat. When applied in this fashion, it supplies strong regular accents, played by the left hand (if right handed), and the backbone for many fills. Its distinctive sound can be attributed to the bed of stiff snare wires held under tension to the underside of the lower drum head. When the stiff wires which are called as the Snare Chains are \"engaged\" (held under tension), they vibrate with the top (snare-side) drum skin which is called as the Snare Velom (head), creating a snappy, staccato buzzing sound, along with the sound of the stick striking the batter head.\nToms.\nTom-tom drums, or \"toms\" for short, are drums without snares and played with sticks (or whatever tools the music style requires), and are the most numerous drums in most kits. They provide the bulk of most drum fills and solos.\nThey include:\nThe smallest and largest drums without snares, octobans and gong drums respectively, are sometimes considered toms. The naming of common configurations (four-piece, five-piece, etc.) is largely a reflection of the number of toms, as only the drums are conventionally counted, and these configurations all contain one snare and one or more bass drums, (though not regularly any standardized use of two bass/kick drums) the balance usually being in toms.\nOther drums.\nOctobans are smaller toms designed for use in a drum kit, extending the tom range upwards in pitch, primarily by their depth; as well as diameter (typically 6\"). Pearl brand octobans are called \"rocket toms\"; the instruments are also called tube toms.\nTimbales are tuned much higher than a tom of the same diameter, and normally played with very light, thin, non-tapered sticks. They have relatively thin heads and a very different tone than a tom, but are used by some drummers/percussionists to extend the tom range upwards. Alternatively, they can be fitted with tom heads and tuned as shallow concert toms.&lt;br&gt;\nTimbales were also used on occasion by Led Zeppelin drummer John Bonham.\nAttack timbales and mini timbales are reduced-diameter timbales designed for drum kit usage, the smaller diameter allowing for thicker heads providing the same pitch and head tension. They are recognizable in 2010s genres and in more traditional forms of Latin, reggae &amp; numerous world music styles.\nGong drums are a rare extension to a drum kit. The single-headed mountable drum appears similar to a bass drum (sizing around 20\u201324 inches in diameter), but has the same purpose as that of a floor tom.\nSimilarly, most hand drum percussion cannot be played easily or suitably with drum sticks without risking damage to the head and to the bearing edge, which is not protected by a metal drum rim, like a snare or tom. For use in a drum kit, they may be fitted with a metal drum head and played with care, or played by hand.\nCymbals.\nIn most drum kits and drum/percussion kits cymbals are as important as the drums themselves. The oldest idiophones in music are cymbals, and were used throughout the ancient Near East, very early in the Bronze Age period. Cymbals are most associated with Turkey and Turkish craftsmanship, where Zildjian (the name means cymbal smith) has predominantly made them since 1623.\nBeginners cymbal packs normally contain four cymbals: one ride, one crash, and a pair of hi-hats. A few contain only three cymbals, using a crash/ride instead of the separate ride and crash. The sizes closely follow those given in Common configurations below.\nMost drummers extend this by adding another crash, a splash, a china/effects cymbal; or even all of those last mentioned.\nRide cymbal.\nThe ride cymbal is most often used for keeping a constant-rhythm pattern, every beat or more often, as the music requires. Development of this ride technique is generally credited to Baby Dodds.\nMost drummers have a single main ride, located near their right handwithin easy playing reach, as it is used very regularlymost often a 20\" sizing but 16\"-24\" diameters are not uncommon. It is most often a heavy, or medium-weighted cymbal that cuts through other instrumental sounds, but some drummers use a swish cymbal, sizzle cymbal or other exotic or lighter metal ride, as the main or only ride in their kit, particularly for jazz, gospel or ballad/folk sounds. In the 1960s Ringo Starr used a sizzle cymbal as a second ride, particularly during guitar solos.\nHi-hats.\nThe hi-hat cymbals (nicknamed \"hats\") consist of two cymbals mounted facing each other on a metal pole with folding support legs that keep a hollow support cylinder standing up. Like the bass drum, the hi-hat has a foot pedal. The bottom cymbal is fixed in place. The top cymbal is mounted on a thin pole, by means of a clutch, which is inserted into the hollow cymbal stand cylinder. The thin pole is connected to a foot pedal. When the foot pedal is pressed down, a mechanism causes the thin pole to move down, causing the upper cymbal to move. When the foot is lifted off the pedal, the upper cymbal rises, due to the pedal's spring-loaded mechanism. The hi-hats can be sounded by striking the cymbals with one or two sticks or just by opening and closing the cymbals with the foot pedal, without striking the cymbals. The ability to create rhythms on the hi-hats with the foot alone enables drummers to use both sticks on other drums or cymbals. Different sounds can be created by striking \"open hi-hats\" (without the pedal depressed, which creates a noisy sound nicknamed \"sloppy hats\") or a crisp \"closed hi-hats\" sound (with the pedal pressed down). As well, the high hats can be played with a partially depressed pedal.\nA unique effect can be created by striking an open hi-hat (i.e., in which the two cymbals are apart) and then closing the cymbals with the foot pedal; this effect is widely used in disco and funk. The hi-hat has a similar function to the ride cymbal. The two are rarely played consistently for long periods at the same time, but one or the other is used to keep the faster-moving rhythms (e.g., sixteenth notes) much of the time in a song. The hi-hats are played by the right stick of a right-handed drummer. Changing between ride and hi-hat, or between either and a \"leaner\" sound with neither, is often used to mark a change from one passage to another, for example; to distinguish between a verse and chorus.\nCrashes.\nThe crash cymbals are usually the strongest accent markers within the kit, marking crescendos and climaxes, vocal entries, and major changes of mood/swells and effects. A crash cymbal is often accompanied by a strong kick on the bass drum pedal, both for musical effect and to support the stroke. It provides a fuller sound and is a commonly taught technique.\nIn the very smallest kits, in jazz, and at very high volumes, ride cymbals may be played in with the technique and sound of a crash cymbal. Some hi-hats will also give a useful crash, particularly thinner hats or those with an unusually severe taper. At low volumes, producing a good crash from a cymbal not particularly suited to it is a highly skilled art. Alternatively, specialised crash/ride and ride/crash cymbals are specifically designed to combine both functions.\nOther cymbals.\nEffects cymbals.\nAll cymbals other than rides, hi-hats and crashes/splashes are usually called effects cymbals when used in a drum kit, though this is a non-classical or colloquial designation that has become a standardized label. Most extended kits include one or more splash cymbals and at least one china cymbal. Major cymbal makers produce cymbal extension packs consisting of one splash and one china, or more rarely a second crash, a splash and a china, to match some of their starter packs of ride, crash and hi-hats. However any combination of options can be found in the marketplace.\nSome cymbals may be considered effects in some kits but \"basic\" in another set of components. A swish cymbal may, for example serve, as the main ride in some styles of music, but in a larger kit, which includes a conventional ride cymbal as well, it may well be considered an effects cymbal per se. Likewise, Ozone crashes have the same purpose as a standard crash cymbal, but are considered to be effects cymbals due to their rarity, and the holes cut into them, which provide a darker, more resonant attack.\nAccent cymbals.\nCymbals of any type used to provide an accent rather than a regular pattern or groove are known as accent cymbals. While any cymbal can be used to provide an accent, the term is applied more correctly to cymbals for which the main purpose is to provide an accent. Accent cymbals include chime cymbals, small-bell domed cymbals or those with a clear sonorous/oriental chime to them like specialized crash and splash cymbals and many china types too, particularly the smaller or thinner ones.\nLow-volume cymbals.\nLow-volume cymbals are a specialty type of cymbal made to produce about 80% less volume than a typical cymbal. The entire surface of the cymbal is perforated by holes. Drummers use low-volume cymbals to play in small venues such as coffeehouses or in genres or spaces where quiet drums are desired (e.g., a jazz quartet playing at a church). As well, low-volume cymbals are used to reduce the volume of drums during practice, for drummers who are trying to avoid disturbing neighbors.\nOther acoustic instruments.\nOther instruments that have regularly been incorporated into drum kits include:\nSee also Extended kits below.\nElectronic drums.\nElectronic drums are used for many reasons. Some drummers use electronic drums for playing in small venues such as coffeehouses or church services, where a very low volume for the band is desired. Since fully electronic drums do not create any acoustic sound (apart from the quiet sound of the stick hitting the sensor pads), all of the drum sounds come from a keyboard amplifier or PA system; as such, the volume of electronic drums can be much lower than an acoustic kit. Some drummers use electronic drums as practice instruments, because they can be listened to with headphones, enabling a drummer to practice in an apartment or in the middle of the night without disturbing others. Some drummers use electronic drums to take advantage of the huge range of sounds that modern drum modules can produce, which range from sampled sounds of real drums, cymbals and percussion instruments (including instruments that would be impractical to take to a small gig, such as gongs or tubular bells), to electronic and synthesized sounds, including non-instrument sounds such as ocean waves.\nA fully electronic kit is also easier to soundcheck than acoustic drums, assuming that the electronic drum module has levels that the drummer has pre-set in her/his practice room; in contrast, when an acoustic kit is sound checked, most drums and cymbals need to be miked and each mic needs to be tested by the drummer so its level and tone equalization can be adjusted by the sound engineer. As well, even after all the individual drum and cymbal mics are soundchecked, the engineer needs to listen to the drummer play a standard groove, to check that the balance between the kit instruments is right. Finally, the engineer needs to set up the monitor mix for the drummer, which the drummer uses to hear her/his instruments and the instruments and vocals of the rest of the band. With a fully electronic kit, many of these steps could be eliminated.\nDrummers' usage of electronic drum equipment can range from adding a single electronic pad to an acoustic kit (e.g., to have access to an instrument that might otherwise be impractical, such as a large gong), to using a mix of acoustic drums/cymbals and electronic pads, to using an acoustic kit in which the drums and cymbals have triggers, which can be used to sound electronic drums and other sounds, to having an exclusively electronic kit, which is often set up with the rubber or mesh drum pads and rubber \"cymbals\" in the usual drum kit locations. A fully electronic kit weighs much less and takes up less space to transport than an acoustic kit and it can be set up more quickly. One of the disadvantages of a fully electronic kit is that it may not have the same \"feel\" as an acoustic kit, and the drum sounds, even if they are high-quality samples, may not sound the same as acoustic drums.\nElectronic drum pads are the second most widely used type of MIDI performance controllers, after electronic keyboards. Drum controllers may be built into drum machines, they may be standalone control surfaces (e.g., rubber drum pads), or they may emulate the look and feel of acoustic percussion instruments. The pads built into drum machines are typically too small and fragile to be played with sticks, and they are usually played with fingers. Dedicated drum pads such as the Roland Octapad or the DrumKAT are playable with the hands or with sticks and are often built to resemble the general form of a drum kit. There are also percussion controllers such as the vibraphone-style MalletKAT, and Don Buchla's Marimba Lumina.\nAs well as providing an alternative to a conventional acoustic drum kit, electronic drums can be incorporated into an acoustic drum kit to supplement it. MIDI triggers can also be installed into acoustic drum and percussion instruments. Pads that can trigger a MIDI device can be homemade from a piezoelectric sensor and a practice pad or other piece of foam rubber.\nThis is possible in two ways:\nIn either case, an electronic control unit (sound module/\"brain\") with suitable sampled/modeled or synthesized drum sounds, amplification equipment (a PA system, keyboard amp, etc.) and stage monitor speakers are required for the drummer (and other band members and audience) to hear the electronically produced sounds. See Triggered drum kit.\nA trigger pad could contain up to four independent sensors, each of them capable of sending information describing the timing and dynamic intensity of a stroke to the drum module/brain. A circular drum pad may have only one sensor for triggering, but a 2016-era cymbal-shaped rubber pad/cymbal will often contain two; one for the body and one for the bell at the centre of the cymbal, and perhaps a cymbal choke trigger, to allow drummers to produce this effect.\nTrigger sensors are most commonly used to replace the acoustic drum sounds, but they can often also be used effectively with an acoustic kit to augment or supplement an instrument's sound for the needs of the session or show. For example, in a live performance in a difficult acoustical space, a trigger may be placed on each drum or cymbal, and used to trigger a similar sound on a drum module. These sounds are then amplified through the PA system so the audience can hear them, and they can be amplified to any level without the risks of audio feedback or bleed problems associated with microphones and PAs in certain settings.\nThe sound of electronic drums and cymbals themselves is heard by the drummer and possibly other musicians in close proximity, but even so, the foldback (audio monitor) system is usually fed from the electronic sounds rather than the live acoustic sounds. The drums can be heavily dampened (made to resonate less or subdue the sound), and their tuning and even quality is less critical in the latter scenario. In this way, much of the atmosphere of the live performance is retained in a large venue, but without some of the problems associated with purely microphone-amplified drums. Triggers and sensors can also be used in conjunction with conventional or built-in microphones. If some components of a kit prove more difficult to \"mike\" than others (e.g., an excessively \"boomy\" low tom), triggers may be used on only the more difficult instruments, balancing out a drummer's/band's sound in the mix.\nTrigger pads and drums, on the other hand, when deployed in a conventional set-up, are most commonly used to produce sounds not possible with an acoustic kit, or at least not with what is available. Any sound that can be sampled/recorded can be played when the pad is struck, by assigning the recorded sounds to specific triggers . Recordings or samples of barking dogs, sirens, breaking glass and stereo recordings of aircraft taking off and landing have all been used. Along with the more obvious electronically generated sounds there are synthesized human voices or song parts or even movie audio or digital video/pictures that (depending on device used) can also be played/triggered by electronic drums.\nVirtual drums.\nVirtual drums are a type of audio software that simulates the sound of a drum kit using synthesized drum kit sounds or digital samples of acoustic drum sounds. Different drum software products offer a recording function, the ability to select from several acoustically distinctive drum kits (e.g., jazz, rock, metal), as well as the option to incorporate different songs into the session. Some software for the personal computer (PC) can turn any hard surface into a virtual drum kit using only one microphone.\nHardware.\n\"Hardware\" is the name given to the metal stands that support the drums, cymbals and other percussion instruments. Generally the term also includes the hi-hat pedal and bass drum pedal or pedals, and the drum stool, but not the drum sticks.\nHardware is carried along with sticks and other accessories in the traps case, and includes:\nMany or even all of the stands may be replaced by a drum rack, particularly useful for large drum kits.\nDrummers often set up their own drum hardware onstage and adjust to their own comfort level. Major touring bands on tour will often have a drum tech who knows how to set up the drummer's hardware and instruments in the desired location and layout.\nCommon configurations.\nDrum kits are traditionally categorised by the number of drums, ignoring cymbals and other instruments. Snare, tom-tom and bass drums are always counted; other drums such as octobans may or may not be counted.\nTraditionally, in America and the United Kingdom, drum sizes were expressed as \"depth x diameter\", both in inches, but many drum kit manufacturers have since begun to express their sizes in terms of \"diameter x depth\"; still in the measure of inches.For example, a hanging tom 12 inches in diameter and 8 inches deep would be described by Tama as 8 inches \u00d7 12 inches, but by Pearl as 12 inches \u00d7 8 inches, and a standard diameter Ludwig snare drum 5 inches deep is a 5-inch \u00d7 14-inch, while the UK's Premier Manufacturer offers the same dimensions as: a 14-inch \u00d7 5-inch snare. The sizes of drums and cymbals given below are typical. Many drummers differ slightly or radically from them. Where no size is given, it is because there is too much variety to determine a typical size.\nThree-piece.\nA three-piece drum set is the most basic set. A conventional three-piece kit consists of a bass drum, a 14\" diameter snare drum, 12\"\u201314\" hi-hats, a single 12\" diameter hanging tom, 8\"\u20139\" in depth, and a suspended cymbal, in the range of 14\"\u201318\", both mounted on the bass drum. These kits were common in the 1950s and 1960s and are still used in the 2010s in small acoustic dance bands. It is a common configuration for kits sold through mail order, and, with smaller sized drums and cymbals, for kits for children.\nFour-piece.\nA four-piece kit extends the three-piece by adding one tom, either a second hanging tom mounted on the bass drum (a notable user is Chris Frantz of Talking Heads) and often displacing the cymbal, or by adding a floor tom. Normally another cymbal is added as well, so there are separate ride and crash cymbals, either on two stands, or the ride cymbal mounted on the bass drum to the player's right and the crash cymbal on a separate stand. The standard cymbal sizes are 16\" crash and 18\"\u201320\" ride, with the 20\" ride most common.\nFour piece with floor tom.\nWhen a floor tom is added to make a four-piece kit, the floor tom is usually 14\" for jazz, and 16\" otherwise. This configuration is usually common in jazz and rock. Notable users include Ringo Starr in The Beatles, Mitch Mitchell in the Jimi Hendrix Experience, John Barbata in the Turtles and various jazz drummers throughout the bebop and hard bop periods. For jazz, which normally emphasizes the use of ride cymbal, the lack of second hanging tom in a four-piece kit allows the cymbal to be positioned closer to the drummer, making them easier to be played.\nFour piece with two hanging toms.\nIf a second hanging tom is used, it is 10\" diameter and 8\" deep for fusion, or 13\" diameter and one inch deeper than the 12\" diameter tom. Otherwise, a 14\" diameter hanging tom is added to the 12\", both being 8\" deep. In any case, both toms are most often mounted on the bass drum with the smaller of the two next to the hi-hats (on the left for a right-handed drummer). These kits are particularly useful for smaller venues where space is limited, such as coffeehouses, caf\u00e9s, hotel lounges, and small pubs.\nFive-piece.\nThe five-piece kit is the full-size kit and the most common configuration used across various genres and styles. It adds a third tom to the four-piece kit, making three toms in all. A fusion kit will normally add a 14\" tom, either a floor tom or a hanging tom on a stand to the right of the bass drum; in either case, making the tom lineup 10\", 12\" and 14\". Having three toms enables drummers to have a low-pitched, middle-register and higher-pitched tom, which gives them more options for fills and solos.\nOther kits will normally have 12\" and 13\" hanging toms plus either a 14\" hanging tom on a stand, a 14\" floor tom, or a 16\" floor tom. For depths, see Tom-tom drum#Modern tom-toms. In the 2010s, it is very popular to have 10\" and 12\" hanging toms, with a 16\" floor tom. This configuration is often called a hybrid setup. The bass drum is most commonly 22\" in diameter, but rock kits may use 24\", fusion 20\", jazz 18\", and in larger bands up to 26\". A second crash cymbal is common, typically an inch or two larger or smaller than the 16\", with the larger of the two to the right for a right-handed drummer, but a big band may use crashes up to 20\" and ride up to 24\" or, very rarely, 26\". A rock kit may also substitute a larger ride cymbal or larger hi-hats, typically 22\" for the ride and 15\" for the hats.\nMost five-piece kits, at more than entry level, also have one or more effects cymbals. Adding cymbals beyond the basic ride, hi-hats and one crash configuration requires more stands in addition to the standard drum hardware packs. Because of this, many higher-cost kits for professionals are sold with little or even no hardware, to allow the drummer to choose the stands and also the bass drum pedal he/she prefers. At the other extreme, many inexpensive, entry-level kits are sold as a five-piece kit complete with two cymbal stands, most often one straight and one boom, and some even with a standard cymbal pack, a stool, and a pair of 5A drum sticks. In the 2010s, digital kits are often offered in a five-piece kit, usually with one plastic crash cymbal triggers and one ride cymbal trigger. Fully electronic drums do not produce any acoustic sound beyond the quiet tapping of sticks on the plastic or rubber heads. The trigger-pads are wired up to a synth module or sampler.\nSmall kits.\nIf the toms are omitted completely, or the bass drum is replaced by a pedal-operated beater on the bottom skin of a floor tom and the hanging toms omitted, the result is a two-piece \"cocktail\" (lounge) kit. Such kits are particularly favoured in musical genres such as trad jazz, bebop, rockabilly and jump blues. Some rockabilly kits and beginners kits for very young players omit the hi-hat stand. In rockabilly, this allows the drummer to play standing rather than seated. A very simple jazz kit for informal or amateur jam sessions consist of bass drum, snare drum and hi-hat, often with only a single cymbal (normally a ride, with or without sizzlers).\nAlthough these kits may be small with respect to the number of drums used, the drums themselves are most often normal sizes, or even larger in the case of the bass drum. Kits using smaller drums in both smaller and larger configurations are also produced for particular uses, such as \"boutique\" kits designed to reduce the visual impact that a large kit creates or due space constraints in coffeehouses, \"travelling\" kits to reduce luggage volume, and junior kits for very young players. Smaller drums also tend to be quieter, again suiting smaller venues, and many of these kits extend this with extra muffling which allows quiet or even silent practice in a hotel room or bedroom.\nExtended kits.\nCommon extensions beyond these standard configurations include:\nSee also other acoustic instruments above. Another versatile extension becoming increasingly common is the use of some electronic drums in a mainly conventional kit.\nLess common extensions found particularly, but not exclusive to very large kits, include:\nAccessories.\nSticks.\nSticks were traditionally made from wood (particularly maple, hickory, and oak) but more recently metal, carbon fibre and other exotic materials have been used for high market end sticks. The prototypical wooden drum stick was primarily designed for use with the snare drum, and optimized for playing snare rudiments. Sticks come in a variety of weights and tip designs; 7N is a common jazz stick with a nylon tip, while a 5B is a common wood tipped stick, heavier than a 7N but with a similar profile, and a common standard for beginners. Numbers range from 1 (heaviest) to 10 (lightest).\nThe meanings of both numbers and letters vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, and some sticks are not described using this system at all, just being known as \"Smooth Jazz\" (typically a 7N or 9N) or \"Speed Rock\" (typically a 2B or 3B) for example. Many famous drummers endorse sticks made to their particular preference and sold under their signature.\nBesides drumsticks, drummers will also use brushes and rutes in jazz and similar softer music. More rarely, other beaters such as cartwheel mallets (known to kit drummers as \"soft sticks\") may be used. It is not uncommon for rock drummers to use the \"wrong\" (butt) end of a stick for a heavier sound; some makers produce tipless sticks with two butt ends.\nA stick bag is the standard way for a drummer to bring drumsticks to a live performance. For easy access, the stick bag is commonly mounted on the side of the floor tom, just within reach of the drummer's right hand for a right-handed drummer.\nMuffles.\nDrum muffles are types of mutes that can reduce the ring, boomy overtone frequencies, or overall volume on a snare, bass, or tom. Controlling the ring is useful in studio or live settings when unwanted frequencies can clash with other instruments in the mix. There are internal and external muffling devices which rest on the inside or outside of the drumhead, respectively. Common types of mufflers include muffling rings, gels and duct tape, and improvised methods, such as placing a wallet near the edge of the head. Some drummers muffle the sound of a drum by putting a cloth over the drumhead.\nSnare drum and tom-tom\nTypical ways to muffle a snare or tom include placing an object on the outer edge of the drumhead. A piece of cloth, a wallet, gel, or fitted rings made of mylar are common objects. Also used are external clip-on muffles that work using the same principle. Internal mufflers that lie on the inside of the drumhead are often built into a drum, but are generally considered less effective than external muffles, as they stifle the initial tone, rather than simply reducing the sustain of it.\nBass drum\nMuffling the bass can be achieved with the same muffling techniques as the snare, but bass drums in a drum kit are more commonly muffled by adding pillows, a sleeping bag or another soft filling inside the drum, between the heads. Cutting a small hole in the resonant head can also produce a more muffled tone, and allows manipulation in internally placed muffling. The Evans EQ pad places a pad against the batterhead and, when struck, the pad moves off the head momentarily, then returns to rest against the head, thus reducing the sustain without choking the tone.\nSilencers/mutes\nAnother type of drum muffler is a piece of rubber that fits over the entire drumhead or cymbal. It interrupts contact between the stick and the head which dampens the sound even more. They are typically used in practice settings.\nCymbals are usually muted with the fingers or hand, to reduce the length or volume of ringing (e.g., the cymbal choke technique which is a key part of heavy metal drumming). Cymbals can also be muted with special rubber rings or with DIY approaches such as using duct tape.\nSome companies with muffle products:\nHistorical uses\nMuffled drums are often associated with funeral ceremonies as well, such as the funerals of John F. Kennedy and Queen Victoria. The use of muffled drums has been written about by such poets as Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, John Mayne, and Theodore O'Hara. Drums have also been used for therapy and learning purposes, such as when an experienced player will sit with a number of students and by the end of the session have all of them relaxed and playing complex rhythms.\nStick holder.\nThere are various types of stick holder accessories, including bags that can be attached to a drum and angled sheath-style stick holders, which can hold a single pair of sticks.\nSizzlers.\nA sizzler is a metal chain or combination of chains that is hung across a cymbal, creating a distinctive metallic sound when the cymbal is struck similar to that of a sizzle cymbal. Using a sizzler is the non-destructive alternative to drilling holes in a cymbal and putting metal rivets in the holes. Another benefit of using a \"sizzler\" chain is that the chain can be removed and the cymbal will return to its normal sound (in contrast, a cymbal with rivets would have to have the rivets removed).\nSome sizzlers feature pivoting arms that allow the chains to be quickly raised from the cymbal, or lowered onto it, allowing the effect to be used for some songs and removed for others.\nCases.\nThree types of protective covers are common for kit drums:\nAs with all musical instruments, the best protection is provided by a combination of a hard-shelled case with padding such as foam next to the drums and cymbals.\nMicrophones.\nMicrophones (\"mics\") are used with drums to pick up the sound of the drums and cymbals for a sound recording and/or to pick up the sound of the drum kit so that it can be amplified through a PA system or sound reinforcement system. While most drummers use microphones and amplification in live shows in the 2010s, so that the sound engineer can adjust and balance the levels of the drums and cymbals, some bands that play in quieter genres of music and that play in small venues such as coffeehouses play acoustically, without mics or PA amplification. Small jazz groups such as jazz quartets or organ trios that are playing in a small bar will often just use acoustic drums. Of course if the same small jazz groups play on the mainstage of a big jazz festival, the drums will be mic'ed so that they can be adjusted in the sound system mix. A middle-ground approach is used by some bands that play in small venues; they do not mic every drum and cymbal, but rather mic only the instruments that the sound engineer wants to be able to control in the mix, such as the bass drum and the snare.\nIn \"miking\" a drum kit, dynamic microphones, which can handle high sound-pressure levels, are usually used to close-mic drums, which is the predominant way to mic drums for live shows. Condenser microphones are used for overheads and room mics, an approach which is more common with sound recording applications. Close miking of drums may be done using stands or by mounting the microphones on the rims of the drums, or even using microphones built into the drum itself, which eliminates the need for stands for these microphones, reducing both clutter and set-up time, as well as isolating them.\nIn some styles of music, drummers use electronic effects on drums, such as individual noise gates that mute the attached microphone when the signal is below a threshold volume. This allows the sound engineer to use a higher overall volume for the drum kit by reducing the number of \"active\" mics which could produce unwanted feedback at any one time. When a drum kit is entirely miked and amplified through the sound reinforcement system, the drummer or the sound engineer can add other electronic effects to the drum sound, such as reverb or digital delay.\nSome drummers arrive at the venue with their drum kit and use the mics and mic stands provided by the venue's sound engineer. Other drummers bring their all of their own mics, or selected mics (e.g., a good quality bass drum mic and a good mic for the snare) to ensure that they have good quality mics for each show. In bars and nightclubs, the microphones supplied by the venue can sometimes be in substandard condition, due to the heavy use they experience.\nMonitors.\nDrummers using electronic drums, drum machines, or hybrid acoustic-electric kits (which blend traditional acoustic drums and cymbals with electronic pads) typically use a monitor speaker, keyboard amplifier or even a small PA system to hear the electronic drum sounds. Even a drummer playing entirely acoustic drums may use a monitor speaker to hear her drums, especially if she is playing in a loud rock or metal band, where there is substantial onstage volume from huge, powerful guitar stacks. Since the drum kit uses the deep bass drum, drummers are often given a large speaker cabinet with a 15\" subwoofer to help them monitor their bass drum sound (along with a full-range monitor speaker to hear the rest of their kit). Some sound engineers and drummers prefer to use an electronic vibration system, colloquially known as a \"butt shaker\" or \"throne thumper\" to monitor the bass drum, because this lowers the stage volume. With a \"butt shaker\", the \"thump\" of each bass drum strike causes a vibration in the drum stool; this way the drummer \"feels\" their beat on the posterior, rather than hears it.\nBass drum gear.\nA number of accessories are designed for the bass drum (also called \"kick drum\"). Ported tubes for the bass drum are available to take advantage of the bass reflex speaker design, in which a tuned port (a hole and a carefully measured tube) are put in a speaker enclosure to improve the bass response at the lowest frequencies. Bass drumhead patches are available, which protect the drumhead from the impact of the felt beater. Bass drum pillows are fabric bags with filling or stuffing that can be used to alter the tone or resonance of the bass drum. A less expensive alternative to using a specialized bass drum pillow is to use an old sleeping bag.\nGloves.\nSome drummers wear special drummer's gloves to improve their grip on the sticks when they play. Drumming gloves often have a textured grip surface made of a synthetic or rubber material and mesh or vents on the parts of the glove not used to hold sticks, to ventilate perspiration.\nDrum screen.\nIn some styles or settings, such as country music clubs or churches, small venues, or when a live recording is being made, the drummer may use a transparent perspex or plexiglas \"drum screen\" (also known as a \"drum shield\") to dampen the onstage volume of the drums. A screen that completely surrounds the drum kit is known as a \"drum booth\". In live sound applications, drum shields are used so that the audio engineer can have more control over the volume of drums that the audience hears through the PA system mix or to reduce the overall volume of the drums, as a way to reduce the overall volume of the band in the venue. In some recording studios, foam and fabric baffles are used in addition to or in place of clear panels. The drawback with foam/cloth baffle panels is that the drummer cannot see other performers, the record producer or the audio engineer well.\nCarpets.\nDrummers often bring a carpet, mats or rugs to venues to prevent the bass drum and hi-hat stand from \"crawling\" (moving away) on a slippery surface from the drum head striking the bass drum. The carpet also reduces short reverberation (which is generally but not always an advantage), and helps to prevent damage to the flooring or floor coverings. In shows where multiple drummers will bring their kits onstage over the night, it is common for drummers to mark the location of their stands and pedals with tape, to allow for quicker positioning of a kits in a drummer's accustomed position. Bass drums and hi-hat stands commonly have retractable spikes to help them to grip surfaces such as carpet, or stay stationary (on hard surfaces) with rubber feet.\nPractice equipment.\nDrummers use a variety of accessories when practicing. Metronomes and beat counters are used to develop a sense of a steady pulse. Drum muffling pads may be used to lessen the volume of drums during practicing. A practice pad, held on the lap, on a leg, or mounted on a stand, is used for near-silent practice with drumsticks. A set of practice pads mounted to simulate an entire drum kit is known as a practice kit. In the 2010s, these have largely been superseded by electronic drums, which can be listened to with headphones for quiet practice and kits with non-sounding mesh heads.\nTuning equipment.\nDrummers use a drum key for tuning their drums and adjusting some drum hardware. Besides the basic type of drum key (a T-handled wrench) there are various tuning wrenches and tools. Basic drum keys are divided in three types which allows tuning of three types of tuning screws on drums: square (most used), slotted and hexagonal. Ratchet-type wrenches allow high-tension drums to be tuned easily. Spin keys (utilizing a ball joint) allow rapid head changing. Torque-wrench type keys are available, graphically revealing the torque at each lug. Also, tension gauges, or meters, which are set on the head, aid drummers to achieve a consistent tuning. Drummers can tune drums \"by ear\" or, in the 2010s, use a digital drum tuner, which \"measures tympanic pressure\" on the drumhead to provide accurate tuning.\nNotation and improvisation.\nDrum kit music is either written down in music notation (called \"drum parts\"), learned and played by ear, improvised, or some combination of some or all three of these methods. Professional session musician drummers and big band drummers are often required to read drum parts. Drum parts are most commonly written on a standard five-line staff. In 2016, a special \"percussion clef\" is used, while previously the bass clef was used. However, even if the bass or no clef is used, each line and space is assigned an instrument of the kit, rather than to a pitch. In jazz, traditional music, folk music, rock music, and pop music, drummers are expected to be able to learn songs by ear (from a recording or from another musician who is playing or singing the song) and improvise. The degree of improvisation differs in different styles. Jazz and jazz fusion drummers may have lengthy improvised solos in every song. In rock music and blues, there are also drum solos in some songs, although they tend to be shorter than those in jazz. Drummers in all popular music and traditional music styles are expected to be able to improvise accompaniment parts to songs, once they are told the genre or style (e.g., shuffle, ballad, blues).\nRecording.\nOn early recording media (until 1925) such as wax cylinders and discs carved with an engraving needle, sound balancing meant that musicians had to be moved back in the room. Drums were often put far from the horn (part of the mechanical transducer) to reduce sound distortion.\nIn the 2020s, drum parts in many popular music styles are often recorded apart from the other instruments and singers, using multitrack recording techniques. Once the drums are recorded, the other instruments (rhythm guitar, piano, etc.) and then vocals are added. To ensure that the drum tempo is consistent in this type of recording, the drummer usually plays along with a click track (a type of digital metronome) in headphones. As such, the ability to play accurately along with a click track has become an important skill for professional drummers.\nDrum manufacturers.\nManufacturers using the American traditional format in their catalogs include these:\nThose using the European measures of diameter x depth include these:"}
{"id": "9080", "revid": "9505726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9080", "title": "Dying Earth", "text": "Dying Earth is a fantasy series by the American author Jack Vance, comprising four books originally published from 1950 to 1984.\nSome have been called picaresque. They vary from short story collections to a fix-up (novel created from older short stories), perhaps all the way to novel.\nThe first book in the series, \"The Dying Earth\", was ranked number 16 of 33 \"All Time Best Fantasy Novels\" by \"Locus\" in 1987, based on a poll of subscribers, although it was marketed as a collection and the Internet Speculative Fiction Database (ISFDB) calls it a \"loosely connected series of stories\".\nSetting.\nThe stories of the \"Dying Earth\" series are set in the distant future, at a point when the sun is almost exhausted and magic has asserted itself as a dominant force. The Moon has disappeared and the Sun is in danger of burning out at any time, often flickering as if about to go out, before shining again. The various civilizations of Earth have collapsed for the most part into decadence or religious fanaticism and its inhabitants overcome with a fatalistic outlook. The Earth is mostly barren and cold, and has become infested with various predatory monsters (possibly created by a magician in a former age).\nMagic in the Dying Earth is performed by memorizing syllables, and the human brain can only accommodate a certain amount at once. When a spell is used, the syllables vanish from the caster's mind. Creatures called sandestins can be summoned and used to perform more complex actions, but are considered dangerous to rely upon. Magic has loose links to the science of old, and advanced mathematics is treated like arcane lore.\nThe Dying Earth exists alongside several Overworlds and Underworlds. These help add a sense of profound longing and entrapment to the series. While humans can, with relative ease, physically travel to the horrific Underworlds (as Cugel does on several occasions, to his dismay) the vast majority of the population are only capable of mentally visiting the wondrous Overworlds through rare artifacts (i.e. through the \"Eyes of the Overworld\") or dangerous magic phenomena (such as the ship Cugel encounters in the deserts). Though they can look at the wonders and pretend they are really there, humans can never truly inhabit or escape to these utopia as their physical bodies remain stuck on the Dying Earth and will die with the sun regardless. These siren-like visions of paradise lead to the deaths, insanity, and suffering of many, especially during Cugel's journeys.\nWhile most remaining civilizations on the Dying Earth are utterly unique in their customs and cultures, there are some common threads. Because the moon is gone and wind is often weak (the sun no longer heats the earth as much) the oceans are largely placid bodies of water with no tide and tiny waves. To cross them, boats are propelled by giant sea-worms. These worms are cared for and controlled by \"Wormingers\". In addition, the manses of magicians, protected by walls and spells and monsters, are relatively common sights in inhabited lands.\nOrigins.\nVance wrote the stories of the first book while he served in the United States Merchant Marine during World War II. In the late 1940s several of his other stories were published in magazines.\nAccording to pulp editor Sam Merwin, Vance's earliest magazine submissions in the 1940s were heavily influenced by the style of James Branch Cabell. Fantasy historian Lin Carter has noted several probable lasting influences of Cabell on Vance's work, and suggests that the early \"pseudo-Cabell\" experiments bore fruit in \"The Dying Earth\" (1950).\nSeries.\nThe series comprises four books by Vance and some sequels by other authors that may be or may not have been canonical.\nOne 741-page omnibus edition has been issued as \"The Compleat Dying Earth\" (SF Book Club, 1999) and in both the US and UK as \"Tales of the Dying Earth\" (2000).\nStories by Vance.\nAll four books were published with Tables of Contents, the first and fourth as collections. The second and third contained mostly material previously published in short story form but were marketed as novels, the second as a fix-up and the third without acknowledging any previous publication.\n1. \"The Dying Earth\" (the author's preferred title is \"Mazirian the Magician\") was openly a collection of six stories, all original, although written during Vance's war service. ISFDB calls them \"slightly connected\" and catalogs the last as a novella (17,500 to 40,000 word count).\n2. \"Eyes of the Overworld\" (the author's preferred title is \"Cugel the Clever\") was a fix-up of six stories, presented as seven. All were novelettes by word count (7500 to 17,500). Five were previously published as noted here.\n3. \"Cugel's Saga\" (the author's preferred title is \"Cugel: The Skybreak Spatterlight\") was marketed as a novel. ISFDB calls it \"[t]wice as large and less episodic than \"Eyes of the Overworld\"\" but qualifies that label. \"This is marketed as a novel, but there is a table of contents, and some of the parts were previously published (although none are acknowledged thus).\" It catalogs previous publication of three chapters without remark on the degree of revision.\n4. \"Rhialto the Marvellous\" was marketed as a collection, a Foreword and three stories, one previously published. The Foreword is non-narrative canonical fiction presenting the general state of the world in the 21st Aeon (a \"short story\" loosely).\nSequels.\nSome sequels have been written by other authors, either with Vance's authorization or as tributes to his work.\nMichael Shea's first publication, the novel \"A Quest for Simbilis\" (DAW Books, 1974, ), was an authorized sequel to \"Eyes\". However, \"When Vance returned to the milieu, his \"Cugel's Saga\" continued the events of \"The Eyes of the Overworld\" in a different direction.\"\nThe tribute anthology \"Songs of the Dying Earth\" (2009) contains short fiction set in the world of the Dying Earth by numerous writers alongside tributes to Vance's work and influence.\nIn 2010 Shea wrote another authorized story belonging to the \"Dying Earth\" series and featuring Cugel as one of characters: \"Hew the Tintmaster\", published in the anthology \"Swords &amp; Dark Magic: The New Sword and Sorcery\", ed. Jonathan Strahan and Lou Anders (Eos, 2010, pp.\u00a0323\u2013362).\nTranslations.\nWorldCat contributing libraries report holding all four books in French, Spanish, and (in omnibus edition) Hebrew translations; and report holding \"The Dying Earth\" in five other languages: Finnish, German, Japanese, Polish, and Russian.\nThe whole first volume (of six stories) has been translated also into Esperanto together with two Cugel stories and made available on-line as e-books by a long-time fan and Vance Integral Edition co-worker. Permission to translate and distribute (only into Esperanto) was obtained informally direct from the author and, since his death in 2013, continues with ongoing permission from the author's estate. To date these are three: \"Mazirian the Magician\", \"The Sorcerer Pharesm\", and \"The Bagful of Dreams\" available for free download as EPub, Mobi and PDF.\nLegacy.\nThe Dying Earth subgenre of science fiction is named in recognition of Vance's role in standardizing a setting, the entropically dying earth and sun. Its importance was recognized with the publication of \"Songs of the Dying Earth\", a tribute anthology edited by George R. R. Martin and Gardner Dozois (Subterranean, 2009). Each short story in the anthology is set on the Dying Earth, and concludes with a short acknowledgement by the author of Vance's influence on them.\nPrint.\nGene Wolfe's \"The Book of the New Sun\" (1980\u201383) is set in a slightly similar world, and was written under Vance's influence. Wolfe suggested in \"The Castle of the Otter\", a collection of essays, that he inserted the book \"The Dying Earth\" into his fictional world under the title \"The Book of Gold\" (specifically, Wolfe wrote that the \"Book of Gold\" mentioned in \"The Book of the New Sun\" is different for each reader, but for him it was \"The Dying Earth.\")'. Wolfe has extended the series.\nMichael Shea's novel \"Nifft the Lean\" (1982), his second book eight years after \"A Quest for Simbilis\", also owes much debt to Vance's creation, since the protagonist of the story is a petty thief (not unlike Cugel the Clever), who travels and struggles in an exotic world. Shea returned to Nifft with 1997 and 2000 sequels.\nThe Archonate stories by Matthew Hughes \u2014 the 1994 novel \"Fools Errant\" and numerous works in this millennium \u2014\ntake place in \"the penultimate age of Old Earth,\" a period of science and technology that is on the verge of transforming into the magical era of the time of the Dying Earth.\nBooklist has called him Vance's \"heir apparent.\" (Review by Carl Hays of The Gist Hunter and Other Stories, Booklist, August 2005)\nRole-playing.\nThe original creators of the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" games were fans of Jack Vance and incorporated many aspects of the \"Dying Earth\" series into the game. The magic system, in which a wizard is limited in the number of spells that can be simultaneously remembered and forgets them once they are cast, was based on the magic of Dying Earth. In role-playing game circles, this sort of magic system is called \"Vancian\" or \"Vancean\". Some of the spells from \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" are based on spells mentioned in the \"Dying Earth\" series, such as the \"prismatic spray\". Magic items from the \"Dying Earth\" stories such as ioun stones also made their way into \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". One of the deities of magic in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is named Vecna, an anagram of \"Vance\".\nThe Talislanta role-playing game designed by Stephan Michael Sechi and originally published in 1987 by Bard Games was inspired by the works of Jack Vance so much so that the first release, \"The Chronicles of Talislanta\" is dedicated to the author.\nThere is an official \"Dying Earth\" role-playing game published by Pelgrane Press with an occasional magazine \"The Excellent Prismatic Spray\" (named after a magic spell). The game situates players in Vance's world populated by desperately extravagant people. Many other role-playing settings pay homage to the series by including fantasy elements he invented such as the darkness-dwelling Grues."}
{"id": "9082", "revid": "150564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9082", "title": "Dispute resolution", "text": "Dispute resolution or dispute settlement is the process of resolving disputes between parties. The term \"dispute resolution\" is sometimes used interchangeably with \"conflict resolution\", although conflicts are generally more deep-rooted and lengthy than disputes. Dispute resolution techniques assist the resolution of antagonisms between parties that can include citizens, corporations, and governments.\nMethods.\nMethods of dispute resolution include:\nOne could theoretically include violence or even war as part of this spectrum, but dispute resolution practitioners do not usually do so; violence rarely ends disputes effectively, and indeed, often only escalates them.\nDispute resolution processes fall into two major types:\nNot all disputes, even those in which skilled intervention occurs, end in resolution. Such intractable disputes form a special area in dispute resolution studies.\nDispute resolution is an important requirement in international trade, including negotiation, mediation, arbitration and litigation.\nLegal dispute resolution.\nThe legal system provides resolutions for many different types of disputes. Some disputants will not reach agreement through a collaborative process. Some disputes need the coercive power of the state to enforce a resolution. Perhaps more importantly, many people want a professional advocate when they become involved in a dispute, particularly if the dispute involves perceived legal rights, legal wrongdoing, or threat of legal action against them.\nThe most common form of judicial dispute resolution is litigation. Litigation is initiated when one party files suit against another. In the United States, litigation is facilitated by the government within federal, state, and municipal courts. The proceedings are very formal and are governed by rules, such as rules of evidence and procedure, which are established by the legislature. Outcomes are decided by an impartial judge and/or jury, based on the factual questions of the case and the application law. The verdict of the court is binding, not advisory; however, both parties have the right to appeal the judgment to a higher court. Judicial dispute resolution is typically adversarial in nature, for example, involving antagonistic parties or opposing interests seeking an outcome most favorable to their position.\nDue to the antagonistic nature of litigation, collaborators frequently opt for solving disputes privately. Indeed, the involvement of lawyers does not always signal the end of a collaborative relationship. The duration of the exchange or the familiarity with exchange partners are important factors impacting the willingness of the firm to resolve disputes. Such impact is contingent on whether a cooperative norm has been developed through the course of the collaboration.\nRetired judges or private lawyers often become arbitrators or mediators; however, trained and qualified non-legal dispute resolution specialists form a growing body within the field of alternative dispute resolution (ADR). In the United States, many states now have mediation or other ADR programs annexed to the courts, to facilitate settlement of lawsuits.\nExtrajudicial dispute resolution.\nSome use the term \"dispute resolution\" to refer only to alternative dispute resolution (ADR), that is, extrajudicial processes such as arbitration, collaborative law, and mediation used to resolve conflict and potential conflict between and among individuals, business entities, governmental agencies, and (in the public international law context) states. ADR generally depends on agreement by the parties to use ADR processes, either before or after a dispute has arisen. ADR has experienced steadily increasing acceptance and utilization because of a perception of greater flexibility, costs below those of traditional litigation, and speedy resolution of disputes, among other perceived advantages. However, some have criticized these methods as taking away the right to seek redress of grievances in the courts, suggesting that extrajudicial dispute resolution may not offer the fairest way for parties not in an equal bargaining relationship, for example in a dispute between a consumer and a large corporation. In addition, in some circumstances, arbitration and other ADR processes may become as expensive as litigation or more so.\nFurther reading.\nAl\u00e9s, Javier y Mata, Juan Diego \" manual pr\u00e1ctico para mediadores: el misterio de la mediacion\" \u00e9xito Atelier. Barcelona 2016"}
{"id": "9087", "revid": "25684063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9087", "title": "Dynamical system", "text": "In mathematics, a dynamical system is a system in which a function describes the time dependence of a point in a geometrical space. Examples include the mathematical models that describe the swinging of a clock pendulum, the flow of water in a pipe, and the number of fish each springtime in a lake.\nAt any given time, a dynamical system has a state given by a tuple of real numbers (a vector) that can be represented by a point in an appropriate state space (a geometrical manifold). The \"evolution rule\" of the dynamical system is a function that describes what future states follow from the current state. Often the function is deterministic, that is, for a given time interval only one future state follows from the current state. However, some systems are stochastic, in that random events also affect the evolution of the state variables.\nIn physics, a dynamical system is described as a \"particle or ensemble of particles whose state varies over time and thus obeys differential equations involving time derivatives.\" In order to make a prediction about the system's future behavior, an analytical solution of such equations or their integration over time through computer simulation is realized.\nThe study of dynamical systems is the focus of dynamical systems theory, which has applications to a wide variety of fields such as mathematics, physics, biology, chemistry, engineering, economics, history, and medicine. Dynamical systems are a fundamental part of chaos theory, logistic map dynamics, bifurcation theory, the self-assembly and self-organization processes, and the edge of chaos concept.\nOverview.\nThe concept of a dynamical system has its origins in Newtonian mechanics. There, as in other natural sciences and engineering disciplines, the evolution rule of dynamical systems is an implicit relation that gives the state of the system for only a short time into the future. (The relation is either a differential equation, difference equation or other time scale.) To determine the state for all future times requires iterating the relation many times\u2014each advancing time a small step. The iteration procedure is referred to as \"solving the system\" or \"integrating the system\". If the system can be solved, given an initial point it is possible to determine all its future positions, a collection of points known as a \"trajectory\" or \"orbit\".\nBefore the advent of computers, finding an orbit required sophisticated mathematical techniques and could be accomplished only for a small class of dynamical systems. Numerical methods implemented on electronic computing machines have simplified the task of determining the orbits of a dynamical system.\nFor simple dynamical systems, knowing the trajectory is often sufficient, but most dynamical systems are too complicated to be understood in terms of individual trajectories. The difficulties arise because:\nHistory.\nMany people regard French mathematician Henri Poincar\u00e9 as the founder of dynamical systems. Poincar\u00e9 published two now classical monographs, \"New Methods of Celestial Mechanics\" (1892\u20131899) and \"Lectures on Celestial Mechanics\" (1905\u20131910). In them, he successfully applied the results of their research to the problem of the motion of three bodies and studied in detail the behavior of solutions (frequency, stability, asymptotic, and so on). These papers included the Poincar\u00e9 recurrence theorem, which states that certain systems will, after a sufficiently long but finite time, return to a state very close to the initial state.\nAleksandr Lyapunov developed many important approximation methods. His methods, which he developed in 1899, make it possible to define the stability of sets of ordinary differential equations. He created the modern theory of the stability of a dynamical system.\nIn 1913, George David Birkhoff proved Poincar\u00e9's \"Last Geometric Theorem\", a special case of the three-body problem, a result that made him world-famous. In 1927, he published his \"Dynamical Systems\". Birkhoff's most durable result has been his 1931 discovery of what is now called the ergodic theorem. Combining insights from physics on the ergodic hypothesis with measure theory, this theorem solved, at least in principle, a fundamental problem of statistical mechanics. The ergodic theorem has also had repercussions for dynamics.\nStephen Smale made significant advances as well. His first contribution was the Smale horseshoe that jumpstarted significant research in dynamical systems. He also outlined a research program carried out by many others.\nOleksandr Mykolaiovych Sharkovsky developed Sharkovsky's theorem on the periods of discrete dynamical systems in 1964. One of the implications of the theorem is that if a discrete dynamical system on the real line has a periodic point of period\u00a03, then it must have periodic points of every other period.\nIn the late 20th century, Palestinian mechanical engineer Ali H. Nayfeh applied nonlinear dynamics in mechanical and engineering systems. His pioneering work in applied nonlinear dynamics has been influential in the construction and maintenance of machines and structures that are common in daily life, such as ships, cranes, bridges, buildings, skyscrapers, jet engines, rocket engines, aircraft and spacecraft.\nBasic definitions.\nA dynamical system is a manifold \"M\" called the phase (or state) space endowed with a family of smooth evolution functions \u03a6\"t\" that for any element \"t\" \u2208 \"T\", the time, map a point of the phase space back into the phase space. The notion of smoothness changes with applications and the type of manifold. There are several choices for the set\u00a0\"T\". When \"T\" is taken to be the reals, the dynamical system is called a \"flow\"; and if \"T\" is restricted to the non-negative reals, then the dynamical system is a \"semi-flow\". When \"T\" is taken to be the integers, it is a \"cascade\" or a \"map\"; and the restriction to the non-negative integers is a \"semi-cascade\".\nNote: There is a further technical condition that \u03a6\"t\" is an action of \"T\" on \"M\". That includes the facts that \u03a6\"0\" is the identity function and that \u03a6\"s+t\" is the composition of \u03a6\"s\" and \u03a6\"t\". This is a monoid action, which doesn't require the existence of negative values for \"t\", and doesn't require the functions \u03a6\"t\" to be invertible.\nExamples.\nThe evolution function \u03a6\u00a0\"t\" is often the solution of a \"differential equation of motion\"\nThe equation gives the time derivative, represented by the dot, of a trajectory \"x\"(\"t\") on the phase space starting at some point\u00a0\"x\"0. The vector field \"v\"(\"x\") is a smooth function that at every point of the phase space \"M\" provides the velocity vector of the dynamical system at that point. (These vectors are not vectors in the phase space\u00a0\"M\", but in the tangent space \"TxM\" of the point\u00a0\"x\".) Given a smooth \u03a6\u00a0\"t\", an autonomous vector field can be derived from it.\nThere is no need for higher order derivatives in the equation, nor for time dependence in \"v\"(\"x\") because these can be eliminated by considering systems of higher dimensions. Other types of differential equations can be used to define the evolution rule:\nis an example of an equation that arises from the modeling of mechanical systems with complicated constraints.\nThe differential equations determining the evolution function \u03a6\u00a0\"t\" are often ordinary differential equations; in this case the phase space \"M\" is a finite dimensional manifold. Many of the concepts in dynamical systems can be extended to infinite-dimensional manifolds\u2014those that are locally Banach spaces\u2014in which case the differential equations are partial differential equations. In the late 20th century the dynamical system perspective to partial differential equations started gaining popularity.\nLinear dynamical systems.\nLinear dynamical systems can be solved in terms of simple functions and the behavior of all orbits classified. In a linear system the phase space is the \"N\"-dimensional Euclidean space, so any point in phase space can be represented by a vector with \"N\" numbers. The analysis of linear systems is possible because they satisfy a superposition principle: if \"u\"(\"t\") and \"w\"(\"t\") satisfy the differential equation for the vector field (but not necessarily the initial condition), then so will \"u\"(\"t\")\u00a0+\u00a0\"w\"(\"t\").\nFlows.\nFor a flow, the vector field v(\"x\") is an affine function of the position in the phase space, that is,\nwith \"A\" a matrix, \"b\" a vector of numbers and \"x\" the position vector. The solution to this system can be found by using the superposition principle (linearity).\nThe case \"b\"\u00a0\u2260\u00a00 with \"A\"\u00a0=\u00a00 is just a straight line in the direction of\u00a0\"b\":\nWhen \"b\" is zero and \"A\"\u00a0\u2260\u00a00 the origin is an equilibrium (or singular) point of the flow, that is, if \"x\"0\u00a0=\u00a00, then the orbit remains there.\nFor other initial conditions, the equation of motion is given by the exponential of a matrix: for an initial point \"x\"0,\nWhen \"b\" = 0, the eigenvalues of \"A\" determine the structure of the phase space. From the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors of \"A\" it is possible to determine if an initial point will converge or diverge to the equilibrium point at the origin.\nThe distance between two different initial conditions in the case \"A\"\u00a0\u2260\u00a00 will change exponentially in most cases, either converging exponentially fast towards a point, or diverging exponentially fast. Linear systems display sensitive dependence on initial conditions in the case of divergence. For nonlinear systems this is one of the (necessary but not sufficient) conditions for chaotic behavior.\nMaps.\nA discrete-time, affine dynamical system has the form of a matrix difference equation:\nwith \"A\" a matrix and \"b\" a vector. As in the continuous case, the change of coordinates \"x\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"x\"\u00a0+\u00a0(1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"A\")\u00a0\u20131\"b\" removes the term \"b\" from the equation. In the new coordinate system, the origin is a fixed point of the map and the solutions are of the linear system \"A\"\u00a0\"n\"\"x\"0.\nThe solutions for the map are no longer curves, but points that hop in the phase space. The orbits are organized in curves, or fibers, which are collections of points that map into themselves under the action of the map.\nAs in the continuous case, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of \"A\" determine the structure of phase space. For example, if \"u\"1 is an eigenvector of \"A\", with a real eigenvalue smaller than one, then the straight lines given by the points along \"\u03b1\"\u00a0\"u\"1, with \"\u03b1\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0R, is an invariant curve of the map. Points in this straight line run into the fixed point.\nThere are also many other discrete dynamical systems.\nLocal dynamics.\nThe qualitative properties of dynamical systems do not change under a smooth change of coordinates (this is sometimes taken as a definition of qualitative): a \"singular point\" of the vector field (a point where\u00a0\"v\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a00) will remain a singular point under smooth transformations; a \"periodic orbit\" is a loop in phase space and smooth deformations of the phase space cannot alter it being a loop. It is in the neighborhood of singular points and periodic orbits that the structure of a phase space of a dynamical system can be well understood. In the qualitative study of dynamical systems, the approach is to show that there is a change of coordinates (usually unspecified, but computable) that makes the dynamical system as simple as possible.\nRectification.\nA flow in most small patches of the phase space can be made very simple. If \"y\" is a point where the vector field \"v\"(\"y\")\u00a0\u2260\u00a00, then there is a change of coordinates for a region around \"y\" where the vector field becomes a series of parallel vectors of the same magnitude. This is known as the rectification theorem.\nThe \"rectification theorem\" says that away from singular points the dynamics of a point in a small patch is a straight line. The patch can sometimes be enlarged by stitching several patches together, and when this works out in the whole phase space \"M\" the dynamical system is \"integrable\". In most cases the patch cannot be extended to the entire phase space. There may be singular points in the vector field (where \"v\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a00); or the patches may become smaller and smaller as some point is approached. The more subtle reason is a global constraint, where the trajectory starts out in a patch, and after visiting a series of other patches comes back to the original one. If the next time the orbit loops around phase space in a different way, then it is impossible to rectify the vector field in the whole series of patches.\nNear periodic orbits.\nIn general, in the neighborhood of a periodic orbit the rectification theorem cannot be used. Poincar\u00e9 developed an approach that transforms the analysis near a periodic orbit to the analysis of a map. Pick a point \"x\"0 in the orbit \u03b3 and consider the points in phase space in that neighborhood that are perpendicular to \"v\"(\"x\"0). These points are a Poincar\u00e9 section \"S\"(\"\u03b3\",\u00a0\"x\"0), of the orbit. The flow now defines a map, the Poincar\u00e9 map \"F\"\u00a0:\u00a0\"S\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"S\", for points starting in \"S\" and returning to\u00a0\"S\". Not all these points will take the same amount of time to come back, but the times will be close to the time it takes\u00a0\"x\"0.\nThe intersection of the periodic orbit with the Poincar\u00e9 section is a fixed point of the Poincar\u00e9 map \"F\". By a translation, the point can be assumed to be at \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a00. The Taylor series of the map is \"F\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"J\"\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0\"x\"\u00a0+\u00a0O(\"x\"2), so a change of coordinates \"h\" can only be expected to simplify \"F\" to its linear part\nThis is known as the conjugation equation. Finding conditions for this equation to hold has been one of the major tasks of research in dynamical systems. Poincar\u00e9 first approached it assuming all functions to be analytic and in the process discovered the non-resonant condition. If \"\u03bb\"1,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"\u03bb\"\"\u03bd\" are the eigenvalues of \"J\" they will be resonant if one eigenvalue is an integer linear combination of two or more of the others. As terms of the form \"\u03bb\"\"i\" \u2013 \u2211 (multiples of other eigenvalues) occurs in the denominator of the terms for the function \"h\", the non-resonant condition is also known as the small divisor problem.\nConjugation results.\nThe results on the existence of a solution to the conjugation equation depend on the eigenvalues of \"J\" and the degree of smoothness required from \"h\". As \"J\" does not need to have any special symmetries, its eigenvalues will typically be complex numbers. When the eigenvalues of \"J\" are not in the unit circle, the dynamics near the fixed point \"x\"0 of \"F\" is called \"hyperbolic\" and when the eigenvalues are on the unit circle and complex, the dynamics is called \"elliptic\".\nIn the hyperbolic case, the Hartman\u2013Grobman theorem gives the conditions for the existence of a continuous function that maps the neighborhood of the fixed point of the map to the linear map \"J\"\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0\"x\". The hyperbolic case is also \"structurally stable\". Small changes in the vector field will only produce small changes in the Poincar\u00e9 map and these small changes will reflect in small changes in the position of the eigenvalues of \"J\" in the complex plane, implying that the map is still hyperbolic.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Arnold\u2013Moser (KAM) theorem gives the behavior near an elliptic point.\nBifurcation theory.\nWhen the evolution map \u03a6\"t\" (or the vector field it is derived from) depends on a parameter \u03bc, the structure of the phase space will also depend on this parameter. Small changes may produce no qualitative changes in the phase space until a special value \"\u03bc\"0 is reached. At this point the phase space changes qualitatively and the dynamical system is said to have gone through a bifurcation.\nBifurcation theory considers a structure in phase space (typically a fixed point, a periodic orbit, or an invariant torus) and studies its behavior as a function of the parameter\u00a0\"\u03bc\". At the bifurcation point the structure may change its stability, split into new structures, or merge with other structures. By using Taylor series approximations of the maps and an understanding of the differences that may be eliminated by a change of coordinates, it is possible to catalog the bifurcations of dynamical systems.\nThe bifurcations of a hyperbolic fixed point \"x\"0 of a system family \"F\u03bc\" can be characterized by the eigenvalues of the first derivative of the system \"DF\"\"\u03bc\"(\"x\"0) computed at the bifurcation point. For a map, the bifurcation will occur when there are eigenvalues of \"DF\u03bc\" on the unit circle. For a flow, it will occur when there are eigenvalues on the imaginary axis. For more information, see the main article on Bifurcation theory.\nSome bifurcations can lead to very complicated structures in phase space. For example, the Ruelle\u2013Takens scenario describes how a periodic orbit bifurcates into a torus and the torus into a strange attractor. In another example, Feigenbaum period-doubling describes how a stable periodic orbit goes through a series of period-doubling bifurcations.\nErgodic systems.\nIn many dynamical systems, it is possible to choose the coordinates of the system so that the volume (really a \u03bd-dimensional volume) in phase space is invariant. This happens for mechanical systems derived from Newton's laws as long as the coordinates are the position and the momentum and the volume is measured in units of (position)\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0(momentum). The flow takes points of a subset \"A\" into the points \u03a6\u00a0\"t\"(\"A\") and invariance of the phase space means that\nIn the Hamiltonian formalism, given a coordinate it is possible to derive the appropriate (generalized) momentum such that the associated volume is preserved by the flow. The volume is said to be computed by the Liouville measure.\nIn a Hamiltonian system, not all possible configurations of position and momentum can be reached from an initial condition. Because of energy conservation, only the states with the same energy as the initial condition are accessible. The states with the same energy form an energy shell \u03a9, a sub-manifold of the phase space. The volume of the energy shell, computed using the Liouville measure, is preserved under evolution.\nFor systems where the volume is preserved by the flow, Poincar\u00e9 discovered the recurrence theorem: Assume the phase space has a finite Liouville volume and let \"F\" be a phase space volume-preserving map and \"A\" a subset of the phase space. Then almost every point of \"A\" returns to \"A\" infinitely often. The Poincar\u00e9 recurrence theorem was used by Zermelo to object to Boltzmann's derivation of the increase in entropy in a dynamical system of colliding atoms.\nOne of the questions raised by Boltzmann's work was the possible equality between time averages and space averages, what he called the ergodic hypothesis. The hypothesis states that the length of time a typical trajectory spends in a region \"A\" is vol(\"A\")/vol(\u03a9).\nThe ergodic hypothesis turned out not to be the essential property needed for the development of statistical mechanics and a series of other ergodic-like properties were introduced to capture the relevant aspects of physical systems. Koopman approached the study of ergodic systems by the use of functional analysis. An observable \"a\" is a function that to each point of the phase space associates a number (say instantaneous pressure, or average height). The value of an observable can be computed at another time by using the evolution function \u03c6\u00a0t. This introduces an operator \"U\"\u00a0\"t\", the transfer operator,\nBy studying the spectral properties of the linear operator \"U\" it becomes possible to classify the ergodic properties of\u00a0\u03a6\u00a0\"t\". In using the Koopman approach of considering the action of the flow on an observable function, the finite-dimensional nonlinear problem involving \u03a6\u00a0\"t\" gets mapped into an infinite-dimensional linear problem involving\u00a0\"U\".\nThe Liouville measure restricted to the energy surface \u03a9 is the basis for the averages computed in equilibrium statistical mechanics. An average in time along a trajectory is equivalent to an average in space computed with the Boltzmann factor exp(\u2212\u03b2\"H\"). This idea has been generalized by Sinai, Bowen, and Ruelle (SRB) to a larger class of dynamical systems that includes dissipative systems. SRB measures replace the Boltzmann factor and they are defined on attractors of chaotic systems.\nNonlinear dynamical systems and chaos.\nSimple nonlinear dynamical systems and even piecewise linear systems can exhibit a completely unpredictable behavior, which might seem to be random, despite the fact that they are fundamentally deterministic. This seemingly unpredictable behavior has been called \"chaos\". Hyperbolic systems are precisely defined dynamical systems that exhibit the properties ascribed to chaotic systems. In hyperbolic systems the tangent space perpendicular to a trajectory can be well separated into two parts: one with the points that converge towards the orbit (the \"stable manifold\") and another of the points that diverge from the orbit (the \"unstable manifold\").\nThis branch of mathematics deals with the long-term qualitative behavior of dynamical systems. Here, the focus is not on finding precise solutions to the equations defining the dynamical system (which is often hopeless), but rather to answer questions like \"Will the system settle down to a steady state in the long term, and if so, what are the possible attractors?\" or \"Does the long-term behavior of the system depend on its initial condition?\"\nNote that the chaotic behavior of complex systems is not the issue. Meteorology has been known for years to involve complex\u2014even chaotic\u2014behavior. Chaos theory has been so surprising because chaos can be found within almost trivial systems. The logistic map is only a second-degree polynomial; the horseshoe map is piecewise linear.\nGeometrical definition.\nA dynamical system is the tuple formula_10, with formula_11 a manifold (locally a Banach space or Euclidean space), formula_12 the domain for time (non-negative reals, the integers, ...) and \"f\" an evolution rule \"t\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"f\"\u00a0\"t\" (with formula_13) such that \"f\u00a0t\" is a diffeomorphism of the manifold to itself. So, f is a mapping of the time-domain formula_14 into the space of diffeomorphisms of the manifold to itself. In other terms, \"f\"(\"t\") is a diffeomorphism, for every time \"t\" in the domain formula_14 .\nMeasure theoretical definition.\nA dynamical system may be defined formally, as a measure-preserving transformation of a sigma-algebra, the quadruplet (\"X\", \u03a3, \u03bc, \u03c4). Here, \"X\" is a set, and \u03a3 is a sigma-algebra on \"X\", so that the pair (\"X\", \u03a3) is a measurable space. \u03bc is a finite measure on the sigma-algebra, so that the triplet (\"X\", \u03a3, \u03bc) is a probability space. A map \u03c4: \"X\" \u2192 \"X\" is said to be \u03a3-measurable if and only if, for every \u03c3 \u2208 \u03a3, one has formula_16. A map \u03c4 is said to preserve the measure if and only if, for every \u03c3 \u2208 \u03a3, one has formula_17. Combining the above, a map \u03c4 is said to be a measure-preserving transformation of \"X\" , if it is a map from \"X\" to itself, it is \u03a3-measurable, and is measure-preserving. The quadruple (\"X\", \u03a3, \u03bc, \u03c4), for such a \u03c4, is then defined to be a dynamical system.\nThe map \u03c4 embodies the time evolution of the dynamical system. Thus, for discrete dynamical systems the iterates formula_18 for integer \"n\" are studied. For continuous dynamical systems, the map \u03c4 is understood to be a finite time evolution map and the construction is more complicated.\nMultidimensional generalization.\nDynamical systems are defined over a single independent variable, usually thought of as time. A more general class of systems are defined over multiple independent variables and are therefore called multidimensional systems. Such systems are useful for modeling, for example, image processing.\nFurther reading.\nWorks providing a broad coverage:\nIntroductory texts with a unique perspective:\nTextbooks\nPopularizations:"}
{"id": "9088", "revid": "15339170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9088", "title": "Dynamic system", "text": ""}
{"id": "9090", "revid": "1369916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9090", "title": "Dhimmi", "text": " ( \"\", , collectively \"/\" \"the people of the covenant\") is a historical term for non-Muslims living in an Islamic state with legal protection. The word literally means \"protected person\", referring to the state's obligation under \"sharia\" to protect the individual's life, property, as well as freedom of religion, in exchange for loyalty to the state and payment of the \"jizya\" tax, which complemented the \"zakat\", or obligatory alms, paid by the Muslim subjects. \"Dhimmi\" were exempt from certain duties assigned specifically to Muslims, and did not enjoy certain privileges and freedoms reserved for Muslims, but were otherwise equal under the laws of property, contract, and obligation.\nUnder \"sharia\", the \"dhimmi\" communities were usually governed by their own laws in place of some of the laws applicable to the Muslim community. For example, the Jewish community of Medina was allowed to have its own Halakhic courts, and the Ottoman millet system allowed its various dhimmi communities to rule themselves under separate legal courts. These courts did not cover cases that involved religious groups outside of their own communities, or capital offences. \"Dhimmi\" communities were also allowed to engage in certain practices that were usually forbidden for the Muslim community, such as the consumption of alcohol and pork.\nHistorically, dhimmi status was originally applied to Jews, Christians, and Sabians, who are considered to be \"People of the Book\" in Islamic theology. This status later also came to be applied to Zoroastrians, Sikhs, Hindus, Jains, and Buddhists.\nModerate Muslims generally reject the \"dhimma\" system as inappropriate for the age of nation-states and democracies. There is a range of opinions among 20th-century and contemporary Islamic theologians about whether the notion of \"dhimma\" is appropriate for modern times, and, if so, what form it should take in an Islamic state.\nThe \"dhimma contract\".\nBased on Quranic verses and Islamic traditions, \"sharia\" law distinguishes between Muslims, followers of other Abrahamic religions, and Pagans or people belonging to other polytheistic religions. As monotheists, Jews and Christians have traditionally been considered \"People of the Book\", and afforded a special legal status known as \"dhimmi\" derived from a theoretical contract\u2014\"dhimma\" or \"residence in return for taxes\". Islamic legal systems based on \"sharia\" law incorporated the religious laws and courts of Christians, Jews, and Hindus, as seen in the early caliphate, al-Andalus, Indian subcontinent, and the Ottoman Millet system. \nIn Yemenite Jewish sources, a treaty was drafted between Muhammad and his Jewish subjects, known as \"kit\u0101b \u1e0fimmat al-nabi\", written in the 17th year of the Hijra (638 CE), which gave express liberty to the Jews living in Arabia to observe the Sabbath and to grow-out their side-locks, but required them to pay the \"jizya\" (poll-tax) annually for their protection. Muslim governments in the Indus basin readily extended the \"dhimmi\" status to the Hindus and Buddhists of India. Eventually, the largest school of Islamic jurisprudence applied this term to all Non-Muslims living in Muslim lands outside the sacred area surrounding Mecca, Arabia.\nIn medieval Islamic societies, the \"qadi\" (Islamic judge) usually could not interfere in the matters of non-Muslims unless the parties voluntarily chose to be judged according to Islamic law, thus the \"dhimmi\" communities living in Islamic states usually had their own laws independent from the \"sharia\" law, as with the Jews who would have their own rabbinical courts. These courts did not cover cases that involved other religious groups, or capital offences or threats to public order. By the 18th century, however, \"dhimmi\" frequently attended the Ottoman Muslim courts, where cases were taken against them by Muslims, or they took cases against Muslims or other \"dhimmi\". Oaths sworn by \"dhimmi\" in these courts were tailored to their beliefs. Non-Muslims were allowed to engage in certain practices (such as the consumption of alcohol and pork) that were usually forbidden by Islamic law, in point of fact, any Muslim who pours away their wine or forcibly appropriates it is liable to pay compensation. Some Islamic theologians held that Zoroastrian \"self-marriages\", considered incestuous under \"sharia\", should also be tolerated. Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya (1292\u20131350) opined that most scholars of the Hanbali school held that non-Muslims were entitled to such practices, as long as they were not presented to sharia courts and the religious minorities in question held them to be permissible. This ruling was based on the precedent that there were no records of the Islamic prophet Muhammad forbidding such self-marriages among Zoroastrians, despite coming into contact with Zoroastrians and knowing about this practice. Religious minorities were also free to do as they wished in their own homes, provided they did not publicly engage in illicit sexual activity in ways that could threaten public morals.\nThere are parallels for this in Roman and Jewish law. According to law professor H. Patrick Glenn of McGill University, \"[t]oday it is said that the dhimmi are 'excluded from the specifically Muslim privileges, but on the other hand they are excluded from the specifically Muslim duties' while (and here there are clear parallels with western public and private law treatment of aliens\u2014Fremdenrecht, la condition de estrangers), '[f]or the rest, the Muslim and the dhimmi are equal in practically the whole of the law of property and of contracts and obligations'.\" Quoting the Qur'anic statement, \"Let Christians judge according to what We have revealed in the Gospel\", Muhammad Hamidullah writes that Islam decentralized and \"communalized\" law and justice. However, the classical \"dhimma\" contract is no longer enforced. Western influence over the Muslim world has been instrumental in eliminating the restrictions and protections of the \"dhimma\" contract.\nThe dhimma contract and sharia law.\nThe \"dhimma\" contract is an integral part of traditional Islamic \"sharia\" law. From the 9th century AD, the power to interpret and refine law in traditional Islamic societies was in the hands of the scholars (\"ulama\"). This separation of powers served to limit the range of actions available to the ruler, who could not easily decree or reinterpret law independently and expect the continued support of the community. Through succeeding centuries and empires, the balance between the ulema and the rulers shifted and reformed, but the balance of power was never decisively changed. At the beginning of the 19th century, the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution introduced an era of European world hegemony that included the domination of most of the Muslim lands. At the end of the Second World War, the European powers found themselves too weakened to maintain their empires. The wide variety in forms of government, systems of law, attitudes toward modernity and interpretations of sharia are a result of the ensuing drives for independence and modernity in the Muslim world.\nMuslim states, sects, schools of thought and individuals differ as to exactly what sharia law entails. In addition, Muslim states today utilize a spectrum of legal systems. Most states have a mixed system that implements certain aspects of sharia while acknowledging the supremacy of a constitution. A few, such as Turkey, have declared themselves secular. Local and customary laws may take precedence in certain matters, as well. Islamic law is therefore polynormative, and despite several cases of regression in recent years, the trend is towards liberalization. Questions of human rights and the status of minorities cannot be generalized with regards to the Muslim world. They must instead be examined on a case-by-case basis, within specific political and cultural contexts, using perspectives drawn from the historical framework.\nThe end of the dhimma contract.\nThe status of the dhimmi \"was for long accepted with resignation by the Christians and with gratitude by the Jews\" but the rising power of Christendom and the radical ideas of the French Revolution caused a wave of discontent among Christian dhimmis. The continuing and growing pressure from the European powers combined with pressure from Muslim reformers gradually relaxed the inequalities between Muslims and non-Muslims.\nOn 18 February 1856, the Ottoman Reform Edict of 1856 (Hatt-i Humayan) was issued, building upon the 1839 edict. It came about partly as a result of pressure from and the efforts of the ambassadors of Great Britain, France, and Austria, whose respective countries were needed as allies in the Crimean War. It again proclaimed the principle of equality between Muslims and non-Muslims, and produced many specific reforms to this end. For example, the jizya tax was abolished and non-Muslims were allowed to join the army.\nDhimmi communities.\nJews and Christians living under early Muslim rule were considered dhimmis, a status that was later also extended to other non-Muslims like Hindus and Buddhists. They were allowed to \"practise their religion, subject to certain conditions, and to enjoy a measure of communal autonomy\" and guaranteed their personal safety and security of property, in return for paying tribute and acknowledging Muslim rule. Islamic law and custom prohibited the enslavement of free dhimmis within lands under Islamic rule. Taxation from the perspective of dhimmis who came under the Muslim rule, was \"a concrete continuation of the taxes paid to earlier regimes\" (but lower under the Muslim rule). They were also exempted from the zakat tax paid by Muslims. The dhimmi communities living in Islamic states had their own laws independent from the Sharia law, such as the Jews who had their own Halakhic courts. The dhimmi communities had their own leaders, courts, personal and religious laws, and \"generally speaking, Muslim tolerance of unbelievers was far better than anything available in Christendom, until the rise of secularism in the 17th century\". \"Muslims guaranteed freedom of worship and livelihood, provided that they remained loyal to the Muslim state and paid a poll tax\". \"Muslim governments appointed Christian and Jewish professionals to their bureaucracies\", and thus, Christians and Jews \"contributed to the making of the Islamic civilization\".\nHowever, dhimmis faced social and symbolic restrictions, and a pattern of stricter, then more lax, enforcement developed over time. Marshall Hodgson, a historian of Islam, writes that during the era of the High Caliphate (7th\u201313th Centuries), zealous Shariah-minded Muslims gladly elaborated their code of symbolic restrictions on the dhimmis.\nFrom an Islamic legal perspective, the pledge of protection granted dhimmis the freedom to practice their religion and spared them forced conversions. The dhimmis also served a variety of useful purposes, mostly economic, which was another point of concern to jurists. Religious minorities were free to do whatever they wished in their own homes, but could not \"publicly engage in illicit sex in ways that threaten public morals\". In some cases, religious practices that Muslims found repugnant were allowed. One example was the Zoroastrian practice of incestuous \"self-marriage\" where a man could marry his mother, sister or daughter. According to the famous Islamic legal scholar Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya (1292\u20131350), non-Muslims had the right to engage in such religious practices even if it offended Muslims, under the conditions that such cases not be presented to Islamic Sharia courts and that these religious minorities believed that the practice in question is permissible according to their religion. This ruling was based on the precedent that Muhammad did not forbid such self-marriages among Zoroastrians despite coming in contact with them and having knowledge of their practices.\nThe Arabs generally established garrisons outside towns in the conquered territories, and had little interaction with the local dhimmi populations for purposes other than the collection of taxes. The conquered Christian, Jewish, Mazdean and Buddhist communities were otherwise left to lead their lives as before. \nChristians.\nAccording to historians Lewis and Stillman, local Christians in Syria, Iraq, and Egypt were non-Chalcedonians and many may have felt better off under early Muslim rule than under that of the Byzantine Orthodox of Constantinople. In 1095, Pope Urban II urged western European Christians to come to the aid of the Christians of Palestine. The subsequent Crusades brought Roman Catholic Christians into contact with Orthodox Christians whose beliefs they discovered to differ from their own perhaps more than they had realized, and whose position under the rule of the Muslim Fatimid Caliphate was less uncomfortable than had been supposed. Consequently, the Eastern Christians provided perhaps less support to the Crusaders than had been expected. When the Arab East came under Ottoman rule in the 16th century, Christian populations and fortunes rebounded significantly. The Ottomans had long experience dealing with Christian and Jewish minorities, and were more tolerant towards religious minorities than the former Muslim rulers, the Mamluks of Egypt.\nHowever, Christians living under Islamic rule have suffered certain legal disadvantages and at times persecution. In the Ottoman Empire, in accordance with the \"dhimmi\" system implemented in Muslim countries, they, like all other Christians and also Jews, were accorded certain freedoms. The dhimmi system in the Ottoman Empire was largely based upon the Pact of Umar. The client status established the rights of the non-Muslims to property, livelihood and freedom of worship but they were in essence treated as second-class citizens in the empire and referred to in Turkish as \"gavours\", a pejorative word meaning \"infidel\" or \"unbeliever\". The clause of the Pact of Umar which prohibited non-Muslims from building new places of worship was historically imposed on some communities of the Ottoman Empire and ignored in other cases, at discretion of the local authorities. Although there were no laws mandating religious ghettos, this led to non-Muslim communities being clustered around existing houses of worship.\nIn addition to other legal limitations, Christians were not considered equals to Muslims and several prohibitions were placed on them. Their testimony against Muslims by Christians and Jews was inadmissible in courts of law wherein a Muslim could be punished; this meant that their testimony could only be considered in commercial cases. They were forbidden to carry weapons or ride atop horses and camels. Their houses could not overlook those of Muslims; and their religious practices were severely circumscribed (e.g., the ringing of church bells was strictly forbidden).\nJews.\nBecause the early Islamic conquests initially preserved much of the existing administrative machinery and culture, in many territories they amounted to little more than a change of rulers for the subject populations, which \"brought peace to peoples demoralized and disaffected by the casualties and heavy taxation that resulted from the years of Byzantine-Persian warfare\".\nMar\u00eda Rosa Menocal, argues that the Jewish dhimmis living under the caliphate, while allowed fewer rights than Muslims, were still better off than in the Christian parts of Europe. Jews from other parts of Europe made their way to al-Andalus, where in parallel to Christian sects regarded as heretical by Catholic Europe, they were not just tolerated, but where opportunities to practice faith and trade were open without restriction save for the prohibitions on proselytization.\nBernard Lewis states:\nProfessor of Jewish medieval history at Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Hayim Hillel Ben-Sasson, notes:\nAccording to the French historian Claude Cahen, Islam has \"shown more toleration than Europe towards the Jews who remained in Muslim lands.\"\nComparing the treatment of Jews in the medieval Islamic world and medieval Christian Europe, Mark R. Cohen notes that, in contrast to Jews in Christian Europe, the \"Jews in Islam were well integrated into the economic life of the larger society\", and that they were allowed to practice their religion more freely than they could do in Christian Europe.\nAccording to the scholar Mordechai Zaken, tribal chieftains (also known as aghas) in tribal Muslim societies such as the Kurdish society in Kurdistan would tax their Jewish subjects. The Jews were in fact civilians protected by their chieftains in and around their communities; in return they paid part of their harvest as dues, and contributed their skills and services to their patron chieftain.\nMaimonides appears to have modeled his conception of the status of peoples who submit to Israel in its wars on the Islamic legislation for dhimmis.\n'The servitude they are to accept is that they are to be humiliated (\"nivzim\") and put down at the lowest (social) status. And they shall not be able to lift their heads among Jews, but they shall being (\"sic\") subjugated (\"kvushim\"). They shall not be appointed (\"ve-lo-yitmanu\") to any office where they would have authority over Jews for any reason whatsoever. The tribute to be received from them is that they are to be ready for the service of the king with their bodies and with their property.'\nHindus and Buddhists.\nBy the 10th century, the Turks of Central Asia had invaded the Indic plains, and brought Islam to Northwestern parts of India. At the end of the 12th century, the Muslims advanced quickly into the Ganges Plain. In one decade, a Muslim army led by Turkic slaves consolidated resistance around Lahore and brought northern India, as far as Bengal, under Muslim rule. From these Turkic slaves would come sultans, including the founder of the sultanate of Delhi. By the 15th century, major parts of Northern India was ruled by Muslim rulers, mostly descended from invaders. In the 16th century, India came under the influence of the Mughals. Babur, the first ruler of the Mughal empire, established a foothold in the north which paved the way for further expansion by his successors. Although the Mughal emperor Akbar has been described as a universalist, most Mughal emperors were oppressive of native Hindu, Buddhist and later Sikh populations. Aurangzeb specifically was inclined towards a highly fundamentalist approach.\nThe Muslim rulers from Turks to Mughals retained their Islamic identities, and made various attempts at conversion and subjugation of native Hindu populations. Due to the invasion by the Muslim rulers, vandalism, and outright destruction of temples happened. Will Durant called the Muslim conquest of India \"probably the bloodiest story in history\".\nRestrictions.\nThere were a number of restrictions on dhimmis. In a modern sense the dhimmis would be described as second-class citizens.\nAlthough \"dhimmis\" were allowed to perform their religious rituals, they were obliged to do so in a manner not conspicuous to Muslims. Loud prayers were forbidden, as were the ringing of church bells and the blowing of the shofar. They were also not allowed to build or repair churches without Muslim consent. Moreover, dhimmis were not allowed to seek converts among Muslims. In the Mamluk Egypt, where non-Mamluk Muslims were not allowed to ride horses and camels, dhimmis were prohibited even from riding donkeys inside cities. Sometimes, Muslim rulers issued regulations requiring dhimmis to attach distinctive signs to their houses.\nMost of the restrictions were social and symbolic in nature, and a pattern of stricter, then more lax, enforcement developed over time. The major financial disabilities of the dhimmi were the jizya poll tax and the fact dhimmis and Muslims could not inherit from each other. That would create an incentive to convert if someone from the family had already converted. Ira M. Lapidus states that the \"payment of the poll tax seems to have been regular, but other obligations were inconsistently enforced and did not prevent many non-Muslims from being important political, business, and scholarly figures. In the late ninth and early tenth centuries, Jewish bankers and financiers were important at the 'Abbasid court.\" The jurists and scholars of Islamic sharia law called for humane treatment of the dhimmis.\nJizya tax.\nPayment of the \"jizya\" obligated Muslim authorities to protect dhimmis in civil and military matters. Sura 9 (At-Tawba), verse 29 stipulates that \"jizya\" be exacted from non-Muslims as a condition required for jihad to cease. Failure to pay the \"jizya\" could result in the pledge of protection of a dhimmi's life and property becoming void, with the dhimmi facing the alternatives of conversion, enslavement, death or imprisonment, as advocated by Abu Yusuf, the chief qadi (Islamic judge) of Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid who ruled over much of modern-day Iraq.\nLewis states there are varying opinions among scholars as to how much of a burden jizya was. According to Norman Stillman: \"\"jizya\" and \"kharaj\" were a \"crushing burden for the non-Muslim peasantry who eked out a bare living in a subsistence economy.\" Both agree that ultimately, the additional taxation on non-Muslims was a critical factor that drove many dhimmis to leave their religion and accept Islam. However, in some regions the jizya on populations was significantly lower than the zakat, meaning dhimmi populations maintained an economic advantage. According to Cohen, taxation, from the perspective of dhimmis who came under Muslim rule, was \"a concrete continuation of the taxes paid to earlier regimes\". Lewis observes that the change from Byzantine to Arab rule was welcomed by many among the dhimmis who found the new yoke far lighter than the old, both in taxation and in other matters, and that some, even among the Christians of Syria and Egypt, preferred the rule of Islam to that of Byzantines. Montgomery Watt states, \"the Christians were probably better off as dhimmis under Muslim-Arab rulers than they had been under the Byzantine Greeks.\" In some places, for example Egypt, the jizya was a tax incentive for Christians to convert to Islam.\nThe importance of dhimmis as a source of revenue for the Rashidun Caliphate is illustrated in a letter ascribed to Umar I and cited by Abu Yusuf: \"if we take dhimmis and share them out, what will be left for the Muslims who come after us? By God, Muslims would not find a man to talk to and profit from his labors.\"\nIslamic jurists required adult, free, healthy males among the dhimma community to pay the jizya, while exempting women, children, the elderly, slaves, those affected by mental or physical handicaps, and travelers who did not settle in Muslim lands.\nThe early Islamic scholars took a relatively humane and practical attitude towards the collection of \"jizya\", compared to the 11th century commentators writing when Islam was under threat both at home and abroad.\nThe jurist Abu Yusuf, the chief judge of the caliph Harun al-Rashid, rules as follows regarding the manner of collecting the jizya\nIn the border provinces, dhimmis were sometimes recruited for military operations. In such cases, they were exempted from jizya for the year of service.\nAdministration of law.\nReligious pluralism existed in medieval Islamic law and ethics. The religious laws and courts of other religions, including Christianity, Judaism and Hinduism, were usually accommodated within the Islamic legal framework, as exemplified in the Caliphate, Al-Andalus, Ottoman Empire and Indian subcontinent. In medieval Islamic societies, the qadi (Islamic judge) usually could not interfere in the matters of non-Muslims unless the parties voluntarily chose to be judged according to Islamic law. The dhimmi communities living in Islamic states usually had their own laws independent from the Sharia law, such as the Jews who had their own Halakha courts.\nDhimmis were allowed to operate their own courts following their own legal systems. However, dhimmis frequently attended the Muslim courts in order to record property and business transactions within their own communities. Cases were taken out against Muslims, against other dhimmis and even against members of the dhimmi's own family. Dhimmis often took cases relating to marriage, divorce or inheritance to the Muslim courts so these cases would be decided under sharia law. Oaths sworn by dhimmis in the Muslim courts were sometimes the same as the oaths taken by Muslims, sometimes tailored to the dhimmis' beliefs.\nMuslim men could generally marry dhimmi women who are considered People of the Book, however Islamic jurists rejected the possibility any non-Muslim man might marry a Muslim woman. Bernard Lewis notes that \"similar position existed under the laws of Byzantine Empire, according to which a Christian could marry a Jewish woman, but a Jew could not marry a Christian woman under pain of death\".\nRelevant texts.\nQuranic verses as a basis for Islamic policies toward dhimmis.\nLewis states\nHadith.\nA hadith by Muhammad, \"Whoever killed a \"Mu'ahid\" (a person who is granted the pledge of protection by the Muslims) shall not smell the fragrance of Paradise though its fragrance can be smelt at a distance of forty years (of traveling).\", is considered to be a foundation for the protection of the People of the Book in Muslim ruled countries. Anwar Shah Kashmiri writes in his commentary on Sahih al-Bukhari \"Fayd al-Bari\" on this hadith: \"You know the gravity of sin for killing a Muslim, for its odiousness has reached the point of disbelief, and it necessitates that [the killer abides in Hell] forever. As for killing a non-Muslim citizen [mu'ahid], it is similarly no small matter, for the one who does it will not smell the fragrance of Paradise.\"\nA similar hadith in regard to the status of the dhimmis: \"Whoever wrongs one with whom a compact (treaty) has been made \"[i.e., a dhimmi]\" and lays on him a burden beyond his strength, I will be his accuser.\"\nConstitution of Medina.\nThe Constitution of Medina, a formal agreement between Muhammad and all the significant tribes and families of Medina (including Muslims, Jews and pagans), declared that non-Muslims in the Ummah had the following rights:\nKhaybar agreement.\nA precedent for the dhimma contract was established with the agreement between Muhammad and the Jews after the Battle of Khaybar, an oasis near Medina. Khaybar was the first territory attacked and conquered by Muslims. When the Jews of Khaybar surrendered to Muhammad after a siege, Muhammad allowed them to remain in Khaybar in return for handing over to the Muslims one half their annual produce.\nPact of Umar.\nThe Pact of Umar, traditionally believed to be between caliph Umar and the conquered Jerusalem Christians in the seventh century, was another source of regulations pertaining to dhimmis. However, Western orientalists doubt the authenticity of the pact, arguing it is usually the victors and not the vanquished who impose rather than propose, the terms of peace, and that it is highly unlikely that the people who spoke no Arabic and knew nothing of Islam could draft such a document. Academic historians believe the Pact of Umar in the form it is known today was a product of later jurists who attributed it to Umar in order to lend greater authority to their own opinions. The similarities between the Pact of Umar and the Theodosian and Justinian Codes of the Eastern Roman Empire suggest that perhaps much of the Pact of Umar was borrowed from these earlier codes by later Islamic jurists. At least some of the clauses of the pact mirror the measures first introduced by the Umayyad caliph Umar II or by the early Abbasid caliphs.\nCultural interactions and cultural differences.\nDuring the Middle Ages, local associations known as \"futuwwa\" clubs developed across the Islamic lands. There were usually several futuwwah in each town. These clubs catered to varying interests, primarily sports, and might involve distinctive manners of dress and custom. They were known for their hospitality, idealism and loyalty to the group. They often had a militaristic aspect, purportedly for the mutual protection of the membership. These clubs commonly crossed social strata, including among their membership local notables, dhimmi and slaves \u2013 to the exclusion of those associated with the local ruler, or amir.\nMuslims and Jews were sometimes partners in trade, with the Muslim taking days off on Fridays and Jews taking off on Saturdays.\nAndrew Wheatcroft describes how some social customs such as different conceptions of dirt and cleanliness made it difficult for the religious communities to live close to each other, either under Muslim or under Christian rule.\nIn modern times.\nThe dhimma and the jizya poll tax are no longer imposed in Muslim majority countries. In the 21st century, jizya is widely regarded as being at odds with contemporary secular conceptions of citizens' civil rights and equality before the law, although there have been occasional reports of religious minorities in conflict zones and areas subject to political instability being forced to pay jizya.\nIn 2009 it was claimed that a group of militants that referred to themselves as the Taliban imposed the \"jizya\" on Pakistan's minority Sikh community after occupying some of their homes and kidnapping a Sikh leader.\nAs late as 2013, in Egypt \"jizya\" was reportedly being imposed by the Muslim Brotherhood on 15,000 Christian Copts of Dalga village.\nIn February 2014, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) announced that it intended to extract jizya from Christians in the city of Raqqa, Syria, which it controlled at the time. Christians who refused to accept the dhimma contract and pay the tax were to have to either convert to Islam, leave or be executed. Wealthy Christians would have to pay half an ounce of gold, the equivalent of $664 twice a year; middle-class Christians were to have to pay half that amount and poorer ones were to be charged one-fourth that amount. In June, 2014 the Institute for the Study of War reported that ISIL claims to have collected jizya and fay. On 18 July 2014 ISIL ordered the Christians in Mosul to accept the dhimma contract and pay the jizya or convert to Islam. If they refused to accept either of the options they would be killed."}
{"id": "9091", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9091", "title": "Doctor V64", "text": "The Doctor V64 (also referred to simply as the V64) is a development and backup device made by Bung Enterprises Ltd that is used in conjunction with the Nintendo 64. The Doctor V64 also had the ability to play Video CDs, audio CDs and had an option for applying stereo 3D effects to the audio.\nHistory.\nThe V64 came out in 1996 and was priced around $450 USD. Some third party developers used a number of V64s in their development process. In comparison the Partner N64 development kit sold by Nintendo, manufactured by Silicon Graphics, was an expensive development machine. The CPU of the V64 is a 6502 chip (the CPU from the Nintendo Entertainment System); the operating system is stored in the BIOS chip. It is likely that Bung reused most of the design of their earlier NES clones in the Doctor V64.\nThe V64 unit contains a CD-ROM drive which sits underneath the Nintendo 64 and plugs into the expansion slot on the underside of the Nintendo 64. The expansion slot is essentially a mirror image of the cartridge slot on the top of the unit, with the same electrical connections, thus the Nintendo 64 reads data from the Doctor V64 in the same manner as it would from a cartridge plugged into the normal slot.\nUsing the V64 involved the solution of two problems: how to boot a game and how to save. In order to get around Nintendo's lockout chip, when using the Doctor V64 a game cartridge is plugged into the Nintendo 64 through an adaptor which connects only the lockout chip. The game cart used for operation had to contain the same lockout chip used by the game backup. The second problem concerned saving progress. Most N64 games saved to the cart itself instead of external memory cards. If the player wanted to keep their progress then the cartridge used had to have the same type of non-volatile memory hardware.\nFollowing the Doctor V64's success, Bung released the Doctor V64 Jr. in December 1998. This was a cost-efficient condensed version of the original V64. The V64jr had no CD drive and plugged into the normal cartridge slot on the top of the Nintendo 64. Data was loaded into the V64jr's battery-backed RAM from a PC via a parallel port connection. The V64Jr had up to 512 megabits (64 MB) of memory storage. At the time this was done to provide for future Nintendo 64 carts that employed larger memory storage. The prohibitive high costs associated with ordering large storage carts kept this occurrence at a minimum. Only a handful of 512 megabit games were released for the Nintendo 64 system.\nDuring the N64's lifetime, Nintendo made one model revision which made the serial port area smaller. This slight change in the N64's plastic casing made the connection to the Doctor V64 difficult to achieve without user modification. This revision may have been a direct reaction of Nintendo to discourage the use of V64 devices. It also explains why Bung decided to drop the use of this port in the later V64Jr models.\nThe Doctor V64 could be used to read the data from a game cartridge and transfer the data to a PC via the parallel port. This allowed developers and homebrew programmers to upload their game images to the Doctor V64 without having to create a CD backup each time. It also allowed users to upload game images taken from the Internet.\nPromotions.\nIn 1998 and 1999, there was a homebrew competition known as \"Presence of Mind\" (POM), an N64 demo competition led by dextrose.com. The contest consisted in submitting a user developed N64 program, game or utility. Bung Enterprises promoted the event and supplied prizes (usually Doctor V64 related accessories). Though a contest was planned for 2000 the interest in the N64 was already fading and so did the event. POM contest demo entries can still be found on the Internet.\nLegal issues.\nThe Doctor V64 unit was the first commercially available backup device for the Nintendo 64 unit. Though the unit was sold as a development machine it could be modified to enable the creation and use of commercial game backups. Unlike official development units, the purchase of V64s was not restricted to software companies only. For this reason the unit became a popular choice among those looking to proliferate unlicensed copies of games.\nOriginal Doctor V64 units sold by Bung did not allow the playing of backups. A person would have to modify the unit by themselves in order to make it backup friendly. This usually required a user to download and install a modified Doctor V64 BIOS. Additionally the cartridge adapter had to be opened and soldered in order to allow the operational procedure described early on this article. Though Bung never sold backup enabled V64s many re-sellers would modify the units themselves.\nNintendo made many legal efforts worldwide in order to stop the sale of Doctor V64 units. They sued Bung directly as well as specific store retailers in Europe and North America for copyright infringement. Eventually Nintendo managed to have the courts prohibit the sale of Doctor V64 units in the United States.\nMain menu.\nAs with many backup devices of its time, the Doctor V64 implemented text based menu driven screens. The menus were spartan and purely functional in nature. Utilizing the buttons on the V64 unit a user would navigate the menus and issue commands. It was mainly designed for game developers even though it is possible to backup cartridges with it (through the use of an unofficial V64 bios). Some of the menu items related to game backups were removed from the V64's BIOS near the end of its life due to pressure from Nintendo. These items are only available by obtaining a patched V64 BIOS."}
{"id": "9092", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9092", "title": "Dragonball Z", "text": ""}
{"id": "9093", "revid": "1009938676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9093", "title": "De Havilland Mosquito", "text": "The de Havilland DH.98 Mosquito is a British twin-engined, shoulder-winged multirole combat aircraft, introduced during the Second World War. Unusual in that its frame was constructed mostly of wood, it was nicknamed the \"Wooden Wonder\", or \"Mossie\". Lord Beaverbrook, Minister of Aircraft Production, nicknamed it \"Freeman's Folly\", alluding to Air Chief Marshal Sir Wilfrid Freeman, who defended Geoffrey de Havilland and his design concept against orders to scrap the project. In 1941, it was one of the fastest operational aircraft in the world.\nOriginally conceived as an unarmed fast bomber, the Mosquito's use evolved during the war into many roles, including low- to medium-altitude daytime tactical bomber, high-altitude night bomber, pathfinder, day or night fighter, fighter-bomber, intruder, maritime strike, and photo-reconnaissance aircraft. It was also used by the British Overseas Airways Corporation as a fast transport to carry small, high-value cargo to and from neutral countries through enemy-controlled airspace. The crew of two, pilot and navigator, sat side by side. A single passenger could ride in the aircraft's bomb bay when necessary.\nThe Mosquito FBVI was often flown in special raids, such as Operation Jericho (an attack on Amiens Prison in early 1944), and precision attacks against military intelligence, security, and police facilities (such as Gestapo headquarters). On 30 January 1943, the 10th anniversary of the Nazis' seizure of power, a morning Mosquito attack knocked out the main Berlin broadcasting station while Hermann G\u00f6ring was speaking, taking his speech off the air.\nThe Mosquito flew with the Royal Air Force (RAF) and other air forces in the European, Mediterranean and Italian theatres. The Mosquito was also operated by the RAF in the Southeast Asian theatre and by the Royal Australian Air Force based in the Halmaheras and Borneo during the Pacific War. During the 1950s, the RAF replaced the Mosquito with the jet-powered English Electric Canberra.\nDevelopment.\nBy the early to mid-1930s, de Havilland had built a reputation for innovative high-speed aircraft with the DH.88 Comet racer. Later, the DH.91 Albatross airliner pioneered the composite wood construction used for the Mosquito. The 22-passenger Albatross could cruise at at , faster than the Handley Page H.P.42 and other biplanes it was replacing. The wooden monocoque construction not only saved weight and compensated for the low power of the de Havilland Gipsy Twelve engines used by this aircraft, but also simplified production and reduced construction time.\nAir Ministry bomber requirements and concepts.\nOn 8 September 1936, the British Air Ministry issued Specification P.13/36, which called for a twin-engined, medium bomber capable of carrying a bomb load of for with a maximum speed of at ; a maximum bomb load of that could be carried over shorter ranges was also specified. Aviation firms entered heavy designs with new high-powered engines and multiple defensive turrets, leading to the production of the Avro Manchester and Handley Page Halifax.\nIn May 1937, as a comparison to P.13/36, George Volkert, the chief designer of Handley Page, put forward the concept of a fast, unarmed bomber. In 20 pages, Volkert planned an aerodynamically clean, medium bomber to carry of bombs at a cruising speed of . Support existed in the RAF and Air Ministry; Captain R N Liptrot, Research Director Aircraft 3, appraised Volkert's design, calculating that its top speed would exceed that of the new Supermarine Spitfire, but counter-arguments held that although such a design had merit, it would not necessarily be faster than enemy fighters for long. The ministry was also considering using non-strategic materials for aircraft production, which, in 1938, had led to specification B.9/38 and the Armstrong Whitworth Albemarle medium bomber, largely constructed from spruce and plywood attached to a steel-tube frame. The idea of a small, fast bomber gained support at a much earlier stage than is sometimes acknowledged, though the Air Ministry likely envisaged it using light alloy components.\nInception of the de Havilland fast bomber.\nBased on his experience with the Albatross, Geoffrey de Havilland believed that a bomber with a good aerodynamic design and smooth, minimal skin area, would exceed the P.13/36 specification. Furthermore, adapting the Albatross principles could save time. In April 1938, performance estimates were produced for a twin Rolls-Royce Merlin-powered DH.91, with the Bristol Hercules (radial engine) and Napier Sabre (H-engine) as alternatives. On 7 July 1938, de Havilland wrote to Air Marshal Wilfrid Freeman, the Air Council's member for Research and Development, discussing the specification and arguing that in war, shortages of aluminium and steel would occur, but supplies of wood-based products were \"adequate.\" Although inferior in tension, the strength-to-weight ratio of wood is equal to or better than light alloys or steel, hence this approach was feasible.\nA follow-up letter to Freeman on 27 July said that the P.13/36 specification could not be met by a twin Merlin-powered aircraft and either the top speed or load capacity would be compromised, depending on which was paramount. For example, a larger, slower, turret-armed aircraft would have a range of carrying a 4,000\u00a0lb bomb load, with a maximum of at , and a cruising speed of at . De Havilland believed that a compromise, including eliminating surplus equipment, would improve matters. On 4 October 1938, de Havilland projected the performance of another design based on the Albatross, powered by two Merlin\u00a0Xs, with a three-man crew and six or eight forward-firing guns, plus one or two manually operated guns and a tail turret. Based on a total loaded weight of , it would have a top speed of and cruising speed of at .\nStill believing this could be improved, and after examining more concepts based on the Albatross and the new all-metal DH.95 Flamingo, de Havilland settled on designing a new aircraft that would be aerodynamically clean, wooden, and powered by the Merlin, which offered substantial future development. The new design would be faster than foreseeable enemy fighter aircraft, and could dispense with a defensive armament, which would slow it and make interception or losses to anti-aircraft guns more likely. Instead, high speed and good manoeuverability would make evading fighters and ground fire easier. The lack of turrets simplified production, reduced drag and reduced production time, with a delivery rate far in advance of competing designs. Without armament, the crew could be reduced to a pilot and navigator. Whereas contemporary RAF design philosophy favoured well-armed heavy bombers, this mode of design was more akin to the German philosophy of the \"Schnellbomber\". At a meeting in early October 1938 with Geoffrey de Havilland and Charles Walker (de Havilland's chief engineer), the Air Ministry showed little interest, and instead asked de Havilland to build wings for other bombers as a subcontractor.\nBy September 1939, de Havilland had produced preliminary estimates for single- and twin-engined variations of light-bomber designs using different engines, speculating on the effects of defensive armament on their designs. One design, completed on 6 September, was for an aircraft powered by a single Napier Sabre, with a wingspan of and capable of carrying a bomb load . On 20 September, in another letter to Wilfrid Freeman, de Havilland wrote \"...we believe that we could produce a twin-engine[d] bomber which would have a performance so outstanding that little defensive equipment would be needed.\" By 4 October, work had progressed to a twin-engined light bomber with a wingspan of and powered by Merlin or Griffon engines, the Merlin favoured because of availability. On 7 October 1939, a month into the war, the nucleus of a design team under Eric Bishop moved to the security and secrecy of Salisbury Hall to work on what was later known as the DH.98. For more versatility, Bishop made provision for four 20\u00a0mm cannon in the forward half of the bomb bay, under the cockpit, firing via blast tubes and troughs under the fuselage.\nThe DH.98 was too radical for the ministry, which wanted a heavily armed, multi-role aircraft, combining medium bomber, reconnaissance, and general-purpose roles, that was also capable of carrying torpedoes. With the outbreak of war, the ministry became more receptive, but was still sceptical about an unarmed bomber. It was thought the Germans would produce fighters that were faster than had been expected. and suggested the incorporation of two forward- and two rear-firing machine guns for defence. The ministry also opposed a two-man bomber, wanting at least a third crewman to reduce the work of the others on long flights. The Air Council added further requirements such as remotely controlled guns, a top speed of at 15,000\u00a0ft on two-thirds engine power, and a range of with a 4,000-lb bomb load. To appease the ministry, de Havilland built mock-ups with a gun turret just aft of the cockpit, but apart from this compromise, de Havilland made no changes.\nOn 12 November, at a meeting considering fast-bomber ideas put forward by de Havilland, Blackburn, and Bristol, Air Marshal Freeman directed de Havilland to produce a fast aircraft, powered initially by Merlin engines, with options of using progressively more powerful engines, including the Rolls-Royce Griffon and the Napier Sabre. Although estimates were presented for a slightly larger Griffon-powered aircraft, armed with a four-gun tail turret, Freeman got the requirement for defensive weapons dropped, and a draft requirement was raised calling for a high-speed, light-reconnaissance bomber capable of at 18,000\u00a0ft.\nOn 12 December, the Vice-Chief of the Air Staff, Director General of Research and Development, and the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief (AOC-in-C) of RAF Bomber Command met to finalise the design and decide how to fit it into the RAF's aims. The AOC-in-C would not accept an unarmed bomber, but insisted on its suitability for reconnaissance missions with F8 or F24 cameras. After company representatives, the ministry, and the RAF's operational commands examined a full-scale mock-up at Hatfield on 29 December 1939, the project received backing. This was confirmed on 1 January 1940, when Freeman chaired a meeting with Geoffrey de Havilland, John Buchanan (Deputy of Aircraft Production), and John Connolly (Buchanan's chief of staff). De Havilland claimed the DH.98 was the \"fastest bomber in the world...it must be useful\". Freeman supported it for RAF service, ordering a single prototype for an unarmed bomber to specification B.1/40/dh, which called for a light bomber/reconnaissance aircraft powered by two Rolls-Royce RM3SM (an early designation for the Merlin 21) with ducted radiators, capable of carrying a bomb load. The aircraft was to have a speed of at and a cruising speed of at with a range of at on full tanks. Maximum service ceiling was to be .\nOn 1 March 1940, Air Marshal Roderic Hill issued a contract under Specification B.1/40, for 50 bomber-reconnaissance variants of the DH.98; this contract included the prototype, which was given the factory serial \"E-0234\". In May 1940, specification F.21/40 was issued, calling for a long-range fighter armed with four 20\u00a0mm cannon and four .303 machine guns in the nose, after which de Havilland was authorised to build a prototype of a fighter version of the DH.98. After debate, that this prototype, given the military serial number \"W4052\", was decided to carry airborne interception (AI) Mk\u00a0IV equipment as a day and night fighter. By June 1940, the DH.98 had been named \"Mosquito\". Having the fighter variant kept the Mosquito project alive, as doubts remained within the government and Air Ministry regarding the usefulness of an unarmed bomber, even after the prototype had shown its capabilities.\nProject Mosquito.\nWith design of the DH.98 started, mock-ups were built, the most detailed at Salisbury Hall, where \"E-0234\" was later constructed. Initially, the concept was for the crew to be enclosed in the fuselage behind a transparent nose (similar to the Bristol Blenheim or Heinkel He 111H), but this was quickly altered to a more solid nose with a conventional canopy.\nWork was cancelled again after the Battle of Dunkirk, when Lord Beaverbrook, as Minister of Aircraft Production, decided no production capacity remained for aircraft like the DH.98, which was not expected to be in service until early 1942. Beaverbrook told Air Vice-Marshal Freeman that work on the project should stop, but he did not issue a specific instruction, and Freeman ignored the request. In June 1940, however, Lord Beaverbrook and the Air Staff ordered that production should concentrate on five existing types, namely the Supermarine Spitfire, Hawker Hurricane fighter, Vickers Wellington, Armstrong-Whitworth Whitley, and Bristol Blenheim bombers. Work on the DH.98 prototype stopped. Apparently, the project shut down when the design team were denied materials for the prototype.\nThe Mosquito was only reinstated as a priority in July 1940, after de Havilland's general manager, L.C.L. Murray, promised Lord Beaverbrook 50 Mosquitos by December 1941. This was only after Beaverbrook was satisfied that Mosquito production would not hinder de Havilland's primary work of producing Tiger Moth and Airspeed Oxford trainers, repairing Hurricanes, and manufacturing Merlin engines under licence. In promising Beaverbrook such a number by the end of 1941, de Havilland was taking a gamble, because they were unlikely to be built in such a limited time. As it transpired, only 20 aircraft were built in 1941, but the other 30 were delivered by mid-March 1942. During the Battle of Britain, interruptions to production due to air raid warnings caused nearly a third of de Havilland's factory time to be lost. Nevertheless, work on the prototype went ahead quickly at Salisbury Hall since \"E-0234\" was completed by November 1940.\nIn the aftermath of the Battle of Britain, the original order was changed to 20 bomber variants and 30 fighters. Whether the fighter version should have dual or single controls, or should carry a turret, was still uncertain, so three prototypes were built: \"W4052\", \"W4053\", and \"W4073\". The second and third, both turret armed, were later disarmed, to become the prototypes for the T.III trainer. This caused some delays, since half-built wing components had to be strengthened for the required higher combat loading. The nose sections also had to be changed from a design with a clear perspex bomb-aimer's position, to one with a solid nose housing four .303 machine guns and their ammunition.\nPrototypes and test flights.\nOn 3 November 1940, the prototype aircraft, painted in \"prototype yellow\" and still coded \"E-0234\", was dismantled, transported by road to Hatfield and placed in a small, blast-proof assembly building. Two Merlin 21 two-speed, single-stage supercharged engines were installed, driving three-bladed de Havilland Hydromatic constant-speed controllable-pitch propellers. Engine runs were made on 19 November. On 24 November, taxiing trials were carried out by Geoffrey de Havilland Jr., the de Havilland test pilot. On 25 November, the aircraft made its first flight, piloted by de Havilland Jr., accompanied by John E. Walker, the chief engine installation designer.\nFor this maiden flight, \"E-0234\", weighing , took off from the grass airstrip at the Hatfield site. The takeoff was reported as \"straightforward and easy\" and the undercarriage was not retracted until a considerable altitude was attained. The aircraft reached , with the only problem being the undercarriage doors \u2013 which were operated by bungee cords attached to the main undercarriage legs \u2013 that remained open by some at that speed. This problem persisted for some time. The left wing of \"E-0234\" also had a tendency to drag to port slightly, so a rigging adjustment, i.e., a slight change in the angle of the wing, was carried out before further flights.\nOn 5 December 1940, the prototype, with the military serial number \"W4050\", experienced tail buffeting at speeds between . The pilot noticed this most in the control column, with handling becoming more difficult. During testing on 10 December, wool tufts were attached to suspect areas to investigate the direction of airflow. The conclusion was that the airflow separating from the rear section of the inner engine nacelles was disturbed, leading to a localised stall and the disturbed airflow was striking the tailplane, causing buffeting. To smooth the air flow and deflect it from forcefully striking the tailplane, nonretractable slots fitted to the inner engine nacelles and to the leading edge of the tailplane were tested. These slots and wing-root fairings fitted to the forward fuselage and leading edge of the radiator intakes, stopped some of the vibration experienced, but did not cure the tailplane buffeting.\nIn February 1941, buffeting was eliminated by incorporating triangular fillets on the trailing edge of the wings and lengthening the nacelles, the trailing edge of which curved up to fair into the fillet some behind the wing's trailing edge; this meant the flaps had to be divided into inboard and outboard sections. With the buffeting problems largely resolved, John Cunningham flew \"W4050\" on 9 February 1941. He was greatly impressed by the \"lightness of the controls and generally pleasant handling characteristics\". Cunningham concluded that when the type was fitted with AI equipment, it might replace the Bristol Beaufighter night fighter.\nDuring its trials on 16 January 1941, \"W4050\" outpaced a Spitfire at . The original estimates were that as the Mosquito prototype had twice the surface area and over twice the weight of the Spitfire Mk II, but also with twice its power, the Mosquito would end up being faster. Over the next few months, \"W4050\" surpassed this estimate, easily beating the Spitfire Mk II in testing at RAF Boscombe Down in February 1941, reaching a top speed of at altitude, compared to a top speed of at for the Spitfire.\nOn 19 February, official trials began at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment (AAEE) based at Boscombe Down, although the de Havilland representative was surprised by a delay in starting the tests. On 24 February, as \"W4050\" taxied across the rough airfield, the tailwheel jammed leading to the fuselage fracturing. Repairs were made by early March, using part of the fuselage of the photo-reconnaissance prototype \"W4051\". In spite of this setback, the \"Initial Handling Report 767\" issued by the AAEE stated, \"The aeroplane is pleasant to fly ... aileron control light and effective...\" The maximum speed reached was at , with an estimated maximum ceiling of and a maximum rate of climb of at .\n\"W4050\" continued to be used for various test programmes, as the experimental \"workhorse\" for the Mosquito family. In late October 1941, it returned to the factory to be fitted with Merlin 61s, the first production Merlins fitted with a two-speed, two-stage supercharger. The first flight with the new engines was on 20 June 1942. \"W4050\" recorded a maximum speed of at (fitted with straight-through air intakes with snow guards, engines in F.S. gear) and at without snow guards. In October 1942, in connection with development work on the NF Mk XV, \"W4050\" was fitted with extended wingtips, increasing the span to , first flying in this configuration on 8 December. Fitted with high-altitude-rated, two-stage, two-speed Merlin\u00a077s, it reached in December 1943. Soon after these flights, \"W4050\" was grounded and scheduled to be scrapped, but instead served as an instructional airframe at Hatfield. In September 1958, \"W4050\" was returned to the Salisbury Hall hangar where it was built, restored to its original configuration, and became one of the primary exhibits of the de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre.\n\"W4051\", which was designed from the outset to be the prototype for the photo-reconnaissance versions of the Mosquito, was slated to make its first flight in early 1941. However, the fuselage fracture in \"W4050\" meant that \"W4051's\" fuselage was used as a replacement; \"W4051\" was then rebuilt using a production standard fuselage and first flew on 10 June 1941. This prototype continued to use the short engine nacelles, single-piece trailing-edge flaps, and the \"No. 1\" tailplane used by \"W4050\", but had production-standard wings and became the only Mosquito prototype to fly operationally.\nConstruction of the fighter prototype, \"W4052\", was also carried out at the secret Salisbury Hall facility. It was powered by Merlin\u00a021s, and had an altered canopy structure with a flat, bullet-proof windscreen; the solid nose had mounted four .303 British Browning machine guns and their ammunition boxes, accessible by a large, sideways hinged panel. Four 20-mm Hispano\u00a0Mk II cannon were housed in a compartment under the cockpit floor with the breeches projecting into the bomb bay and the automatic bomb bay doors were replaced by manually operated bay doors, which incorporated cartridge ejector chutes.\nAs a day and night fighter, prototype \"W4052\" was equipped with AI Mk\u00a0IV equipment, complete with an \"arrowhead\" transmission aerial mounted between the central Brownings and receiving aerials through the outer wing tips, and it was painted in black RDM2a \"Special Night\" finish. It was also the first prototype constructed with the extended engine nacelles. \"W4052\" was later tested with other modifications, including bomb racks, drop tanks, barrage balloon cable cutters in the leading edge of the wings, Hamilton airscrews and braking propellers, and drooping aileron systems that enabled steep approaches and a larger rudder tab. The prototype continued to serve as a test machine until it was scrapped on 28 January 1946. \"4055\" flew the first operational Mosquito flight on 17 September 1941.\nDuring flight testing, the Mosquito prototypes were modified to test a number of configurations. \"W4050\" was fitted with a turret behind the cockpit for drag tests, after which the idea was abandoned in July 1941. \"W4052\" had the first version of the Youngman Frill airbrake fitted to the fighter prototype. The frill was mounted around the fuselage behind the wing and was opened by bellows and venturi effect to provide rapid deceleration during interceptions and was tested between January and August 1942, but was also abandoned when lowering the undercarriage was found to have the same effect with less buffeting.\nProduction plans and American interest.\nThe Air Ministry authorised mass production plans on 21 June 1941, by which time the Mosquito had become one of the world's fastest operational aircraft. It ordered 19 photo-reconnaissance (PR) models and 176 fighters. A further 50 were unspecified; in July 1941, these were confirmed to be unarmed fast bombers. By the end of January 1942, contracts had been awarded for 1,378 Mosquitos of all variants, including 20 T.III trainers and 334 FB.VI bombers. Another 400 were to be built by de Havilland Canada.\nOn 20 April 1941, \"W4050\" was demonstrated to Lord Beaverbrook, the Minister of Aircraft Production. The Mosquito made a series of flights, including one rolling climb on one engine. Also present were US General Henry H. Arnold and his aide Major Elwood Quesada, who wrote \"I ... recall the first time I saw the Mosquito as being impressed by its performance, which we were aware of. We were impressed by the appearance of the airplane that looks fast usually is fast, and the Mosquito was, by the standards of the time, an extremely well-streamlined airplane, and it was highly regarded, highly respected.\"\nThe trials set up future production plans between Britain, Australia, and Canada. Six days later, Arnold returned to America with a full set of manufacturer's drawings. As a result of his report, five companies (Beech, Curtiss-Wright, Fairchild, Fleetwings, and Hughes) were asked to evaluate the de Havilland data. The report by Beech Aircraft summed up the general view: \"It appears as though this airplane has sacrificed serviceability, structural strength, ease of construction and flying characteristics in an attempt to use construction material which is not suitable for the manufacture of efficient airplanes.\" The Americans did not pursue the proposal for licensed production, the consensus arguing that the Lockheed P-38 Lightning could fulfill the same duties. However, Arnold urged the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) to evaluate the design even if they would not adopt it. On 12 December 1941, after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the USAAF requested one airframe for this purpose.\nDesign and manufacture.\nOverview.\nWhile timber construction was considered outmoded by some, de Havilland claimed that their successes with techniques used for the DH 91 Albatross could lead to a fast, light bomber using monocoque-sandwich shell construction. Arguments in favour of this included speed of prototyping, rapid development, minimisation of jig-building time, and employment of a separate category of workforce. The ply-balsa-ply monocoque fuselage and one-piece wings with doped fabric covering would give excellent aerodynamic performance and low weight, combined with strength and stiffness. At the same time, the design team had to fight conservative Air Ministry views on defensive armament. Guns and gun turrets, favoured by the ministry, would impair the aircraft's aerodynamic properties and reduce speed and manoeuvrability, in the opinion of the designers. Whilst submitting these arguments, Geoffrey de Havilland funded his private venture until a very late stage. The project was a success beyond all expectations. The initial bomber and photo-reconnaissance versions were extremely fast, whilst the armament of subsequent variants might be regarded as primarily offensive.\nThe most-produced variant, designated the FB Mk VI (Fighter-bomber Mark 6), was powered by two Merlin Mk 23 or Mk 25 engines driving three-bladed de Havilland hydromatic propellers. The typical fixed armament for an FB Mk VI was four Browning .303 machine guns and four 20-mm Hispano cannons, while the offensive load consisted of up to of bombs, or eight RP-3 unguided rockets.\nPerformance.\nThe design was noted for light and effective control surfaces that provided good manoeuvrability, but required that the rudder not be used aggressively at high speeds. Poor aileron control at low speeds when landing and taking off was also a problem for inexperienced crews. For flying at low speeds, the flaps had to be set at 15\u00b0, speed reduced to , and rpm set to 2,650. The speed could be reduced to an acceptable for low-speed flying. For cruising, the optimum speed for obtaining maximum range was at weight.\nThe Mosquito had a low stalling speed of with undercarriage and flaps raised. When both were lowered, the stalling speed decreased from . Stall speed at normal approach angle and conditions was . Warning of the stall was given by buffeting and would occur before stall was reached. The conditions and impact of the stall were not severe. The wing did not drop unless the control column was pulled back. The nose drooped gently and recovery was easy.\nEarly on in the Mosquito's operational life, the intake shrouds that were to cool the exhausts on production aircraft overheated. Flame dampers prevented exhaust glow on night operations, but they had an effect on performance. Multiple ejector and open-ended exhaust stubs helped solve the problem and were used in the PR.VIII, B.IX, and B.XVI variants. This increased speed performance in the B.IX alone by .\nFuselage.\nThe oval-section fuselage was a frameless monocoque shell built in two vertically separate halves formed over a mahogany or concrete mould. Pressure was applied with band clamps. The shell sandwich skins comprised birch three-ply outers, with cores of Ecuadorean balsa. In many generally smaller but vital areas, such as around apertures and attachment zones, stronger timbers, including aircraft-quality spruce, replaced the balsa core. The main areas of the sandwich skin were only thick. Together with various forms of wood reinforcement, often of laminated construction, the sandwich skin gave great stiffness and torsional resistance. The separate fuselage halves speeded construction, permitting access by personnel working in parallel with others, as the work progressed.\nWork on the separate half-fuselages included installation of control mechanisms and cabling. Screwed inserts into the inner skins that would be under stress in service were reinforced using round shear plates made from a fabric-Bakelite composite.\nTransverse bulkheads were also compositely built-up with several species of timber, plywood, and balsa. Seven vertically halved bulkheads were installed within each moulded fuselage shell before the main \"boxing up\" operation. Bulkhead number seven was especially strongly built, since it carried the fitments and transmitted the aerodynamic loadings for the tailplane and rudder. The fuselage had a large ventral section cut-out, strongly reinforced, that allowed the fuselage to be lowered onto the wing centre-section at a later stage of assembly.\nFor early production aircraft, the structural assembly adhesive was casein-based. At a later stage, this was replaced by \"Aerolite\", a synthetic urea-formaldehyde type, which was more durable. To provide for the edge joints for the fuselage halves, zones near the outer edges of the shells had their balsa sandwich cores replaced by much stronger inner laminations of birch plywood. For the bonding together of the two halves (\"boxing up\"), a longitudinal cut was machined into these edges. The profile of this cut was a form of V-groove. Part of the edge bonding process also included adding further longitudinal plywood lap strips on the outside of the shells. The half bulkheads of each shell were bonded to their corresponding pair in a similar way. Two laminated wooden clamps were used in the after portion of the fuselage to provide supports during this complex gluing work. The resulting large structural components had to be kept completely still and held in the correct environment until the glue cured.\nFor finishing, a covering of doped madapollam (a fine, plain-woven cotton) fabric was stretched tightly over the shell and several coats of red, followed by silver dope, were added, followed by the final camouflage paint.\nWing.\nThe all-wood wing pairs comprised a single structural unit throughout the wingspan, with no central longitudinal joint. Instead, the spars ran from wingtip to wingtip. There was a single continuous main spar and another continuous rear spar. Because of the combination of dihedral with the forward sweep of the trailing edges of the wings, this rear spar was one of the most complex units to laminate and to finish machining after the bonding and curing. It had to produce the correct 3D tilt in each of two planes. Also, it was designed and made to taper from the wing roots towards the wingtips. Both principal spars were of ply box construction, using in general 0.25-in plywood webs with laminated spruce flanges, plus a number of additional reinforcements and special details.\nSpruce and plywood ribs were connected with gusset joints. Some heavy-duty ribs contained pieces of ash and walnut, as well as the special five ply that included veneers laid up at 45\u00b0. The upper skin construction was in two layers of 0.25-in five-ply birch, separated by Douglas fir stringers running in the span-wise direction. The wings were covered with madapollam fabric and doped in a similar manner to the fuselage. The wing was installed into the roots by means of four large attachment points. The engine radiators were fitted in the inner wing, just outboard of the fuselage on either side. These gave less drag. The radiators themselves were split into three sections: an oil cooler section outboard, the middle section forming the coolant radiator and the inboard section serving the cabin heater.\nThe wing contained metal-framed and -skinned ailerons, but the flaps were made of wood and were hydraulically controlled. The nacelles were mostly wood, although for strength, the engine mounts were all metal, as were the undercarriage parts. Engine mounts of welded steel tube were added, along with simple landing gear oleos filled with rubber blocks. Wood was used to carry only in-plane loads, with metal fittings used for all triaxially loaded components such as landing gear, engine mounts, control-surface mounting brackets, and the wing-to-fuselage junction. The outer leading wing edge had to be brought further forward to accommodate this design. The main tail unit was all wood built. The control surfaces, the rudder, and elevator were aluminium-framed and fabric-covered. The total weight of metal castings and forgings used in the aircraft was only .\nIn November 1944, several crashes occurred in the Far East. At first, these were thought to be a result of wing-structure failures. The casein glue, it was said, cracked when exposed to extreme heat and/or monsoon conditions. This caused the upper surfaces to \"lift\" from the main spar. An investigating team led by Major Hereward de Havilland travelled to India and produced a report in early December 1944 stating, \"the accidents were not caused by the deterioration of the glue, but by shrinkage of the airframe during the wet monsoon season\". However, a later inquiry by Cabot &amp; Myers firmly attributed the accidents to faulty manufacture and this was confirmed by a further investigation team by the Ministry of Aircraft Production at Defford, which found faults in six Mosquito marks (all built at de Havilland's Hatfield and Leavesden plants). The defects were similar, and none of the aircraft had been exposed to monsoon conditions or termite attack.\nThe investigators concluded that construction defects occurred at the two plants. They found that the \"...standard of glueing...left much to be desired.\" Records at the time showed that accidents caused by \"loss of control\" were three times more frequent on Mosquitos than on any other type of aircraft. The Air Ministry forestalled any loss of confidence in the Mosquito by holding to Major de Havilland's initial investigation in India that the accidents were caused \"largely by climate\" To solve the problem of seepage into the interior, a strip of plywood was set along the span of the wing to seal the entire length of the skin joint.\nSystems.\nThe fuel systems gave the Mosquito good range and endurance, using up to nine fuel tanks. Two outer wing tanks each contained of fuel. These were complemented by two inner wing fuel tanks, each containing , located between the wing root and engine nacelle. In the central fuselage were twin fuel tanks mounted between bulkhead number two and three aft of the cockpit. In the FB.VI, these tanks contained each, while in the B.IV and other unarmed Mosquitos each of the two centre tanks contained . Both the inner wing, and fuselage tanks are listed as the \"main tanks\" and the total internal fuel load of was initially deemed appropriate for the type. In addition, the FB Mk VI could have larger fuselage tanks, increasing the capacity to . Drop tanks of or could be mounted under each wing, increasing the total fuel load to .\nThe design of the Mark VI allowed for a provisional long-range fuel tank to increase range for action over enemy territory, for the installation of bomb release equipment specific to depth charges for strikes against enemy shipping, or for the simultaneous use of rocket projectiles along with a drop tank under each wing supplementing the main fuel cells. The FB.VI had a wingspan of , a length (over guns) of . It had a maximum speed of at . Maximum take-off weight was and the range of the aircraft was with a service ceiling of .\nTo reduce fuel vaporisation at the high altitudes of photographic reconnaissance variants, the central and inner wing tanks were pressurised. The pressure venting cock located behind the pilot's seat controlled the pressure valve. As the altitude increased, the valve increased the volume applied by a pump. This system was extended to include field modifications of the fuel tank system.\nThe engine oil tanks were in the engine nacelles. Each nacelle contained a oil tank, including a air space. The oil tanks themselves had no separate coolant controlling systems. The coolant header tank was in the forward nacelle, behind the propeller. The remaining coolant systems were controlled by the coolant radiators shutters in the forward inner wing compartment, between the nacelle and the fuselage and behind the main engine cooling radiators, which were fitted in the leading edge. Electric-pneumatic operated radiator shutters directed and controlled airflow through the ducts and into the coolant valves, to predetermined temperatures.\nElectrical power came from a 24 volt DC generator on the starboard (No. 2) engine and an alternator on the port engine, which also supplied AC power for radios. The radiator shutters, supercharger gear change, gun camera, bomb bay, bomb/rocket release and all the other crew controlled instruments were powered by a 24 V battery. The radio communication devices included VHF and HF communications, GEE navigation, and IFF and G.P. devices. The electric generators also powered the fire extinguishers. Located on the starboard side of the cockpit, the switches would operate automatically in the event of a crash. In flight, a warning light would flash to indicate a fire, should the pilot not already be aware of it. In later models, to save liquids and engine clean up time in case of belly landing, the fire extinguisher was changed to semi-automatic triggers.\nThe main landing gear, housed in the nacelles behind the engines, were raised and lowered hydraulically. The main landing gear shock absorbers were de Havilland manufactured and used a system of rubber in compression, rather than hydraulic oleos, with twin pneumatic brakes for each wheel. The Dunlop-Marstrand anti-shimmy tailwheel was also retractable.\nOperational history.\nThe de Havilland Mosquito operated in many roles, performing medium bomber, reconnaissance, tactical strike, anti-submarine warfare and shipping attacks and night fighter duties, until the end of the war. In July 1941, the first production Mosquito \"W4051\" (a production fuselage combined with some prototype flying surfaces \u2013 see Prototypes and test flights) was sent to No. 1 Photographic Reconnaissance Unit (PRU), at RAF Benson. The secret reconnaissance flights of this aircraft were the first operational missions of the Mosquito. In 1944, the journal \"Flight\" gave 19 September 1941 as date of the first PR mission, at an altitude \"of some 20,000 ft\".\nOn 15 November 1941, 105 Squadron, RAF, took delivery at RAF Swanton Morley, Norfolk, of the first operational Mosquito Mk. B.IV bomber, serial no. \"W4064\". Throughout 1942, 105 Squadron, based next at RAF Horsham St. Faith, then from 29 September, RAF Marham, undertook daylight low-level and shallow dive attacks. Apart from the Oslo and Berlin raids, the strikes were mainly on industrial and infrastructure targets in occupied Netherlands and Norway, France and northern and western Germany. The crews faced deadly flak and fighters, particularly Focke-Wulf Fw 190s, which they called \"snappers\". Germany still controlled continental airspace and the Fw 190s were often already airborne and at an advantageous altitude. Collisions within the formations also caused casualties. It was the Mosquito's excellent handling capabilities, rather than pure speed, that facilitated successful evasions.\nThe Mosquito was first announced publicly on 26 September 1942 after the Oslo Mosquito raid of 25 September. It was featured in \"The Times\" on 28 September and the next day the newspaper published two captioned photographs illustrating the bomb strikes and damage. On 6 December 1942, Mosquitos from Nos. 105 and 139 Squadrons made up part of the bomber force used in Operation Oyster, the large No. 2 Group raid against the Philips works at Eindhoven.\nFrom mid-1942 to mid-1943, Mosquito bombers flew high-speed, medium and low-altitude daylight missions against factories, railways and other pinpoint targets in Germany and German-occupied Europe. From June 1943, Mosquito bombers were formed into the Light Night Striking Force to guide RAF Bomber Command heavy bomber raids and as \"nuisance\" bombers, dropping Blockbuster bombs \u2013 \"cookies\" \u2013 in high-altitude, high-speed raids that German night fighters were almost powerless to intercept.\nAs a night fighter from mid-1942, the Mosquito intercepted \"Luftwaffe\" raids on Britain, notably those of Operation Steinbock in 1944. Starting in July 1942, Mosquito night-fighter units raided \"Luftwaffe\" airfields. As part of 100 Group, it was flown as a night fighter and as an intruder supporting Bomber Command heavy bombers that reduced losses during 1944 and 1945.\nThe Mosquito fighter-bomber served as a strike aircraft in the Second Tactical Air Force (2TAF) from its inception on 1 June 1943. The main objective was to prepare for the invasion of occupied Europe a year later. In Operation Overlord three Mosquito FB VI wings flew close air support for the Allied armies in co-operation with other RAF units equipped with the North American B-25 Mitchell medium bomber. In the months between the foundation of 2TAF and its duties from D day onwards, vital training was interspersed with attacks on V-1 flying bomb launch sites.\nIn another example of the daylight precision raids carried out by the Mosquitos of Nos. 105 and 139 Squadrons, on 30 January 1943, the 10th anniversary of the Nazis' seizure of power, a morning Mosquito attack knocked out the main Berlin broadcasting station while \"Luftwaffe\" Chief Reichsmarschall Hermann G\u00f6ring was speaking, putting his speech off the air. A second sortie in the afternoon inconvenienced another speech, by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels. Lecturing a group of German aircraft manufacturers, G\u00f6ring said:\nDuring this daylight-raiding phase, Nos. 105 and 139 Squadrons flew 139 combat operations and aircrew losses were high. Even the losses incurred in the squadrons' dangerous Blenheim era were exceeded in percentage terms. The Roll of Honour shows 51 aircrew deaths from the end of May 1942 to April 1943. In the corresponding period, crews gained three Mentions in Despatches, two DFMs and three DFCs. The low-level daylight attacks finished on 27 May 1943 with strikes on the Schott glass and Zeiss instrument works, both in Jena. Subsequently, when low-level precision attacks required Mosquitos, they were allotted to squadrons operating the FB.IV version. Examples include the Aarhus air raid and Operation Jericho.\nSince the beginning of the year, the German fighter force had become seriously overstretched. In April 1943, in response to \"political humiliation\" caused by the Mosquito, G\u00f6ring ordered the formation of special \"Luftwaffe\" units (\"Jagdgeschwader 25\", commanded by \"Oberstleutnant\" Herbert Ihlefeld and \"Jagdgeschwader 50\", under \"Major\" Hermann Graf) to combat the Mosquito attacks, though these units, which were \"little more than glorified squadrons\", were unsuccessful against the elusive RAF aircraft. Post-war German histories also indicate that there was a belief within the Luftwaffe that Mosquito aircraft \"gave only a weak radar signal.\".\nThe first Mosquito Squadron to be equipped with Oboe (navigation) was No. 109, based at RAF Wyton, after working as an experimental unit at RAF Boscombe Down. They used Oboe in anger for the first time on 31 December 1942 and 1 January 1943, target marking for a force of heavy bombers attacking D\u00fcsseldorf.. On 1 June, the two pioneering Squadrons joined No. 109 Squadron in the re-formed No. 8 Group RAF (Bomber Command). Initially they were engaged in moderately high altitude (about ) night bombing, with 67 trips during that summer, mainly to Berlin. Soon after, Nos. 105 and 139 Squadron bombers were widely used by the RAF Pathfinder Force, marking targets for the main night-time strategic bombing force.\nIn what were, initially, diversionary \"nuisance raids,\" Mosquito bombers dropped 4,000\u00a0lb Blockbuster bombs or \"Cookies.\" Particularly after the introduction of H2S (radar) in some Mosquitos, these raids carrying larger bombs succeeded to the extent that they provided a significant additional form of attack to the large formations of \"heavies.\" Latterly in the war, there were a significant number of all-Mosquito raids on big German cities involving up to 100 or more aircraft. On the night of 20/21 February 1945, for example, Mosquitos of No. 8 Group mounted the first of 36 consecutive night raids on Berlin.\nFrom 1943, Mosquitos with RAF Coastal Command attacked \"Kriegsmarine\" U-boats and intercepted transport ship concentrations. After Operation Overlord, the U-boat threat in the Western Approaches decreased fairly quickly, but correspondingly the Norwegian and Danish waters posed greater dangers. Hence the RAF Coastal Command Mosquitos were moved to Scotland to counter this threat. The Strike Wing at Banff stood up in September 1944 and comprised Mosquito aircraft of No's 143, 144, 235 and 248 Squadrons Royal Air Force and No.333 Squadron Royal Norwegian Air Force. Despite an initially high loss rate, the Mosquito bomber variants ended the war with the lowest losses of any aircraft in RAF Bomber Command service.\nThe Mosquito also proved a very capable night fighter. Some of the most successful RAF pilots flew these variants. For example, Wing Commander Branse Burbridge claimed 21 kills, and Wing Commander John Cunningham claimed 19 of his 20 victories at night on Mosquitos.\nMosquitos of No. 100 Group RAF acted as night intruders operating at high level in support of the Bomber Command \"heavies\", to counter the enemy tactic of merging into the bomber stream, which, towards the end of 1943, was causing serious allied losses. These RCM (radio countermeasures) aircraft were fitted with a device called \"Serrate\" to allow them to track down German night fighters from their \"Lichtenstein B/C\" (low-UHF-band) and \"Lichtenstein SN-2\" (lower end of the VHF FM broadcast band) radar emissions, as well as a device named \"Perfectos\" that tracked German IFF signals. These methods were responsible for the destruction of 257 German aircraft from December 1943 to April 1945. Mosquito fighters from all units accounted for 487 German aircraft during the war, the vast majority of which were night fighters.\nOne Mosquito is listed as belonging to German secret operations unit \"Kampfgeschwader 200\", which tested, evaluated and sometimes clandestinely operated captured enemy aircraft during the war. The aircraft was listed on the order of battle of \"Versuchsverband OKL\"s, \"2 Staffel\", \"Stab Gruppe\" on 10 November and 31 December 1944. However, on both lists, the Mosquito is listed as unserviceable.\nThe Mosquito flew its last official European war mission on 21 May 1945, when Mosquitos of 143 Squadron and 248 Squadron RAF were ordered to continue to hunt German submarines that might be tempted to continue the fight; instead of submarines all the Mosquitos encountered were passive E-boats.\nThe last operational RAF Mosquitos were the Mosquito TT.35's, which were finally retired from No. 3 Civilian Anti-Aircraft Co-Operation Unit (CAACU) in May 1963.\nIn 1947\u201349, up to 180 Canadian surplus Mosquitoes flew many operations for the Nationalist Chinese under Chiang Kai-shek in the civil war against Communist forces. Pilots from three squadrons of Mosquitoes claimed to have sunk or damaged 500 ships during one invasion attempt. As the Communists assumed control, the remaining aircraft were evacuated to Formosa, where they flew missions against shipping.\nVariants.\nUntil the end of 1942 the RAF always used Roman numerals (I, II, ...) for mark numbers; 1943\u20131948 was a transition period during which new aircraft entering service were given Arabic numerals (1, 2, ...) for mark numbers, but older aircraft retained their Roman numerals. From 1948 onwards, Arabic numerals were used exclusively.\nPrototypes.\nThree prototypes were built, each with a different configuration. The first to fly was \"W4050\" on 25 November 1940, followed by the fighter \"W4052\" on 15 May 1941 and the photo-reconnaissance prototype \"W4051\" on 10 June 1941. \"W4051\" later flew operationally with 1 Photographic Reconnaissance Unit (1 PRU).\nPhoto-reconnaissance.\nA total of 10 Mosquito PR Mk Is were built, four of them \"long range\" versions equipped with a overload fuel tank in the fuselage. The contract called for 10 of the PR Mk I airframes to be converted to B Mk IV Series 1s. All of the PR Mk Is, and the B Mk IV Series 1s, had the original short engine nacelles and short span (19\u00a0ft 5.5 in) tailplanes. Their engine cowlings incorporated the original pattern of integrated exhaust manifolds, which, after relatively brief flight time, had a troublesome habit of burning and blistering the cowling panels. The first operational sortie by a Mosquito was made by a PR Mk I, W4055, on 17 September 1941; during this sortie the unarmed Mosquito PR.I evaded three Messerschmitt Bf 109s at . Powered by two Merlin 21s, the PR Mk I had a maximum speed of , a cruise speed of , a ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of per minute.\nOver 30 Mosquito B Mk IV bombers were converted into the PR Mk IV photo-reconnaissance aircraft. The first operational flight by a PR Mk IV was made by \"DK284\" in April 1942.\nThe Mosquito PR Mk VIII, built as a stopgap pending the introduction of the refined PR Mk IX, was the next photo-reconnaissance version. The five VIIIs were converted from B Mk IVs and became the first operational Mosquito version to be powered by two-stage, two-speed supercharged engines, using Rolls-Royce Merlin 61 engines in place of Merlin 21/22s. The first PR Mk VIII, \"DK324\" first flew on 20 October 1942. The PR Mk VIII had a maximum speed of , an economical cruise speed of at 20,000\u00a0ft, and at 30,000\u00a0ft, a ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of 2,500\u00a0ft per minute (760 m).\nThe Mosquito PR Mk IX, 90 of which were built, was the first Mosquito variant with two-stage, two-speed engines to be produced in quantity; the first of these, \"LR405\", first flew in April 1943. The PR Mk IX was based on the Mosquito B Mk IX bomber and was powered by two Merlin 72/73 or 76/77 engines. It could carry either two , two or two droppable fuel tanks.\nThe Mosquito PR Mk XVI had a pressurised cockpit and, like the Mk IX, was powered by two Rolls-Royce Merlin 72/73 or 76/77 piston engines. This version was equipped with three overload fuel tanks, totalling in the bomb bay, and could also carry two or drop tanks. A total of 435 of the PR Mk XVI were built. The PR Mk XVI had a maximum speed of , a cruise speed of , ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of 2,900 feet per minute (884 m).\nThe Mosquito PR Mk 32 was a long-range, high-altitude, pressurised photo-reconnaissance version. It was powered by a pair of two-stage supercharged Rolls-Royce Merlin 113 and Merlin 114 piston engines, the Merlin 113 on the starboard side and the Merlin 114 on the port. First flown in August 1944, only five were built and all were conversions from PR.XVIs.\nThe Mosquito PR Mk 34 and PR Mk 34A was a very long-range unarmed high altitude photo-reconnaissance version. The fuel tank and cockpit protection armour were removed. Additional fuel was carried in a bulged bomb bay: 1,192 gallons\u2014the equivalent of . A further two 200-gallon (910-litre) drop tanks under the outer wings gave a range of cruising at . Powered by two Merlin 114s first used in the PR.32. The port Merlin 114 drove a Marshal cabin supercharger. A total of 181 were built, including 50 built by Percival Aircraft Company at Luton. The PR.34's maximum speed (TAS) was at sea level, at and at .\nAll PR.34s were installed with four split F52 vertical cameras, two forward, two aft of the fuselage tank and one F24 oblique camera. Sometimes a K-17 camera was used for air surveys. In August 1945, the PR.34A was the final photo-reconnaissance variant with one Merlin 113A and 114A each delivering .\nColonel Roy M. Stanley II, USAF (RET) wrote: \"I consider the Mosquito the best photo-reconnaissance aircraft of the war\".\nAfter the end of World War II Spartan Air Services used 10 ex-RAF Mosquitoes, mostly B.35's plus one of only six PR.35's built, for high-altitude photographic survey work in Canada.\nBombers.\nOn 21 June 1941 the Air Ministry ordered that the last 10 Mosquitos, ordered as photo-reconnaissance aircraft, should be converted to bombers. These 10 aircraft were part of the original 1 March 1940 production order and became the B Mk IV Series 1. \"W4052\" was to be the prototype and flew for the first time on 8 September 1941.\nThe bomber prototype led to the B Mk IV, of which 273 were built: apart from the 10 Series 1s, all of the rest were built as Series 2s with extended nacelles, revised exhaust manifolds, with integrated flame dampers, and larger tailplanes. Series 2 bombers also differed from the Series 1 in having an increased payload of four bombs, instead of the four bombs of Series 1. This was made possible by \"cropping\", or shortening the tail of the bomb so that these four heavier weapons could be carried (or a 2,000\u00a0lb (920;kg) total load). The B Mk IV entered service in May 1942 with 105 Squadron.\nIn April 1943 it was decided to convert a B Mk IV to carry a Blockbuster bomb (nicknamed a Cookie). The conversion, including modified bomb bay suspension arrangements, bulged bomb bay doors and fairings, was relatively straightforward and 54 B.IVs were modified and distributed to squadrons of the Light Night Striking Force. 27 B Mk IVs were later converted for special operations with the Highball anti-shipping weapon, and were used by 618 Squadron, formed in April 1943 specifically to use this weapon. A B Mk IV, \"DK290\" was initially used as a trials aircraft for the bomb, followed by \"DZ471,530 and 533\". The B Mk IV had a maximum speed of , a cruising speed of , ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of 2,500\u00a0ft per minute (762 m).\nOther bomber variants of the Mosquito included the Merlin 21 powered B Mk V high-altitude version. Trials with this configuration were made with \"W4057\", which had strengthened wings and two additional fuel tanks, or alternatively, two bombs. This design was not produced in Britain, but formed the basic design of the Canadian-built B.VII. Only \"W4057\" was built in prototype form. The Merlin 31 powered B Mk VII was built by de Havilland Canada and first flown on 24 September 1942. It only saw service in Canada, 25 were built. Six were handed over to the United States Army Air Forces.\nB Mk IX (54 built) was powered by the Merlin 72,73, 76 or 77. The two-stage Merlin variant was based on the PR.IX. The prototype \"DK 324\" was converted from a PR.VIII and first flew on 24 March 1943. In October 1943 it was decided that all B Mk IVs and all B Mk IXs then in service would be converted to carry the \"Cookie\", and all B Mk IXs built after that date were designed to allow them to be converted to carry the weapon. The B Mk IX had a maximum speed of , an economical cruise speed of at 20,000\u00a0ft, and at 30,000\u00a0ft, ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of 2,850 feet per minute (869 m). The IX could carry a maximum load of of bombs. A Mosquito B Mk IX holds the record for the most combat operations flown by an Allied bomber in the Second World War. \"LR503\", known as \"F for Freddie\" (from its squadron code letters, GB*F), first served with No. 109 and subsequently, No. 105 RAF squadrons. It flew 213 sorties during the war, only to crash at Calgary airport during the Eighth Victory Loan Bond Drive on 10 May 1945, two days after Victory in Europe Day, killing both the pilot, Flt. Lt. Maurice Briggs, DSO, DFC, DFM and navigator Fl. Off. John Baker, DFC and Bar.\nThe B Mk XVI was powered by the same variations as the B.IX. All B Mk XVIs were capable of being converted to carry the \"Cookie\". The two-stage powerplants were added along with a pressurised cabin. \"DZ540\" first flew on 1 January 1944. The prototype was converted from a IV (402 built). The next variant, the B Mk XX, was powered by Packard Merlins 31 and 33s. It was the Canadian version of the IV. Altogether, 245 were built. The B Mk XVI had a maximum speed of , an economical cruise speed of at 20,000\u00a0ft, and at 30,000\u00a0ft, ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of 2,800\u00a0ft per minute (853 m). The type could carry of bombs.\nThe B.35 was powered by Merlin 113 and 114As. Some were converted to TT.35s (Target Tugs) and others were used as PR.35s (photo-reconnaissance). The B.35 had a maximum speed of , a cruising speed of , ceiling of , a range of , and a climb rate of 2,700\u00a0ft per minute (823 m). A total of 174 B.35s were delivered up to the end of 1945. A further 100 were delivered from 1946 for a grand total of 274, 65 of which were built by Airspeed Ltd.\nFighters.\nDeveloped during 1940, the first prototype of the Mosquito F Mk II was completed on 15 May 1941. These Mosquitos were fitted with four Hispano cannon in the fuselage belly and four .303 (7.7 mm) Browning machine guns mounted in the nose. On production Mk IIs the machine guns and ammunition tanks were accessed via two centrally hinged, sideways opening doors in the upper nose section. To arm and service the cannon the bomb bay doors were replaced by manually operated bay doors: the F and NF Mk IIs could not carry bombs. The type was also fitted with a gun camera in a compartment above the machine guns in the nose and was fitted with exhaust flame dampers to reduce the glare from the Merlin XXs.\nIn the summer of 1942, Britain experienced day-time incursions of the high-altitude reconnaissance bomber, the Junkers Ju 86P. Although the Ju 86P only carried a light bomb load, it overflew sensitive areas, including Bristol, Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire. Bombs were dropped on Luton and elsewhere, and this particular aircraft was seen from the main de Havilland offices and factory at Hatfield. An attempt to intercept it with a Spitfire from RAF Manston was unsuccessful. As a result of the potential threat, a decision was quickly taken to develop a high-altitude Mosquito interceptor, using the \"MP469\" prototype.\n\"MP469\" entered the experimental shop on 7 September and made its initial flight on 14 September, piloted by John de Havilland. The bomber nose was altered using a normal fighter nose, armed with four standard .303 (7.7 mm) Browning machine guns. The low pressure cabin retained a bomber canopy structure and a two-piece windscreen. The control wheel was replaced with a fighter control stick. The wingspan was increased to . The airframe was lightened by removing armour plating, some fuel tanks and other fitments. Smaller-diameter main wheels were fitted after the first few flights. At a loaded weight of this HA Mk XV was lighter than a standard Mk II. For this first conversion, the engines were a pair of Merlin 61s. On 15 September, John de Havilland reached an altitude of in this version. The aircraft was delivered to a High Altitude Flight which had been formed at RAF Northolt. However, the high-level German daylight intruders were no longer to be seen. It was subsequently revealed that only five Ju 86P aircraft had been built and they had only flown 12 sorties. Nevertheless, the general need for high altitude interceptors was recognised \u2013 but now the emphasis was to be upon night fighters.\nThe A&amp;AEE tested the climb and speed of night fighter conversion of MP469 in January 1943 for the Ministry of Aircraft Production. Wingspan had been increased to , the Brownings had been moved to a fairing below the fuselage. According to Birtles, an AI radar was mounted in the nose and the Merlins were upgraded to Mk76 type, although Boscombe Down reported Merlin 61s. In addition to MP469, four more B Mk IVs were converted into NF MK XVs. The Fighter Interception Unit at RAF Ford carried out service trials, March 1943, and then these five aircraft went to 85 Squadron, Hunsdon, where they were flown from April until August of that year. The greatest height reached in service was .\nApart from the F Mk XV, all Mosquito fighters and fighter bombers featured a modified canopy structure incorporating a flat, single piece armoured windscreen, and the crew entry/exit door was moved from the bottom of the forward fuselage to the right side of the nose, just forward of the wing leading edge.\nNight fighters.\nAt the end of 1940, the Air Staff's preferred turret-equipped night fighter design to Operational Requirement O.R. 95 was the Gloster F.18/40 (derived from their F.9/37). However, although in agreement as to the quality of the Gloster company's design, the Ministry of Aircraft Production was concerned that Gloster would not be able to work on the F.18/40 and also the jet fighter design, considered the greater priority. Consequently, in mid-1941 the Air Staff and MAP agreed that the Gloster aircraft would be dropped and the Mosquito, when fitted with a turret would be considered for the night fighter requirement.\nThe first production night fighter Mosquitos \u2013 minus turrets \u2013 were designated NF Mk II. A total of 466 were built with the first entering service with No. 157 Squadron in January 1942, replacing the Douglas Havoc. These aircraft were similar to the F Mk II, but were fitted with the AI Mk IV metric wavelength radar. The herring-bone transmitting antenna was mounted on the nose and the dipole receiving antennae were carried under the outer wings. A number of NF IIs had their radar equipment removed and additional fuel tanks installed in the bay behind the cannon for use as night intruders. These aircraft, designated NF II (Special) were first used by 23 Squadron in operations over Europe in 1942. 23 Squadron was then deployed to Malta on 20 December 1942, and operated against targets in Italy.\nNinety-seven NF Mk IIs were upgraded with 3.3\u00a0GHz frequency, low-SHF-band AI Mk VIII radar and these were designated NF Mk XII. The NF Mk XIII, of which 270 were built, was the production equivalent of the Mk XII conversions. These \"centimetric\" radar sets were mounted in a solid \"thimble\" (Mk XII / XIII) or universal \"bull nose\" (Mk XVII / XIX) radome, which required the machine guns to be dispensed with.\nFour F Mk XVs were converted to the NF Mk XV. These were fitted with AI Mk VIII in a \"thimble\" radome, and the .303 Brownings were moved into a gun pack fitted under the forward fuselage.\n NF Mk XVII was the designation for 99 NF Mk II conversions, with single-stage Merlin 21, 22, or 23 engines, but British AI.X (US SCR-720) radar.\nThe NF Mk XIX was an improved version of the NF XIII. It could be fitted with American or British AI radars; 220 were built.\nThe NF Mk 30 was the final wartime variant and was a high-altitude version, powered by two Rolls-Royce Merlin 76s. The NF Mk 30 had a maximum speed of at . It also carried early electronic countermeasures equipment. 526 were built.\nOther Mosquito night fighter variants planned but never built included the NF Mk X and NF Mk XIV (the latter based on the NF Mk XIII), both of which were to have two-stage Merlins. The NF Mk 31 was a variant of the NF Mk 30, but powered by Packard Merlins.\nAfter the war, two more night fighter versions were developed:\nThe NF Mk 36 was similar to the Mosquito NF Mk 30, but fitted with the American-built AI.Mk X radar. Powered by two Rolls-Royce Merlin 113/114 piston engines; 266 built. Max level speeds (TAS) with flame dampers fitted were at sea level, at , and at .\nThe NF Mk 38, 101 of which were built, was also similar to the Mosquito NF Mk 30, but fitted with the British-built AI Mk IX radar. This variant suffered from stability problems and did not enter RAF service: 60 were eventually sold to Yugoslavia. According to the Pilot's Notes and Air Ministry 'Special Flying Instruction TF/487', which posted limits on the Mosquito's maximum speeds, the NF Mk 38 had a VNE of 370 knots (425\u00a0mph), without under-wing stores, and within the altitude range of sea level to . However, from 10,000 to the maximum speed was 348 knots (400\u00a0mph). As the height increased other recorded speeds were; 15,000 to 320 knots (368\u00a0mph); 20,000 to , 295 knots (339\u00a0mph); 25,000 to , 260 knots (299\u00a0mph); 30,000 to , 235 knots (270\u00a0mph). With two added 100-gallon fuel tanks this performance fell; between sea level and 15,000 feet 330 knots (379\u00a0mph); between 15,000 and 320 knots (368\u00a0mph); 20,000 to , 295 knots (339\u00a0mph); 25,000 to , 260 knots (299\u00a0mph); 30,000 to , 235 knots (270\u00a0mph). Little difference was noted above .\nStrike (\"fighter-bomber\") variants.\nThe FB Mk VI, which first flew on 1 June 1942, was powered by two, single-stage two-speed, Merlin 21s or Merlin 25s, and introduced a re-stressed and reinforced \"basic\" wing structure capable of carrying single bombs on racks housed in streamlined fairings under each wing, or up to eight RP-3 25lb or 60 lb rockets. In addition fuel lines were added to the wings to enable single or drop tanks to be carried under each wing. The usual fixed armament was four 20\u00a0mm Hispano Mk.II cannon and four .303 (7.7\u00a0mm) Browning machine guns, while two bombs could be carried in the bomb bay.\nUnlike the F Mk II, the ventral bay doors were split into two pairs, with the forward pair being used to access the cannon, while the rear pair acted as bomb bay doors. The maximum fuel load was distributed between internal fuel tanks, plus two overload tanks, each of capacity, which could be fitted in the bomb bay, and two drop tanks. All-out level speed is often given as , although this speed applies to aircraft fitted with saxophone exhausts. The test aircraft (\"HJ679\") fitted with stub exhausts was found to be performing below expectations. It was returned to de Havilland at Hatfield where it was serviced. Its top speed was then tested and found to be , in line with expectations. 2,298 FB Mk VIs were built, nearly one-third of Mosquito production. Two were converted to TR.33 carrier-borne, maritime strike prototypes.\nThe FB Mk VI proved capable of holding its own against fighter aircraft, in addition to strike/bombing roles. For example, on 15 January 1945 Mosquito FB Mk VIs of 143 Squadron were engaged by 30 Focke-Wulf Fw 190s from \"Jagdgeschwader 5\": the Mosquitos sank an armed trawler and two merchant ships, but five Mosquitos were lost (two reportedly to flak), while shooting down five Fw 190s.\nAnother fighter-bomber variant was the Mosquito FB Mk XVIII (sometimes known as the \"Tsetse\") of which one was converted from a FB Mk VI to serve as prototype and 17 were purpose-built. The Mk XVIII was armed with a Molins \"6-pounder Class M\" cannon: this was a modified QF 6-pounder (57\u00a0mm) anti-tank gun fitted with an auto-loader to allow both semi- or fully automatic fire. 25 rounds were carried, with the entire installation weighing . In addition, of armour was added within the engine cowlings, around the nose and under the cockpit floor to protect the engines and crew from heavily armed U-boats, the intended primary target of the Mk XVIII. Two or four .303 (7.7\u00a0mm) Browning machine guns were retained in the nose and were used to \"sight\" the main weapon onto the target.\nThe Air Ministry initially suspected that this variant would not work, but tests proved otherwise. Although the gun provided the Mosquito with yet more anti-shipping firepower for use against U-boats, it required a steady approach run to aim and fire the gun, making its wooden construction an even greater liability, in the face of intense anti-aircraft fire. The gun had a muzzle velocity of and an excellent range of some . It was sensitive to sidewards movement; an attack required a dive from at a 30\u00b0 angle with the turn and bank indicator on centre. A move during the dive could jam the gun. The prototype \"HJ732\" was converted from a FB.VI and was first flown on 8 June 1943.\nThe effect of the new weapon was demonstrated on 10 March 1944 when Mk XVIIIs from 248 Squadron (escorted by four Mk VIs) engaged a German convoy of one U-boat and four destroyers, protected by 10 Ju 88s. Three of the Ju 88s were shot down. Pilot Tony Phillips destroyed one Ju 88 with four shells, one of which tore an engine off the Ju 88. The U-boat was damaged. On 25 March, was sunk by Molins-equipped Mosquitos. On 10 June, was abandoned in the face of intense air attack from No. 248 Squadron, and was later sunk by a Liberator of No. 206 Squadron. On 5 April 1945 Mosquitos with Molins attacked five German surface ships in the Kattegat and again demonstrated their value by setting them all on fire and sinking them. A German \"Sperrbrecher\" (\"minefield breaker\") was lost with all hands, with some 200 bodies being recovered by Swedish vessels. Some 900 German soldiers died in total. On 9 April, German U-boats , and were spotted in formation heading for Norway. All were sunk with rockets. and followed on 19 April and 2 May 1945, also sunk by rockets.\nDespite the preference for rockets, a further development of the large gun idea was carried out using the even larger, 96\u00a0mm calibre QF 32-pounder, a gun based on the QF 3.7-inch AA gun designed for tank use, the airborne version using a novel form of muzzle brake. Developed to prove the feasibility of using such a large weapon in the Mosquito, this installation was not completed until after the war, when it was flown and fired in a single aircraft without problems, then scrapped.\nDesigns based on the Mk VI were the FB Mk 26, built in Canada, and the FB Mk 40, built in Australia, powered by Packard Merlins. The FB.26 improved from the FB.21 using single stage Packard Merlin 225s. Some 300 were built and another 37 converted to T.29 standard. 212 FB.40s were built by de Havilland Australia. Six were converted to PR.40; 28 to PR.41s, one to FB.42 and 22 to T.43 trainers. Most were powered by Packard-built Merlin 31 or 33s.\nTrainers.\nThe Mosquito was also built as the Mosquito T Mk III two-seat trainer. This version, powered by two Rolls-Royce Merlin 21s, was unarmed and had a modified cockpit fitted with dual control arrangements. A total of 348 of the T Mk III were built for the RAF and Fleet Air Arm. de Havilland Australia built 11 T Mk 43 trainers, similar to the Mk III.\nTorpedo-bombers.\nTo meet specification N.15/44 for a navalised Mosquito for Royal Navy use as a torpedo bomber, de Havilland produced a carrier-borne variant. A Mosquito FB.VI was modified as a prototype designated Sea Mosquito TR Mk 33 with folding wings, arrester hook, thimble nose radome, Merlin 25 engines with four-bladed propellers and a new oleo-pneumatic landing gear rather than the standard rubber-in-compression gear. Initial carrier tests of the Sea Mosquito were carried out by Eric \"Winkle\" Brown aboard HMS \"Indefatigable\", the first landing-on taking place on 25 March 1944. An order for 100 TR.33s was placed although only 50 were built at Leavesden. Armament was four 20\u00a0mm cannon, two 500\u00a0lb bombs in the bomb bay (another two could be fitted under the wings), eight 60\u00a0lb rockets (four under each wing) and a standard torpedo under the fuselage. The first production TR.33 flew on 10 November 1945. This series was followed by six Sea Mosquito TR Mk 37s, which differed in having ASV Mk XIII radar instead of the TR.33's AN/APS-6.\nTarget tugs.\nThe RAF's target tug version was the Mosquito TT Mk 35, which were the last aircraft to remain in operational service with No 3 CAACU at Exeter, being finally retired in 1963. These aircraft were then featured in the film 633 Squadron.\nA number of B Mk XVIs bombers were converted into TT Mk 39 target tug aircraft. The Royal Navy also operated the Mosquito TT Mk 39 for target towing.\nTwo ex-RAF FB.6s were converted to TT.6 standard at Manchester (Ringway) Airport by Fairey Aviation in 1953\u20131954, and delivered to the Belgian Air Force for use as towing aircraft from the Sylt firing ranges.\nCanadian-built.\nA total of 1,032 (wartime \n+ 2 afterwards) Mosquitos were built by De Havilland Canada at Downsview Airfield in Downsview Ontario (now Downsview Park in Toronto Ontario).\nHighball.\nA number of Mosquito IVs were modified by Vickers-Armstrongs to carry Highball \"bouncing bombs\" and were allocated Vickers Type numbers:\nProduction.\nAbout 5,000 of the total of 7,781 Mosquitos built had major structural components fabricated from wood in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, England. Fuselages, wings and tailplanes were made at furniture companies such as Ronson, E. Gomme, Parker Knoll, Austinsuite and Styles &amp; Mealing. Wing spars were made by J. B. Heath and Dancer &amp; Hearne. Many of the other parts, including flaps, flap shrouds, fins, leading edge assemblies and bomb doors were also produced in the Buckinghamshire town. Dancer &amp; Hearne processed much of the wood from start to finish, receiving timber and transforming it into finished wing spars at their factory in Penn Street on the outskirts of High Wycombe.\nInitially much of the specialised yellow birch wood veneer and finished plywood used for the prototypes and early production aircraft was shipped from firms in Wisconsin, US. Prominent in this role were Roddis Plywood and Veneer Manufacturing in Marshfield. In conjunction with the USDA Forest Products Laboratory, Hamilton Roddis had developed new plywood adhesives and hot pressing technology. \nCanada.\nIn July 1941, it was decided that DH Canada would build Mosquitos at Downsview, Ontario. This was to continue even if Germany invaded Great Britain. Packard Merlin engines produced under licence were bench-tested by August and the first two aircraft were built in September. Production was to increase to fifty per month by early 1942. Initially, the Canadian production was for bomber variants; later, fighters, fighter-bombers and training aircraft were also made. DH Chief Production Engineer, Harry Povey, was sent first, then W. D. Hunter followed on an extended stay, to liaise with materials and parts suppliers. As was the case with initial UK production, Tego-bonded plywood and birch veneer was obtained from firms in Wisconsin, principally Roddis Plywood and Veneer Manufacturing, Marshfield. Enemy action delayed the shipping of jigs and moulds and it was decided to build these locally. During 1942, production improved to over 80 machines per month, as sub-contractors and suppliers became established. A mechanised production line based in part on car building methods started in 1944. When flight testing could no longer keep up, this was moved to the Central Aircraft Company airfield, London, Ontario, where the approved Mosquitos left for commissioning and subsequent ferry transfer to Europe.\nFerrying Mosquitos and many other types of WWII aircraft from Canada to Europe was dangerous, resulting in losses of lives and machines, but in the exigencies of war it was regarded as the best option for twin-engine and multi-engine aircraft. In the parlance of the day, among RAF personnel, \"it was no piece of cake.\" Considerable efforts were made by de Havilland Canada to resolve problems with engine and oil systems and an additional five hours of flight testing were introduced before the ferry flight, but the actual cause of some of the losses was unknown. Nevertheless, by the end of the war, nearly 500 Mosquito bombers and fighter-bombers had been ferried successfully by the Canadian operation.\nAfter DH Canada had been established for the Mosquito, further manufacturing was set up at DH Australia, in Sydney. One of the DH staff who travelled there was the distinguished test pilot, Pat Fillingham. These production lines added totals of 1,133 aircraft of varying types from Canada plus 212 aircraft from Australia.\nExports.\nIn total, both during the war and after, de Havilland exported 46 FB.VIs and 29 PR. XVIs to Australia; two FB.VI and 18 NF.30s to Belgium; approximately 250 FB.26, T.29 and T.27s from Canada to Nationalist China. A significant number never went into service due to deterioration on the voyage and to crashes during Chinese pilot training; however, five were captured by the People's Liberation Army during the Chinese Civil War; 19 FB.VIs to Czechoslovakia in 1948; 6 FB.VIs to Dominica; a few B.IVs, 57 FB.VIs, 29 PR.XVIs and 23 NF.30s to France. Some T.IIIs were exported to Israel along with 60 FB.VIs, and at least five PR.XVIs and 14 naval versions. Four T.IIIs, 76 FB.VIs, one FB.40 and four T.43s were exported to New Zealand. Three T.IIIs were exported to Norway, and 18 FB.VIs, which were later converted to night fighter standard. South Africa received two F.II and 14 PR.XVI/XIs and Sweden received 60 NF.XIXs. Turkey received 96 FB.VIs and several T.IIIs, and Yugoslavia had 60 NF.38s, 80 FB.VIs and three T.IIIs delivered.\nSites.\nTotal Mosquito production was 7,781, of which 6,710 were built during the war.\nCivilian accidents and incidents.\nA number of Mosquitos were lost in civilian airline service, mostly with British Overseas Airways Corporation during World War II.\nWhat was probably the crash that affected the Mosquito the most in recent times was on 21 July 1996, when de Havilland Mosquito G-ASKH, wearing the markings of RR299, crashed 1 mile west of Manchester Barton Airport. Pilot Kevin Moorhouse and Engineer Steve Watson both killed in crash. At the time, this was the last airworthy Mosquito T.III.\nSurviving aircraft.\nThere are approximately 30 non-flying Mosquitos around the world with four airworthy examples, three in the United States and one in Canada. The largest collection of Mosquitos is at the de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre in the United Kingdom, which owns three aircraft, including the first prototype, \"W4050\", the only initial prototype of a Second World War British aircraft design still in existence in the 21st century."}
{"id": "9097", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9097", "title": "Devangari alphabet", "text": ""}
{"id": "9098", "revid": "1559905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9098", "title": "Devanaagarii", "text": ""}
{"id": "9099", "revid": "15977090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9099", "title": "Dave Thomas (businessman)", "text": "Rex David Thomas (July 2, 1932 \u2013 January 8, 2002) was an American businessman, philanthropist, and fast-food tycoon. Thomas was the founder and chief executive officer of Wendy's, a fast-food restaurant chain specializing in hamburgers. He is also known for appearing in more than 800 commercial advertisements for the chain from 1989 to 2002, more than any other company founder in television history.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Atlantic City, New Jersey, his biological father's name was Sam and his biological mother's name was Molly. Thomas was adopted between six weeks and six months later by Rex and Auleva Thomas, and as an adult became a well-known advocate for adoption, founding the Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption. After his adoptive mother's death when he was 5, his father moved around the country seeking work. Thomas spent some of his early childhood near Kalamazoo, Michigan, with his grandmother, Minnie Sinclair, whom he credited with teaching him the importance of service and treating others well and with respect, lessons that helped him in his future business life.\nAt age 12, Thomas had his first job at Regas Restaurant, a fine dining restaurant in downtown Knoxville, Tennessee, then lost it in a dispute with his boss; decades later, Regas Restaurant installed a large autographed poster of Thomas just inside their entrance, which remained until the business closed in 2010. He vowed never to lose another job. Moving with his father, by 15 he was working at the Hobby House Restaurant in Fort Wayne, Indiana. When his father prepared to move again, Thomas decided to stay in Fort Wayne, dropping out of high school to work full-time at the restaurant. Thomas, who considered ending his schooling the greatest mistake of his life, did not graduate from high school until 1993, when he obtained a GED.\nHe subsequently became an education advocate and founded the Dave Thomas Education Center in Coconut Creek, Florida, which offers GED classes to young adults.\nCareer.\nU.S. Army.\nAt the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, rather than waiting for the draft, he volunteered for the U.S. Army at age 18 to have some choice in assignments. Having food production and service experience, Thomas requested the Cook's and Baker's School at Fort Benning, Georgia. He was sent to West Germany as a mess sergeant and was responsible for the daily meals of 2,000 soldiers, rising to the rank of staff sergeant. After his discharge in 1953, Thomas returned to Fort Wayne and the Hobby House.\nFast food career.\nKentucky Fried Chicken.\nIn the mid-1950s, Kentucky Fried Chicken founder Col. Harland Sanders came to Fort Wayne to find restaurateurs with established businesses in order to try to sell KFC franchises to them. At first, Thomas, who was the head cook at a restaurant, and the Clauss family declined Sanders's offer, but Sanders persisted, and the Clauss family franchised their restaurant with KFC and later also owned many other KFC franchises in the Midwest. During this time, Thomas worked with Sanders on many projects to make KFC more profitable and to give it brand recognition. Among other things Thomas suggested to Sanders, that were implemented, was that KFC reduce the number of items on the menu and focus on a signature dish. Thomas also suggested Sanders make commercials that he appear in. Thomas was sent by the Clauss family in the mid-1960s to help turn around four failing KFC stores they owned in Columbus, Ohio.\nBy 1968 Thomas had increased sales in the four fried chicken restaurants so much that he sold his share in them back to Sanders for more than $1.5 million. This experience would prove invaluable to Thomas when he began Wendy's about a year later.\nArthur Treacher's.\nAfter serving as a regional director for Kentucky Fried Chicken, Thomas became part of the investor group which founded Arthur Treacher's. His involvement with the new restaurant lasted less than a year before he went on to found Wendy's.\nWendy's.\nThomas opened his first Wendy's in Columbus, Ohio, November 15, 1969. This original restaurant remained operational until March 2, 2007, when it was closed due to lagging sales. Thomas named the restaurant after his eight-year-old daughter Melinda Lou, whose nickname was \"Wendy\", stemming from the child's inability to say her own name at a young age. According to \"Bio TV\", Dave claims that people nicknamed his daughter \"Wenda. Not Wendy, but Wenda. 'I'm going to call it Wendy's Old Fashioned Hamburgers'.\" Before his death in 2002, Thomas admitted regret for naming the franchise after his daughter, saying \"I should\u2019ve just named it after myself, because it put a lot of pressure on [her].\"\nIn 1982, Thomas resigned from his day-to-day operations at Wendy's. However, by 1985, several company business decisions, including an awkward new breakfast menu and loss in brand awareness due to fizzled marketing efforts, caused the company's new president to urge Thomas back into a more active role with Wendy's. Thomas began to visit franchises and espouse his hardworking, so-called \"mop-bucket attitude\". In 1989, he took on a significant role as the TV spokesperson in a series of commercials for the brand. Thomas was not a natural actor, and initially, his performances were criticized as stiff and ineffective by advertising critics.\nBy 1990, after efforts by Wendy's advertising agency, Backer Spielvolgel Bates, to get humor into the campaign, a decision was made to portray Thomas in a more self-deprecating and folksy manner, which proved much more popular with test audiences. Consumer brand awareness of Wendy's eventually regained levels it had not achieved since octogenarian Clara Peller's wildly popular \"Where's the beef?\" campaign of 1984.\nWith his natural self-effacing style and his relaxed manner, Thomas quickly became a household name. A company survey during the 1990s, a decade during which Thomas starred in every Wendy's commercial that aired, found that 90% of Americans knew who Thomas was. After more than 800 commercials, it was clear that Thomas played a major role in Wendy's status as the third most popular burger restaurant in the U.S.\nIn 1994, Thomas made a cameo appearance as himself in \"Bionic Ever After?\", a reunion TV movie based upon \"The Six Million Dollar Man\" and \"The Bionic Woman\".\nThe Wellington School.\nIn 1982, Thomas and several other people came together to form a school known as The Wellington School in Columbus, Ohio. It is a k-12 co-ed private school off of Reed Road. The current principal is Dr. Jeff Terwin.\nPersonal life.\nDave Thomas was married for 47 years to Lorraine. In addition to Melinda they had three more daughters, Pam, Lori, and Molly, and a son, Kenny. Though Kenny died in 2013, Dave's daughters still continue to own and run multiple Wendy's locations. Thomas founded the chain Sisters Chicken and Biscuits in 1978, named in reference to his other three daughters.\nDeath.\nThomas had been afflicted with a carcinoid neuroendocrine tumor for ten years, before it metastasized to his liver. He died on January 8, 2002 in his home in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, at the age of 69. Thomas was buried in Union Cemetery in Columbus, Ohio. At the time of his death, there were more than 6,000 Wendy's restaurants operating in North America.\nHonors and memberships.\nIn 1979, Thomas received the Horatio Alger Award for his success with his restaurant chain Wendy's, which had reached annual sales of $1 billion with franchises then.\nIn 1980, Thomas received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nThomas, realizing that his success as a high school dropout might convince other teenagers to quit school (something he later claimed was a mistake), became a student at Coconut Creek High School. He earned a GED in 1993. Thomas was inducted into the Junior Achievement U.S. Business Hall of Fame in 1999.\nThomas was an honorary Kentucky colonel, as was former boss Colonel Sanders.\nThomas was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2003.\nThomas was raised a Master Mason in Sol. D. Bayless Lodge No. 359 of Fort Wayne, Indiana, and became a 32\u00b0 Mason, N.M.J., on November 16, 1961, in the Scottish Rite Bodies of Fort Wayne. He affiliated with the Miami, Florida, Scottish Rite Bodies on December 18, 1991; was invested with the Rank and Decoration of Knight Commander Court of Honour on November 13, 1993, in Jacksonville, Florida; and was coroneted an Inspector General Honorary, S.J., on November 25, 1995, in Atlanta, Georgia, and unanimously elected to the Scottish Rite's highest honor, the Grand Cross, by The Supreme Council, 33\u00b0, in Executive Session on October 3, 1997, in Washington, D.C."}
{"id": "9101", "revid": "1011906347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9101", "title": "Device driver", "text": "In computing, a device driver is a computer program that operates or controls a particular type of device that is attached to a computer or automaton. A driver provides a software interface to hardware devices, enabling operating systems and other computer programs to access hardware functions without needing to know precise details about the hardware being used.\nA driver communicates with the device through the computer bus or communications subsystem to which the hardware connects. When a calling program invokes a routine in the driver, the driver issues commands to the device. Once the device sends data back to the driver, the driver may invoke routines in the original calling program. \nDrivers are hardware dependent and operating-system-specific. They usually provide the interrupt handling required for any necessary asynchronous time-dependent hardware interface.\nPurpose.\nThe main purpose of device drivers is to provide abstraction by acting as a translator between a hardware device and the applications or operating systems that use it. Programmers can write higher-level application code independently of whatever specific hardware the end-user is using.\nFor example, a high-level application for interacting with a serial port may simply have two functions for \"send data\" and \"receive data\". At a lower level, a device driver implementing these functions would communicate to the particular serial port controller installed on a user's computer. The commands needed to control a 16550 UART are much different from the commands needed to control an FTDI serial port converter, but each hardware-specific device driver abstracts these details into the same (or similar) software interface.\nDevelopment.\nWriting a device driver requires an in-depth understanding of how the hardware and the software works for a given platform function. Because drivers require low-level access to hardware functions in order to operate, drivers typically operate in a highly privileged environment and can cause system operational issues if something goes wrong. In contrast, most user-level software on modern operating systems can be stopped without greatly affecting the rest of the system. Even drivers executing in user mode can crash a system if the device is erroneously programmed. These factors make it more difficult and dangerous to diagnose problems.\nThe task of writing drivers thus usually falls to software engineers or computer engineers who work for hardware-development companies. This is because they have better information than most outsiders about the design of their hardware. Moreover, it was traditionally considered in the hardware manufacturer's interest to guarantee that their clients can use their hardware in an optimum way. Typically, the Logical Device Driver (LDD) is written by the operating system vendor, while the Physical Device Driver (PDD) is implemented by the device vendor. However, in recent years, non-vendors have written numerous device drivers for proprietary devices, mainly for use with free and open source operating systems. In such cases, it is important that the hardware manufacturer provide information on how the device communicates. Although this information can instead be learned by reverse engineering, this is much more difficult with hardware than it is with software.\nMicrosoft has attempted to reduce system instability due to poorly written device drivers by creating a new framework for driver development, called Windows Driver Framework (WDF). This includes User-Mode Driver Framework (UMDF) that encourages development of certain types of drivers\u2014primarily those that implement a message-based protocol for communicating with their devices\u2014as user-mode drivers. If such drivers malfunction, they do not cause system instability. The Kernel-Mode Driver Framework (KMDF) model continues to allow development of kernel-mode device drivers, but attempts to provide standard implementations of functions that are known to cause problems, including cancellation of I/O operations, power management, and plug and play device support.\nApple has an open-source framework for developing drivers on macOS, called I/O Kit.\nIn Linux environments, programmers can build device drivers as parts of the kernel, separately as loadable modules, or as user-mode drivers (for certain types of devices where kernel interfaces exist, such as for USB devices). Makedev includes a list of the devices in Linux, including ttyS (terminal), lp (parallel port), hd (disk), loop, and sound (these include mixer, sequencer, dsp, and audio).\nMicrosoft Windows .sys files and Linux .ko files can contain loadable device drivers. The advantage of loadable device drivers is that they can be loaded only when necessary and then unloaded, thus saving kernel memory.\nKernel mode vs. user mode.\nDevice drivers, particularly on Microsoft Windows platforms, can run in kernel-mode (Ring 0 on x86 CPUs) or in user-mode (Ring\u00a03 on x86 CPUs). The primary benefit of running a driver in user mode is improved stability, since a poorly written user-mode device driver cannot crash the system by overwriting kernel memory. On the other hand, user/kernel-mode transitions usually impose a considerable performance overhead, thus making kernel-mode drivers preferred for low-latency networking.\nKernel space can be accessed by user module only through the use of system calls. End user programs like the UNIX shell or other GUI-based applications are part of user space. These applications interact with hardware through kernel supported functions.\nApplications.\nBecause of the diversity of hardware and operating systems, drivers operate in many different environments. Drivers may interface with:\nCommon levels of abstraction for device drivers include:\nSo choosing and installing the correct device drivers for given hardware is often a key component of computer system configuration.\nVirtual device drivers.\nVirtual device drivers represent a particular variant of device drivers. They are used to emulate a hardware device, particularly in virtualization environments, for example when a DOS program is run on a Microsoft Windows computer or when a guest operating system is run on, for example, a Xen host. Instead of enabling the guest operating system to dialog with hardware, virtual device drivers take the opposite role and emulates a piece of hardware, so that the guest operating system and its drivers running inside a virtual machine can have the illusion of accessing real hardware. Attempts by the guest operating system to access the hardware are routed to the virtual device driver in the host operating system as e.g.,\u00a0function calls. The virtual device driver can also send simulated processor-level events like interrupts into the virtual machine.\nVirtual devices may also operate in a non-virtualized environment. For example, a virtual network adapter is used with a virtual private network, while a virtual disk device is used with iSCSI. A good example for virtual device drivers can be Daemon Tools.\nThere are several variants of virtual device drivers, such as VxDs, VLMs, and VDDs.\nOpen source drivers.\nSolaris descriptions of commonly used device drivers:\nIdentifiers.\nA device on the PCI bus or USB is identified by two IDs which consist of 4 hexadecimal numbers each. The vendor ID identifies the vendor of the device. The device ID identifies a specific device from that manufacturer/vendor.\nA PCI device has often an ID pair for the main chip of the device, and also a subsystem ID pair which identifies the vendor, which may be different from the chip manufacturer."}
{"id": "9103", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9103", "title": "Dimona", "text": "Dimona () is an Israeli city in the Negev desert, to the south-east of Beersheba and west of the Dead Sea above the Arava valley in the Southern District of Israel. In its population was . The Shimon Peres Negev Nuclear Research Center, colloquially known as the \"Dimona Reactor\", is located southeast of the city.\nEtymology.\nThe Negev Naming Committee chose the name based upon that of a biblical town, mentioned in Joshua 15:21-22, on the basis that \"the sound of this name had been preserved in the Arabic name Harabat Umm Dumna.\"\nHistory.\nDimona was one of the development towns created in the 1950s under the leadership of Israel's first Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion. Dimona itself was conceived in 1953. The location chosen was close to the Dead Sea Works. It was established in 1955. The first residents were Jewish immigrants from North Africa, with an initial 36 families being the first to settle there. Its population in 1955 was about 300. The North African immigrants also constructed the city's houses. The population was composed mainly of North African, particularly Moroccan immigrants, though immigrants from Yemen and Eastern Europe also arrived, as did Bene Israel immigrants from India.\nWhen the Israeli nuclear program began in 1958, a location not far from the city was chosen for the Negev Nuclear Research Center due to its relative isolation in the desert and availability of housing. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, immigrants from Eastern Europe arrived. A textile factory was opened in 1958. That same year, Dimona became a local council. In 1961, it had a population of 5,000. The emblem of Dimona (as a local council), adopted 2 March 1961, appeared on a stamp issued on 24 March 1965. Dimona was declared a city in 1969. In 1971, it had a population of 23,700. \nIn spite of a gradual decrease during the 1980s, the city's population began to grow once again in the 1990s when it took in immigrants from the former Soviet Union and Ethiopia. Currently, Dimona is the third largest city in the Negev, with the population of almost 34,000. Due to projected rapid population growth in the Negev, the city is expected to triple in size by 2025.\nDemography.\nDimona is described as \"mini-India\" by many for its 7,500-strong Indian Jewish community. It is also home to Israel's Black Hebrew community, formerly governed by its founder and spiritual leader, Ben Ammi Ben-Israel, now deceased. The Black Hebrews number about 3,000 in Dimona, with additional families in Arad, Mitzpe Ramon and the Tiberias area. Their official status in Israel was an ongoing issue for many years, but in May 1990, the issue was resolved with the issuing of first B/1 visas, and a year later, issuing of temporary residency. Status was extended to August 2003, when the Israeli Ministry of Interior granted permanent residency.\nEconomy.\nIn the early 1980s, textile plants, such as Dimona Textiles Ltd., dominated the industrial landscape. Many plants have since closed. Dimona Silica Industries Ltd. manufactures precipitated silica and calcium carbonate fillers. About a third of the city's population works in industrial workplaces (chemical plants near the Dead Sea like the Dead Sea Works, high-tech companies and textile shops), and another third in the area of services. Due to the introduction of new technologies, many workers have been made redundant in the recent years, creating a total unemployment rate of about 10%. Dimona has taken part of Israel's solar transformation. The Rotem Industrial Complex outside of the city has dozens of solar mirrors that focus the sun's rays on a tower that in turn heats a water boiler to create steam, turning a turbine to create electricity. Luz II, Ltd. plans to use the solar array to test new technology for the three new solar plants to be built in California for Pacific Gas and Electric Company.\nGeography and climate.\nDimona is located in the Negev Desert. The city stands at an elevation of around above sea level.\nClimate.\nDimona has a semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSh\"). The average annual temperature is , and around of precipitation falls annually.\nTransportation.\nIn the early 1950s, an extension to Dimona and south was constructed from the Railway to Beersheba, designed for freight traffic. A passenger service began in 2005, after pressure from Dimona's municipality. Dimona Railway Station is located in the southwestern part of the city. The main bus terminal is the Dimona Central Bus Station, with lines to Beersheba, Tel Aviv, Eilat, and nearby towns.\nTwin towns.\nDimona is twinned with:"}
{"id": "9105", "revid": "36588661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9105", "title": "DC Comics", "text": "DC Comics, Inc. is an American comic book publisher and the flagship unit of DC Entertainment, a subsidiary of the Warner Bros. Global Brands and Experiences division of Warner Bros., which itself is a subsidiary of AT&amp;T's WarnerMedia through its Studios &amp; Networks division.\nDC Comics is one of the largest and oldest American comic book companies. The majority of its publications take place within the fictional DC Universe and feature numerous culturally iconic heroic characters, such as Superman, Batman and Wonder Woman. The universe also features well-known supervillains who oppose the superheroes such as Lex Luthor, The Cheetah and the Joker. The company has published non-DC Universe-related material, including \"Watchmen\", \"V for Vendetta\", \"Fables\" and many titles under their alternative imprint Vertigo.\nOriginally in Manhattan at 432 Fourth Avenue, the DC Comics offices have been located at 480 and later 575 Lexington Avenue; 909 Third Avenue; 75 Rockefeller Plaza; 666 Fifth Avenue; and 1325 Avenue of the Americas. DC had its headquarters at 1700 Broadway, Midtown Manhattan, New York City, however DC Entertainment relocated its headquarters from New York to Burbank, California in April 2015.\nPenguin Random House Publisher Services distributes DC Comics' books to the bookstore market, while Diamond Comic Distributors supplied the comics shop direct market until June 2020, where Lunar Distribution and UCS Comic Distributors, who already distributed to the direct market due to Diamond's distribution interruption as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, replaced Diamond to distribute to that market. DC Comics and its longtime major competitor Marvel Comics (acquired in 2009 by The Walt Disney Company, WarnerMedia's main competitor) together shared approximately 70% of the American comic book market in 2017, though this number may give a distorted view since graphic novels are excluded. With the sales of all books included, DC is the second biggest publisher, after Viz Media, and Marvel is third.\nHistory.\nGolden Age.\nEntrepreneur Major Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson founded National Allied Publications in Autumn 1934 intended as an American comic book publishing company. The first publishing of the company debuted with the tabloid-sized \"New Fun: The Big Comic Magazine\" #1 (the first of a comic series later called \"More Fun Comics\") with a cover date of February 1935. An anthology title essential for containing original stories not reprinted from newspaper strips unlike many comic book series before. While superhero comics are what DC Comics is known for throughout modern times, the genres in the anthology titles consisted of funnies, Western comics and adventure-related stories starting out. The character Doctor Occult, created by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster in December 1935 within the issue No. 6 of \"New Fun Comics\", is considered as the earliest recurring superhero created by DC that is still used. The company created a second recurring title called \"New Comics\" No. 1 released in December 1935 which would be the start of the long-running \"Adventure Comics\" series featuring many anthology titles as well.\nWheeler-Nicholson's next and final title, \"Detective Comics\", advertised with a cover illustration dated December 1936, eventually premiered three months late with a March 1937 cover date. The themed anthology that revolved originally on fictional detective stories became in modern times the longest-running ongoing comic series. A notable debut in the first issue was Slam Bradley created in contribution by Malcom-Wheeler-Nicholson, Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster. In 1937, in debt to printing-plant owner and magazine distributor Harry Donenfeld \u2014 who also published pulp magazines and operated as a principal in the magazine distributorship Independent News \u2014 Wheeler-Nicholson had to take Donenfeld on as a partner to publish \"Detective Comics\" No. 1. Detective Comics, Inc. (which would help inspire the abbreviation DC) was formed, with Wheeler-Nicholson and Jack S. Liebowitz, Donenfeld's accountant, listed as owners. Major Wheeler-Nicholson remained for a year, but cash-flow problems continued, and he was forced out. Shortly afterwards, Detective Comics, Inc. purchased the remains of National Allied, also known as Nicholson Publishing, at a bankruptcy auction.\nMeanwhile Max Gaines, formed the sister company All-American Publications around 1938. Detective Comics, Inc. soon launched a new anthology title, entitled \"Action Comics\". Issue#1, cover dated in June 1938, first featured characters such as Superman by Siegel and Shuster, Zatara by Fred Guardineer and Tex Thompson by Ken Finch and Bernard Baily. It is considered to be the first comic book to feature the new character archetype\u2014soon known as \"superheroes\" and was a sales hit bringing to life a new age of comic books with the credit going to the first appearance of Superman both being featured on the cover and within the issue. It is now one of the most expensive and valuable comic book issues of all time. The issue's first featured tale which starred Superman was the first to feature an origin story of superheroes with the reveal of an unnamed planet later known as Krypton that he is said to be from. The issue also contained the first essential supporting character and one of the earliest essential female characters in comics with Lois Lane as Superman's first depicted romantic interest. The Green Hornet inspired character known as the Crimson Avenger by Jim Chamber was featured in \"Detective Comics\" No. 20 (October 1938). The character makes a distinction of being the first masked vigilante published by DC. An unnamed \"office boy\" retconned as Jimmy Olsen's first appearance was revealed in \"Action Comics\" #6's (November 1938) Superman story by Siegel and Shuster.\nStarting in 1939, Siegel and Shuster's Superman would be the first comic derived character to appear outside of comic magazines and later appear in newspaper strips starring himself which first introduced Superman's biological parents, Jor-El and Lara. All-American Publications' first comic series called \"All-American Comics\" was first published in April 1939. The series of \"Detective Comics\" would make successful history as first featuring Batman by Bob Kane and Bill Finger in issue#27 (March 1939) with the request of more superhero titles. Batman was depicted as a masked vigilante depicted as wearing a suit known as the Batsuit along with riding a car that would later be referred to as the Batmobile. Also within the Batman story was the supporting character, James Gordon, Police commissioner of what later would be Gotham City Police Department. Despite being a parody, All-American Publications introduced the earliest female character who would later be a female superhero called Red Tornado (though disguised as a male) in Ma Hunkel who first appeared in the \"Scribbly\" stories in \"All-American Comics\" No. 3 (June 1939). Another important Batman debut was the introduction of the fictional mansion known as Wayne Manor first seen in \"Detective Comics\" No. 28 (June 1939). The series \"Adventure Comics\" would eventually follow in the \"Action Comics\" and \"Detective Comics\" series footsteps with featuring a new recurring superhero. The superhero called Sandman was first written in issue No. 40 (cover date: July 1939). \"Action Comics\" No. 13 (June 1939) introduced the first recurring Superman enemy referred to as the Ultra-Humanite first introduced by Siegel and Shuster, commonly cited as one of the earliest supervillain in comic books. The character Superman had another breakthrough with progress when the character had his own comic book starring him which was unheard of at the time. The first issue introduced in June 1939 helped directly introduce Superman's adoptive parents, Jonathan and Martha Kent by Siegel and Shuster. \"Detective Comics\" #29 (July 1939) introduced the Batman's utility belt by Gardner Fox. Outside of DC's publishing, a character later integrated as DC was introduced by Fox Feature Syndicate named the Blue Beetle released in August 1939. Fictional cities would be a common theme of DC. The first revealed city was Superman's home city, Metropolis, that was originally named in \"Action Comics\" No. 16 in September 1939. \"Detective Comics\" No. 31 in September 1939 by Gardner Fox, Bob Kane and Sheldon Moldoff introduced a romantic interest of Batman called Julie Madison, the weapon known as the Batarang that Batman commonly uses along with the fictional aircraft called the Batplane. Batman's origin would first be used in \"Detective Comics\" No. 33 (Nov. 1939) first depicting the death of Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne by a mugger. The origin story would remain crucial for the fictional character since the inception.\nThe \"Daily Planet\" (a common setting of Superman) was first named in a newspaper strip of Superman around November 1939. The superhero Doll Man was the first superhero by Quality that DC now owns. Fawcett Comics was formed around 1939 and would end up as DC's original competitor company in the next decade.\nNational Allied Publications soon merged with Detective Comics, Inc., forming National Comics Publications on September 30, 1946. National Comics Publications absorbed an affiliated concern, Max Gaines' and Liebowitz' All-American Publications. In the same year Gaines let Liebowitz buy him out, and kept only \"Picture Stories from the Bible\" as the foundation of his own new company, EC Comics. At that point, \"Liebowitz promptly orchestrated the merger of All-American and Detective Comics into National Comics... Next he took charge of organizing National Comics, [the self-distributorship] Independent News, and their affiliated firms into a single corporate entity, National Periodical Publications\". National Periodical Publications became publicly traded on the stock market in 1961.\nDespite the official names \"National Comics\" and \"National Periodical Publications\", the company began branding itself as \"Superman-DC\" as early as 1940, and the company became known colloquially as DC Comics for years before the official adoption of that name in 1977.\nThe company began to move aggressively against what it saw as copyright-violating imitations from other companies, such as Fox Comics' Wonder Man, which (according to court testimony) Fox started as a copy of Superman. This extended to DC suing Fawcett Comics over Captain Marvel, at the time comics' top-selling character (see \"National Comics Publications, Inc. v. Fawcett Publications, Inc.\"). Faced with declining sales and the prospect of bankruptcy if it lost, Fawcett capitulated in 1953 and ceased publishing comics. Years later, Fawcett sold the rights for Captain Marvel to DC\u2014which in 1972 revived Captain Marvel in the new title \"Shazam!\" featuring artwork by his creator, C. C. Beck. In the meantime, the abandoned trademark had been seized by Marvel Comics in 1967, with the creation of their Captain Marvel, forbidding the DC comic itself to be called that. While Captain Marvel did not recapture his old popularity, he later appeared in a Saturday morning live action TV adaptation and gained a prominent place in the mainstream continuity DC calls the DC Universe.\nWhen the popularity of superheroes faded in the late 1940s, the company focused on such genres as science fiction, Westerns, humor, and romance. DC also published crime and horror titles, but relatively tame ones, and thus avoided the mid-1950s backlash against such comics. A handful of the most popular superhero-titles, including \"Action Comics\" and \"Detective Comics\", the medium's two longest-running titles, continued publication.\nSilver Age.\nIn the mid-1950s, editorial director Irwin Donenfeld and publisher Liebowitz directed editor Julius Schwartz (whose roots lay in the science-fiction book market) to produce a one-shot Flash story in the try-out title \"Showcase\". Instead of reviving the old character, Schwartz had writers Robert Kanigher and John Broome, penciler Carmine Infantino, and inker Joe Kubert create an entirely new super-speedster, updating and modernizing the Flash's civilian identity, costume, and origin with a science-fiction bent. The Flash's reimagining in \"Showcase\" No. 4 (October 1956) proved sufficiently popular that it soon led to a similar revamping of the Green Lantern character, the introduction of the modern all-star team Justice League of America (JLA), and many more superheroes, heralding what historians and fans call the Silver Age of Comic Books.\nNational did not reimagine its continuing characters (primarily Superman, Batman, and Wonder Woman), but radically overhauled them. The Superman family of titles, under editor Mort Weisinger, introduced such enduring characters as Supergirl, Bizarro, and Brainiac. The Batman titles, under editor Jack Schiff, introduced the successful Batwoman, Bat-Girl, Ace the Bat-Hound, and Bat-Mite in an attempt to modernize the strip with non-science-fiction elements. Schwartz, together with artist Infantino, then revitalized Batman in what the company promoted as the \"New Look\", with relatively down-to-Earth stories re-emphasizing Batman as a detective. Meanwhile, editor Kanigher successfully introduced a whole family of Wonder Woman characters having fantastic adventures in a mythological context.\nSince the 1940s, when Superman, Batman, and many of the company's other heroes began appearing in stories together, DC's characters inhabited a shared continuity that, decades later, was dubbed the \"DC Universe\" by fans. With the story \"Flash of Two Worlds\", in \"Flash\" No. 123 (September 1961), editor Schwartz (with writer Gardner Fox and artists Infantino and Joe Giella) introduced a concept that allowed slotting the 1930s and 1940s Golden Age heroes into this continuity via the explanation that they lived on an other-dimensional \"Earth 2\", as opposed to the modern heroes' \"Earth 1\"\u2014in the process creating the foundation for what was later called the DC Multiverse.\nDC's introduction of the reimagined superheroes did not go unnoticed by other comics companies. In 1961, with DC's JLA as the specific spur, Marvel Comics writer-editor Stan Lee and a robust creator Jack Kirby ushered in the sub-Silver Age \"Marvel Age\" of comics with the debut issue of \"The Fantastic Four\". Reportedly, DC ignored the initial success of Marvel with this editorial change until its consistently strengthening sales, albeit also benefiting Independent News' business as their distributor as well, made that impossible. That commercial situation especially applied with Marvel's superior sell-through percentage numbers which were typically 70% to DC's roughly 50%, which meant DC's publications were barely making a profit in comparison after returns from the distributors were calculated while Marvel was making an excellent profit by comparison.\nHowever, the senior DC staff were reportedly at a loss at this time to understand how this small publishing house was achieving this increasingly threatening commercial strength. For instance, when Marvel's product was examined in a meeting, Marvel's emphasis on more sophisticated character-based narrative and artist-driven visual storytelling was apparently ignored for self-deluding guesses at the brand's popularity which included superficial reasons like the presence of the color red or word balloons on the cover, or that the perceived crudeness of the interior art was somehow more appealing to readers. When Lee learned about DC's subsequent experimental attempts to imitate these perceived details, he amused himself by arranging direct defiance of those assumptions in Marvel's publications as sales strengthened further to frustrate the competition.\nHowever, this ignorance of Marvel's true appeal did not extend to some of the writing talent during this period, from which there were some attempts to emulate Marvel's narrative approach. For instance, there was the \"Doom Patrol\" series by Arnold Drake, a writer who previously warned the management of the new rival's strength; a superhero team of outsiders who resented their freakish powers, which Drake later speculated was plagiarized by Stan Lee to create \"The X-Men\". There was also the young Jim Shooter who purposely emulated Marvel's writing when he wrote for DC after much study of both companies' styles, such as for the \"Legion of Super-Heroes\" feature.\nA 1966 Batman TV show on the ABC network sparked a temporary spike in comic book sales, and a brief fad for superheroes in Saturday morning animation (Filmation created most of DC's initial cartoons) and other media. DC significantly lightened the tone of many DC comics\u2014particularly \"Batman\" and \"Detective Comics\"\u2014to better complement the \"camp\" tone of the TV series. This tone coincided with the famous \"Go-Go Checks\" checkerboard cover-dress which featured a black-and-white checkerboard strip (all DC books cover dated February 1966 until August 1967) at the top of each comic, a misguided attempt by then-managing editor Irwin Donenfeld to make DC's output \"stand out on the newsracks\". In particular, DC artist, Carmine Infantino, complained that the visual cover distinctiveness made DC's titles easier for readers to see and then avoid in favor of Marvel's titles.\nIn 1967, Batman artist Infantino (who had designed popular Silver Age characters Batgirl and the Phantom Stranger) rose from art director to become DC's editorial director. With the growing popularity of upstart rival Marvel Comics threatening to topple DC from its longtime number-one position in the comics industry, he attempted to infuse the company with more focus towards marketing new and existing titles and characters with more adult sensibilities towards an emerging older age group of superhero comic book fans that grew out of Marvel's efforts to market their superhero line to college-aged adults. He also recruited major talents such as ex-Marvel artist and Spider-Man co-creator Steve Ditko and promising newcomers Neal Adams and Denny O'Neil and replaced some existing DC editors with artist-editors, including Joe Kubert and Dick Giordano, to give DC's output a more artistic critical eye.\nKinney National Company/Warner Communications subsidiary (1967\u20131990).\nIn 1967, National Periodical Publications was purchased by Kinney National Company, which purchased Warner Bros.-Seven Arts in 1969. Kinney National spun off its non-entertainment assets in 1972 (as National Kinney Corporation) and changed its name to Warner Communications Inc.\nIn 1970, Jack Kirby moved from Marvel Comics to DC, at the end of the Silver Age of Comics, in which Kirby's contributions to Marvel played a large, integral role. Given carte blanche to write and illustrate his own stories, he created a handful of thematically linked series he called collectively The Fourth World. In the existing series \"Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen\" and in his own, newly launched series \"New Gods\", \"Mister Miracle\", and \"The Forever People\", Kirby introduced such enduring characters and concepts as archvillain Darkseid and the other-dimensional realm Apokolips. Furthermore, Kirby intended their stories to be reprinted in collected editions, in a publishing format that was later called the trade paperback, which became a standard industry practice decades later. While sales were respectable, they did not meet DC management's initially high expectations, and also suffered from a lack of comprehension and internal support from Infantino. By 1973 the \"Fourth World\" was all cancelled, although Kirby's conceptions soon became integral to the broadening of the DC Universe, especially after the major toy company, Kenner Products, judged them ideal for their action figure adaptation of the DC Universe, the Super Powers Collection., Obligated by his contract, Kirby created other unrelated series for DC, including \"Kamandi\", \"The Demon\", and \"OMAC\", before ultimately returning to Marvel Comics.\nBronze Age.\nFollowing the science-fiction innovations of the Silver Age, the comics of the 1970s and 1980s became known as the Bronze Age, as fantasy gave way to more naturalistic and sometimes darker themes. Illegal drug use, banned by the Comics Code Authority, explicitly appeared in comics for the first time in Marvel Comics' story \"Green Goblin Reborn!\" in \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" No. 96 (May 1971), and after the Code's updating in response, DC offered a drug-fueled storyline in writer Dennis O'Neil and artist Neal Adams' \"Green Lantern\", beginning with the story \"Snowbirds Don't Fly\" in the retitled \"Green Lantern / Green Arrow\" No. 85 (September 1971), which depicted Speedy, the teen sidekick of superhero archer Green Arrow, as having become a heroin addict.\nJenette Kahn, a former children's magazine publisher, replaced Infantino as editorial director in January 1976. As it happened, her first task even before being formally hired, was to convince Bill Sarnoff, the head of Warner Publishing, to keep DC as a publishing concern, as opposed to simply managing their licensing of their properties. With that established, DC had attempted to compete with the now-surging Marvel by dramatically increasing its output and attempting to win the market by flooding it. This included launching series featuring such new characters as \"Firestorm\" and \"Shade, the Changing Man\", as well as an increasing array of non-superhero titles, in an attempt to recapture the pre-Wertham days of post-War comicdom. In June 1978, five months before the release of the first Superman movie, Kahn expanded the line further, increasing the number of titles and story pages, and raising the price from 35 cents to 50 cents. Most series received eight-page back-up features while some had full-length twenty-five-page stories. This was a move the company called the \"DC Explosion\". The move was not successful, however, and corporate parent Warner dramatically cut back on these largely unsuccessful titles, firing many staffers in what industry watchers dubbed \"the DC Implosion\". In September 1978, the line was dramatically reduced and standard-size books returned to 17-story pages but for a still increased 40 cents. By 1980, the books returned to 50 cents with a 25-page story count but the story pages replaced house ads in the books.\nSeeking new ways to boost market share, the new team of publisher Kahn, vice president Paul Levitz, and managing editor Giordano addressed the issue of talent instability. To that end\u2014and following the example of Atlas/Seaboard Comics and such independent companies as Eclipse Comics\u2014DC began to offer royalties in place of the industry-standard work-for-hire agreement in which creators worked for a flat fee and signed away all rights, giving talent a financial incentive tied to the success of their work. As it happened, the implementation of these incentives proved opportune considering Marvel Comics' Editor-in-Chief, Jim Shooter, was alienating much of his company's creative staff with his authoritarian manner and major talents there went to DC like Roy Thomas, Gene Colan, Marv Wolfman, and George Perez.\nIn addition, emulating the era's new television form, the miniseries while addressing the matter of an excessive number of ongoing titles fizzling out within a few issues of their start, DC created the industry concept of the comic book limited series. This publishing format allowed for the deliberate creation of finite storylines within a more flexible publishing format that could showcase creations without forcing the talent into unsustainable open-ended commitments. The first such title was \"World of Krypton\" in 1979, and its positive results lead to subsequent similar titles and later more ambitious productions like \"Camelot 3000\" for the direct market in 1982.\nThese changes in policy shaped the future of the medium as a whole, and in the short term allowed DC to entice creators away from rival Marvel, and encourage stability on individual titles. In November 1980 DC launched the ongoing series \"The New Teen Titans\", by writer Marv Wolfman and artist George P\u00e9rez, two popular talents with a history of success. Their superhero-team comic, superficially similar to Marvel's ensemble series \"X-Men\", but rooted in DC history, earned significant sales in part due to the stability of the creative team, who both continued with the title for six full years. In addition, Wolfman and P\u00e9rez took advantage of the limited-series option to create a spin-off title, \"Tales of the New Teen Titans\", to present origin stories of their original characters without having to break the narrative flow of the main series or oblige them to double their work load with another ongoing title.\nModern Age.\nThis successful revitalization of the Silver Age Teen Titans led DC's editors to seek the same for the wider DC Universe. The result, the Wolfman/P\u00e9rez 12-issue limited series \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", gave the company an opportunity to realign and jettison some of the characters' complicated backstory and continuity discrepancies. A companion publication, two volumes entitled \"The History of the DC Universe\", set out the revised history of the major DC characters. \"Crisis\" featured many key deaths that shaped the DC Universe for the following decades, and it separated the timeline of DC publications into pre- and post-\"Crisis\".\nMeanwhile, a parallel update had started in the non-superhero and horror titles. Since early 1984, the work of British writer Alan Moore had revitalized the horror series \"The Saga of the Swamp Thing\", and soon numerous British writers, including Neil Gaiman and Grant Morrison, began freelancing for the company. The resulting influx of sophisticated horror-fantasy material led to DC in 1993 establishing the Vertigo mature-readers imprint, which did not subscribe to the Comics Code Authority.\nTwo DC limited series, \"\" by Frank Miller and \"Watchmen\" by Moore and artist Dave Gibbons, drew attention in the mainstream press for their dark psychological complexity and promotion of the antihero. These titles helped pave the way for comics to be more widely accepted in literary-criticism circles and to make inroads into the book industry, with collected editions of these series as commercially successful trade paperbacks.\nThe mid-1980s also saw the end of many long-running DC war comics, including series that had been in print since the 1960s. These titles, all with over 100 issues, included \"Sgt. Rock\", \"G.I. Combat\", \"The Unknown Soldier\", and \"Weird War Tales\".\nTime Warner/AOL Time Warner/WarnerMedia unit (1990\u2013present).\nIn March 1989, Warner Communications merged with Time Inc., making DC Comics a subsidiary of Time Warner. In June, the first Tim Burton directed Batman movie was released, and DC began publishing its hardcover series of DC Archive Editions, collections of many of their early, key comics series, featuring rare and expensive stories unseen by many modern fans. Restoration for many of the Archive Editions was handled by Rick Keene with colour restoration by DC's long-time resident colourist, Bob LeRose. These collections attempted to retroactively credit many of the writers and artists who had worked without much recognition for DC during the early period of comics when individual credits were few and far between.\nThe comics industry experienced a brief boom in the early 1990s, thanks to a combination of speculative purchasing (mass purchase of the books as collectible items, with intent to resell at a higher value as the rising value of older issues, was thought to imply that \"all\" comics would rise dramatically in price) and several storylines which gained attention from the mainstream media. DC's extended storylines in which Superman was killed, and superhero \"Green Lantern\" turned into the supervillain Parallax resulted in dramatically increased sales, but the increases were as temporary as the hero's replacements. Sales dropped off as the industry went into a major slump, while manufactured \"collectables\" numbering in the millions replaced quality with quantity until fans and speculators alike deserted the medium in droves.\nDC's Piranha Press and other imprints (including the mature readers line Vertigo, and Helix, a short-lived science fiction imprint) were introduced to facilitate compartmentalized diversification and allow for specialized marketing of individual product lines. They increased the use of non-traditional contractual arrangements, including the dramatic rise of creator-owned projects, leading to a significant increase in critically lauded work (much of it for Vertigo) and the licensing of material from other companies. DC also increased publication of book-store friendly formats, including trade paperback collections of individual serial comics, as well as original graphic novels.\nOne of the other imprints was Impact Comics from 1991 to 1992 in which the Archie Comics superheroes were licensed and revamped. The stories in the line were part of its own shared universe.\nDC entered into a publishing agreement with Milestone Media that gave DC a line of comics featuring a culturally and racially diverse range of superhero characters. Although the Milestone line ceased publication after a few years, it yielded the popular animated series \"Static Shock\". DC established Paradox Press to publish material such as the large-format \"Big Book of...\" series of multi-artist interpretations on individual themes, and such crime fiction as the graphic novel \"Road to Perdition\". In 1998, DC purchased WildStorm Comics, Jim Lee's imprint under the Image Comics banner, continuing it for many years as a wholly separate imprint \u2013 and fictional universe \u2013 with its own style and audience. As part of this purchase, DC also began to publish titles under the fledgling WildStorm sub-imprint America's Best Comics (ABC), a series of titles created by Alan Moore, including \"The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen\", \"Tom Strong\", and \"Promethea\". Moore strongly contested this situation, and DC eventually stopped publishing ABC.\n2000s.\nIn March 2003 DC acquired publishing and merchandising rights to the long-running fantasy series \"Elfquest\", previously self-published by creators Wendy and Richard Pini under their WaRP Graphics publication banner. This series then followed another non-DC title, Tower Comics' series T.H.U.N.D.E.R. Agents, in collection into DC Archive Editions. In 2004 DC temporarily acquired the North American publishing rights to graphic novels from European publishers 2000 AD and Humanoids. It also rebranded its younger-audience titles with the mascot Johnny DC and established the CMX imprint to reprint translated manga. In 2006, CMX took over from Dark Horse Comics publication of the webcomic \"Megatokyo\" in print form. DC also took advantage of the demise of Kitchen Sink Press and acquired the rights to much of the work of Will Eisner, such as his \"The Spirit\" series and his graphic novels.\nIn 2004, DC began laying the groundwork for a full continuity-reshuffling sequel to \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", promising substantial changes to the DC Universe (and side-stepping the 1994 \"Zero Hour\" event which similarly tried to ret-con the history of the DCU). In 2005, the critically lauded \"Batman Begins\" film was released; also, the company published several limited series establishing increasingly escalated conflicts among DC's heroes, with events climaxing in the \"Infinite Crisis\" limited series. Immediately after this event, DC's ongoing series jumped forward a full year in their in-story continuity, as DC launched a weekly series, \"52\", to gradually fill in the missing time. Concurrently, DC lost the copyright to \"Superboy\" (while retaining the trademark) when the heirs of Jerry Siegel used a provision of the 1976 revision to the copyright law to regain ownership.\nIn 2005, DC launched its \"All-Star\" line (evoking the title of the 1940s publication), designed to feature some of the company's best-known characters in stories that eschewed the long and convoluted continuity of the DC Universe. The line began with \"All-Star Batman &amp; Robin the Boy Wonder\" and \"All-Star Superman\", with \"All-Star Wonder Woman\" and \"All-Star Batgirl\" announced in 2006 but neither being released nor scheduled as of the end of 2009.\nDC licensed characters from the Archie Comics imprint Red Circle Comics by 2007. They appeared in the Red Circle line, based in the DC Universe, with a series of one-shots followed by a miniseries that lead into two ongoing titles, each lasting 10 issues.\n2010s.\nIn 2011, DC rebooted all of its running titles following the Flashpoint storyline. The reboot called The New 52 gave new origin stories and costume designs to many of DC's characters.\nDC licensed pulp characters including Doc Savage and the Spirit which it then used, along with some DC heroes, as part of the First Wave comics line launched in 2010 and lasting through fall 2011.\nIn May 2011, DC announced it would begin releasing digital versions of their comics on the same day as paper versions.\nOn June 1, 2011, DC announced that it would end all ongoing series set in the DC Universe in August and relaunch its comic line with 52 issue #1s, starting with \"Justice League\" on August 31 (written by Geoff Johns and drawn by Jim Lee), with the rest to follow later on in September.\nOn June 4, 2013, DC unveiled two new digital comic innovations to enhance interactivity: \"DC2\" and \"DC2 Multiverse\". \"DC2\" layers dynamic artwork onto digital comic panels, adding a new level of dimension to digital storytelling, while \"DC2 Multiverse\" allows readers to determine a specific story outcome by selecting individual characters, storylines and plot developments while reading the comic, meaning one digital comic has multiple outcomes. \"DC2\" will first appear in the upcoming digital-first title, \"Batman '66\", based on the 1960s television series and \"DC2 Multiverse\" will first appear in \"\", a digital-first title based on the .\nIn 2014, DC announced an eight-issue miniseries titled \"Convergence\" which began in April 2015.\nIn 2016, DC announced a line-wide relaunch titled DC Rebirth. The new line would launch with an 80-page one-shot titled DC Universe: Rebirth, written by Geoff Johns, with art from Gary Frank, Ethan Van Sciver, and more. After that, many new series would launch with a twice-monthly release schedule and new creative teams for nearly every title. The relaunch was meant to bring back the legacy and heart many felt had been missing from DC characters since the launch of the New 52. Rebirth brought huge success, both financially and critically.\nIn January 2019 it was reported that 7 of the DC's 240 person workforce were laid off, including several vice presidents.\n2020s.\nOn February 21, 2020, the Co-Publisher of DC Comics, Dan DiDio stepped down after 10 years at that position. The company did not give a reason for the move, nor did it indicate whether it was his decision or the company's. The leadership change was the latest event in the company restructuring which began the previous month, as several top executives were laid off from the company. However, Bleeding Cool reported that he was fired.\nOn June 2020, Warner Bros. announced a separate DC-themed online-only convention. Dubbed as DC FanDome, the free \"immersive virtual fan experience\" was a 24-hour-long event held on August 22, 2020. The main presentation, entitled \"DC FanDome: Hall of Heroes\", was held as scheduled on August 22. The remaining programming was provided through a one-day video on demand experience, \"DC FanDome: Explore the Multiverse\", on September 12.\nAs Warner Bros. and DC's response to San Diego Comic-Con's cancellation due to the COVID-19 pandemic, The convention featured information about DC-based content including the DC Extended Universe film franchise, the Arrowverse television franchise, comic books, and video games.\nIn August 2020, roughly one-third of DC's editorial ranks were laid off, including the editor-in-chief, senior story editor, executive editor, and several senior VPs.\nDC Entertainment.\nDC Entertainment, Inc. is a subsidiary of Warner Bros. that manages its comic book units and intellectual property (characters) in other units as they work with other Warner Bros units.\nIn September 2009, Warner Bros. announced that DC Comics would become a subsidiary of DC Entertainment, Inc., with Diane Nelson, President of Warner Premiere, becoming president of the newly formed holding company and DC Comics President and Publisher Paul Levitz moving to the position of Contributing Editor and Overall Consultant there. Warner Bros. and DC Comics have been owned by the same company since 1969.\nOn February 18, 2010, DC Entertainment named Jim Lee and Dan DiDio as Co-Publishers of DC Comics, Geoff Johns as Chief Creative Officer, John Rood as EVP (Executive Vice President) of Sales, Marketing and Business Development, and Patrick Caldon as EVP of Finance and Administration.\nIn October 2013, DC Entertainment announced that the DC Comics offices were going to move from New York City to Warner Bros. Burbank, California, headquarters in 2015. The other units, animation, movie, TV and portfolio planning, had preceded DC Comics by moving there in 2010.\nDC Entertainment announced its first franchise, the DC Super Hero Girls universe, in April 2015 with multi-platform content, toys and apparel to start appearing in 2016.\nWarner Bros. Pictures reorganized in May 2016 to have genre responsible film executives, thus DC Entertainment franchise films under Warner Bros. were placed under a newly created division, DC Films, created under Warner Bros. executive vice president Jon Berg and DC chief content officer Geoff Johns. This was done in the same vein as Marvel Studios in unifying DC-related filmmaking under a single vision and clarifying the greenlighting process. Johns also kept his existing role at DC Comics. Johns was promoted to DC president &amp; CCO with the addition of his DC Films while still reporting to DCE President Nelson. In August 2016, Amit Desai was promoted from senior vice president, marketing &amp; global franchise management to exec vice president, business and marketing strategy, direct-to-consumer and global franchise management.\nDC Entertainment and Warner Bros. Digital Networks announced in April 2017 DC Universe digital service to be launched in 2018 with two original series.\nWith frustration over DC Films not matching Marvel Studios' results and Berg wanting to step back to being a producer in January 2018, it was announced that Warner Bros. executive Walter Hamada was appointed president of DC film production. After a leave of absence starting in March 2018, Diane Nelson resigned as president of DC Entertainment. The company's executive management were to report to WB Chief Digital Officer Thomas Gewecke until a new president is selected. In June 2018, Johns was also moved out of his position as chief creative officer and DC Entertainment president for a writing and producing deal with the DC and WB companies. Jim Lee added DC Entertainment chief creative officer title to his DC co-publisher post. In September 2018, DC became part of the newly-created Warner Bros. Global Brands and Experiences division overseen by President Pam Lifford.\nIn August 2020, DC Comics publisher Jim Lee revealed that all original programming would be migrated over to HBO Max. Speaking to the community aspect of DC Universe, as well as the ability to access the backlog of comics titles, Lee said \"there is always going to be a need for that\" and that DC was looking at ways to transform the platform so that content would not go away.\nIn September 2020, DC announced that the service would change its name to DC Universe Infinite and become solely a digital comics subscription service on January 21, 2021. The service would offer currently published DC Comics titles six months after their retail release date (before the change, current comics would arrive a year after their release date), early access to DC Comics' digital first titles, would feature exclusive comics created for the service, and access to 24,000 titles in DC's back catalog. DC Universe subscriptions will automatically transfer over to DC Universe Infinite. Regarding the original programming, Young Justice seasons 1-4, Titans season 1-3, Doom Patrol seasons 1-3, the first season of Stargirl, and Harley Quinn seasons 1-3 will move to HBO Max to become Max Original series, with new DC series and \"key DC classics\" also being available on HBO Max.\nLogo.\nDC's first logo appeared on the April 1940 issues of its titles. The small logo, with no background, read simply, \"A DC Publication\".\nThe November 1941 DC titles introduced an updated logo. This version was almost twice the size of the previous one and was the first version with a white background. The name \"Superman\" was added to \"A DC Publication\", effectively acknowledging both Superman and Batman. This logo was the first to occupy the top-left corner of the cover, where the logo has usually resided since. The company now referred to itself in its advertising as \"Superman-DC\".\nIn November 1949, the logo was modified to incorporate the company's formal name, National Comics Publications. This logo also served as the round body of Johnny DC, DC's mascot in the 1960s.\nIn October 1970, DC briefly retired the circular logo in favour of a simple \"DC\" in a rectangle with the name of the title, or the star of the book; the logo on many issues of \"Action Comics\", for example, read \"DC Superman\". An image of the lead character either appeared above or below the rectangle. For books that did not have a single star, such as anthologies like \"House of Mystery\" or team series such as \"Justice League of America\", the title and \"DC\" appeared in a stylized logo, such as a bat for \"House of Mystery\". This use of characters as logos helped to establish the likenesses as trademarks, and was similar to Marvel's contemporaneous use of characters as part of its cover branding.\nDC's \"100 Page Super-Spectacular\" titles and later 100-page and \"Giant\" issues published from 1972 to 1974 featured a logo exclusive to these editions: the letters \"DC\" in a simple sans-serif typeface within a circle. A variant had the letters in a square.\nThe July 1972 DC titles featured a new circular logo. The letters \"DC\" were rendered in a block-like typeface that remained through later logo revisions until 2005. The title of the book usually appeared inside the circle, either above or below the letters.\nIn December 1973, this logo was modified with the addition of the words \"The Line of DC Super-Stars\" and the star motif that continued in later logos. This logo was placed in the top center of the cover from August 1975 to October 1976.\nWhen Jenette Kahn became DC's publisher in late 1976, she commissioned graphic designer Milton Glaser to design a new logo. Popularly referred to as the \"DC bullet\", this logo premiered on the February 1977 titles. Although it varied in size and colour and was at times cropped by the edges of the cover, or briefly rotated 4 degrees, it remained essentially unchanged for nearly three decades. Despite logo changes since 2005, the old \"DC bullet\" continues to be used only on the DC Archive Editions series.\nIn July 1987, DC released variant editions of \"Justice League\" No. 3 and \"The Fury of Firestorm\" No. 61 with a new DC logo. It featured a picture of Superman in a circle surrounded by the words \"SUPERMAN COMICS\". The company released these variants to newsstands in certain markets as a marketing test.\nOn May 8, 2005, a new logo (dubbed the \"DC spin\") was unveiled, debuting on DC titles in June 2005 with \"DC Special: The Return of Donna Troy\" No. 1 and the rest of the titles the following week. In addition to comics, it was designed for DC properties in other media, which was used for movies since \"Batman Begins\", with \"Superman Returns\" showing the logo's normal variant, and the TV series \"Smallville\", the animated series \"Justice League Unlimited\" and others, as well as for collectibles and other merchandise. The logo was designed by Josh Beatman of Brainchild Studios and DC executive Richard Bruning.\nIn March 2012, DC unveiled a new logo consisting of the letter \"D\" flipping back to reveal the letter \"C\" and \"DC ENTERTAINMENT\". \"The Dark Knight Rises\" was the first film to use the new logo, while the TV series \"Arrow\" was the first series to feature the new logo.\nDC Entertainment announced a new identity and logo for another iconic DC Comics universe brand on May 17, 2016. The new logo was first used on May 25, 2016, in conjunction with the release of \"DC Universe: Rebirth Special #1\" by Geoff Johns.\nDC Universe.\nDC Universe is a video on demand service operated by DC Entertainment. It was announced in April 2017, with the title and service formally announced in May 2018. DC Universe is expected to offer more than video content through the inclusion of an immersive experience with fan interaction that encompasses comics in addition to television. In August 2020, DC publisher Jim Lee announced that all video content from DC Universe would migrate to HBO Max, with the majority of the staff of DC Universe having been laid off.\nDigital distribution.\nDC Comics are available in digital form through several sources.\nFree services: In 2015, Hoopla Digital became the first library-based digital system to distribute DC Comics.\nPaid services: Google Play, ComiXology"}
{"id": "9106", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9106", "title": "David Grinnell", "text": ""}
{"id": "9108", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9108", "title": "Daimler-Chrysler", "text": ""}
{"id": "9109", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9109", "title": "Diophantine equation", "text": "In mathematics, a Diophantine equation is a polynomial equation, usually involving two or more unknowns, such that the only solutions of interest are the integer ones (an integer solution is such that all the unknowns take integer values). A linear Diophantine equation equates to a constant the sum of two or more monomials, each of degree one. An exponential Diophantine equation is one in which unknowns can appear in exponents.\nDiophantine problems have fewer equations than unknowns and involve finding integers that solve simultaneously all equations. As such systems of equations define algebraic curves, algebraic surfaces, or, more generally, algebraic sets, their study is a part of algebraic geometry that is called \"Diophantine geometry\".\nThe word \"Diophantine\" refers to the Hellenistic mathematician of the 3rd century, Diophantus of Alexandria, who made a study of such equations and was one of the first mathematicians to introduce symbolism into algebra. The mathematical study of Diophantine problems that Diophantus initiated is now called Diophantine analysis.\nWhile individual equations present a kind of puzzle and have been considered throughout history, the formulation of general theories of Diophantine equations (beyond the case of linear and quadratic equations) was an achievement of the twentieth century.\nExamples.\nIn the following Diophantine equations, , , , and are the unknowns and the other letters are given constants:\nLinear Diophantine equations.\nOne equation.\nThe simplest linear Diophantine equation takes the form , where , and are given integers. The solutions are described by the following theorem:\nProof: If is this greatest common divisor, B\u00e9zout's identity asserts the existence of integers and such that . If is a multiple of , then for some integer , and is a solution. On the other hand, for every pair of integers and , the greatest common divisor of and divides . Thus, if the equation has a solution, then must be a multiple of . If and , then for every solution , we have\nshowing that is another solution. Finally, given two solutions such that , one deduces that . As and are coprime, Euclid's lemma shows that divides , and thus that\nthere exists an integer such that and . Therefore, and , which completes the proof.\nChinese remainder theorem.\nThe Chinese remainder theorem describes an important class of linear Diophantine systems of equations: let be pairwise coprime integers greater than one, be arbitrary integers, and be the product . The Chinese remainder theorem asserts that the following linear Diophantine system has exactly one solution such that , and that the other solutions are obtained by adding to a multiple of :\nSystem of linear Diophantine equations.\nMore generally, every system of linear Diophantine equations may be solved by computing the Smith normal form of its matrix, in a way that is similar to the use of the reduced row echelon form to solve a system of linear equations over a field. Using matrix notation every system of linear Diophantine equations may be written\nwhere is an matrix of integers, is an column matrix of unknowns and is an column matrix of integers.\nThe computation of the Smith normal form of provides two unimodular matrices (that is matrices that are invertible over the integers and have \u00b11 as determinant) and of respective dimensions and , such that the matrix\nis such that is not zero for not greater than some integer , and all the other entries are zero. The system to be solved may thus be rewritten as\nCalling the entries of and those of , this leads to the system\nThis system is equivalent to the given one in the following sense: A column matrix of integers is a solution of the given system if and only if for some column matrix of integers such that .\nIt follows that the system has a solution if and only if divides for and for . If this condition is fulfilled, the solutions of the given system are\nwhere are arbitrary integers.\nHermite normal form may also be used for solving systems of linear Diophantine equations. However, Hermite normal form does not directly provide the solutions; to get the solutions from the Hermite normal form, one has to successively solve several linear equations. Nevertheless, Richard Zippel wrote that the Smith normal form \"is somewhat more than is actually needed to solve linear diophantine equations. Instead of reducing the equation to diagonal form, we only need to make it triangular, which is called the Hermite normal form. The Hermite normal form is substantially easier to compute than the Smith normal form.\"\nInteger linear programming amounts to finding some integer solutions (optimal in some sense) of linear systems that include also inequations. Thus systems of linear Diophantine equations are basic in this context, and textbooks on integer programming usually have a treatment of systems of linear Diophantine equations.\nHomogeneous equations.\nA homogeneous Diophantine equation is a Diophantine equation that is defined by a homogeneous polynomial. A typical such equation is the equation of Fermat's Last Theorem\nAs a homogeneous polynomial in indeterminates defines a hypersurface in the projective space of dimension , solving a homogeneous Diophantine equation is the same as finding the rational points of a projective hypersurface.\nSolving a homogeneous Diophantine equation is generally a very difficult problem, even in the simplest non-trivial case of three indeterminates (in the case of two indeterminates the problem is equivalent with testing if a rational number is the th power of another rational number). A witness of the difficulty of the problem is Fermat's Last Theorem (for , there is no integer solution of the above equation), which needed more than three centuries of mathematicians' efforts for being solved.\nFor degrees higher than three, most known results are theorems asserting that there are no solutions (for example Fermat's Last Theorem) or that the number of solutions is finite (for example Falting's theorem). \nFor the degree three, there are general solving methods, which work on almost all equations that are encountered in practice, but no algorithm is known that works for every cubic equation.\nDegree two.\nHomogeneous Diophantine equations of degree two are easier to solve. The standard solving method proceed in two steps. One has first to find one solution, or to prove that there is no solution. When a solution has been found, all solutions are then deduced.\nFor proving that there is no solution, one may reduce the equation modulo. For example, the Diophantine equation\ndoes not have any other solution than the trivial solution . In fact, by dividing and by their greatest common divisor, one may suppose that they are coprime. The squares modulo 4 are congruent to 0 and 1. Thus the left-hand side of the equation is congruent to 0, 1, or 2, and the right-hand side is congruent to 0 or 3. Thus the equality may be obtained only if and are all even, and are thus not coprime. Thus the only solution is the trivial solution . This shows that there is no rational point on a circle of radius formula_5 centered at the origin.\nMore generally, Hasse principle allows deciding whether a homogeneous Diophantine equation of degree two has an integer solution, and computing a solution if there exist. \nIf a non-trivial integer solution is known, one may produce all other solutions in the following way.\nGeometric interpretation.\nLet \nbe a homogeneous Diophantine equation, where formula_7 is a quadratic form (that is, a homogeneous polynomial of degree 2), with integer coefficients. The \"trivial solution\" is the solution where all formula_8 are zero. If formula_9 is a non-trivial integer solution of this equation, then formula_10 are the homogeneous coordinates of a rational point of the hypersurface defined by . Conversely, if formula_11 are homogeneous coordinates of a rational point of this hypersurface, where formula_12 are integers, then formula_13 is an integer solution of the Diophantine equation. Moreover, the integer solutions that define a given rational point are all sequences of the form \nwhere is any integer, and is the greatest common divisor of the formula_15\nIt follows that solving the Diophantine equation formula_6 is completely reduced to finding the rational points of the corresponding projective hypersurface.\nParameterization.\nLet now formula_17 be an integer solution of the equation formula_18 As is a polynomial of degree two, a line passing through crosses the hypersurface at a single other point, which is rational if and only if the line is rational (that is, if the line is defined by rational parameters). This allows parameterizing the hypersurface by the lines passing through , and the rational points are the those that are obtained from rational lines, that is, those that correspond to rational values of the parameters.\nMore precisely, one may proceed as follows. \nBy permuting the indices, one may suppose, without loss of generality that formula_19 Then one may pass to the affine case by considering the affine hypersurface defined by \nwhich has the rational point\nIf this rational point is a singular point, that is if all partial derivatives are zero at , all lines passing through are contained in the hypersurface, and one has a cone. The change of variables \ndoes not change the rational points, and transforms into a homogeneous polynomial in variables. In this case, the problem may thus be solved by applying the method to an equation with fewer variables.\nIf the polynomial is a product of linear polynomials (possibly with non-rational coefficients), then it defines two hyperplanes. The intersection of these hyperplanes is a rational flat, and contains rational singular points. This case is thus a special instance of the preceding case.\nIn the general case, let consider the parametric equation of a line passing through :\nSubstituting this in , one gets a polynomial of degree two in formula_24 that is zero for formula_25 It is thus divisible by formula_26. The quotient is linear in formula_24 and may be solved for expressing formula_28 as a quotient of two polynomials of degree at most two in formula_29 with integer coefficients:\nSubstituting this in the expressions for formula_31 one gets, for ,\nwhere formula_33 are polynomials of degree at most two with integer coefficients.\nThen, one can return to the homogeneous case. Let, for , \nbe the homogenization of formula_35 These quadratic polynomials with integer coefficients form a parameterization of the projective hypersurface defined by :\nA point of the projective hypersurface defined by is rational if and only if it may be obtained from rational values of formula_37 As formula_38 are homogeneous polynomials, the point is not changed if all formula_39 are multiplied by the same rational number. Thus, one may suppose that formula_40 are coprime integers. It follows that the integer solutions of the Diophantine equation are exactly the sequences formula_41 where, for ,\nwhere is an integer, formula_40 are coprime integers, and is the greatest common divisor of the integers formula_44\nOne could hope that the coprimality of the formula_39 could imply that . Unfortunately this is not the case, as shown in the next section.\nExample of Pythagorean triples.\nThe equation \nis probably the first homogeneous Diophantine equation of degree two that has been studied. Its solutions are the Pythagorean triples. This is also the homogeneous equation of the unit circle. In this section, we show how the above method allows retrieving Euclid's formula for generating Pythagorean triples.\nFor retrieving exactly Euclid's formula, we start from the solution , corresponding to the point of the unit circle. A line passing through this point may be parameterized by its slope:\nPutting this in the circle equation \none gets \nDividing by , results in\nwhich is easy to solve in :\nIt follows\nHomogenizing as described above one gets all solutions as \nwhere is any integer, and are coprime integers, and is the greatest common divisor of the three numerators. In fact, if and are both odd, and if one is odd and the other is even.\nThe \"primitive triples\" are the solutions where and .\nThis description of the solutions differs slightly from Euclid's formula because Euclid's formula considers only the solutions such that and are all positive, and does not distinguish between two triples that differ by the exchange of and ,\nDiophantine analysis.\nTypical questions.\nThe questions asked in Diophantine analysis include:\nThese traditional problems often lay unsolved for centuries, and mathematicians gradually came to understand their depth (in some cases), rather than treat them as puzzles.\nTypical problem.\nThe given information is that a father's age is 1 less than twice that of his son, and that the digits making up the father's age are reversed in the son's age (i.e. ). This leads to the equation , thus . Inspection gives the result , , and thus equals 73 years and equals 37 years. One may easily show that there is not any other solution with and positive integers less than 10.\nMany well known puzzles in the field of recreational mathematics lead to diophantine equations. Examples include the Cannonball problem, Archimedes's cattle problem and The monkey and the coconuts.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nIn 1637, Pierre de Fermat scribbled on the margin of his copy of \"Arithmetica\": \"It is impossible to separate a cube into two cubes, or a fourth power into two fourth powers, or in general, any power higher than the second into two like powers.\" Stated in more modern language, \"The equation has no solutions for any higher than 2.\" Following this, he wrote: \"I have discovered a truly marvelous proof of this proposition, which this margin is too narrow to contain.\" Such a proof eluded mathematicians for centuries, however, and as such his statement became famous as Fermat's Last Theorem. It wasn't until 1995 that it was proven by the British mathematician Andrew Wiles.\nIn 1657, Fermat attempted to solve the Diophantine equation (solved by Brahmagupta over 1000 years earlier). The equation was eventually solved by Euler in the early 18th century, who also solved a number of other Diophantine equations. The smallest solution of this equation in positive integers is , (see Chakravala method).\nHilbert's tenth problem.\nIn 1900, David Hilbert proposed the solvability of all Diophantine equations as the tenth of his fundamental problems. In 1970, Yuri Matiyasevich solved it negatively, building on work of Julia Robinson, Martin Davis, and Hilary Putnam to prove that a general algorithm for solving all Diophantine equations cannot exist.\nDiophantine geometry.\nDiophantine geometry, which is the application of techniques from algebraic geometry in this field, has continued to grow as a result; since treating arbitrary equations is a dead end, attention turns to equations that also have a geometric meaning. The central idea of Diophantine geometry is that of a rational point, namely a solution to a polynomial equation or a system of polynomial equations, which is a vector in a prescribed field , when is \"not\" algebraically closed.\nModern research.\nOne of the few general approaches is through the Hasse principle. Infinite descent is the traditional method, and has been pushed a long way.\nThe depth of the study of general Diophantine equations is shown by the characterisation of Diophantine sets as equivalently described as recursively enumerable. In other words, the general problem of Diophantine analysis is blessed or cursed with universality, and in any case is not something that will be solved except by re-expressing it in other terms.\nThe field of Diophantine approximation deals with the cases of \"Diophantine inequalities\". Here variables are still supposed to be integral, but some coefficients may be irrational numbers, and the equality sign is replaced by upper and lower bounds.\nThe single most celebrated question in the field, the conjecture known as Fermat's Last Theorem, was solved by Andrew Wiles, using tools from algebraic geometry developed during the last century rather than within number theory where the conjecture was originally formulated. Other major results, such as Faltings's theorem, have disposed of old conjectures.\nInfinite Diophantine equations.\nAn example of an infinite diophantine equation is:\nwhich can be expressed as \"How many ways can a given integer be written as the sum of a square plus twice a square plus thrice a square and so on?\" The number of ways this can be done for each forms an integer sequence. Infinite Diophantine equations are related to theta functions and infinite dimensional lattices. This equation always has a solution for any positive . Compare this to:\nwhich does not always have a solution for positive .\nExponential Diophantine equations.\nIf a Diophantine equation has as an additional variable or variables occurring as exponents, it is an exponential Diophantine equation. Examples include the Ramanujan\u2013Nagell equation, , and the equation of the Fermat-Catalan conjecture and Beal's conjecture, with inequality restrictions on the exponents. A general theory for such equations is not available; particular cases such as Catalan's conjecture have been tackled. However, the majority are solved via ad hoc methods such as St\u00f8rmer's theorem or even trial and error."}
{"id": "9110", "revid": "40685589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9110", "title": "Diophantus", "text": " Diophantus of Alexandria (; born probably sometime between AD 200 and 214; died around the age of 84, probably sometime between AD 284 and 298) was an Alexandrian mathematician, who was the author of a series of books called \"Arithmetica\", many of which are now lost. His texts deal with solving algebraic equations. While reading Claude Gaspard Bachet de M\u00e9ziriac's edition of Diophantus' \"Arithmetica,\" Pierre de Fermat concluded that a certain equation considered by Diophantus had no solutions, and noted in the margin without elaboration that he had found \"a truly marvelous proof of this proposition,\" now referred to as Fermat's Last Theorem. This led to tremendous advances in number theory, and the study of Diophantine equations (\"Diophantine geometry\") and of Diophantine approximations remain important areas of mathematical research. Diophantus coined the term \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03cc\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 (parisotes) to refer to an approximate equality. This term was rendered as \"adaequalitas\" in Latin, and became the technique of adequality developed by Pierre de Fermat to find maxima for functions and tangent lines to curves. Diophantus was the first Greek mathematician who recognized fractions as numbers; thus he allowed positive rational numbers for the coefficients and solutions. In modern use, Diophantine equations are usually algebraic equations with integer coefficients, for which integer solutions are sought.\nBiography.\nLittle is known about the life of Diophantus. He lived in Alexandria, Egypt, during the Roman era, probably from between AD 200 and 214 to 284 or 298. Diophantus has variously been described by historians as either Greek, or possibly Hellenized Egyptian, or Hellenized Babylonian, Many of these identifications may stem from confusion with the 4th-century rhetorician Diophantus the Arab. Much of our knowledge of the life of Diophantus is derived from a 5th-century Greek anthology of number games and puzzles created by Metrodorus. One of the problems (sometimes called his epitaph) states:\nThis puzzle implies that Diophantus' age can be expressed as\nwhich gives a value of 84 years. However, the accuracy of the information cannot be independently confirmed.\nIn popular culture, this puzzle was the Puzzle No.142 in \"Professor Layton and Pandora's Box\" as one of the hardest solving puzzles in the game, which needed to be unlocked by solving other puzzles first.\n\"Arithmetica\".\n\"Arithmetica\" is the major work of Diophantus and the most prominent work on algebra in Greek mathematics. It is a collection of problems giving numerical solutions of both determinate and indeterminate equations. Of the original thirteen books of which \"Arithmetica\" consisted only six have survived, though there are some who believe that four Arabic books discovered in 1968 are also by Diophantus. Some Diophantine problems from \"Arithmetica\" have been found in Arabic sources.\nIt should be mentioned here that Diophantus never used general methods in his solutions. Hermann Hankel, renowned German mathematician made the following remark regarding Diophantus.\n\u201cOur author (Diophantos) not the slightest trace of a general, comprehensive method is discernible; each problem calls for some special method which refuses to work even for the most closely related problems. For this reason it is difficult for the modern scholar to solve the 101st problem even after having studied 100 of Diophantos\u2019s solutions\u201d.\nHistory.\nLike many other Greek mathematical treatises, Diophantus was forgotten in Western Europe during the so-called Dark Ages, since the study of ancient Greek, and literacy in general, had greatly declined. The portion of the Greek \"Arithmetica\" that survived, however, was, like all ancient Greek texts transmitted to the early modern world, copied by, and thus known to, medieval Byzantine scholars. Scholia on Diophantus by the Byzantine Greek scholar John Chortasmenos (1370\u20131437) are preserved together with a comprehensive commentary written by the earlier Greek scholar Maximos Planudes (1260 \u2013 1305), who produced an edition of Diophantus within the library of the Chora Monastery in Byzantine Constantinople. In addition, some portion of the \"Arithmetica\" probably survived in the Arab tradition (see above). In 1463 German mathematician Regiomontanus wrote:\n\"Arithmetica\" was first translated from Greek into Latin by Bombelli in 1570, but the translation was never published. However, Bombelli borrowed many of the problems for his own book \"Algebra\". The \"editio princeps\" of \"Arithmetica\" was published in 1575 by Xylander. The best known Latin translation of \"Arithmetica\" was made by Bachet in 1621 and became the first Latin edition that was widely available. Pierre de Fermat owned a copy, studied it, and made notes in the margins.\nMargin-writing by Fermat and Chortasmenos.\nThe 1621 edition of \"Arithmetica\" by Bachet gained fame after Pierre de Fermat wrote his famous \"Last Theorem\" in the margins of his copy:\nFermat's proof was never found, and the problem of finding a proof for the theorem went unsolved for centuries. A proof was finally found in 1994 by Andrew Wiles after working on it for seven years. It is believed that Fermat did not actually have the proof he claimed to have. Although the original copy in which Fermat wrote this is lost today, Fermat's son edited the next edition of Diophantus, published in 1670. Even though the text is otherwise inferior to the 1621 edition, Fermat's annotations\u2014including the \"Last Theorem\"\u2014were printed in this version.\nFermat was not the first mathematician so moved to write in his own marginal notes to Diophantus; the Byzantine scholar John Chortasmenos (1370\u20131437) had written \"Thy soul, Diophantus, be with Satan because of the difficulty of your other theorems and particularly of the present theorem\" next to the same problem.\nOther works.\nDiophantus wrote several other books besides \"Arithmetica\", but very few of them have survived.\nThe \"Porisms\".\nDiophantus himself refers to a work which consists of a collection of lemmas called \"The Porisms\" (or \"Porismata\"), but this book is entirely lost.\nAlthough \"The Porisms\" is lost, we know three lemmas contained there, since Diophantus refers to them in the \"Arithmetica\". One lemma states that the difference of the cubes of two rational numbers is equal to the sum of the cubes of two other rational numbers, i.e. given any and , with , there exist , all positive and rational, such that\nPolygonal numbers and geometric elements.\nDiophantus is also known to have written on polygonal numbers, a topic of great interest to Pythagoras and Pythagoreans. Fragments of a book dealing with polygonal numbers are extant.\nA book called \"Preliminaries to the Geometric Elements\" has been traditionally attributed to Hero of Alexandria. It has been studied recently by Wilbur Knorr, who suggested that the attribution to Hero is incorrect, and that the true author is Diophantus.\nInfluence.\nDiophantus' work has had a large influence in history. Editions of Arithmetica exerted a profound influence on the development of algebra in Europe in the late sixteenth and through the 17th and 18th centuries. Diophantus and his works also influenced Arab mathematics and were of great fame among Arab mathematicians. Diophantus' work created a foundation for work on algebra and in fact much of advanced mathematics is based on algebra. How much he affected India is a matter of debate.\nDiophantus is often called \u201cthe father of algebra\" because he contributed greatly to number theory, mathematical notation, and because Arithmetica contains the earliest known use of syncopated notation.\nDiophantine analysis.\nToday, Diophantine analysis is the area of study where integer (whole-number) solutions are sought for equations, and Diophantine equations are polynomial equations with integer coefficients to which only integer solutions are sought. It is usually rather difficult to tell whether a given Diophantine equation is solvable. Most of the problems in Arithmetica lead to quadratic equations. Diophantus looked at 3 different types of quadratic equations: , , and . The reason why there were three cases to Diophantus, while today we have only one case, is that he did not have any notion for zero and he avoided negative coefficients by considering the given numbers , , to all be positive in each of the three cases above. Diophantus was always satisfied with a rational solution and did not require a whole number which means he accepted fractions as solutions to his problems. Diophantus considered negative or irrational square root solutions \"useless\", \"meaningless\", and even \"absurd\". To give one specific example, he calls the equation 'absurd' because it would lead to a negative value for . One solution was all he looked for in a quadratic equation. There is no evidence that suggests Diophantus even realized that there could be two solutions to a quadratic equation. He also considered simultaneous quadratic equations.\nMathematical notation.\nDiophantus made important advances in mathematical notation, becoming the first person known to use algebraic notation and symbolism. Before him everyone wrote out equations completely. Diophantus introduced an algebraic symbolism that used an abridged notation for frequently occurring operations, and an abbreviation for the unknown and for the powers of the unknown. Mathematical historian Kurt Vogel states:\n\u201cThe symbolism that Diophantus introduced for the first time, and undoubtedly devised himself, provided a short and readily comprehensible means of expressing an equation... Since an abbreviation is also employed for the word \u2018equals\u2019, Diophantus took a fundamental step from verbal algebra towards symbolic algebra.\u201d\nAlthough Diophantus made important advances in symbolism, he still lacked the necessary notation to express more general methods. This caused his work to be more concerned with particular problems rather than general situations. Some of the limitations of Diophantus' notation are that he only had notation for one unknown and, when problems involved more than a single unknown, Diophantus was reduced to expressing \"first unknown\", \"second unknown\", etc. in words. He also lacked a symbol for a general number . Where we would write , Diophantus has to resort to constructions like: \"... a sixfold number increased by twelve, which is divided by the difference by which the square of the number exceeds three\".\nAlgebra still had a long way to go before very general problems could be written down and solved succinctly."}
{"id": "9111", "revid": "1004591469", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9111", "title": "Dong", "text": "Dong or DONG may refer to:"}
{"id": "9112", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9112", "title": "Dr. Doom", "text": ""}
{"id": "9118", "revid": "11292517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9118", "title": "Duke Kahanamoku", "text": "Duke Paoa Kahinu Mokoe Hulikohola Kahanamoku (August 24, 1890 \u2013 January 22, 1968) was an American and Native Hawaiian competition swimmer who popularized the ancient Hawaiian sport of surfing. He was born towards the end of the Kingdom of Hawaii, just before the overthrow, living into statehood as a United States citizen. He was a five-time Olympic medalist in swimming. Duke was also a Scottish Rite Freemason, a Shriner, a law enforcement officer, an actor, a beach volleyball player and a businessman.\nEarly years.\nAccording to Kahanamoku, he was born in Honolulu at Hale\u02bb\u0101kala, the home of Bernice Pauahi Bishop which was later converted into the Arlington Hotel. He had five brothers and three sisters, including Samuel Kahanamoku and Sargent Kahanamoku. In 1893, the family moved to K\u0101lia, Waikiki (near the present site of the Hilton Hawaiian Village), to be closer to his mother's parents and family. Duke grew up with his siblings and 31 Paoa cousins. Duke attended the Waikiki Grammar School, Kaahumanu School, and the Kamehameha Schools, although he never graduated because he had to quit to help support the family.\n\"Duke\" was not a title or a nickname, but a given name. He was named after his father, Duke Halapu Kahanamoku, who was christened by Bernice Pauahi Bishop in honor of Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, who was visiting Hawaii at the time. His father was a policeman. His mother Julia Paakonia Lonokahikina Paoa was a deeply religious woman with a strong sense of family ancestry.\nEven though not of the formal Hawaiian Royal Family, his parents were from prominent Hawaiian ohana (family); the Kahanamoku and the Paoa ohana were considered to be lower-ranking nobles, who were in service to the \"ali\u02bbi nui\" or royalty. His paternal grandfather was Kahanamoku and his grandmother, Kapiolani Kaoeha (sometimes spelled \"Kahoea\"), a descendant of Alapainui. They were \"kahu\", retainers and trusted advisors of the Kamehamehas, to whom they were related. His maternal grandparents Paoa, son of Paoa Hoolae and Hiikaalani, and Mele Uliama were also of ali\u02bbi descent.\nGrowing up on the outskirts of Waikiki, Kahanamoku spent his youth as a bronzed beach boy. At Waikiki Beach he developed his surfing and swimming skills. In his youth, Kahanamoku preferred a traditional surf board, which he called his \"papa nui\", constructed after the fashion of ancient Hawaiian \"olo\" boards. Made from the wood of a koa tree, it was long and weighed . The board was without a skeg, which had yet to be invented. In his later career, he would often use smaller boards but always preferred those made of wood.\nOn August 11, 1911, Kahanamoku was timed at 55.4 seconds in the freestyle, beating the existing world record by 4.6 seconds, in the salt water of Honolulu Harbor. He also broke the record in the and equaled it in the . But the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU), in disbelief, would not recognize these feats until many years later. The AAU initially claimed that the judges must have been using alarm clocks rather than stopwatches and later claimed that ocean currents aided Kahanamoku.\nHe was initiated, passed and raised to the sublime degree of Master Mason in Hawaiian Lodge Masonic Lodge No 21\n and was also a Noble (member) of the Shriners fraternal organization.\nCareer.\nKahanamoku easily qualified for the U.S. Olympic swimming team in 1912. At the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, he won a gold medal in the 100-meter freestyle, and a silver medal with the second-place U.S. team in the men's 4\u00d7200-meter freestyle relay. During the 1920 Olympics in Antwerp, he won gold medals both in the 100 meters (bettering fellow Hawaiian Pua Kealoha) and in the relay. He finished the 100 meters with a silver medal during the 1924 Olympics in Paris, with the gold going to Johnny Weissmuller and the bronze to Duke's brother, Samuel Kahanamoku. At age 34, this was Kahanamoku's last Olympic medal. He also was an alternate for the U.S. water polo team at the 1932 Summer Olympics.\nPost Olympic Career.\nBetween Olympic competitions, and after retiring from the Olympics, Kahanamoku traveled internationally to give swimming exhibitions. It was during this period that he popularized the sport of surfing, previously known only in Hawaii, by incorporating surfing exhibitions into these visits as well. His surfing exhibition at Sydney's Freshwater Beach on December 24, 1914, is widely regarded as a seminal event in the development of surfing in Australia. The board that Kahanamoku built from a piece of pine from a local hardware store is retained by the Freshwater Surf Club. There is a statue of Kahanamoku on the Northern headland of Freshwater Beach, New South Wales. He made surfing popular in mainland America first in 1912 while in Southern California.\nDuring his time living in Southern California, Kahanamoku performed in Hollywood as a background actor and a character actor in several films. In this way, he made connections with people who could further publicize the sport of surfing. Kahanamoku was involved with the Los Angeles Athletic Club, acting as a lifeguard and competing in both swimming and water polo teams.\nWhile living in Newport Beach, California on June 14, 1925, Kahanamoku rescued eight men from a fishing vessel that capsized in heavy surf while attempting to enter the city's harbor. Twenty nine sport fishermen went into the water, and seventeen eventually drowned. Using his surfboard Duke was able to make repeated trips back &amp; forth from shore to the capsized ship increasing the number of those rescued. Two other surfers saved four more fishermen. At the time the Newport Beach police chief called Duke's efforts \"The most superhuman surfboard rescue act the world has ever seen\". It also led to lifeguards across the US to begin using surfboards as standard equipment for water rescues.\nIn 1940, Kahanamoku married Nadine Alexander, who accompanied him when he traveled. He was the first person to be inducted into both the Swimming Hall of Fame and the Surfing Hall of Fame. The Duke Kahanamoku Invitational Surfing Championships in Hawaii, the first major professional surfing contest event ever held in the huge surf on the North Shore of Oahu was named in his honor. He is a member of the U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame. Kahanamoku went on to serve as the Sheriff of Honolulu, Hawaii from 1932 to 1961, completing 13 consecutive terms. During that period he also appeared in a number of television programs and films, such as \"Mister Roberts\" (1955), and was well-liked throughout the Hollywood community.\nKahanamoku was a friend and surfing companion of heiress Doris Duke, who built a home (now a museum) on Oahu named Shangri-la.\n\"Duncan v. Kahanamoku\".\nIn 1946, Kahanamoku was the \"pro forma\" defendant in the landmark Supreme Court case \"Duncan v. Kahanamoku\". While Kahanamoku was a military police officer during World War II, he arrested Duncan, a civilian shipfitter, for public intoxication. At the time, Hawaii, not yet a state, was being administered under the Hawaiian Organic Act which effectively instituted martial law on the island. Duncan was therefore tried by a military tribunal and appealed to the Supreme Court. In a \"post hoc\" ruling, the court ruled that trial by military tribunal was, in this case, unconstitutional.\nDeath and legacy.\nKahanamoku died of a heart attack on January 22, 1968, at the age of 77. For his burial at sea a long motorcade of mourners, accompanied by a 30-man police escort, moved across town to Waikiki Beach. Reverend Abraham Akaka, the pastor of Kawaiahao Church, performed the service, a group of beach boys sang Hawaiian songs, including \"Aloha Oe\", and his ashes were scattered into the ocean. \nStatues and monuments.\nThe City of Honolulu commemorated this Waikiki Beach burial site in 1990 with a 9-foot cast bronze statue of Kahanamoku by Jan Gordon Fisher that shows Kahanamoku with outstretched arms in front of his surfboard, flanked by honorary Hawaiian spears and surrounded by a dedication plaque and historic information marker. The statue's orientation that placed Kahanamoku's back to the sea was initially criticized as being contrary to Hawaiian custom. This placement and orientation created a highly popular local shrine and tourist locale; the statue's outstretched arms are continuously adorned with fresh leis and the locale hosts annual tribute ceremonies and thousands of yearly tourist visits.\nIn 1994 a statue of Kahanamoku by Barry Donohoo was inaugurated in Freshwater, NSW, Australia as the showpiece of the Australian Surfers Walk of Fame.\nOn February 28, 2015, a monument featuring a replica of Kahanamoku's surfboard was unveiled at New Brighton beach, Christchurch, New Zealand in honor of the 100th anniversary of Kahanamoku's visit to New Brighton.\nAdditional tributes.\nHawaii music promoter Kimo Wilder McVay capitalized on Kahanamoku's popularity by naming his Waikiki showroom \"Duke Kahanamoku's\" at the International Market Place, and giving Kahanamoku a financial interest in the showroom in exchange for the use of his name. It was a major Waikiki showroom in the 1960s and is remembered as the home of Don Ho &amp; The Aliis from 1964 through 1969. The showroom continued to be known as Duke Kahanamoku's until Hawaii showman Jack Cione bought it in the mid-1970s and renamed it Le Boom Boom.\nKahanamoku's name is also used by Duke's Canoe Club &amp; Barefoot Bar, known as Duke's Waikiki, a beachfront bar and restaurant in the Outrigger Waikiki on the Beach Hotel. There is a chain of restaurants named after him in California, Florida and Hawaii called Duke's.\nOn August 24, 2002, the 112th anniversary of Kahanamoku's birth, the U.S. Postal Service issued a first-class commemorative stamp with Duke's picture on it. The First Day Ceremony was held at the Hilton Hawaiian Village in Waikiki and was attended by thousands. At this ceremony, attendees could attach the Duke stamp to an envelope and get it canceled with a First Day of Issue postmark. These first day covers are very collectible.\nOn August 24, 2015, a Google Doodle honored the 125th anniversary of Duke Kahanamoku's birthday."}
{"id": "9119", "revid": "746004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9119", "title": "Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)", "text": "The Distinguished Service Medal (DSM) is a military decoration of the United States Army that is presented to soldiers who have distinguished themselves by exceptionally meritorious service to the government in a duty of great responsibility. The performance must be such as to merit recognition for service that is clearly exceptional. The exceptional performance of normal duty will not alone justify an award of this decoration.\nThe Army's Distinguished Service Medal is equivalent to the Navy and Marine Corps' Navy Distinguished Service Medal, Air Force and Space Force's Air Force Distinguished Service Medal, and the Coast Guard Distinguished Service Medal. Prior to the creation of the Air Force Distinguished Service Medal in 1960, United States Air Force airmen were awarded the Distinguished Service Medal.\nCriteria.\nThe Distinguished Service Medal is awarded to any person who, while serving in any capacity with the United States Army, has distinguished himself or herself by exceptionally meritorious service to the Government in a duty of great responsibility.\nThe performance must be such as to merit recognition for service which is clearly exceptional. Exceptional performance of normal duty will not alone justify an award of this decoration. For service not related to actual war, the term \"duty of a great responsibility\" applies to a narrower range of positions than in time of war and requires evidence of a conspicuously significant achievement. However, justification of the award may accrue by virtue of exceptionally meritorious service in a succession of high positions of great importance. Awards may be made to persons other than members of the Armed Forces of the United States for wartime services only, and only then under exceptional circumstances with the express approval of the president in each case.\nHistory of the Distinguished Service Medal.\nThe Distinguished Service Medal was authorized by Presidential Order dated 01-02-1918, and confirmed by Congress on 07-09-1918. It was announced by War Department General Order No. 6, 1918-01-12, with the following information concerning the medal: \"A bronze medal of appropriate design and a ribbon to be worn in lieu thereof, to be awarded by the President to any person who, while serving in any capacity with the Army shall hereafter distinguish himself or herself, or who, since 04-06-1917, has distinguished himself or herself by exceptionally meritorious service to the Government in a duty of great responsibility in time of war or in connection with military operations against an armed enemy of the United States.\" The Act of Congress on 07-09-1918, recognized the need for different types and degrees of heroism and meritorious service and included such provisions for award criteria. The current statutory authorization for the Distinguished Service Medal is Title 10, United States Code, Section 3743.\nRecipients.\nMore than 2,000 awards were made during World War I, and by the time the United States entered World War II, approximately 2,800 awards had been made. From July 1, 1941, to June 6, 1969, when the Department of the Army stopped publishing awards of the DSM in Department of the Army General Orders, over 2,800 further awards were made.\nPrior to World War II the DSM was the only decoration for non-combat service in the U.S. Army. As a result, before World War II the DSM was awarded to a wider range of recipients than during and after World War II. During World War I awards of the DSM to officers below the rank of brigadier general were fairly common but became rare once the Legion of Merit was established in 1942.\nUntil the first award of the Air Force Distinguished Service Medal in 1965, United States Air Force personnel received this award as well, as was the case with several other Department of the Army decorations until the Department of the Air Force fully established its own system of decorations.\nNotable recipients.\nBecause the Army Distinguished Service Medal is principally awarded to general officers, a list of notable recipients would include nearly every general, and some admirals, since 1918, many of whom received multiple awards, as well as a few civilians and sergeants major prominent for their contributions to national defense.\nGeneral Martin Dempsey, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has the record for the greatest number of awards received of the Army Distinguished Service Medal, at 6. He also received three awards of the Defense Distinguished Service Medal as well as one award each of the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, the Air Force Distinguished Service Medal, and the Coast Guard Distinguished Service Medal, for a total of twelve Distinguished Service Medals.\nGenerals of the Army Douglas MacArthur and Dwight Eisenhower are tied with five awards each received of the Army Distinguished Service Medal. They also each received one award of the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, for a total of six DSMs each.\nGeneral Lucius D. Clay (Four Star) received three Army DSM awards for his service that included Commanding General, U.S. Army Forces (European Theater) and Military Governor of Germany. During his tenure, Gen. Clay solved his greatest challenge: the Soviet Blockade of Berlin, which was imposed in June 1948. Gen. Clay triggered the Berlin Airlift, which served the city residents during the harsh winter of 1948\u20131949. He is also a recipient of the Legion of Merit.\nGeneral Norman Schwarzkopf received two awards of the Army DSM and one award each of the Defense DSM, Navy DSM, the Air Force DSM and the Coast Guard DSM, for a total of six DSMs.\nGeneral Lloyd Austin received four awards of the Army DSM and five awards of the Defense DSM for a total of nine DSMs.\nAmong notable recipients below flag rank are: X-1 test pilot Chuck Yeager and X-15 test pilot Robert M. White, who both received the DSM as U.S. Air Force majors; Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson, the U-2 pilot shot down during the Cuban Missile Crisis; director Frank Capra, decorated in 1945 as an army colonel; actor James Stewart, decorated in 1945 as an Army Air Forces colonel (later Air Force Brigadier General); Colonel Wendell Fertig, who led Filipino guerrillas behind Japanese lines; Colonel (later Major General) John K. Singlaub, who led partisan forces in the Korean War; and Major Maude C. Davison, who led the \"Angels of Bataan and Corregidor\" during their imprisonment by the Japanese, and Colonel William S. Taylor, Program Manager Multiple Launch Rocket System. Among notable civilian recipients are Harry L. Hopkins, Robert S. McNamara and Henry L. Stimson.\nNotable American and foreign recipients include:\nUnited States Air Force.\nNote \u2013 includes Army Air Service, Army Air Corps and Army Air Forces"}
{"id": "9120", "revid": "746004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9120", "title": "Defense Distinguished Service Medal", "text": "The Defense Distinguished Service Medal is a military decoration of the United States Department of Defense, which is presented to United States Armed Forces servicemembers for exceptionally distinguished performance of duty contributing to the national security or defense of the United States. The medal was created on July 9, 1970, by President Richard Nixon in . President Nixon awarded the first medal, on the day the Executive Order was signed, to General Earle Wheeler, who was retiring from the US Army after serving as Chief of Staff of the United States Army and then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nIt is equivalent to the United States Department of Homeland Security's Homeland Security Distinguished Service Medal.\nCriteria.\nThe Defense Distinguished Service Medal is the United States Department of Defense's highest non-combat related military award and it is the highest joint service decoration. The Defense Distinguished Service Medal is awarded only while assigned to a joint activity. Normally, such responsibilities deserving of the Defense Distinguished Service Medal are held by the most senior officers such as the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the chiefs and vice chiefs of the military services, and commanders and deputy commanders of the Combatant Commands, the Director of the Joint Staff, and others whose duties bring them frequently into direct contact with the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and other senior government officials. In addition, the medal may also be awarded to other service members whose direct and individual contributions to national security or national defense are recognized as being so exceptional in scope and value as to be equivalent to contributions normally associated with positions encompassing broader responsibilities.\nThis decoration takes precedence over the Distinguished Service Medals of the services and is not to be awarded to any individual for a period of service for which an Army, Navy, Air Force or Coast Guard Distinguished Service Medal is awarded.\nAppearance.\nThe medal is gold in color and on the obverse it features a medium blue enameled pentagon (point up). Superimposed on this is an American bald eagle with wings outspread facing left grasping three crossed arrows in its talons and on its breast is a shield of the United States. The pentagon and eagle are enclosed within a gold pieced circle consisting, in the upper half of 13 five-pointed stars and in the lower half, a wreath of laurel on the left and olive on the right. At the top is a suspender of five graduated gold rays. The reverse of the medal has the inscription \"\"For Distinguished Service\" at the top in raised letters, and within the pentagon the inscription \"From The Secretary of Defense To,\"\" all in raised letters.\nAdditional awards of the Defense Distinguished Service Medal are denoted by oak leaf clusters."}
{"id": "9121", "revid": "1012762005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9121", "title": "Dacoity", "text": "Dacoity is a term used for \"banditry\" in the Indian subcontinent. The spelling is the anglicised version of the Hindustani word \"daaku\"; \"dacoit\" is a colloquial Indian English word with this meaning and it appears in the \"Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases\" (1903). Banditry is criminal activity involving robbery by groups of armed bandits. The East India Company established the Thuggee and Dacoity Department in 1830, and the Thuggee and Dacoity Suppression Acts, 1836\u20131848 were enacted in British India under East India Company rule. Areas with ravines or forests, such as Chambal and Chilapata Forests, were once known for dacoits.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dacoity\", the anglicized version of the Hindi word \"\u1e0dakait\u012b\" (historically spelled \"dakaitee\", Hindi \u0921\u0915\u0948\u0924\u0940 comes from \"\u1e0d\u0101k\u016b\" (historically spelled \"dakoo\", Hindi: \u0921\u093e\u0915\u0942, meaning \"armed robber\").\nThe term dacoit (Hindi: \u0921\u0915\u0948\u0924 \"\u1e0dakait\",means \"a bandit\", according to the \"OED\" (\"A member of a class of robbers in India and Burma, who plunder in armed bands\").\nHistory.\nBandits of Morena and Chambal.\nThe dacoity have had a large impact in the Morena and Chambal regions in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh in north-central India. The exact reasons for the emergence of dacoity in the Chambal valley has been disputed. Most explanations have simply suggested feudal exploitation as the cause that provoked many people of this region to take to arms. The area was also underdeveloped and poor, so that banditry posed great economic incentives. However, the fact that many gangs operating in this valley were composed of higher castes and wealthy people appears to suggest that feudalism may only be a partial explanation of dacoity in Chambal valley (Bhaduri, 1972; Khan, 1981; Jatar, 1980; Katare, 1972). Furthermore, traditional honor codes and blood feuds would drive some into criminality.\nIn Chambal,India, organized crime controlled much of the countryside from the time of the British Raj up to the early 2000s, with the police offering high rewards for the most notorious bandit chiefs. The criminals regularly targeted local businesses, though they preferred to kidnap wealthy people, and demand ransom from their relatives - cutting off fingers, noses, and ears to pressure them into paying high sums. Many dacoity also posed as social bandits toward the local poor, paying medical bills and funding weddings. One ex-dacoit described his own criminal past by claiming that \"I was a rebel. I fought injustice.\" Following intense anti-banditry campaigns by the Indian Police, highway robbery was almost completely eradicated in the early 2000s. Nevertheless, Chambal is still popularly believed to be unsafe and bandit-infested by many Indians. One police officer noted that the fading of the dacoity was also due to social changes, as few young people were any longer willing to endure the harsh life as highway robber in the countryside. Instead, they prefer to join crime groups in the city, where life is easier.\nOther dacoity.\nThe term is also applied, according to the \"OED\", to \"pirates who formerly infested the Ganges between Calcutta and Burhampore\".\nDacoits existed in Burma as well \u2013 Rudyard Kipling's fictional Private Mulvaney hunted Burmese dacoits in \"The Taking of Lungtungpen\". Sax Rohmer's criminal mastermind Dr. Fu Manchu also employed Burmese dacoits as his henchmen.\nIndian police forces use \"Known Dacoit\" (K.D.) as a label to classify criminals.\nNotable dacoits.\nNotable dacoits include:\nProtection measures.\nIn Madhya Pradesh, women belonging to a village defence group have been issued firearm permits to fend off dacoity. The Chief minister of the state, Shivraj Singh Chouhan, recognised the role the women had played in defending their villages without guns. He stated that he wanted to enable these women to better defend both themselves and their villages, and issued the gun permits to advance this goal.\nIn popular culture.\nDacoit films.\nAs the dacoits flourished through the 1940s\u20131970s, they were the subject of various Hindi films made during this era, leading to the emergence of the dacoit film genre in Bollywood. The genre began with Mehboob Khan's \"Aurat\" (1940), which he remade as \"Mother India\" (1957). \"Mother India\" received an Academy Award nomination, and defined the dacoit film genre, along with Dilip Kumar's \"Gunga Jumna\" (1961). Other popular films in this genre included Raj Kapoor\u2019s \"Jis Desh Mein Ganga Behti Hai\" (1961) and Moni Bhattacharjee's \"Mujhe Jeene Do\" (1963).\nPakistani actor Akmal Khan had two dacoit films, \"Malangi\" (1965) and \"Imam Din Gohavia\" (1967). Other films in this genre included \"Khote Sikkay\" (1973), \"Mera Gaon Mera Desh\" (1971), and \"Kuchhe Dhaage\" (1973) both by Raj Khosla.\nThe most famous dacoit film is \"Sholay\" (1975), written by Salim\u2013Javed, and starring Dharmendra, Amitabh Bachchan, and Amjad Khan as the dacoit character Gabbar Singh. It was a masala film that combined the dacoit film conventions of \"Mother India\" and \"Gunga Jumna\" with that of Spaghetti Westerns, spawning the \"Dacoit Western\" genre, also known as the \"Curry Western\" genre. The film also borrowed elements from Akira Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\". \"Sholay\" became a classic in the genre, and its success led to a surge of films in this genre, including \"Ganga Ki Saugandh\" (1978), once again starring Amitabh Bachchan and Amjad Khan.\nAn internationally acclaimed example of the genre is \"Bandit Queen\" (1994).\nThe Tamil movie starring Karthi, \"Theeran Adhigaaram Ondru\" (2017) deals elaborately with bandits. The film reveals the real dacoity incidents which held in Tamil Nadu between 1995 and 2005. Director Vinoth did a two-year research about bandits to develop the script.\nA related genre of crime films are Mumbai underworld films.\nOther media.\nA Hindi novel named \"Painstth Lakh ki Dacoity\" (1977) was written by Surender Mohan Pathak; it was translated as \"The 65 Lakh Heist\".\nDacoits armed with pistols and swords appear in \"\".\nThey frequently appeared in the French language \"Bob Morane\" series of novels by Henri Vernes, principally as the main thugs or assassins of the hero's recurring villain, Mr. Ming."}
{"id": "9123", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9123", "title": "Davis, California", "text": "Davis, known prior to 1907 as Davisville, is a city in the U.S. state of California and the most populous city in Yolo County. It had a population of 65,622 in 2010, not including the on-campus population of the University of California, Davis, which was over 9,400 (not including students' families) in 2016. As of 2019, there were 38,369 students enrolled at the university.\nHistory.\nDavis sits on land that originally belonged to the Indigenous Patwin, a southern branch of Wintun people, who were killed or forced from their lands by the 1830s as part of the California Genocide through a combination of mass murders, smallpox and other diseases, and both Mexican and American systems of Indigenous slavery. Patwin burials grounds have been found across Davis, including on the site of the UC Davis Mondavi Center. After the killing and expulsion of the Patwin, territory that eventually became Davis emerged from one of California's most complicated, corrupt land grants, Laguna de Santos Call\u00e9. The 1852 Land Commission concurred with US Attorneys who argued that the grant was \"fraudulent in all its parts,\" and in his 1860 District Court ruling Justice Ogden Hoffman observed that \"It is impossible to contemplate without disgust the series of perjuries which compose the record\" of the land grant. Nevertheless, Jerome C. Davis, a prominent farmer and one of the early claimants to land in Laguna de Santos Call\u00e9, lobbied all the way to the United States Congress in order to retain the land that eventually became Davis. Davis became a depot on the Southern Pacific Railroad in 1868, when it was named \"Davisville\" after Jerome C. Davis. However, the post office at Davisville shortened the town name to \"Davis\" in 1907. The name stuck, and the city of Davis was incorporated on March 28, 1917.\nFrom its inception as a farming community, Davis is known for its contributions to agricultural policy along with veterinary care and animal husbandry. Following the passage of the University Farm Bill in 1905 by the California State Legislature, Governor George Pardee selected Davis out of 50 other sites as the future home to the University of California's University Farm, officially opening to students in 1908. The farm, later renamed the Northern Branch of the College of Agriculture in 1922, was upgraded to become the seventh UC general campus, the University of California, Davis, in 1959.\nGeography and environment.\nLocation.\nDavis is located in Yolo County, California, west of Sacramento, northeast of San Francisco, north of Los Angeles, at the intersection of Interstate 80 and State Route 113. Neighboring towns include Dixon, Winters, Woodland, and West Sacramento.\nDavis lies in the Sacramento Valley, the northern portion of the Central Valley, in Northern California, at an elevation of about above sea level.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . of it is land and of it (0.19%) is water.\nThe topography is flat, which has helped Davis to become known as a haven for bicyclists.\nClimate.\nThe Davis climate resembles that of nearby Sacramento and is typical of California's Central Valley Mediterranean climate region: warm and dry in the spring, summer and autumn, and cool and wet in the winter. It is classified as a K\u00f6ppen Csa climate. Summer days are hot, ranging from to , but the nights turn pleasantly cool, almost always dropping below . The Delta Breeze, a flow of cool marine air originating from the Pacific Ocean via San Francisco Bay and the Sacramento\u2013San Joaquin River Delta, frequently provides relief in the evening. Winter temperatures generally reach between and in the afternoon; nights average at about , but often fall below freezing.\nAverage temperatures range from in December and January to in July and August. Thick ground fog called tule fog settles into Davis during late fall and winter. This fog can be dense with visibility nearly zero. As in other areas of northern California, the tule fog is a leading cause of road accidents in the winter season.\nMean rainfall per annum is about . The bulk of rain occurs between about mid-November to mid-March, with typically no precipitation falling from mid-June to mid-September.\nRecord temperatures range from a high of on July 17, 1925, to a low of on December 11, 1932.\nNeighborhoods.\nDavis is internally divided by two freeways (Interstate 80 and State Route 113), a north\u2013south railroad (California Northern), an east\u2013west mainline (Union Pacific) and several major streets. The city is unofficially divided into six main districts made up of smaller neighborhoods (often originally named as housing subdivisions):\nThe University of California, Davis is located south of Russell Boulevard and west of A Street and then south of 1st Street. The land occupied by the university is not incorporated within the boundaries of the city of Davis and lies within both Yolo and Solano Counties.\nEnvironment.\nLocal energy planning began in Davis after the energy crisis of 1973. A new building code promoted energy efficiency. Energy use in buildings decreased dramatically and in 1981 Davis citizens won a $100,000 prize from utility PG&amp;E, for cutting electricity use during the summer peak.\nOn November 14, 1984, the Davis City Council declared the city to be a nuclear-free zone. In 1998, the City passed a 'Dark Skies' ordinance in an effort to reduce light pollution in the night sky.\nIn 2013, Davis became part of the state Cool Roof Initiative with 'CoolDavis' campaign, requiring all new roofing projects to meet Cool Roof Rating Council (CRRC) requirements including the installation of light colored roofs. The aim is to reflect more sunlight back into space via the albedo effect, and reduce the amount of heat absorbed in hopes of limiting climate change.\nDemographics.\nDavis is part of the Sacramento\u2013Arden-Arcade\u2013Roseville Metropolitan Statistical Area.\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States Census reported that Davis had a population of 65,622. The population density was 6,615.8 people per square mile (2,554.4/km). The racial makeup of Davis was 42,571 (64.9%) White, 1,528 (2.3%) African American, 339 (0.5%) Native American, 14,355 (21.9%) Asian, 136 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 3,121 (4.8%) from other races, and 3,572 (5.4%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8,172 persons (12.5%).\nIn 2006, Davis was ranked as the second most educated city (in terms of the percentage of residents with graduate degrees) in the US by CNN \"Money Magazine\", after Arlington, Virginia.\nDavis' Asian population of 14,355 was apportioned among 1,631 Indian Americans, 6,395 Chinese Americans, 1,560 Korean Americans, 1,185 Vietnamese Americans, 1,033 Filipino Americans, 953 Japanese Americans, and 1,598 other Asian Americans.\nDavis' Hispanic and Latino population of 8,172 was apportioned among 5,618 Mexican American, 221 Puerto Rican American, 80 Cuban American, and 2,253 other Hispanic and Latino.\nThe Census reported that 63,522 people (96.8% of the population) lived in households, 1,823 (2.8%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 277 (0.4%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 24,873 households, of which 6,119 (24.6%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 9,343 (37.6%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 1,880 (7.6%) had a female householder with no husband present, and 702 (2.8%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 1,295 (5.2%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 210 (0.8%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 5,952 households (23.9%) were made up of individuals, and 1,665 (6.7%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55. There were 11,925 families (47.9% of all households); the average family size was 2.97.\nThe population age and sex distribution was 10,760 people (16.4%) under the age of 18, 21,757 people (33.2%) aged 18 to 24, 14,823 people (22.6%) aged 25 to 44, 12,685 people (19.3%) aged 45 to 64, and 5,597 people (8.5%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 25.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.0 males.\nThere were 25,869 housing units with an average density of 2,608.0 per square mile (1,007.0/km), of which 10,699 (43.0%) were owner-occupied, and 14,174 (57.0%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 0.9%; the rental vacancy rate was 3.5%. 27,594 people (42.0% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 35,928 people (54.7%) lived in rental housing units.\n2000.\nAs of the United States 2000 Census, there were 60,308 people, 22,948 households, and 11,290 families residing in the city. The population density was 5,769.2 inhabitants per square mile (2,228.2/km2). There were 23,617 housing units at an average density of 2,259.3 per square mile (872.6/km2). The racial composition of the city was 70.07% White, 2.35% Black or African American, 0.67% Native American, 17.5% Asian, 0.24% Pacific Islander, 4.26% from other races, and 4.87% from two or more races. 9.61% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 22,948 households, of which 26.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.3% were married couples living together, 8.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 50.8% were non-families. 25.0% of all households were composed of individuals, and 5.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.00.\nIn the city, the population age distribution was 18.6% under the age of 18, 30.9% from 18 to 24, 27.1% from 25 to 44, 16.7% from 45 to 64, and 6.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 25 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.8 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $42,454, and the median income for a family was $74,051. Males had a median income of $51,189 versus $36,082 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,937. About 5.4% of families and 24.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.8% of those under age 18 and 2.8% of those age 65 or over.\nThis city of approximately 62,000 people abuts a university campus of 32,000 students. Although the university's land is not incorporated within the city, many students live off-campus in the city.\nEconomy.\nThe California Northern Railroad is based in Davis.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the City's 2011 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\nDavis Dollars.\nA community currency scheme was in use in Davis, called \"Davis Dollars\".\nBicycling.\nBicycling has been a popular mode of transportation in Davis for decades, particularly among school-age children and UC Davis students. In 2010, Davis became the new home of the United States Bicycling Hall of Fame.\nBicycle infrastructure became a political issue in the 1960s, culminating in the election of a pro-bicycle majority to the City Council in 1966. By the early 1970s, Davis became a pioneer in the implementation of cycling facilities. As the city expands, new facilities are usually mandated. As a result, Davis residents today enjoy an extensive network of bike lanes, bike paths, and grade-separated bicycle crossings. The flat terrain and temperate climate are also conducive to bicycling.\nIn 2005 the Bicycle-Friendly Community program of the League of American Bicyclists recognized Davis as the first Platinum Level city in the US In March 2006, \"Bicycling Magazine\" named Davis the best small town for cycling in its compilation of \"America's Best Biking Cities.\" Bicycling appears to be declining among Davis residents: from 1990 to 2000, the US Census Bureau reported a decline in the fraction of commuters traveling by bicycle, from 22 percent to 15 percent. This resulted in the reestablishment of the city's Bicycle Advisory Commission and creation of advocate groups such as \"Davis Bicycles!\". In 2016, Fifth Street, a main road in Davis was converted from four lanes to two lanes to allow for bicycle lanes and encourage more bicycling.\nIn 1996, 2001, 2006, and 2009 the UC Davis \"Cal Aggie Cycling\" Team won the national road cycling competition. The team also competes off-road and on the track, and has competed in the national competitions of these disciplines. In 2007, UC Davis also organized a record breaking bicycle parade numbering 822 bicycles.\nSights and culture.\nWhole Earth Festival.\nA continuous stream of bands, speakers and various workshops occurs throughout Mother's Day weekend on each of Whole Earth Festival's (WEF) three stages and other specialty areas. The WEF is organized entirely by UC Davis students, in association with the Associated Students of UC Davis, the Experimental College, and the university.\nCelebrate Davis.\nCelebrate Davis is the annual free festival held by the Davis Chamber of Commerce. It features booths by Davis businesses, live music, food vendors, live animals, activities like rock climbing and zip-line. It concludes with fireworks after dark. Parking is problematic, so most people ride their bikes and use the free valet parking.\nPicnic Day.\nPicnic Day is an annual event at the University of California, Davis and is always held on the third Saturday in April. It is the largest student-run event in the US. Picnic Day starts off with a parade, which features the UC Davis California Aggie Marching Band-uh!, and runs through campus and around downtown Davis and ends with the Battle of the Bands, which lasts until the last band stops playing (sometimes until 2\u00a0am). There are over 150 free events and over 50,000 attend every year. Other highlights include: the Dachshund races, a.k.a. the Doxie Derby, held in the Pavilion; the Davis Rock Challenge, the Chemistry Magic Show, and the sheep dog trials. Many departments have exhibits and demonstrations, such as the Cole Facility, which until recently showed a fistulated cow (a cow that has been fitted with a plastic portal (a \"fistula\") into its digestive system to observe digestion processes). Its name was \"Hole-y Cow\".\nDavis Transmedia Art Walk.\nThe Davis Transmedia Art Walk is a free\u2014self-guided\u2014public art tour includes 23 public murals, 16 sculptures, and 15 galleries and museums all in downtown Davis and the University of Davis campus. A free Davis Art Walk map serves as a detailed guide to the entire collection. The art pieces are all within walking distance of each other. The walk is a roughly circuitous path that can be completed within an hour or two. Every piece of art on the Art Walk has been embedded with an RFID chip. Using a cellphone that supports this technology, you access multimedia files that relate to each work. You can even leave a comment or \"burn your own message\" for other visitors to see. Artist hosted tours are held on the weekend by appointment only. To pick up a copy of the Davis Art Walk map, visit the Yolo County Visitors Bureau (132 E St., Suite 200; (530) 297-1900) or the John Natsoulas Center for the Arts (521 1st St.; (530) 756-3938).\nManetti Shrem Museum of Art.\nThe Manetti Shrem Museum of Art, located on the UC Davis campus, opened on November 13, 2016 and carries on the legacy of the university's world-renowned first generation art faculty, which contributed to innovations in conceptual, performance and video art in the 1960s and 70s. The museum has generated nationwide attention with exhibits by artists such as Wayne Thiebaud, Bruce Nauman, John Cage, and Robert Arneson as well as its striking architecture, featuring a 50,000 square-foot \u201cGrand Canopy\u201d of perforated aluminum triangular beams, supported by 40 steel columns. Every year the museum exhibits works by graduating art students. The museum is free and hosts lecture series and events throughout the year, as well as weekend art studio activities for all ages.\nMondavi Center.\nThe Mondavi Center, located on the UC Davis campus, is one of the biggest non-seasonal attractions in Davis. The Mondavi Center is a theater which hosts many world-class touring acts, including star performers such as Yo-Yo Ma, Yitzhak Perlman and Wynton Marsalis, and draws a large audience from Sacramento.\nUC Davis Arboretum.\nThe UC Davis Arboretum is an arboretum and botanical garden. Plants from all over the world grow in different sections of the park. There are notable oak and native plant collections and a small redwood grove. A small waterway spans the arboretum along the bed of the old North Fork of Putah Creek. Occasionally herons, kingfishers, and cormorants can be seen around the waterways, as well as the ever-present ducks. Tours of the arboretum led by volunteer naturalists are often held for grade-school children.\nThe Domes.\nThe Domes, (AKA Baggins End Innovative Housing), is an on-campus cooperative housing community designed by project manager Ron Swenson and future student-residents in 1972. Consisting of 14 polyurethane foam-insulated fiberglass domes and located in the Sustainable Research Area at the western end of Orchard Road, it is governed by its 26 UCD student residents. It is one of the few student co-housing cooperative communities in the US, and is an early example of the modern-day growing tiny house movement. The community has successfully resisted several threats to its continuation over the years.\nFarmers Market.\nThe Davis Farmers Market is held every Wednesday evening and Saturday morning. Participants sell a range of fruits and vegetables, baked goods, dairy and meat products (often from certified organic farms), crafts, and plants and flowers. From April to October, the market hosts \"Picnic in the Park\", with musical events and food sold from restaurant stands.\nThe Davis Farmers Market won first place in the 2009, and second place in the 2010 \"America's Favorite Farmers Markets\" held by the American Farmland Trust under the large Farmers market classification.\nMedia.\nDavis has one daily newspaper, \"The Davis Enterprise\", founded in 1897. UC Davis also has a weekly newspaper called \"The California Aggie\" which covers campus, local and national news. Davis Media Access, a community media center, is the umbrella organization of television station DCTV. There are also numerous commercial stations broadcasting from nearby Sacramento. Davis has two community radio stations: KDVS 90.3 FM, on the University of California campus, and KDRT 95.7 FM, a subsidiary of Davis Media Access and one of the first low-power FM radio stations in the United States. Davis has the world's largest English-language local wiki, DavisWiki.\nToad Tunnel.\nDavis' Toad Tunnel is a wildlife crossing that was constructed in 1995 and has drawn much attention over the years, including a mention on \"The Daily Show\". Because of the building of an overpass, animal lovers worried about toads being killed by cars commuting from South Davis to North Davis, since the toads traveled from one side of a dirt lot (which the overpass replaced) to the reservoir at the other end. After much controversy, a decision was made to build a toad tunnel, which runs beneath the Pole Line Road overpass which crosses Interstate 80. The project cost $14,000. The tunnel is 21\u00a0inches (53\u00a0cm) wide and 18\u00a0inches (46\u00a0cm) high.\nDavis Food Coop.\nThe Davis Food Coop is a Davis institution. Founded in 1972, this cooperative is presently owned and operated by over 9,000 members and families of the Davis Community. The Coop is a full service supermarket that has championed organic, healthy eating in the community, sponsoring community events including summer programs for children, cooking classes, and many other activities.\nDavis Pride Run/Walk for Equality and Community Festival.\nDavis Pride is an all-day, all-inclusive, family-friendly celebration event for members and supporters of the LGBTQ+ community. Davis Pride is a two-part large-scale fundraising event for the Davis Phoenix Coalition developed each year by a volunteer planning committee made of community members invested not only in the city of Davis but Yolo County and the LGBTQ+ community as a whole. The day starts off with the Run/Walk for Equality, a brisk 1K/5K/10K run/walk through the picturesque Davis renown greenbelts. After which is followed by the FREE Community Fair which includes the Pride Music Festival, vendor booths, exhibits, cultural presentations, delicious food booths, and many of your closest friends!\nEducation.\nUniversity of California.\nThe University of California, Davis, or UC Davis, a campus of the University of California, had a 2019 Fall enrollment of 38,369 students. UC Davis has a dominant influence on the social and cultural life of the town.\nD-Q University.\nAlso known as Deganawidah-Quetzalcoatl University and much smaller than UC Davis, D-Q University was a two-year institution located on Road 31 in Yolo County 6.7 miles (11\u00a0km) west of State Route 113. This is just west of Davis near the Yolo County Airport. About four miles (6\u00a0km) to the west, the Road 31 exit from Interstate 505 is marked with cryptic signage, \"DQU.\" The site is about 100 feet (30 m) above mean sea level (AMSL). NAD83 coordinates for the campus are \nThe college closed in 2005. The curriculum was said to include heritage and traditional American Indian ceremonies. The and 5 buildings were formerly a military reservation according to a National Park Service publication, \"Five Views.\" The full name of the school is included here so that readers can accurately identify the topic. According to some tribal members, use of the spelled-out name of the university can be offensive. People who want to be culturally respectful refer to the institution as \"D-Q University\". Tribal members in appropriate circumstances may use the full name.\nOther colleges.\nAn off-campus branch of Sacramento City College is located in Davis. The satellite is located in West Village, an area built by UC Davis to house students and others affiliated with the university.\nPublic schools.\nDavis' public school system is administrated by the Davis Joint Unified School District.\nThe city has nine public elementary schools (North Davis, Birch Lane, Pioneer Elementary, Patwin, Cesar Chavez, Robert E. Willett, Marguerite Montgomery, Fred T. Korematsu at Mace Ranch, and Fairfield Elementary (which is outside the city limits but opened in 1866 and is Davis Joint Unified School District's oldest public school)). Davis has one school for independent study (Davis School for Independent Study), three public junior high schools (Ralph Waldo Emerson, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and Frances Harper), one main high school (Davis Senior High School), one alternative high school (Martin Luther King High School), and a small project based high school (Leonardo da Vinci High School). Cesar Chavez is a Spanish immersion school, with no English integration until the third grade. The junior high schools contain grades 7 through 9. Due to a decline in the school-age population in Davis, two of the elementary schools in south Davis may have their district boundaries changed, or magnet programs may be moved to equalize enrollment. Valley Oak was closed after the 2007\u201308 school year, and their campus was granted to Da Vinci High (which had formerly been located in the back of Davis Senior High's campus) and a special-ed preschool. On average, class size is about 25 students: 1 teacher.\nAt one time, Chavez and Willett were incorporated together to provide elementary education K\u20136 to both English-speaking and Spanish immersion students in West Davis. C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez served grades K\u20133 and was called West Davis Elementary, and Robert E. Willett (named for a long-time teacher at the school, now deceased) served grades 4\u20136 and was known as West Davis Intermediate. Willett now serves K\u20136 English-speaking students, and Chavez supports the Spanish immersion program for K\u20136.\nNotable people.\nThese are some notable Davis residents, other than UC Davis faculty who were not previously from Davis.\nSister cities.\nDavis' sister cities are:"}
{"id": "9124", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9124", "title": "Descending chain condition", "text": ""}
{"id": "9125", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9125", "title": "Descending Chain Condition", "text": ""}
{"id": "9127", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9127", "title": "Double boiler", "text": ""}
{"id": "9128", "revid": "1273126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9128", "title": "Damon Runyon", "text": "Alfred Damon Runyon (October 4, 1880 \u2013 December 10, 1946) was an American newspaperman and short-story writer.\nHe was best known for his short stories celebrating the world of Broadway in New York City that grew out of the Prohibition era. To New Yorkers of his generation, a \"Damon Runyon character\" evoked a distinctive social type from Brooklyn or Midtown Manhattan. The adjective \"Runyonesque\" refers to this type of character as well as to the type of situations and dialog that Runyon depicted. He spun humorous and sentimental tales of gamblers, hustlers, actors, and gangsters, few of whom go by \"square\" names, preferring instead colorful monikers such as \"Nathan Detroit\", \"Benny Southstreet\", \"Big Jule\", \"Harry the Horse\", \"Good Time Charley\", \"Dave the Dude\", or \"The Seldom Seen Kid\". His distinctive vernacular style is known as \"Runyonese\": a mixture of formal speech and colorful slang, almost always in present tense, and always devoid of contractions. He is credited with coining the phrase \"Hooray Henry\", a term now used in British English to describe the upper class version of a loud-mouthed, arrogant twit.\nRunyon's fictional world is also known to the general public through the musical \"Guys and Dolls\" based on two of his stories, \"The Idyll of Miss Sarah Brown\" and \"Blood Pressure\". The musical additionally borrows characters and story elements from a few other Runyon stories, most notably \"Pick The Winner\". The film \"Little Miss Marker\" (and its three remakes, \"Sorrowful Jones\", \"40 Pounds of Trouble\" and the 1980 \"Little Miss Marker\") grew from his short story of the same name.\nRunyon was also a newspaper reporter, covering sports and general news for decades for various publications and syndicates owned by William Randolph Hearst. Already known for his fiction, he wrote a well-remembered \"present tense\" article on Franklin Delano Roosevelt's Presidential inauguration in 1933 for the Universal Service, a Hearst syndicate, which was merged with the co-owned International News Service in 1937.\nLife and work.\nDamon Runyon was born Alfred Damon Runyan to Alfred Lee and Elizabeth (Damon) Runyan. His relatives in his birthplace of Manhattan, Kansas included several newspapermen. His grandfather was a newspaper printer from New Jersey who had relocated to Manhattan, Kansas in 1855, and his father was editor of his own newspaper in the town. In 1882 Runyon's father was forced to sell his newspaper, and the family moved westward. The family eventually settled in Pueblo, Colorado in 1887, where Runyon spent the rest of his youth. By most accounts, he attended school only through the fourth grade. He began to work in the newspaper trade under his father in Pueblo. In present-day Pueblo, Runyon Field, the Damon Runyon Repertory Theater Company, and Runyon Lake are named in his honor.\nIn 1898, when still in his teens, Runyon enlisted in the US Army to fight in the Spanish\u2013American War. While in the service, he was assigned to write for the \"Manila Freedom\" and \"Soldier's Letter\".\nAfter military service, he worked for Colorado newspapers, beginning in Pueblo. His first job as a reporter was in September 1900, when he was hired by the \"Pueblo Star\"; he then worked in the Rocky Mountain area during the first decade of the 1900s: at the \"Denver Daily News\", he served as \"sporting editor\" (today a \"sports editor\") and then as a staff writer. His expertise was in covering the semi-professional teams in Colorado. He briefly managed a semi-pro team in Trinidad, Colorado. At one of the newspapers where he worked, the spelling of his last name was changed from \"Runyan\" to \"Runyon\", a change he let stand.\nAfter failing in an attempt to organize a Colorado minor baseball league, which lasted less than a week, Runyon moved to New York City in 1910. In his first New York byline, the \"American\" editor dropped the \"Alfred\" and the name \"Damon Runyon\" appeared for the first time. For the next ten years he covered the New York Giants and professional boxing for the \"New York American\".\nHe was the Hearst newspapers' baseball columnist for many years, beginning in 1911, and his knack for spotting the eccentric and the unusual, on the field or in the stands, is credited with revolutionizing the way baseball was covered. Perhaps as confirmation, Runyon was voted the 1967 J. G. Taylor Spink Award by the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA), for which he was honored at ceremonies at the National Baseball Hall of Fame in July 1968, and added to what is commonly referred to as the \"writers wing\" of the Hall. He is also a member of the International Boxing Hall Of Fame and is known for dubbing heavyweight champion James J. Braddock, the \"Cinderella Man\". Runyon frequently contributed sports poems to the \"American\" on boxing and baseball themes, and also wrote numerous short stories and essays. \nOne year, while covering spring training in Texas, he met Pancho Villa in a bar and later accompanied the unsuccessful American expedition into Mexico searching for Villa. It was while he was in Mexico that he met the young girl whom he eventually married.\nGambling, particularly on craps or horse races, was a common theme of Runyon's works, and he was a notorious gambler. One of his paraphrases from a line in Ecclesiastes ran: \"The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but that's how the smart money bets.\"\nA heavy drinker as a young man, he seems to have quit drinking soon after arriving in New York, after his drinking nearly cost him the courtship of the woman who became his first wife, Ellen Egan. He remained a heavy smoker.\nHis best friend was mobster accountant Otto Berman, and he incorporated Berman into several of his stories under the alias \"Regret, the horse player\". When Berman was killed in a hit on Berman's boss, Dutch Schultz, Runyon quickly assumed the role of damage control for his deceased friend, correcting erroneous press releases (including one that stated Berman was one of Schultz's gunmen, to which Runyon replied, \"Otto would have been as effective a bodyguard as a two-year-old.\").\nRunyon's marriage to Ellen Egan produced two children (Mary and Damon, Jr.), but broke up in 1928 over rumors that Runyon had become infatuated with Patrice Amati del Grande, a Mexican woman he had first met while covering the Pancho Villa raids in 1916 and discovered once again in New York, when she called the \"American\" seeking him out. Runyon had promised her in Mexico that if she would complete the education he paid for her, he would find her a dancing job in New York. She became his companion after he separated from his wife. After Ellen Runyon's death, Runyon and del Grande married on July 7, 1932; that marriage ended in 1946 when she left him for a younger man.\nRunyon died in New York City from throat cancer in late 1946, at age 66. His body was cremated, and his ashes were scattered from a DC-3 airplane over Broadway in Manhattan by Eddie Rickenbacker on December 18, 1946. This was an infringement of the law, but widely approved. The family plot of Damon Runyon is located at Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York.\nLiterary style - the \u201cBroadway\u201d stories.\nThe English comedy writer Frank Muir comments that Runyon's plots were, in the manner of O. Henry, neatly constructed with professionally wrought endings, but their distinction lay in the manner of their telling, as the author invented a peculiar argot for his characters to speak. Runyon almost totally avoids the past tense (English humorist E.C. Bentley thought there was only one instance, and was willing to \"lay plenty of 6 to 5 that it is nothing but a misprint\", but \"was\" appears in the short stories \"The Lily of St Pierre\" and \"A Piece of Pie\"; \"had\" appears in \"The Lily of St Pierre\", \"Undertaker Song\" and \"Bloodhounds of Broadway\"), and makes little use of the future tense, using the present for both. He also avoided the conditional, using instead the future indicative in situations that would normally require conditional. An example: \"Now most any doll on Broadway will be very glad indeed to have Handsome Jack Madigan give her a tumble\" (\"Guys and Dolls\", \"Social error\"). Bentley comments that \"there is a sort of ungrammatical purity about it [Runyon's resolute avoidance of the past tense], an almost religious exactitude.\" There is an homage to Runyon that makes use of this peculiarity (\"Chronic Offender\" by Spider Robinson) which involves a time machine and a man going by the name \"Harry the Horse\".\nHe uses many slang terms (which go unexplained in his stories), such as:\nThere are many recurring composite phrases such as:\nBentley notes that Runyon's \"telling use of the recurrent phrase and fixed epithet\" demonstrates a debt to Homer.\nRunyon's stories also employ occasional rhyming slang, similar to the cockney variety but native to New York (e.g.: \"Miss Missouri Martin makes the following crack one night to her: 'Well, I do not see any Simple Simon on your lean and linger.' This is Miss Missouri Martin's way of saying she sees no diamond on Miss Billy Perry's finger.\" (from \"Romance in the Roaring Forties\")).\nThe comic effect of his style results partly from the juxtaposition of broad slang with mock-pomposity. Women, when not \"dolls\", \"Judies\", \"pancakes\", \"tomatoes\", or \"broads\", may be \"characters of a female nature\", for example. He typically avoided contractions such as \"don't\" in the example above, which also contributes significantly to the humorously pompous effect. In one sequence, a gangster tells another character to do as he is told, or else \"find another world in which to live\".\nRunyon's short stories are told in the first person by a protagonist who is never named, and whose role is unclear; he knows many gangsters and does not appear to have a job, but he does not admit to any criminal involvement, and seems to be largely a bystander. He describes himself as \"being known to one and all as a guy who is just around\". The radio program \"The Damon Runyon Theatre\" dramatized 52 of Runyon's works in 1949, and for these the protagonist was given the name \"Broadway\", although it was admitted that this was not his real name, much in the way \"Harry the Horse\" and \"Sorrowful Jones\" are aliases.\nLiterary works.\nStories.\nThere are many collections of Runyon's stories, in particular \"Runyon on Broadway\" and \"Runyon from First to Last\". A publisher's note in the latter claims that collection contains all of Runyon's short stories not included in \"Runyon on Broadway\", but two Broadway stories originally published in \"Collier's Weekly\" are not in either collection: \"Maybe a Queen\" and \"Leopard's Spots\", both collected in \"More Guys And Dolls\" (1950). The radio show, in addition, has a story, \"Joe Terrace\", that appears in \u2018More Guys and Dolls\u2019 and the August 29, 1936, issue of \"Colliers\". It is one of his \"Our Town\" stories that does not appear in the \u201cIn Our Town\u201d book, and the only episode of the show which is not a Broadway\u2019 story, however, the action is changed in the show from Our Town to Broadway.\nThe \"Our Town\" stories are short vignettes of life in a small town, largely based on Runyon's experiences in his home town of Pueblo, Colorado. They are written in a simple, descriptive style and contain twists and odd endings based on the personalities of the people involved. Each story's title is the name of the principal character. Twenty-seven of them were published in the 1946 book \"In Our Town\".\n\"Runyon on Broadway\" contains the following stories:\nMore Than Somewhat\nFurthermore\nTake It Easy\n\"Runyon from First to Last\" includes the following stories and sketches:\nThe First Stories (early non-Broadway stories):\nStories \u00e0 la Carte (Broadway stories written in Runyonese):\nThe Last Stories (Broadway stories written in Runyonese):\nWritten in Sickness (sketches):\nFilm.\nTwenty of his stories became motion pictures.\nIn 1938, his unproduced play \"Saratoga Chips\" became the basis of The Ritz Brothers film \"Straight, Place and Show\".\nRadio.\n\"The Damon Runyon Theater\" radio series dramatized 52 of Runyon's short stories in weekly broadcasts running from October 1948 to September 1949 (with reruns until 1951). The series was produced by Alan Ladd's Mayfair Transcription Company for syndication to local radio stations. John Brown played the character \"Broadway\", who doubled as host and narrator. The cast also comprised Alan Reed, Luis Van Rooten, Joseph Du Val, Gerald Mohr, Frank Lovejoy, Herb Vigran, Sheldon Leonard, William Conrad, Jeff Chandler, Lionel Stander, Sidney Miller, Olive Deering and Joe De Santis. Pat O'Brien was initially engaged for the role of \"Broadway\". The original stories were adapted for the radio by Russell Hughes.\n\"Broadway's New York had a crisis each week, though the streets had a rose-tinged aura\", wrote radio historian John Dunning. \"The sad shows then were all the sadder; plays like \"For a Pal\" had a special poignance. The bulk of Runyon's work had been untapped by radio, and the well was deep.\"\nTelevision.\n\"Damon Runyon Theatre\" aired on CBS-TV from 1955 to 1956.\nMike McShane told Runyon stories as monologues on British TV in 1994, and an accompanying book was released, both titled \"Broadway Stories\".\n\"Three Wise Guys\" was 2005 TV movie."}
{"id": "9129", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9129", "title": "Don Tennant", "text": "Donald G. Tennant (November 23, 1922 \u2013 December 8, 2001) was an American advertising agency executive.\nHe worked at the Leo Burnett agency in Chicago, Illinois. The agency placed anthropomorphic faces of 'critters' on packaged goods. He was the first to draw Tony the Tiger for the Kellogg's Sugar Frosted Flakes advertising campaign in 1952. Tennant was also in charge of the Marlboro account and invented the Marlboro Man."}
{"id": "9130", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9130", "title": "Devo", "text": "Devo (, originally ) is an American rock band from Akron, Ohio, formed in 1973. Their classic lineup consisted of two sets of brothers, the Mothersbaughs (Mark and Bob) and the Casales (Gerald and Bob), along with Alan Myers. The band had a No. 14 \"Billboard\" chart hit in 1980 with the single \"Whip It\", the song that gave the band mainstream popularity.\nDevo is known for their music and stage shows mingling kitsch science fiction themes, deadpan surrealist humor and mordantly satirical social commentary. Their early, pre-Warner Bros. dissonant songs use synthetic instrumentation and time signatures proven influential on subsequent popular music, particularly new wave, industrial, and alternative rock artists. Devo (most enthusiastically Gerald Casale) was also a pioneer of the music video, creating clips for the LaserDisc format, with \"Whip It\" getting heavy airplay in the early days of MTV.\nHistory.\n1973\u20131978: Formation.\nThe name \"Devo\" comes from the concept of \"de-evolution\" and the band's related idea that instead of continuing to evolve, mankind had begun to regress, as evidenced by the dysfunction and herd mentality of American society. In the late 1960s, this idea was developed as a joke by Kent State University art students Gerald Casale and Bob Lewis, who created a number of satirical art pieces in a devolution vein. At this time, Casale had also performed with the local band 15-60-75 (The Numbers Band). They met Mark Mothersbaugh around 1970, a talented keyboardist who had been playing with the band Flossy Bobbitt. Mothersbaugh brought a more humorous feel to the band, introducing them to material like the pamphlet \"Jocko Homo Heavenbound\", which includes an illustration of a winged devil labelled \"D-EVOLUTION\" and would later inspire the song \"Jocko Homo\". The \"joke\" about de-evolution became serious following the Kent State shootings of May 4, 1970. This event would be cited multiple times as the impetus for forming the band Devo. Throughout the band's career, they have often been considered a \"joke band\" by the music press.\nThe first form of Devo was the \"Sextet Devo\" which performed at the 1973 Kent State performing arts festival. It included Casale, Lewis and Mothersbaugh, as well as Gerald's brother Bob Casale on guitar, and friends Rod Reisman and Fred Weber on drums and vocals, respectively. This performance was filmed and a part was included on the home video \"The Complete Truth About De-Evolution\". This lineup performed only once. Devo returned to perform in the Student Governance Center (featured prominently in the film) at the 1974 Creative Arts Festival with a lineup including the Casale brothers, Bob Lewis, Mark Mothersbaugh, and Jim Mothersbaugh on drums.\nThe band continued to perform, generally as a quartet, but with a fluid lineup including Mark's brothers Bob Mothersbaugh and Jim Mothersbaugh. Bob played electric guitar, and Jim provided percussion using a set of home-made electronic drums. Their first two music videos, \"Secret Agent Man\" and \"Jocko Homo\" featured on \"The Truth About De-Evolution\", were filmed in Akron, and Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, the hometown of most members. This lineup of Devo lasted until late 1975 when Jim left the band. Bob Lewis would sometimes play guitar during this period, but mainly stayed in a managerial role. In concert, Devo would often perform in the guise of theatrical characters, such as Booji Boy and the Chinaman. Live concerts from this period were often confrontational, and would remain so until 1977. A recording of an early Devo performance from 1975 with the quartet lineup appears on \"\", ending with the promoters unplugging Devo's equipment.\nFollowing Jim Mothersbaugh's departure, Bob Mothersbaugh found a new drummer, Alan Myers, who played on a conventional, acoustic drum kit. Casale re-recruited his brother Bob Casale, and the lineup of Devo remained the same for nearly ten years.\nDevo gained some fame in 1976 when the short film \"The Truth About De-Evolution\" directed by Chuck Statler won a prize at the Ann Arbor Film Festival. This attracted the attention of David Bowie, who began work to get the band a recording contract with Warner Music Group. In 1977, Devo were asked by Neil Young to participate in the making of his film \"Human Highway\". Released in 1982, the film featured the band as \"nuclear garbagemen\". The band members were asked to write their own parts and Mark Mothersbaugh scored and recorded much of the soundtrack, his first of many.\nIn March 1977, Devo released their first single \"Mongoloid\" backed with \"Jocko Homo\", the B-side of which came from the soundtrack to \"The Truth About De-Evolution\", on their independent label Booji Boy. This was followed by a cover of the Rolling Stones' \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\".\nIn 1978, the \"B Stiff EP\" was released by British independent label Stiff, which included the single \"Be Stiff\" plus two previous Booji Boy releases. \"Mechanical Man\", a 4-track 7\" extended play (EP) of demos, an apparent bootleg, but rumored to be put out by the band, was also released that year.\n1978\u20131980: Recording contract, \"Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo!\", and \"Duty Now for the Future\".\nRecommendations from David Bowie and Iggy Pop enabled Devo to secure a recording contract with Warner Bros. in 1978. After Bowie backed out of the business deal due to previous commitments, their first album, \"Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo!\" was produced by Brian Eno and featured re-recordings of their previous singles \"Mongoloid\" and \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\". On October 14, 1978, Devo gained national exposure with an appearance on the late-night show \"Saturday Night Live\", a week after the Rolling Stones, performing \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\" and \"Jocko Homo\".\nAfter the band achieved this success, co-founder Bob Lewis asked for accreditation and compensation in 1978 for his contributions to the band. The band refused to negotiate, and sued Lewis in Los Angeles County Superior Court, seeking a declaratory judgment stating that Lewis had no rights to the name or theory of de-evolution. Lewis then filed an action in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, alleging theft of intellectual property. During discovery, Lewis produced articles, promotional materials, documentary evidence and an interview recorded at the Akron Art Museum following the premiere of \"In the Beginning was the End\" in which Mothersbaugh and other band members credited Lewis with developing the theory of de-evolution. The band quickly settled for an undisclosed sum.\nThe band followed up with \"Duty Now for the Future\" in 1979, which moved the band more towards electronic instrumentation. While not as successful as their first album, it did produce some fan favorites with the songs \"Blockhead\" and \"The Day My Baby Gave Me a Surprize\" , as well as a cover of the Johnny Rivers hit \"Secret Agent Man\". \"Secret Agent Man\" had been recorded first in 1974 for Devo's first film and performed live as early as 1976. In 1979, Devo traveled to Japan for the first time, and a live show from this tour was partially recorded. Devo appeared on \"Don Kirshner's Rock Concert\" in 1979, performing \"Blockhead\", \"Secret Agent Man\", \"Uncontrollable Urge\", and \"Mongoloid\". Also in 1979, Rhino, in conjunction with the Los Angeles radio station KROQ-FM, released \"Devotees\", a tribute album. It contained a set of covers of Devo songs interspersed with renditions of popular songs in Devo's style.\nDevo actively embraced the parody religion Church of the SubGenius. In concert, Devo sometimes performed as their own opening act, pretending to be a Christian soft rock band called \"Dove (the Band of Love)\", which is an anagram of \"Devo\". They appeared as Dove in the 1980 televangelism spoof film \"Pray TV\".\n1980\u20131982: Mainstream breakthrough, \"Freedom of Choice\", and \"New Traditionalists\".\nDevo gained a new level of visibility with 1980's \"Freedom of Choice\". This album included their best-known hit, \"Whip It\", which quickly became a Top 40 hit. The album moved to an almost completely electronic sound, with the exception of acoustic drums and Bob Mothersbaugh's guitar. The tour for \"Freedom of Choice\" was ambitious for the band, including dates in Japan, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Canada. The band used a minimalist set including large custom light boxes which could be laid on their back to form a second, smaller stage during the second half of the set. Other popular songs from \"Freedom of Choice\" were \"Girl U Want\", the title-track, and \"Gates of Steel\". The band released popular music videos for \"Whip It\" and \"Girl U Want\". Devo made two appearances on the TV show \"Fridays\" in 1980, as well as on \"Don Kirshner's Rock Concert\", \"American Bandstand\", and other shows. The band members often wore red, terraced Energy dome hats as part of its stage outfit. The dome was first worn during the band's \"Freedom of Choice\" campaign of 1980. It reappeared in the 1981, 1982, and 1988 tours, as well as in most of their performances since 1997. Devo also recorded two albums of their own songs as elevator music for their fan club, Club Devo, released on cassette in 1981 and 1984. These were later re-released on the album \"E-Z Listening Disc\" (1987), with all but two of the original Club Devo songs. These songs were often played as house music before Devo concerts.\nIn August 1981, the band's \"DEV-O Live\" EP spent three weeks at the top of the Australian charts. In 1982, they toured Australia and appeared on the TV show \"Countdown\". Devo enjoyed continued popularity in Australia, where the nationally broadcast 1970s\u20131980s pop TV show \"Countdown\" was one of the first programs in the world to broadcast their video clips. They were given consistent radio support by Sydney-based non-commercial rock station Double Jay (2JJ) and Brisbane-based independent community station Triple Zed (4ZZZ), two of the first rock stations outside America to play their recordings. The late-night music program \"Nightmoves\" aired \"The Truth About De-Evolution\".\nIn 1981, Devo contributed a cover of \"Working in the Coal Mine\", recorded during the \"Freedom of Choice\" sessions, to the film \"Heavy Metal\". They offered the song to be used in the film when Warner Bros. refused to include it on the album. Warner then included it as an independent bonus single accompanying their 1981 release, \"New Traditionalists\". For this album Devo wore self-described \"Utopian Boy Scout uniforms\" topped with a \"New Traditionalist Pomp\"\u2014a plastic half-wig modeled on the hairstyle of John F. Kennedy. Among the singles from the album was \"Through Being Cool\", written as a reaction to their new-found fame from \"Whip It\" and seen as a response to new fans who had misinterpreted the message behind the hit song. The album's accompanying tour featured the band performing an intensely physical show with treadmills and a large Greek temple set. That same year they served as Toni Basil's backing band on \"Word of Mouth\", her debut album, which included versions of three Devo songs, recorded with Basil singing lead.\n1982\u20131987: \"Oh No! It's Devo\", \"Shout\", and Myers' departure.\n\"Oh, No! It's Devo\" followed in 1982. Produced by Roy Thomas Baker, the album featured a more synth-pop-oriented sound than its predecessors. According to Gerald Casale, the album's sound was inspired by reviewers alternately describing them as both \"fascists\" and \"clowns\". The album's tour featured the band performing seven songs in front of a 12-foot high rear-projection screen with synchronized video, an image recreated using blue screen effects in the album's accompanying music videos. Devo also contributed two songs, \"Theme from Doctor Detroit\" and \"Luv-Luv\" to the 1983 Dan Aykroyd film \"Doctor Detroit\", and produced a music video for \"Theme from Doctor Detroit\" featuring clips from the film with live-action segments.\nDevo released their sixth album, \"Shout\", in 1984 to poor reviews. The album has been criticized for its overuse of the Fairlight CMI digital sampling synthesizer and weak songwriting. However, the band's cover of the Jimi Hendrix song \"Are You Experienced?\" and the accompanying music video received some praise. Following the critical and commercial failure of \"Shout\", Warner Bros. dropped Devo from their label. Shortly after, claiming to feel creatively unfulfilled, Alan Myers left the band, causing the remaining band members to abandon the plans for a \"Shout\" video LP, as well as a tour. In the interim, Mark Mothersbaugh began composing music for the TV show \"Pee-wee's Playhouse\" and released an elaborately packaged solo cassette, \"Musik for Insomniaks\", which was later expanded and released as two CDs in 1988.\n1987\u20131991: \"Total Devo\", \"Smooth Noodle Maps\", and breakup.\nIn 1987, Devo re-formed with former Sparks drummer David Kendrick to replace Myers. Their first project was a soundtrack for the flop horror film \"Slaughterhouse Rock\", starring Toni Basil. The band released the album \"Total Devo\" in 1988, on Enigma Records. This album included two songs used in the \"Slaughterhouse Rock\" soundtrack. The song \"Baby Doll\" was used that same year in the comedy film \"Tapeheads\", with newly recorded Swedish lyrics, and was credited to (and shown in a music video by) a fictitious Swedish band called Cube-Squared. Devo followed this up with a world tour, and released the live album \"\". However, \"Total Devo\" was not a commercial success and received poor critical reviews.\nIn 1989, members of Devo were involved in the project Visiting Kids, releasing a self-titled EP on the New Rose label in 1990. The band featured Mark's then-wife Nancye Ferguson, as well as David Kendrick, Bob Mothersbaugh, and Bob's daughter Alex Mothersbaugh. Their record was produced by Bob Casale and Mark Mothersbaugh, and Mark also co-wrote some of the songs. Visiting Kids appeared on the soundtrack to the film \"Rockula\", as well as on \"Late Night with David Letterman\". A promotional video was filmed for the song \"Trilobites\".\nIn 1990, \"Smooth Noodle Maps\", Devo's last album for twenty years, was released. It too was a critical and commercial failure which, along with its two singles \"Stuck in a Loop\" and \"Post Post-Modern Man\", hold the distinction of being Devo's worst-selling efforts; all failed to appear on the U.S. charts. Devo launched a concert tour in support of the album, but poor ticket sales and the bankruptcy and dissolution of Enigma Records, who was responsible for organizing and financing the tour, caused it to be cancelled part way through. They had a falling out and played one final show in March 1991 before breaking up. In an interview with Mark Mothersbaugh from excerpts on their 1996 computer game \"Devo Presents Adventures of the Smart Patrol\", \"Around '88, '89, '90 maybe, we did our last tour in Europe, and it was kind of at that point, We were watching \"This Is Spinal Tap\" on the bus and said, 'Oh my God, that's our life.' And we just said, 'Things have to change.' So we kind of agreed from there that we wouldn't do live shows anymore.\" Around this time, members of Devo appeared in the film \"The Spirit of '76\", except for Bob Mothersbaugh. Two albums of demo recordings from 1974\u20131977, namely ' (1990) and ' (1991), were released on Rykodisc, as well as an album of early live recordings, \"\".\n1991\u20131996: Hiatus.\nFollowing the split, Mark Mothersbaugh established Mutato Muzika, a commercial music production studio, along with Bob Mothersbaugh and Bob Casale. Mothersbaugh meant to further a career as a composer, and the latter worked as an audio engineer. Mothersbaugh has had considerable success writing and producing music for television programs, including \"Pee-wee's Playhouse\" and \"Rugrats\", video games, cartoons, and films, where he worked alongside director Wes Anderson. David Kendrick also worked at Mutato for a period during the early 1990s. Gerald Casale began a career as a director of music videos and commercials, working with bands including Rush, Soundgarden, Silverchair and the Foo Fighters. In the wake of Devo's dissolution, Bob Mothersbaugh attempted to start a solo career with The Bob I Band, recording an album that was never released. The tapes for this are now lost, though a bootleg recording of the band in concert exists and can be obtained through the bootleg aggregator Booji Boy's Basement.\nWhile they did not release any studio albums during this period, Devo sporadically reconvened to record a number of songs for various films and compilations, including a new recording of \"Girl U Want\" on the soundtrack to the 1995 film \"Tank Girl\" and a cover of the Nine Inch Nails hit \"Head Like a Hole\" for the 1996 North American version of the film \"Supercop\".\n1996\u20132007: Reunion.\nIn January 1996, Devo performed a reunion concert at the Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah. The band performed on part of the 1996 Lollapalooza tour in the rotating Mystery Spot. On these tours and most subsequent tours, Devo performed a set-list mostly composed of material from between 1978 and 1982, ignoring their Enigma Records-era material. Also in 1996, Devo released a multimedia CD-ROM adventure game, \"Adventures of the Smart Patrol\" with Inscape. The game was not a success, but the Lollapalooza tour was received well enough to allow Devo to return in 1997 as a headliner. Devo performed sporadically from 1997 onwards.\nThe \"Oh, No! It's Devo\" era outtakes \"Faster and Faster\" and \"One Dumb Thing\", as well as the \"Shout\" era outtake \"Modern Life\", were restored, completed and used in the video game \"Interstate '82\", developed by Activision and released in 1999. Also that year, Mothersbaugh started the Devo side-project The Wipeouters, featuring himself (keyboards, organ), Bob Mothersbaugh (guitar), Bob Casale (guitar), and Mutato Muzika composer Josh Mancell (drums). The Wipeouters performed the theme song to the Nickelodeon animated series \"Rocket Power\", and in 2001 they released an album of surf rock material, titled \"P'Twaaang!!!\".\nIn 2005, Devo recorded a new version of \"Whip It\" to be used in Swiffer television commercials, a decision they have said they regretted. During an interview with the \"Dallas Observer\", Gerald Casale said, \"It's just aesthetically offensive. It's got everything a commercial that turns people off has.\" The song \"Beautiful World\" was also used in a re-recorded form for an advertisement for Target stores. Due to rights issues with their back catalog, Devo has re-recorded songs for films and advertisements.\nIn 2005, Gerald Casale announced his \"solo\" project, Jihad Jerry &amp; the Evildoers (the Evildoers, including the other members of Devo), and released the first EP, \"Army Girls Gone Wild\" in 2006. A full-length album, \"Mine Is Not a Holy War\", was released on September 12, 2006, after a several-month delay. It featured mostly new material, plus re-recordings of four obscure Devo songs: \"I Need a Chick\" and \"I Been Refused\" (from \"\"), \"Find Out\" (which appeared on the single and EP of \"Peek-a-Boo!\" in 1982), and \"Beehive\" (which was recorded by the band in 1974, whereupon it was apparently abandoned, with the exception of one appearance at a special show in 2001). Devo continued to tour actively in 2005 and 2006, unveiling a new stage show at appearances in October 2006, with the Jihad Jerry character performing \"Beautiful World\" as an encore.\nAlso in 2006, Devo worked on a project with Disney known as Devo 2.0. A band of child performers was assembled and re-recorded Devo songs. A quote from the \"Akron Beacon Journal\" stated, \"Devo recently finished a new project in cahoots with Disney called Devo 2.0, which features the band playing old songs and two new ones with vocals provided by children. Their debut album, a two disc CD/DVD combo entitled \"DEV2.0\", was released on March 14, 2006. The lyrics of some of the songs were changed for family-friendly airplay, which has been claimed by the band to be a play on irony of the messages of their classic hits.\"\nIn an April 2007 interview, Gerald Casale mentioned a tentative project for a biographical film about Devo's early days. According to Casale, a script was supposedly in development, called \"The Beginning Was the End\". Devo played their first European tour since 1990 in the summer of 2007, including a performance at Festival Internacional de Benic\u00e0ssim.\n2007\u2013present: \"Something for Everybody\" and current activities.\nIn December 2007, Devo released their first new single since 1990, \"Watch Us Work It\", which was featured in a commercial for Dell. The song features a sample drum track from the \"New Traditionalists\" song \"The Super Thing\". Casale said that the song was chosen from a batch that the band was working on, and that it was the closest the band had been to a new album. \nWhen Devo performed at SXSW in March 2009 the band presented a new stage show with synchronized video backdrops (similar to the 1982 tour), new costumes, and three new songs: \"Don't Shoot, I'm a Man!\", \"What We Do\", and \"Fresh\". The album, \"Something for Everybody\" was eventually released in June 2010, preceded by a 12\" single of \"Fresh\"/\"What We Do\".\nOn September 16, 2009, Warner Bros. and Devo announced a re-release of \"Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo!\" and \"Freedom of Choice\", with a tour performing both albums.\nDevo was awarded the first Moog Innovator Award on October 29, 2010, during Moogfest 2010 in Asheville, North Carolina. The Moog Innovator Award has been said to celebrate \"pioneering artists whose genre-defying work exemplifies the bold, innovative spirit of Bob Moog\". Devo was scheduled to perform at Moogfest, but Bob Mothersbaugh severely injured his hand three days prior, and the band was forced to cancel. Mark Mothersbaugh and Gerald Casale collaborated with Austin, Texas, band The Octopus Project to perform \"Girl U Want\" and \"Beautiful World\" at the event instead.\nThe band split from Warner Bros in 2012 and launched a new \"post-Warner Brothers\" website that would offer \"new protective gear\" and \"unreleased material from the archives in vinyl disc format\".\nIn August 2012, the band released a single called \"Don't Roof Rack Me, Bro (Seamus Unleashed)\", dedicated to the Republican Party presidential candidate Mitt Romney's former pet dog Seamus. The title relates to the Mitt Romney dog incident, which occurred in 1983 when Romney traveled twelve hours with the dog in a crate on his car's roof rack. \nAlan Myers died of stomach cancer in Los Angeles, California, on June 24, 2013. He was 58. News reports at the time of his death incorrectly cited brain cancer as the cause. \nBob Casale died on February 17, 2014, at 61. According to his brother Gerald, it was a \"sudden death from conditions that led to heart failure\".\nGerald Casale mentioned plans to release a collection of demos from the sessions of \"Something for Everybody\", with potential titles being \"Devo Opens the Vault\", \"Gems from the Devo Dumpster\", or \"Something Else for Everybody\". The album was eventually titled \"Something Else For Everybody\" and was released on May 20, 2014.\nThe band toured the US and Canada in June and July 2014, playing ten dates consisting of their \"experimental music\" composed and recorded from 1974\u20131978. Planned as a 40th anniversary tour, this outing was billed as the \"Hardcore Devo\" tour. Partial proceeds for the ten shows went to support Bob Casale's family after his sudden death. The June 28 Oakland show was filmed and turned into the concert film \"Hardcore Devo Live!\", released on Blu-ray, DVD, and Video on Demand on February 10, 2015, along with CD and double-vinyl audios. Following the Hardcore tour, Devo performed several more tours throughout late 2014, with former Elevator Drops guitarist Josh Hager (a.k.a. Garvy J) replacing Bob Casale.\nRobert Mothersbaugh, Sr., father of Mark, Bob, and Jim Mothersbaugh, who portrayed General Boy in various Devo films, died on May 22, 2016, according to the Mothersbaugh family.\nA documentary film about Devo, entitled \"Are We Not Men?\" and directed by Tony Pemberton, had started production in 2009, but was still in post-production as of 2018. On September 23, 2017, the official Twitter account for the documentary, operated by music and film producer Jeff Winner, stated that \"the film was finished years ago\" and that \"mm [Mark Mothersbaugh] is blocking its release\". Winner, who is also the Consulting Producer for the Devo documentary, went on to state that he and Pemberton had \"delivered the film that was contracted, and on schedule. It's now in the hands of the band to decide when/how it's released/distributed.\"\nAfter a four-year hiatus from live performances, Devo headlined the Burger Boogaloo festival in Oakland, California on June 30, 2018. Comedian and former Trenchmouth drummer Fred Armisen filled in for Josh Freese on drums.\nIn October 2018, Devo was announced as a nominee to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. They were nominated again in February of 2021.\nIn January 2021 Funko announced two special vinyl statues dedicated to the band. The first one will represent the music video of Whip It while the second one will be about Satisfaction.\nBand members.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nTouring members\nTimeline.\nNotes"}
{"id": "9131", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9131", "title": "Djinn", "text": ""}
{"id": "9132", "revid": "39346316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9132", "title": "Dale Chihuly", "text": "Dale Chihuly (born September 20, 1941) is an American glass sculptor and entrepreneur. His works are considered to possess outstanding artistic merit in the field of blown glass, \"moving it into the realm of large-scale sculpture.\" The technical difficulties of working with glass forms are considerable, yet Chihuly uses it as the primary medium for installations and environmental artwork.\nEarly life.\nDale Patrick Chihuly was born on September 20, 1941, in Tacoma, Washington. His parents were George and Viola Chihuly; his paternal grandfather was born in Slovakia. In 1956, his older brother and only sibling, George, died in a Navy aviation training accident in Pensacola, Florida. Two years later, in 1958, Chihuly's father died of a heart attack at the age of 51.\nChihuly had no interest in continuing his formal education after graduating from Woodrow Wilson High School in 1959. However, at his mother's urging, he enrolled at the College of Puget Sound A year later, he transferred to the University of Washington in Seattle to study interior design. In 1961, he joined the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity (Kappa Epsilon chapter), and the same year he learned how to melt and fuse glass. Chihuly became bored with his studies, and in 1962 he dropped out of the university to study art in Florence. He later traveled to the Middle East where he met architect Robert Landsman. Their meeting and his time abroad spurred Chihuly to return to his studies. In 1963, he took a weaving class where he incorporated glass shards into tapestries. He received an award for his work from the Seattle Weavers Guild in 1964. Chihuly graduated from the University of Washington in 1965 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in interior design.\nChihuly began experimenting with glassblowing in 1965, and in 1966 he received a full scholarship to attend the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison. He studied under Harvey Littleton, who had established the first glass program in the United States at the university. In 1967, Chihuly received a Master of Science degree in sculpture. After graduating, he enrolled at the Rhode Island School of Design, where he met and became close friends with Italo Scanga. Chihuly earned a Master of Fine Arts degree in sculpture from the RISD in 1968. That same year, he was awarded a Louis Comfort Tiffany Foundation grant for his work in glass, as well as a Fulbright Fellowship. He traveled to Venice to work at the Venini factory on the island of Murano, where he first saw the team approach to blowing glass. After returning to the United States, Chihuly spent the first of four consecutive summers teaching at the Haystack Mountain School of Crafts in Deer Isle, Maine. In 1969, he traveled to Europe, in part to meet Erwin Eisch in Germany and Stanislav Libensk\u00fd and Jaroslava Brychtov\u00e1 in Czechoslovakia.\nChihuly donated a portion of a large exhibit to his alma mater, the University of Wisconsin, in 1997 and it is on permanent display in the Kohl Center. In 2013 the University awarded him a Honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts.\nCareer.\nIn 1971, with the support of John Hauberg and Anne Gould Hauberg, Chihuly cofounded the Pilchuck Glass School near Stanwood, Washington. Chihuly also founded the HillTop Artists program in Tacoma, Washington at Jason Lee Middle School and Wilson High School.\nIn 1976, while Chihuly was in England, he was involved in a head-on car accident during which he was propelled through the windshield. His face was severely cut by glass and he was blinded in his left eye. After recovering, he continued to blow glass until he dislocated his right shoulder in 1979 while bodysurfing. No longer able to hold the glassblowing pipe, he hired others to do the work. Chihuly explained the change in a 2006 interview, saying \"Once I stepped back, I liked the view,\" and pointed out that it allowed him to see the work from more perspectives and enabled him to anticipate problems earlier. Chihuly's role has been described as \"more choreographer than dancer, more supervisor than participant, more director than actor.\" \"San Diego Union-Tribune\" reporter Erin Glass wrote that she \"wonders at the vision of not just the artist Chihuly, but the very successful entrepreneur Chihuly, whose estimated sales by 2004 was reported by \"The Seattle Times\" as $29 million.\" Chihuly and his team of artists were the subjects of the documentary \".\" They were also featured in the documentary \"Chihuly in the Hotshop,\" syndicated to public television stations by American Public Television starting on November 1, 2008.\n2006 lawsuit.\nIn 2006, Chihuly filed a lawsuit against his former longtime employee, glassblower Bryan Rubino, and businessman Robert Kaindl, claiming copyright and trademark infringement. Kaindl's pieces used titles Chihuly had employed for his own works, such as \"Seaforms\" and \"Ikebana\", and resembled the construction of Chihuly's pieces. Arguments made by legal experts stated that influence on art style does not constitute copyright infringement. Chihuly settled the lawsuit with Rubino initially, and later with Kaindl as well.\nWorks.\nRegina Hackett, a \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\" art critic, provided a chronology of Chihuly's work during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s:\nFor his exhibition in Jerusalem, Israel in 2000, in addition to the glass pieces, he had enormous blocks of transparent ice brought in from an Alaskan artesian well and formed a wall, echoing the stones of the nearby Citadel. Lights with color gels were set up behind them for illumination. Chihuly said the melting wall represented the \"dissolution of barriers\" between people. This exhibit holds the world record for most visitors to a temporary exhibit with more than 1.3 million visitors.\nGalleries.\nChihuly's largest permanent exhibit can be found at the Oklahoma City Museum of Art. Chihuly maintains two retail stores in partnership with MGM Resorts International. One is located at the Bellagio on the Las Vegas Strip, the other at the MGM Grand Casino in Macau. A number of other galleries also carry his pieces. He also has a gallery in Las Vegas in the Crystals in the Las Vegas City Center in Gallery Row. In 1983 Chihuly returned to his native Pacific Northwest where he continued to develop his own work at the Pilchuck Glass School, which he had helped to found in 1971. Throughout the 1970s, influenced by the great glassblowing tradition of Murano, Chihuly experimented with the team approach to glassblowing. Working with a team of master glassblowers and assistants has enabled him to produce architectural glass art of a scale and quantity unimaginable working alone or with only one assistant. In 2010 the Space Needle Corporation submitted a proposal for an exhibition of Chihuly's work at a site in the Seattle Center, in competition with proposals for other uses from several other groups. The project, which sees the new Chihuly exhibition hall occupy the site of the former Fun Forest amusement park in the Seattle Center park and entertainment complex, received the final green light from the Seattle City Council on April 25, 2011. Called Chihuly Garden and Glass, it opened May 21, 2012.\nPermanent collections.\nChihuly's art appears in permanent collections all over the world, including in the United States (The Chihuly Collection housed in its own building on Central Ave in St Petersburg, Florida), Canada, England, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait.\nRecognition.\nIn 1994, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nIn 2006, he received the American Craft Council\u2019s Gold Medal.\nIn 2011, he received the Fritz Redlich Alumni Award of the Institute of International Education."}
{"id": "9133", "revid": "127415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9133", "title": "Dean Kamen", "text": "Dean Lawrence Kamen (born April 5, 1951) is an American engineer, inventor, and businessman. He is known for his invention of the Segway and iBOT, as well as founding the non-profit organization FIRST with Woodie Flowers. Kamen holds over 1,000 patents.\nEarly life and family.\nKamen was born in Long Island, New York, to a Jewish family. \nHis father is Jack Kamen, an illustrator for \"Mad\", \"Weird Science\" and other EC Comics publications. During his teenage years, Kamen was already being paid for his ideas; local bands and museums paid him to build light and sound systems. His annual earnings reached $60,000 before his high school graduation.\nHe attended Worcester Polytechnic Institute, but in 1976 dropped out before graduating, after five years of private advanced research for the insulin pump AutoSyringe.\nCareer.\nInventions.\nKamen is best known for inventing the product that eventually became known as the Segway PT, an electric, self-balancing human transporter with a computer-controlled gyroscopic stabilization and control system. The device is balanced on two parallel wheels and is controlled by moving body weight. The machine's development was the object of much speculation and hype after segments of a book quoting Steve Jobs and other notable IT visionaries espousing its society-revolutionizing potential were leaked in December 2001.\nKamen was already a successful inventor: his company \"Auto Syringe\" manufactures and markets the first drug infusion pump. His company DEKA also holds patents for the technology used in portable dialysis machines, an insulin pump (based on the drug infusion pump technology), and an all-terrain electric wheelchair known as the iBOT, using many of the same gyroscopic balancing technologies that later made their way into the Segway.\nKamen has worked extensively on a project involving Stirling engine designs, attempting to create two machines: one that would generate power, and the Slingshot that would serve as a water purification system. He hopes the project will help improve living standards in developing countries. Kamen has a patent on his water purifier, and other patents pending. In 2014, the film \"SlingShot\" was released, detailing Kamen's quest to use his vapor compression distiller to fix the world's water crisis.\nKamen is also the co-inventor of a compressed air device that would launch a human into the air in order to quickly launch SWAT teams or other emergency workers to the roofs of tall, inaccessible buildings.\nIn 2009 Kamen stated that his company DEKA was now working on solar powered inventions.\nKamen and DEKA also developed the DEKA Arm System or \"Luke\", a prosthetic arm replacement that offers its user much more fine motor control than traditional prosthetic limbs. It was approved for use by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in May 2014, and DEKA is looking for partners to mass-produce the prosthesis.\nFIRST.\nIn 1989, Kamen founded FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology), an organization intended to build students' interests in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). In 1992, working with MIT Professor Emeritus Woodie Flowers, Kamen created the FIRST Robotics Competition (FRC), which evolved into an international competition involving 3,647 teams and serving more than 91,000 students as of 2020. \nFIRST organizes multiple robotics competition leagues for students in grades K-12, including FLL JR. (FIRST Lego League Jr.) for younger elementary school students, FLL (FIRST Lego League) for older elementary school and middle school students, FTC (FIRST Tech Challenge) for middle and high school students, and FRC (FIRST Robotics Competition) for high school students. In 2017, FIRST held the inaugural event of its first olympics-style competition \u2013 FGC (FIRST Global Challenge) \u2013 in Washington, D.C.\nKamen says that FIRST is the invention he is most proud of, and predicts that the 1 million students who have taken part in the contests so far will be responsible for some significant technological advances in years to come.\nAdvanced Regenerative Manufacturing Institute.\nIn 2017, Kamen founded the Advanced Regenerative Manufacturing Institute (ARMI) and launched BioFabUSA, a Manufacturing USA Innovation Institute with an $80M grant from the Department of Defense. BioFabUSA's mission is to \"...\"make practical the large-scale manufacturing of engineered tissues and tissue-related technologies, to benefit existing industries and grow new ones\"\" In addition to DoD funding, Kamen brought together a consortium of private sector entities to form a public-private partnership which pledged $214M additional private dollars. \nIn early 2020, ARMI was awarded a grant from the Department of Health and Human Services to establish the first Foundry for American Biotechnology, known as NextFab \"to produce technological solutions that help the United States protect against and respond to health security threats, enhance daily medical care, and add to the U.S. bioeconomy\".\nAwards.\nDuring his career Kamen has won numerous awards. He was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1997 for his biomedical devices and for making engineering more popular among high school students. In 1999 he was awarded the 5th Annual Heinz Award in Technology, the Economy and Employment, and in 2000 received the National Medal of Technology from then President Clinton for inventions that have advanced medical care worldwide. In April 2002, Kamen was awarded the Lemelson-MIT Prize for inventors, for his invention of the Segway and of an infusion pump for diabetics. In 2003 his \"Project Slingshot\", an inexpensive portable water purification system, was named a runner-up for \"coolest invention of 2003\" by \"Time\" magazine.\nIn 2005 he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame for his invention of the AutoSyringe. In 2006 Kamen was awarded the \"Global Humanitarian Action Award\" by the United Nations. In 2007 he received the ASME Medal, the highest award from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, in 2008 he was the recipient of the IRI Achievement Award from the Industrial Research Institute, and in 2011 Kamen was awarded the Benjamin Franklin Medal in Mechanical Engineering of the Franklin Institute.\nKamen received an honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Worcester Polytechnic Institute in 1992, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute May 17, 1996, a Doctor of Engineering degree from Kettering University in 2001, an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Clarkson University on May 13, 2001, an honorary \"Doctor of Science\" degree from the University of Arizona on May 16, 2009, and an honorary doctorate from the Wentworth Institute of Technology when he spoke at the college's centennial celebration in 2004, and other honorary doctorates from North Carolina State University in 2005, Bates College in 2007, the Georgia Institute of Technology in 2008, the Illinois Institute of Technology in 2008 and Plymouth State University in May 2008. In 2015, Kamen received an honorary Doctor of Engineering and Technology degree from Yale University. In 2017, Kamen was honored with an institutional honorary degree from Universit\u00e9 de Sherbrooke.\nKamen received the Stevens Honor Award on November 6, 2009, given by the Stevens Institute of Technology and the Stevens Alumni Association. On November 14, 2013, he received the James C. Morgan Global Humanitarian Award.\nKamen received the 2018 Public Service Award from the National Science Board, honoring his exemplary public service and contributions to the public's understanding of science and engineering.\nPersonal life.\nIn 2007, his residence was a hexagonal, shed style mansion he dubbed Westwind, located in Bedford, New Hampshire, just outside Manchester. The house has at least four different levels and is very eclectically conceived, with such things as: hallways resembling mine shafts; 1960s novelty furniture; a collection of vintage wheelchairs; spiral staircases; at least one secret passage; an observation tower; a fully equipped machine shop; and a huge cast iron steam engine which once belonged to Henry Ford (built into the multi-story center atrium of the house) which Kamen is working to convert into a Stirling engine-powered kinetic sculpture. Kamen owns and pilots an Embraer Phenom 300 light jet aircraft and three Enstrom helicopters, including a 280FX, a 480, and a 480B. He regularly commutes to work via his helicopters and had a hangar built into his house. In 2016 he flew as a passenger in a B-2 Spirit bomber at Whiteman AFB, marking the opening of the 2016 FRC World Championship in St. Louis.\nHe is the main subject of \"Code Name Ginger: the Story Behind Segway and Dean Kamen's Quest to Invent a New World\", a nonfiction narrative book by journalist Steve Kemper published by Harvard Business School Press in 2003 (released in paperback as \"Reinventing the Wheel\").\nHis company, DEKA, annually creates intricate mechanical presents for him. The company has created a robotic chess player, which is a mechanical arm attached to a chess board, and a vintage-looking computer with antique wood, and a converted typewriter as a keyboard. In addition, DEKA has received funding from DARPA to work on a brain-controlled prosthetic limb called the Luke Arm.\nKamen is a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board and is also a member of the Xconomists, an ad hoc team of editorial advisors for the tech news and media company, Xconomy. He is also on the Board of Trustees of the X Prize Foundation.\n\"Dean of Invention\", a TV show on Planet Green, premiered on October 22, 2010. It starred Kamen and correspondent Joanne Colan, in which they investigate new technologies,\nKamen was a keynote speaker at the 2015 Congress of Future Science and Technology Leaders."}
{"id": "9135", "revid": "1008986973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9135", "title": "Derivative (finance)", "text": "Derivative is a product whose value is derived from the value of one or more variable called bases (underlying assets). This underlying entity can be an asset, index, or interest rate, and is often simply called the \"underlying\". Derivatives can be used for a number of purposes, including insuring against price movements (hedging), increasing exposure to price movements for speculation, or getting access to otherwise hard-to-trade assets or markets.\nSome of the more common derivatives include forwards, futures, options, swaps, and variations of these such as synthetic collateralized debt obligations and credit default swaps. Most derivatives are traded over-the-counter (off-exchange) or on an exchange such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, while most insurance contracts have developed into a separate industry. In the United States, after the financial crisis of 2007\u20132009, there has been increased pressure to move derivatives to trade on exchanges. \nDerivatives are one of the three main categories of financial instruments, the other two being equity (i.e., stocks or shares) and debt (i.e., bonds and mortgages). The oldest example of a derivative in history, attested to by Aristotle, is thought to be a contract transaction of olives, entered into by ancient Greek philosopher Thales, who made a profit in the exchange. Bucket shops, outlawed in 1936, are a more recent historical example.\nBasics.\nDerivatives are contracts between two parties that specify conditions (especially the dates, resulting values and definitions of the underlying variables, the parties' contractual obligations, and the notional amount) under which payments are to be made between the parties. The assets include commodities, stocks, bonds, interest rates and currencies, but they can also be other derivatives, which adds another layer of complexity to proper valuation. The components of a firm's capital structure, e.g., bonds and stock, can also be considered derivatives, more precisely options, with the underlying being the firm's assets, but this is unusual outside of technical contexts.\nFrom the economic point of view, financial derivatives are cash flows that are conditioned stochastically and discounted to present value. The market risk inherent in the underlying asset is attached to the financial derivative through contractual agreements and hence can be traded separately. The underlying asset does not have to be acquired. Derivatives therefore allow the breakup of ownership and participation in the market value of an asset. This also provides a considerable amount of freedom regarding the contract design. That contractual freedom allows derivative designers to modify the participation in the performance of the underlying asset almost arbitrarily. Thus, the participation in the market value of the underlying can be effectively weaker, stronger (leverage effect), or implemented as inverse. Hence, specifically the market price risk of the underlying asset can be controlled in almost every situation.\nThere are two groups of derivative contracts: the privately traded over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives such as swaps that do not go through an exchange or other intermediary, and exchange-traded derivatives (ETD) that are traded through specialized derivatives exchanges or other exchanges.\nDerivatives are more common in the modern era, but their origins trace back several centuries. One of the oldest derivatives is rice futures, which have been traded on the Dojima Rice Exchange since the eighteenth century. Derivatives are broadly categorized by the relationship between the underlying asset and the derivative (such as forward, option, swap); the type of underlying asset (such as equity derivatives, foreign exchange derivatives, interest rate derivatives, commodity derivatives, or credit derivatives); the market in which they trade (such as exchange-traded or over-the-counter); and their pay-off profile.\nDerivatives may broadly be categorized as \"lock\" or \"option\" products. Lock products (such as swaps, futures, or forwards) obligate the contractual parties to the terms over the life of the contract. Option products (such as interest rate swaps) provide the buyer the right, but not the obligation to enter the contract under the terms specified.\nDerivatives can be used either for risk management (i.e. to \"hedge\" by providing offsetting compensation in case of an undesired event, a kind of \"insurance\") or for speculation (i.e. making a financial \"bet\"). This distinction is important because the former is a prudent aspect of operations and financial management for many firms across many industries; the latter offers managers and investors a risky opportunity to increase profit, which may not be properly disclosed to stakeholders.\nAlong with many other financial products and services, derivatives reform is an element of the Dodd\u2013Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. The Act delegated many rule-making details of regulatory oversight to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and those details are not finalized nor fully implemented as of late 2012.\nSize of market.\nTo give an idea of the size of the derivative market, \"The Economist\" has reported that as of June 2011, the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market amounted to approximately $700 trillion, and the size of the market traded on exchanges totaled an additional $83 trillion. For the fourth quarter 2017 the European Securities Market Authority estimated the size of European derivatives market at a size of \u20ac660 trillion with 74 million outstanding contracts.\nHowever, these are \"notional\" values, and some economists say that these aggregated values greatly exaggerate the market value and the true credit risk faced by the parties involved. For example, in 2010, while the aggregate of OTC derivatives exceeded $600 trillion, the value of the market was estimated to be much lower, at $21 trillion. The credit-risk equivalent of the derivative contracts was estimated at $3.3 trillion.\nStill, even these scaled-down figures represent huge amounts of money. For perspective, the budget for total expenditure of the United States government during 2012 was $3.5 trillion, and the total current value of the U.S. stock market is an estimated $23 trillion. Meanwhile, the world annual Gross Domestic Product is about $65 trillion.\nAt least for one type of derivative, Credit Default Swaps (CDS), for which the inherent risk is considered high , the higher, nominal value remains relevant. It was this type of derivative that investment magnate Warren Buffett referred to in his famous 2002 speech in which he warned against \"financial weapons of mass destruction\". CDS notional value in early 2012 amounted to $25.5 trillion, down from $55 trillion in 2008.\nUsage.\nDerivatives are used for the following:\nMechanics and valuation.\nLock products are theoretically valued at zero at the time of execution and thus do not typically require an up-front exchange between the parties. Based upon movements in the underlying asset over time, however, the value of the contract will fluctuate, and the derivative may be either an asset (i.e., \"in the money\") or a liability (i.e., \"out of the money\") at different points throughout its life. Importantly, either party is therefore exposed to the credit quality of its counterparty and is interested in protecting itself in an event of default.\nOption products have immediate value at the outset because they provide specified protection (intrinsic value) over a given time period (time value). One common form of option product familiar to many consumers is insurance for homes and automobiles. The insured would pay more for a policy with greater liability protections (intrinsic value) and one that extends for a year rather than six months (time value). Because of the immediate option value, the option purchaser typically pays an up front premium. Just like for lock products, movements in the underlying asset will cause the option's intrinsic value to change over time while its time value deteriorates steadily until the contract expires. An important difference between a lock product is that, after the initial exchange, the option purchaser has no further liability to its counterparty; upon maturity, the purchaser will execute the option if it has positive value (i.e., if it is \"in the money\") or expire at no cost (other than to the initial premium) (i.e., if the option is \"out of the money\").\nHedging.\nDerivatives allow risk related to the price of the underlying asset to be transferred from one party to another. For example, a wheat farmer and a miller could sign a futures contract to exchange a specified amount of cash for a specified amount of wheat in the future. Both parties have reduced a future risk: for the wheat farmer, the uncertainty of the price, and for the miller, the availability of wheat. However, there is still the risk that no wheat will be available because of events unspecified by the contract, such as the weather, or that one party will renege on the contract. Although a third party, called a clearing house, insures a futures contract, not all derivatives are insured against counter-party risk.\nFrom another perspective, the farmer and the miller both reduce a risk and acquire a risk when they sign the futures contract: the farmer reduces the risk that the price of wheat will fall below the price specified in the contract and acquires the risk that the price of wheat will rise above the price specified in the contract (thereby losing additional income that he could have earned). The miller, on the other hand, acquires the risk that the price of wheat will fall below the price specified in the contract (thereby paying more in the future than he otherwise would have) and reduces the risk that the price of wheat will rise above the price specified in the contract. In this sense, one party is the insurer (risk taker) for one type of risk, and the counter-party is the insurer (risk taker) for another type of risk.\nHedging also occurs when an individual or institution buys an asset (such as a commodity, a bond that has coupon payments, a stock that pays dividends, and so on) and sells it using a futures contract. The individual or institution has access to the asset for a specified amount of time, and can then sell it in the future at a specified price according to the futures contract. Of course, this allows the individual or institution the benefit of holding the asset, while reducing the risk that the future selling price will deviate unexpectedly from the market's current assessment of the future value of the asset.\nDerivatives trading of this kind may serve the financial interests of certain particular businesses. For example, a corporation borrows a large sum of money at a specific interest rate. The interest rate on the loan reprices every six months. The corporation is concerned that the rate of interest may be much higher in six months. The corporation could buy a forward rate agreement (FRA), which is a contract to pay a fixed rate of interest six months after purchases on a notional amount of money. If the interest rate after six months is above the contract rate, the seller will pay the difference to the corporation, or FRA buyer. If the rate is lower, the corporation will pay the difference to the seller. The purchase of the FRA serves to reduce the uncertainty concerning the rate increase and stabilize earnings.\nSpeculation and arbitrage.\nDerivatives can be used to acquire risk, rather than to hedge against risk. Thus, some individuals and institutions will enter into a derivative contract to speculate on the value of the underlying asset, betting that the party seeking insurance will be wrong about the future value of the underlying asset. Speculators look to buy an asset in the future at a low price according to a derivative contract when the future market price is high, or to sell an asset in the future at a high price according to a derivative contract when the future market price is less.\nIndividuals and institutions may also look for arbitrage opportunities, as when the current buying price of an asset falls below the price specified in a futures contract to sell the asset.\nSpeculative trading in derivatives gained a great deal of notoriety in 1995 when Nick Leeson, a trader at Barings Bank, made poor and unauthorized investments in futures contracts. Through a combination of poor judgment, lack of oversight by the bank's management and regulators, and unfortunate events like the Kobe earthquake, Leeson incurred a $1.3 billion loss that bankrupted the centuries-old institution.\nProportion used for hedging and speculation.\nThe true proportion of derivatives contracts used for hedging purposes is unknown, but it appears to be relatively small. Also, derivatives contracts account for only 3\u20136% of the median firms' total currency and interest rate exposure. Nonetheless, we know that many firms' derivatives activities have at least some speculative component for a variety of reasons.\nTypes.\nIn broad terms, there are two groups of derivative contracts, which are distinguished by the way they are traded in the market:\nOver-the-counter derivatives.\nOver-the-counter (OTC) derivatives are contracts that are traded (and privately negotiated) directly between two parties, without going through an exchange or other intermediary. Products such as swaps, forward rate agreements, exotic options \u2013 and other exotic derivatives \u2013 are almost always traded in this way. The OTC derivative market is the largest market for derivatives, and is largely unregulated with respect to disclosure of information between the parties, since the OTC market is made up of banks and other highly sophisticated parties, such as hedge funds. Reporting of OTC amounts is difficult because trades can occur in private, without activity being visible on any exchange.\nAccording to the Bank for International Settlements, who first surveyed OTC derivatives in 1995, reported that the \"gross market value, which represent the cost of replacing all open contracts at the prevailing market prices,\u00a0... increased by 74% since 2004, to $11 trillion at the end of June 2007 (BIS 2007:24).\" Positions in the OTC derivatives market increased to $516 trillion at the end of June 2007, 135% higher than the level recorded in 2004. The total outstanding notional amount is US$708 trillion (as of June 2011). Of this total notional amount, 67% are interest rate contracts, 8% are credit default swaps (CDS), 9% are foreign exchange contracts, 2% are commodity contracts, 1% are equity contracts, and 12% are other. Because OTC derivatives are not traded on an exchange, there is no central counter-party. Therefore, they are subject to counterparty risk, like an ordinary contract, since each counter-party relies on the other to perform.\nExchange-traded derivatives.\nExchange-traded derivatives (ETD) are those derivatives instruments that are traded via specialized derivatives exchanges or other exchanges. A derivatives exchange is a market where individuals trade standardized contracts that have been defined by the exchange. A derivatives exchange acts as an intermediary to all related transactions, and takes initial margin from both sides of the trade to act as a guarantee. The world's largest derivatives exchanges (by number of transactions) are the Korea Exchange (which lists KOSPI Index Futures &amp; Options), Eurex (which lists a wide range of European products such as interest rate &amp; index products), and CME Group (made up of the 2007 merger of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board of Trade and the 2008 acquisition of the New York Mercantile Exchange). According to BIS, the combined turnover in the world's derivatives exchanges totaled US$344 trillion during Q4 2005. By December 2007 the Bank for International Settlements reported that \"derivatives traded on exchanges surged 27% to a record $681 trillion.\"\nInverse ETFs and leveraged ETFs.\nInverse exchange-traded funds (IETFs) and leveraged exchange-traded funds (LETFs) are two special types of exchange traded funds (ETFs) that are available to common traders and investors on major exchanges like the NYSE and Nasdaq. To maintain these products' net asset value, these funds' administrators must employ more sophisticated financial engineering methods than what's usually required for maintenance of traditional ETFs. These instruments must also be regularly rebalanced and re-indexed each day.\nCommon derivative contract.\nSome of the common variants of derivative contracts are as follows:\nSome common examples of these derivatives are the following:\nCollateralized debt obligation.\nA collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a type of structured asset-backed security (ABS). An \"asset-backed security\" is used as an umbrella term for a type of security backed by a pool of assets\u2014including collateralized debt obligations and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) (Example: \"The capital market in which asset-backed securities are issued and traded is composed of three main categories: ABS, MBS and CDOs\".)\u2014and sometimes for a particular type of that security\u2014one backed by consumer loans (example: \"As a rule of thumb, securitization issues backed by mortgages are called MBS, and securitization issues backed by debt obligations are called CDO, [and] Securitization issues backed by consumer-backed products\u2014car loans, consumer loans and credit cards, among others\u2014are called ABS.) Originally developed for the corporate debt markets, over time CDOs evolved to encompass the mortgage and mortgage-backed security (MBS) markets.\nLike other private-label securities backed by assets, a CDO can be thought of as a promise to pay investors in a prescribed sequence, based on the cash flow the CDO collects from the pool of bonds or other assets it owns. The CDO is \"sliced\" into \"tranches\", which \"catch\" the cash flow of interest and principal payments in sequence based on seniority. If some loans default and the cash collected by the CDO is insufficient to pay all of its investors, those in the lowest, most \"junior\" tranches suffer losses first. The last to lose payment from default are the safest, most senior tranches. Consequently, coupon payments (and interest rates) vary by tranche with the safest/most senior tranches paying the lowest and the lowest tranches paying the highest rates to compensate for higher default risk. As an example, a CDO might issue the following tranches in order of safeness: Senior AAA (sometimes known as \"super senior\"); Junior AAA; AA; A; BBB; Residual.\nSeparate special-purpose entities\u2014rather than the parent investment bank\u2014issue the CDOs and pay interest to investors. As CDOs developed, some sponsors repackaged tranches into yet another iteration called \"CDO-Squared\" or the \"CDOs of CDOs\". \nIn the early 2000s, CDOs were generally diversified, but by 2006\u20132007\u2014when the CDO market grew to hundreds of billions of dollars\u2014this changed. CDO collateral became dominated not by loans, but by lower level (BBB or A) tranches recycled from other asset-backed securities, whose assets were usually non-prime mortgages. These CDOs have been called \"the engine that powered the mortgage supply chain\" for nonprime mortgages, and are credited with giving lenders greater incentive to make non-prime loans leading up to the 2007-9 subprime mortgage crisis.\nCredit default swap.\nA credit default swap (CDS) is a financial swap agreement that the seller of the CDS will compensate the buyer (the creditor of the reference loan) in the event of a loan default (by the debtor) or other credit event. The buyer of the CDS makes a series of payments (the CDS \"fee\" or \"spread\") to the seller and, in exchange, receives a payoff if the loan defaults. It was invented by Blythe Masters from JP Morgan in 1994.\nIn the event of default the buyer of the CDS receives compensation (usually the face value of the loan), and the seller of the CDS takes possession of the defaulted loan. However, anyone with sufficient collateral to trade with a bank or hedge fund can purchase a CDS, even buyers who do not hold the loan instrument and who have no direct insurable interest in the loan (these are called \"naked\" CDSs). If there are more CDS contracts outstanding than bonds in existence, a protocol exists to hold a credit event auction; the payment received is usually substantially less than the face value of the loan.\nCredit default swaps have existed since the early 1990s, and increased in use after 2003. By the end of 2007, the outstanding CDS amount was $62.2\u00a0trillion, falling to $26.3\u00a0trillion by mid-year 2010 but reportedly $25.5\u00a0trillion in early 2012. CDSs are not traded on an exchange and there is no required reporting of transactions to a government agency. During the 2007\u20132010 financial crisis the lack of transparency in this large market became a concern to regulators as it could pose a systemic risk.\n In March 2010, the [DTCC] Trade Information Warehouse (see Sources of Market Data) announced it would give regulators greater access to its credit default swaps database.\nCDS data can be used by financial professionals, regulators, and the media to monitor how the market views credit risk of any entity on which a CDS is available, which can be compared to that provided by credit rating agencies. U.S. courts may soon be following suit.\nMost CDSs are documented using standard forms drafted by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA), although there are many variants. In addition to the basic, single-name swaps, there are basket default swaps (BDSs), index CDSs, funded CDSs (also called credit-linked notes), as well as loan-only credit default swaps (LCDS). In addition to corporations and governments, the reference entity can include a special-purpose vehicle issuing asset-backed securities.\nSome claim that derivatives such as CDS are potentially dangerous in that they combine priority in bankruptcy with a lack of transparency. A CDS can be unsecured (without collateral) and be at higher risk for a default.\nForwards.\nIn finance, a forward contract or simply a forward is a non-standardized contract between two parties to buy or to sell an asset at a specified future time at an amount agreed upon today, making it a type of derivative instrument. This is in contrast to a spot contract, which is an agreement to buy or sell an asset on its spot date, which may vary depending on the instrument, for example most of the FX contracts have Spot Date two business days from today. The party agreeing to buy the underlying asset in the future assumes a long position, and the party agreeing to sell the asset in the future assumes a short position. The price agreed upon is called the delivery price, which is equal to the forward price at the time the contract is entered into.\nThe price of the underlying instrument, in whatever form, is paid before control of the instrument changes. This is one of the many forms of buy/sell orders where the time and date of trade is not the same as the value date where the securities themselves are exchanged.\nThe forward price of such a contract is commonly contrasted with the spot price, which is the price at which the asset changes hands on the spot date. The difference between the spot and the forward price is the forward premium or forward discount, generally considered in the form of a profit, or loss, by the purchasing party. Forwards, like other derivative securities, can be used to hedge risk (typically currency or exchange rate risk), as a means of speculation, or to allow a party to take advantage of a quality of the underlying instrument which is time-sensitive.\nA closely related contract is a futures contract; they differ in certain respects. Forward contracts are very similar to futures contracts, except they are not exchange-traded, or defined on standardized assets. Forwards also typically have no interim partial settlements or \"true-ups\" in margin requirements like futures\u2014such that the parties do not exchange additional property securing the party at gain and the entire unrealized gain or loss builds up while the contract is open. However, being traded over the counter (OTC), forward contracts specification can be customized and may include mark-to-market and daily margin calls. Hence, a forward contract arrangement might call for the loss party to pledge collateral or additional collateral to better secure the party at gain. In other words, the terms of the forward contract will determine the collateral calls based upon certain \"trigger\" events relevant to a particular counterparty such as among other things, credit ratings, value of assets under management or redemptions over a specific time frame (e.g., quarterly, annually).\nFutures.\nIn finance, a 'futures contract' (more colloquially, futures) is a standardized contract between two parties to buy or sell a specified asset of standardized quantity and quality for a price agreed upon today (the \"futures price\") with delivery and payment occurring at a specified future date, the \"delivery date\", making it a derivative product (i.e. a financial product that is derived from an underlying asset). The contracts are negotiated at a futures exchange, which acts as an intermediary between buyer and seller. The party agreeing to buy the underlying asset in the future, the \"buyer\" of the contract, is said to be \"long\", and the party agreeing to sell the asset in the future, the \"seller\" of the contract, is said to be \"short\".\nWhile the futures contract specifies a trade taking place in the future, the purpose of the futures exchange is to act as intermediary and mitigate the risk of default by either party in the intervening period. For this reason, the futures exchange requires both parties to put up an initial amount of cash (performance bond), the margin. Margins, sometimes set as a percentage of the value of the futures contract, need to be proportionally maintained at all times during the life of the contract to underpin this mitigation because the price of the contract will vary in keeping with supply and demand and will change daily and thus one party or the other will theoretically be making or losing money. To mitigate risk and the possibility of default by either party, the product is marked to market on a daily basis whereby the difference between the prior agreed-upon price and the actual daily futures price is settled on a daily basis. This is sometimes known as the variation margin where the futures exchange will draw money out of the losing party's margin account and put it into the other party's thus ensuring that the correct daily loss or profit is reflected in the respective account. If the margin account goes below a certain value set by the Exchange, then a margin call is made and the account owner must replenish the margin account. This process is known as \"marking to market\". Thus on the delivery date, the amount exchanged is not the specified price on the contract but the spot value (i.e., the original value agreed upon, since any gain or loss has already been previously settled by marking to market). Upon marketing the strike price is often reached and creates much income for the \"caller\".\nA closely related contract is a forward contract. A forward is like a futures in that it specifies the exchange of goods for a specified price at a specified future date. However, a forward is not traded on an exchange and thus does not have the interim partial payments due to marking to market. Nor is the contract standardized, as on the exchange.\nUnlike an option, both parties of a futures contract must fulfill the contract on the delivery date. The seller delivers the underlying asset to the buyer, or, if it is a cash-settled futures contract, then cash is transferred from the futures trader who sustained a loss to the one who made a profit. To exit the commitment prior to the settlement date, the holder of a futures position can close out its contract obligations by taking the opposite position on another futures contract on the same asset and settlement date. The difference in futures prices is then a profit or loss..\nMortgage-backed securities.\nA mortgage-backed security (MBS) is an asset-backed security that is secured by a mortgage, or more commonly a collection (\"pool\") of sometimes hundreds of mortgages. The mortgages are sold to a group of individuals (a government agency or investment bank) that \"securitizes\", or packages, the loans together into a security that can be sold to investors. The mortgages of an MBS may be residential or commercial, depending on whether it is an Agency MBS or a Non-Agency MBS; in the United States they may be issued by structures set up by government-sponsored enterprises like Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, or they can be \"private-label\", issued by structures set up by investment banks. The structure of the MBS may be known as \"pass-through\", where the interest and principal payments from the borrower or homebuyer pass through it to the MBS holder, or it may be more complex, made up of a pool of other MBSs. Other types of MBS include collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs, often structured as real estate mortgage investment conduits) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).\nThe shares of subprime MBSs issued by various structures, such as CMOs, are not identical but rather issued as tranches (French for \"slices\"), each with a different level of priority in the debt repayment stream, giving them different levels of risk and reward. Tranches\u2014especially the lower-priority, higher-interest tranches\u2014of an MBS are/were often further repackaged and resold as collaterized debt obligations. These subprime MBSs issued by investment banks were a major issue in the subprime mortgage crisis of 2006\u20132008\nThe total face value of an MBS decreases over time, because like mortgages, and unlike bonds, and most other fixed-income securities, the principal in an MBS is not paid back as a single payment to the bond holder at maturity but rather is paid along with the interest in each periodic payment (monthly, quarterly, etc.). This decrease in face value is measured by the MBS's \"factor\", the percentage of the original \"face\" that remains to be repaid.\nOptions.\nIn finance, an option is a contract which gives the \"buyer\" (the owner) the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying asset or instrument at a specified strike price on or before a specified date. The \"seller\" has the corresponding obligation to fulfill the transaction\u2014that is to sell or buy\u2014if the buyer (owner) \"exercises\" the option. The buyer pays a premium to the seller for this right. An option that conveys to the owner the right to buy something at a certain price is a \"call option\"; an option that conveys the right of the owner to sell something at a certain price is a \"put option\". Both are commonly traded, but for clarity, the call option is more frequently discussed.\nOptions valuation is a topic of ongoing research in academic and practical finance. In basic terms, the value of an option is commonly decomposed into two parts:\nAlthough options valuation has been studied since the 19th century, the contemporary approach is based on the Black\u2013Scholes model, which was first published in 1973.\nOptions contracts have been known for many centuries. However, both trading activity and academic interest increased when, as from 1973, options were issued with standardized terms and traded through a guaranteed clearing house at the Chicago Board Options Exchange. Today, many options are created in a standardized form and traded through clearing houses on regulated options exchanges, while other over-the-counter options are written as bilateral, customized contracts between a single buyer and seller, one or both of which may be a dealer or market-maker. Options are part of a larger class of financial instruments known as derivative products or simply derivatives.\nSwaps.\nA swap is a derivative in which two counterparties exchange cash flows of one party's financial instrument for those of the other party's financial instrument. The benefits in question depend on the type of financial instruments involved. For example, in the case of a swap involving two bonds, the benefits in question can be the periodic interest (coupon) payments associated with such bonds. Specifically, two counterparties agree to the exchange one stream of cash flows against another stream. These streams are called the swap's \"legs\". The swap agreement defines the dates when the cash flows are to be paid and the way they are accrued and calculated. Usually at the time when the contract is initiated, at least one of these series of cash flows is determined by an uncertain variable such as a floating interest rate, foreign exchange rate, equity price, or commodity price.\nThe cash flows are calculated over a notional principal amount. Contrary to a future, a forward or an option, the notional amount is usually not exchanged between counterparties. Consequently, swaps can be in cash or collateral.\nSwaps can be used to hedge certain risks such as interest rate risk, or to speculate on changes in the expected direction of underlying prices.\nSwaps were first introduced to the public in 1981 when IBM and the World Bank entered into a swap agreement. Today, swaps are among the most heavily traded financial contracts in the world: the total amount of interest rates and currency swaps outstanding is more than $348 trillion in 2010, according to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). The five generic types of swaps, in order of their quantitative importance, are: interest rate swaps, currency swaps, credit swaps, commodity swaps and equity swaps (there are many other types).\nEconomic function of the derivative market.\nSome of the salient economic functions of the derivative market include:\nIn a nutshell, there is a substantial increase in savings and investment in the long run due to augmented activities by derivative market participant.\nValuation.\nMarket and arbitrage-free prices.\nTwo common measures of value are:\nDetermining the market price.\nFor exchange-traded derivatives, market price is usually transparent (often published in real time by the exchange, based on all the current bids and offers placed on that particular contract at any one time). Complications can arise with OTC or floor-traded contracts though, as trading is handled manually, making it difficult to automatically broadcast prices. In particular with OTC contracts, there is no central exchange to collate and disseminate prices.\nDetermining the arbitrage-free price.\nThe arbitrage-free price for a derivatives contract can be complex, and there are many different variables to consider. Arbitrage-free pricing is a central topic of financial mathematics. For futures/forwards the arbitrage free price is relatively straightforward, involving the price of the underlying together with the cost of carry (income received less interest costs), although there can be complexities.\nHowever, for options and more complex derivatives, pricing involves developing a complex pricing model: understanding the stochastic process of the price of the underlying asset is often crucial. A key equation for the theoretical valuation of options is the Black\u2013Scholes formula, which is based on the assumption that the cash flows from a European stock option can be replicated by a continuous buying and selling strategy using only the stock. A simplified version of this valuation technique is the binomial options model.\nOTC represents the biggest challenge in using models to price derivatives. Since these contracts are not publicly traded, no market price is available to validate the theoretical valuation. Most of the model's results are input-dependent (meaning the final price depends heavily on how we derive the pricing inputs).\nTherefore, it is common that OTC derivatives are priced by Independent Agents that both counterparties involved in the deal designate upfront (when signing the contract).\nCriticisms.\nDerivatives are often subject to the following criticisms:\nHidden tail risk.\nAccording to Raghuram Rajan, a former chief economist of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), \"...\u00a0it may well be that the managers of these firms [investment funds] have figured out the correlations between the various instruments they hold and believe they are hedged. Yet as Chan and others (2005) point out, the lessons of summer 1998 following the default on Russian government debt is that correlations that are zero or negative in normal times can turn overnight to one \u2013 a phenomenon they term \"phase lock-in\". A hedged position \"can become unhedged at the worst times, inflicting substantial losses on those who mistakenly believe they are protected\".\nSee the FRTB framework, which seeks to address this to some extent.\nRisks.\nThe use of derivatives can result in large losses because of the use of leverage, or borrowing. Derivatives allow investors to earn large returns from small movements in the underlying asset's price. However, investors could lose large amounts if the price of the underlying moves against them significantly. There have been several instances of massive losses in derivative markets, such as the following:\nCounter party risk.\nSome derivatives (especially swaps) expose investors to counterparty risk, or risk arising from the other party in a financial transaction. Different types of derivatives have different levels of counter party risk. For example, standardized stock options by law require the party at risk to have a certain amount deposited with the exchange, showing that they can pay for any losses; banks that help businesses swap variable for fixed rates on loans may do credit checks on both parties. However, in private agreements between two companies, for example, there may not be benchmarks for performing due diligence and risk analysis.\nLarge notional value.\nDerivatives typically have a large notional value. As such, there is the danger that their use could result in losses for which the investor would be unable to compensate. The possibility that this could lead to a chain reaction ensuing in an economic crisis was pointed out by famed investor Warren Buffett in Berkshire Hathaway's 2002 annual report. Buffett called them 'financial weapons of mass destruction.' A potential problem with derivatives is that they comprise an increasingly larger notional amount of assets which may lead to distortions in the underlying capital and equities markets themselves. Investors begin to look at the derivatives markets to make a decision to buy or sell securities and so what was originally meant to be a market to transfer risk now becomes a leading indicator.(See Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report for 2002)\nFinancial reform and government regulation.\nUnder US law and the laws of most other developed countries, derivatives have special legal exemptions that make them a particularly attractive legal form to extend credit. The strong creditor protections afforded to derivatives counterparties, in combination with their complexity and lack of transparency however, can cause capital markets to underprice credit risk. This can contribute to credit booms, and increase systemic risks. Indeed, the use of derivatives to conceal credit risk from third parties while protecting derivative counterparties contributed to the financial crisis of 2008 in the United States.\nIn the context of a 2010 examination of the ICE Trust, an industry self-regulatory body, Gary Gensler, the chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission which regulates most derivatives, was quoted saying that the derivatives marketplace as it functions now \"adds up to higher costs to all Americans\". More oversight of the banks in this market is needed, he also said. Additionally, the report said, \"[t]he Department of Justice is looking into derivatives, too. The department's antitrust unit is actively investigating 'the possibility of anticompetitive practices in the credit derivatives clearing, trading and information services industries', according to a department spokeswoman.\"\nFor legislators and committees responsible for financial reform related to derivatives in the United States and elsewhere, distinguishing between hedging and speculative derivatives activities has been a nontrivial challenge. The distinction is critical because regulation should help to isolate and curtail speculation with derivatives, especially for \"systemically significant\" institutions whose default could be large enough to threaten the entire financial system. At the same time, the legislation should allow for responsible parties to hedge risk without unduly tying up working capital as collateral that firms may better employ elsewhere in their operations and investment. \nIn this regard, it is important to distinguish between financial (e.g. banks) and non-financial end-users of derivatives (e.g. real estate development companies) because these firms' derivatives usage is inherently different. More importantly, the reasonable collateral that secures these different counterparties can be very different. The distinction between these firms is not always straight forward (e.g. hedge funds or even some private equity firms do not neatly fit either category). Finally, even financial users must be differentiated, as 'large' banks may classified as \"systemically significant\" whose derivatives activities must be more tightly monitored and restricted than those of smaller, local and regional banks.\nOver-the-counter dealing will be less common as the Dodd\u2013Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act comes into effect. The law mandated the clearing of certain swaps at registered exchanges and imposed various restrictions on derivatives. To implement Dodd-Frank, the CFTC developed new rules in at least 30 areas. The Commission determines which swaps are subject to mandatory clearing and whether a derivatives exchange is eligible to clear a certain type of swap contract.\nNonetheless, the above and other challenges of the rule-making process have delayed full enactment of aspects of the legislation relating to derivatives. The challenges are further complicated by the necessity to orchestrate globalized financial reform among the nations that comprise the world's major financial markets, a primary responsibility of the Financial Stability Board whose progress is ongoing.\nIn the U.S., by February 2012 the combined effort of the SEC and CFTC had produced over 70 proposed and final derivatives rules. However, both of them had delayed adoption of a number of derivatives regulations because of the burden of other rulemaking, litigation and opposition to the rules, and many core definitions (such as the terms \"swap\", \"security-based swap\", \"swap dealer\", \"security-based swap dealer\", \"major swap participant\" and \"major security-based swap participant\") had still not been adopted. SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro opined: \"At the end of the day, it probably does not make sense to harmonize everything [between the SEC and CFTC rules] because some of these products are quite different and certainly the market structures are quite different.\" On February 11, 2015, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) released two final rules toward establishing a reporting and public disclosure framework for security-based swap transaction data. The two rules are not completely harmonized with the requirements with CFTC requirements.\nIn November 2012, the SEC and regulators from Australia, Brazil, the European Union, Hong Kong, Japan, Ontario, Quebec, Singapore, and Switzerland met to discuss reforming the OTC derivatives market, as had been agreed by leaders at the 2009 G-20 Pittsburgh summit in September 2009. In December 2012, they released a joint statement to the effect that they recognized that the market is a global one and \"firmly support the adoption and enforcement of robust and consistent standards in and across jurisdictions\", with the goals of mitigating risk, improving transparency, protecting against market abuse, preventing regulatory gaps, reducing the potential for arbitrage opportunities, and fostering a level playing field for market participants. They also agreed on the need to reduce regulatory uncertainty and provide market participants with sufficient clarity on laws and regulations by avoiding, to the extent possible, the application of conflicting rules to the same entities and transactions, and minimizing the application of inconsistent and duplicative rules. At the same time, they noted that \"complete harmonization \u2013 perfect alignment of rules across jurisdictions\" would be difficult, because of jurisdictions' differences in law, policy, markets, implementation timing, and legislative and regulatory processes.\nOn December 20, 2013 the CFTC provided information on its swaps regulation \"comparability\" determinations. The release addressed the CFTC's cross-border compliance exceptions. Specifically it addressed which entity level and in some cases transaction-level requirements in six jurisdictions (Australia, Canada, the European Union, Hong Kong, Japan, and Switzerland) it found comparable to its own rules, thus permitting non-US swap dealers, major swap participants, and the foreign branches of US Swap Dealers and major swap participants in these jurisdictions to comply with local rules in lieu of Commission rules.\nReporting.\nMandatory reporting regulations are being finalized in a number of countries, such as Dodd Frank Act in the US, the European Market Infrastructure Regulations (EMIR) in Europe, as well as regulations in Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Canada, and other countries. The OTC Derivatives Regulators Forum (ODRF), a group of over 40 worldwide regulators, provided trade repositories with a set of guidelines regarding data access to regulators, and the Financial Stability Board and CPSS IOSCO also made recommendations in with regard to reporting.\nDTCC, through its \"Global Trade Repository\" (GTR) service, manages global trade repositories for interest rates, and commodities, foreign exchange, credit, and equity derivatives. It makes global trade reports to the CFTC in the U.S., and plans to do the same for ESMA in Europe and for regulators in Hong Kong, Japan, and Singapore. It covers cleared and uncleared OTC derivatives products, whether or not a trade is electronically processed or bespoke."}
{"id": "9136", "revid": "37784427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9136", "title": "Disney (disambiguation)", "text": "Disney or The Walt Disney Company is an American diversified media conglomerate.\nDisney may also refer to:"}
{"id": "9137", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9137", "title": "Divine right of kings", "text": "The divine right of kings, divine right, or God's mandate is a political and religious doctrine of political legitimacy in a monarchy. It stems from a specific metaphysical framework in which a monarch is pre-ordained to inherit the crown before their birth. Under this theory of political legitimacy the subjects of the crown are considered to have actively (rather than merely passively) turned over the metaphysical selection of the king's soul \u2013 which will inhabit the body and rule them \u2013 over to God. In this way, the \"divine right\" originates as a metaphysical act of humility or submission towards God. The divine right has been a key element for legitimizing many absolute monarchies.\nConsequentially, it asserts that a monarch is not accountable to an earthly authority (such as a parliament) because their right to rule is derived from divine authority. The monarch is thus not subject to the will of his people, of the aristocracy, or of any other estate of the realm. It implies that only divine authority can judge an unjust monarch and that any attempt to depose, dethrone or restrict their powers runs contrary to God's will and may constitute a sacrilegious act. It is often expressed in the phrase \"by the Grace of God\", attached to the titles of a reigning monarch; although this right does not make the monarch the same as a sacred king.\nHistorically, many notions of rights were authoritarian and hierarchical, with different people granted different rights, and some having more rights than others. For instance, the right of a father to respect from his son did not indicate a right for the son to receive a return from that respect; and the divine right of kings, which permitted absolute power over subjects, did not leave a lot of room for many rights for the subjects themselves.\nIn contrast, conceptions of rights developed during the Age of Enlightenment often emphasized liberty and equality as among the most important aspects of rights, for example in the American Revolution and the French Revolution.\nPre-Christian European conceptions.\nThe Imperial cult of ancient Rome identified Roman emperors and some members of their families with the \"divinely sanctioned\" authority (\"auctoritas\") of the Roman State. The official offer of \"cultus\" to a living emperor acknowledged his office and rule as divinely approved and constitutional: his Principate should therefore demonstrate pious respect for traditional Republican deities and mores. Many of the rites, practices and status distinctions that characterized the cult to emperors were perpetuated in the theology and politics of the Christianised Empire.\nChristian conceptions.\nDuring early and middle ages.\nOutside of Christianity, kings were often seen as either ruling with the backing of heavenly powers or perhaps even being divine beings themselves. However, the Christian notion of a divine right of kings is traced to a story found in 1 Samuel, where the prophet Samuel anoints Saul and then David as \"mashiach\" (\"anointed one\")\u2014king over Israel. The anointing is to such an effect that the monarch became inviolable so that even when Saul sought to kill David, David would not raise his hand against him because \"he was the Lord's anointed\".\nAlthough the later Roman Empire had developed the European concept of a divine regent in Late Antiquity, Adomnan of Iona provides one of the earliest written examples of a Western medieval concept of kings ruling with divine right. He wrote of the Irish King Diarmait mac Cerbaill's assassination and claimed that divine punishment fell on his assassin for the act of violating the monarch. Adomnan also recorded a story about Saint Columba supposedly being visited by an angel carrying a glass book, who told him to ordain Aedan mac Gabrain as King of Dal Riata. Columba initially refused, and the angel answered by whipping him and demanding that he perform the ordination because God had commanded it. The same angel visited Columba on three successive nights. Columba finally agreed, and Aedan came to receive ordination. At the ordination, Columba told Aedan that so long as he obeyed God's laws, then none of his enemies would prevail against him, but the moment he broke them, this protection would end, and the same whip with which Columba had been struck would be turned against the king. Adomnan's writings most likely influenced other Irish writers, who in turn influenced continental ideas as well. Pepin the Short's coronation may have also come from the same influence. The Byzantine Empire can be seen as the progenitor of this concept (which began with Constantine I), which in turn inspired the Carolingian dynasty and the Holy Roman Emperors, whose lasting impact on Western and Central Europe further inspired all subsequent Western ideas of kingship.\nIn the Middle Ages, the idea that God had granted earthly power to the monarch, just as he had given spiritual authority and power to the church, especially to the Pope, was already a well-known concept long before later writers coined the term \"divine right of kings\" and employed it as a theory in political science. For example, Richard I of England declared at his trial during the diet at Speyer in 1193: \"\", and it was Richard who first used the motto \"Dieu et mon droit\" (\"God and my right\") which is still the motto of the Monarch of the United Kingdom.\nWith the rise of nation-states and the Protestant Reformation in the late 16th century, the theory of divine right justified the king's absolute authority in both political and spiritual matters. Henry VIII of England declared himself the Supreme Head of the Church of England, and exerted the power of the throne more than any of his predecessors. As a political theory, it was further developed by James VI of Scotland (1567\u20131625), and came to the force in England under his reign as James I of England (1603\u20131625). Louis XIV of France (1643\u20131715) strongly promoted the theory as well.\nScots texts of James VI of Scotland.\nThe Scots textbooks of the divine right of kings were written in 1597\u20131598 by James VI of Scotland despite Scotland never having believed in the theory and where the monarch was regarded as the \"first among equals\" on a par with his people. His \"Basilikon Doron\", a manual on the powers of a king, was written to edify his four-year-old son Henry Frederick that a king \"acknowledgeth himself ordained for his people, having received from the god a burden of government, whereof he must be countable\". He based his theories in part on his understanding of the Bible, as noted by the following quote from a speech to parliament delivered in 1610 as James I of England:\nJames's reference to \"God's lieutenants\" is apparently a reference to the text in Romans 13 where Paul refers to \"God's ministers\".\nWestern conceptions.\nThe conception of ordination brought with it largely unspoken parallels with the Anglican and Catholic priesthood, but the overriding metaphor in James's handbook was that of a father's relation to his children. \"Just as no misconduct on the part of a father can free his children from obedience to the fifth commandment\", James also had printed his \"Defense of the Right of Kings\" in the face of English theories of inalienable popular and clerical rights. The divine right of kings, or divine-right theory of kingship, is a political and religious doctrine of royal and political legitimacy. It asserts that a monarch is subject to no earthly authority, deriving his right to rule directly from the will of God. The king is thus not subject to the will of his people, the aristocracy, or any other estate of the realm, including (in the view of some, especially in Protestant countries) the church. A weaker or more moderate form of this political theory does hold, however, that the king is subject to the church and the pope, although completely irreproachable in other ways; but according to this doctrine in its strong form, only God can judge an unjust king. The doctrine implies that any attempt to depose the king or to restrict his powers runs contrary to the will of God and may constitute a sacrilegious act.\nOne passage in scripture supporting the idea of the divine right of kings was used by Martin Luther, when urging the secular authorities to crush the Peasant Rebellion of 1525 in Germany in his \"Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants\", basing his argument on St. Paul's Epistle to the .\nIt is related to the ancient Catholic philosophies regarding monarchy, in which the monarch is God's vicegerent upon the earth and therefore subject to no inferior power. However, in Roman Catholic jurisprudence, the monarch is always subject to natural and divine law, which are regarded as superior to the monarch. The possibility of monarchy declining morally, overturning natural law, and degenerating into a tyranny oppressive of the general welfare was answered theologically with the Catholic concept of extra-legal tyrannicide, ideally ratified by the pope. Until the unification of Italy, the Holy See did, from the time Christianity became the Roman state religion, assert on that ground its primacy over secular princes; however this exercise of power never, even at its zenith, amounted to theocracy, even in jurisdictions where the Bishop of Rome was the temporal authority.\nCatholic justification for the divine rights.\nCatholic thought justified submission to the monarchy by reference to the following:\nThe French Huguenot nobles and clergy, having rejected the pope and the Catholic Church, were left only with the supreme power of the king who, they taught, could not be gainsaid or judged by anyone. Since there was no longer the countervailing power of the papacy and since the Church of England was a creature of the state and had become subservient to it, this meant that there was nothing to regulate the powers of the king, and he became an absolute power. In theory, divine, natural, customary, and constitutional law still held sway over the king, but, absent a superior spiritual power, it was difficult to see how they could be enforced since the king could not be tried by any of his own courts.\nSome of the symbolism within the coronation ceremony for British monarchs, in which they are anointed with holy oils by the Archbishop of Canterbury, thereby \"ordaining\" them to monarchy, perpetuates the ancient Roman Catholic monarchical ideas and ceremonial (although few Protestants realize this, the ceremony is nearly entirely based upon that of the Coronation of the Holy Roman Emperor). However, in the UK, the symbolism ends there since the real governing authority of the monarch was all but extinguished by the Whig revolution of 1688\u201389 (see Glorious Revolution). The king or queen of the United Kingdom is one of the last monarchs still to be crowned in the traditional Christian ceremonial, which in most other countries has been replaced by an inauguration or other declaration.\nThe concept of divine right incorporates, but exaggerates, the ancient Christian concept of \"royal God-given rights\", which teach that \"the right to rule is anointed by God\", although this idea is found in many other cultures, including Aryan and Egyptian traditions. In pagan religions, the king was often seen as a kind of god and so was an unchallengeable despot. The ancient Roman Catholic tradition overcame this idea with the doctrine of the \"Two Swords\" and so achieved, for the very first time, a balanced constitution for states. The advent of Protestantism saw something of a return to the idea of a mere unchallengeable despot.\nThomas Aquinas condoned extra-legal tyrannicide in the worst of circumstances:\nOn the other hand, Aquinas forbade the overthrow of any morally, Christianly and spiritually legitimate king by his subjects. The only human power capable of deposing the king was the pope. The reasoning was that if a subject may overthrow his superior for some bad law, who was to be the judge of whether the law was bad? If the subject could so judge his own superior, then all lawful superior authority could lawfully be overthrown by the arbitrary judgement of an inferior, and thus all law was under constant threat. Towards the end of the Middle Ages, many philosophers, such as Nicholas of Cusa and Francisco Suarez, propounded similar theories. The Church was the final guarantor that Christian kings would follow the laws and constitutional traditions of their ancestors and the laws of God and of justice. Similarly, the Chinese concept of Mandate of Heaven required that the emperor properly carry out the proper rituals and consult his ministers; however, this concept made it extremely difficult to undo any acts carried out by an ancestor.\nThe French prelate Jacques-B\u00e9nigne Bossuet made a classic statement of the doctrine of divine right in a sermon preached before King Louis XIV:\nDivine right and Protestantism.\nBefore the Reformation the anointed king was, within his realm, the accredited vicar of God for secular purposes (see the Investiture Controversy); after the Reformation he (or she if queen regnant) became this in Protestant states for religious purposes also.\nIn England, it is not without significance that the sacerdotal vestments, generally discarded by the clergy \u2013 dalmatic, alb and stole \u2013 continued to be among the insignia of the sovereign (see Coronation of the British monarch). Moreover, this sacrosanct character he acquired not by virtue of his \"sacring\", but by hereditary right; the coronation, anointing and vesting were but the outward and visible symbol of a divine grace adherent in the sovereign by virtue of his title. Even Roman Catholic monarchs, like Louis XIV, would never have admitted that their coronation by the archbishop constituted any part of their title to reign; it was no more than the consecration of their title.\nIn England the doctrine of the divine right of kings was developed to its most extreme logical conclusions during the political controversies of the 17th century; its most famous exponent was Sir Robert Filmer. It was the main issue to be decided by the English Civil War, the Royalists holding that \"all Christian kings, princes and governors\" derive their authority direct from God, the Parliamentarians that this authority is the outcome of a contract, actual or implied, between sovereign and people.\nIn one case the king's power would be unlimited, according to Louis XIV's famous saying: \"L' \u00e9tat, c'est moi!\", or limited only by his own free act; in the other his actions would be governed by the advice and consent of the people, to whom he would be ultimately responsible. The victory of this latter principle was proclaimed to all the world by the execution of Charles I. The doctrine of divine right, indeed, for a while drew nourishment from the blood of the royal \"martyr\"; it was the guiding principle of the Anglican Church of the Restoration; but it suffered a rude blow when James II of England made it impossible for the clergy to obey both their conscience and their king. The Glorious Revolution of 1688 made an end of it as a great political force. This has led to the constitutional development of the Crown in Britain, as held by descent modified and modifiable by parliamentary action.\nDivine right in Asia.\nZoroastrianism conceptions (Iranian world).\nKhvarenah (Avestan: 'x\u1d5bar\u0259nah;' Persian: \"far\") is an Iranian and \nZoroastrian concept, which literally means \"glory\", about divine right of the kings. In the Iranian view, kings would never rule, unless Khvarenah is with them, and they will never fall unless Khvarenah leaves them. For example, according to the \"Kar-namag of Ardashir,\" when Ardashir I of Persia and Artabanus V of Parthia fought for the throne of Iran, on the road Artabanus and his contingent are overtaken by an enormous ram, which is also following Ardashir. Artabanus's religious advisors explain to him that the ram is the manifestation of the \"khwarrah\" of the ancient Iranian kings, which is leaving Artabanus to join Ardashir.\nIn early Mesopotamian culture, kings were often regarded as deities after their death. Shulgi of Ur was among the first Mesopotamian rulers to declare himself to be divine. This was the direct precursor to the concept of \"Divine Right of kings\", as well as in the Egyptian and Roman religions.\nConfucianism and Shintoism.\nPractice in China and East Asia.\nIn China and East Asia, rulers justified their rule with the philosophy of the Mandate of Heaven, which, although similar to the European concept, bore several key differences. While the divine right of kings granted unconditional legitimacy, the Mandate of Heaven was dependent on the behaviour of the ruler, the Son of Heaven. Heaven would bless the authority of a just ruler, but it could be displeased with a despotic ruler and thus withdraw its mandate, transferring it to a more suitable and righteous person. This withdrawal of mandate also afforded the possibility of revolution as a means to remove the errant ruler; revolt was never legitimate under the European framework of divine right.\nIn China, the right of rebellion against an unjust ruler had been a part of the political philosophy ever since the Zhou dynasty, whose rulers had used this philosophy to justify their overthrow of the previous Shang dynasty. Chinese historians interpreted a successful revolt as evidence that the Mandate of Heaven had passed on to the usurper.\nPractice in Japan.\nIn Japan, the Son of Heaven title was less conditional than its Chinese equivalent. There was no divine mandate that punished the emperor for failing to rule justly. The right to rule of the Japanese emperor, descended from the sun goddess Amaterasu, was absolute. The Japanese emperors traditionally wielded little secular power; generally, it was the duty of the sitting emperor to perform rituals and make public appearances, while true power was held by regents, high-ranking ministers, a commander-in-chief of the emperor's military known as the \"sh\u014dgun\", or even retired emperors depending on the time period.\nHinduism and Indic religions.\nIndian origin religions (also called Dharmic or Indic religions) originated in the Indian subcontinent; namely Hinduism, and its later offshoots such as Jainism, Buddhism, and Sikhism. These religions are also all classified as Eastern religions. Although Indian religions are connected through the history of India, they constitute a wide range of religious communities, and are not confined to the Indian subcontinent. With ancient roots in the Indus Valley Civilisation, the documented history of Indian religions begin with the historical Vedic religion during the Vedic period which lasted from 1750 BCE to 500 BCE. Various reform movements in Hinduism led to development of offshoots of Hinduism such as Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism.\nConcept of \"Chakravarti\".\n\"Chakravarti\" refers to an ideal universal ruler especially in the sense of an imperial ruler of the entire Indian sub-continent (as in the case of the Maurya Empire).\nIn Hinduism, the term generally denotes a powerful ruler whose dominion extended to the entire earth. In Buddhist kingship and Jainism, the term generally applies to temporal as well as spiritual kingship and leadership.\nConcept of \"Devaraja\".\nThe concept \"devar\u0101ja\" grew out of Sanatana Dharma, in which the king was a divine universal ruler, a manifestation of Shri Bhagawan (often attributed to Shiva or Vishnu). The concept viewed the monarch to possess transcendental quality, the king as the living god on earth. The concept is closely related to the Bharati concept of Chakravartin (universal monarch). In politics, it is viewed as the divine justification of a king's rule.\nThe concept was institutionalized and gained its elaborate manifestations in ancient Java and Kambujadesha, where monuments such as Prambanan and Angkor Wat were erected to celebrate the king's divine rule on earth.\nIndian Subcontinent.\n\"Chakravarti\" kings of Indian subcontinent.\nThe first references to a \"Chakravala Chakravartin\" appear in monuments from the time of the early Maurya Empire, in the 4th to 3rd century BCE, in reference to Chandragupta Maurya and his grandson Ashoka.\nAshoka, also known as \"Ashoka the Great\", was an Indian emperor of the Maurya empire, who ruled almost all of the Indian subcontinent from to 232 BCE. For the spread of Buddhism, he sent buddhist missions to 9 destinations, including Tibet and China, Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia.\n\"Devaraja\" tamil kings.\nIn Dravidian culture, before Brahmanism and especially during the Sangam period, emperors were known as \u0b87\u0bb1\u0bc8\u0baf\u0bb0\u0bcd (\"Iraiyer\"), or \"those who spill\", and kings were called \u0b95\u0bcb (\"Ko\") or \u0b95\u0bcb\u0ba9\u0bcd (\"Kon\"). During this time, the distinction between kingship and godhood had not yet occurred, as the caste system had not yet been introduced. Even in Modern Tamil, the word for temple is '\u0b95\u0bcb\u0baf\u0bbf\u0bb2\u0bcd', meaning \"king's house\". Kings were understood to be the \"agents of God\", as they protected the world like God did. This may well have been continued post-Brahminism in Tamilakam, as the famous Thiruvalangadu inscription states:\n\"Devaraja\" kings in Indianized polities in Southeast Asia.\nIndianised Hindu-Buddhist kingdoms of Southeast Asia deployed the Indian Hindu Brahmins scholars in their courts. Under the influence of the Brahmin scholars these kingdoms adopted the concept of deveraja. It was first adopted by the Indianised Hindu-Buddhist kingdoms of Java. Khmer empire which ruled Cambodia and Vietnam and other parts of the nearby present day nations adopted it from the Javanese kings. Eventually, Thai kings adopted the concept from the nearby Khmer empire.\nIndonesian empires.\nIndianised Hindu-Buddhist empires such as Srivijaya and Majapahit deployed the Indian Hindu Brahmins scholars in their courts, and through Brahmins these kingdoms adopted the concept of deveraja. It was first adopted by the Srivijaya and then the Indianised Hindu-Buddhist kingdoms of Java such as Majapahit, through them the concept of deveraja transmitted to the territories under their influence (present day Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Brunei, East Timur, parts of southern mainland Southeast Asia.\nThe concept of devaraja or God King was the ancient Cambodian state religion, but it probably originated in Java where the Hindu influence first reached Southeast Asia. Circa 8th century, Sailendras allegedly ruled over Java, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula and parts of Cambodia. In ancient Java, since Sailendra dynasty. The concept of devaraja is believed to be introduced to Java in 732, when king Sanjaya installed a linga to consecrate a new Mataram Dynasty, as stated in Canggal inscription, thus the king seek Shiva's protection of his rule.\nEven older Tarumanagara kingdom, the state religion regarded the king as god incarnated on earth. The Tarumanagara fifth century CE Ciaruteun inscription, inscribed with king's sole print, regarded King Purnawarman as incarnation of Vishnu on earth. The Kebon Kopi I inscription, also called \"Telapak Gajah\" stone, with an inscription and the engraving of two large elephant footprints, associated king's elephant ride as Airavata (elephant ride of God Indra), thus associated the king also with Indra.\nIn Medang kingdom in Central Java, it is customary to erect \"candi\" (temple) to honor and sent the soul of a dead king. The image of god inside the garbhagriha (central chamber) of the temple often portrayed the deceased king as a god, as the soul of the dead king finally united with the revered god in svargaloka. Some archaeologists propose that the statue of Shiva in the garbhagriha of Prambanan main temple was modelled after King Balitung, serving as a depiction of his posthumous deified self. It is suggested that the concept of devaraja was the fusion of Hinduism with native Austronesian ancestor worship. The 11th century great king Airlangga of Kahuripan in East Java, was deified posthumously as Vishnu in Belahan temple. In Java, the tradition of divine king continued well to Kediri, Singhasari, and Majapahit kingdom in the 15th century.\nAfter the coming of Islam in the archipelago and the fall of Majapahit, the concept of God-King were most likely ceased to exist in Java, since Islam rejects the concept of divinity in mortal human being. Yet the concept survived in traditional Javanese mysticism of Kejawen as \"wahyu\", suggesting that every king and rulers in Java was bestowed \"wahyu\", a divine authority and mandate from God.\nKhmer empire of Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos.\nKhmer empire followed the Hindu concept of divine devaraja kingship which they had adopted from the Indianised Hindu Javanese Majapahit empire.\nIn ancient Cambodia, devar\u0101ja is recognized as the state's institutionalized religion. The Cambodian the cult of the \"god-king\" is believed to be established early in the 9th century by Jayavarman II, founder of the Khmer empire of Angkor, with the brahmin scholar Sivakaivalya as his first chief priest at Mahendraparvata. For centuries, the cult provided the religious basis of the royal authority of the Khmer kings.\nIn a Khmer context the term was used in the latter sense as \"god-king\", but occurs only in the Sanskrit portion of the inscription K. 235 from Sdok Kak Thom / Sdok K\u0103k Tho\u1e43 (in modern Thailand) dated 8 February 1053 CE, referring to the Khmer term \"kamrate\u1e45 jagat ta r\u0101ja\" (\"Lord of the Universe who is King\") describing the protective deity of the Khmer Empire, a distinctly Khmer deity, which was mentioned before in the inscription K. 682 of Chok Gargyar (K\u00f2\u1e25 Ker) dated 921/22 CE.\nKhmer emperor Jayavarman II is widely regarded as the king that set the foundation of the Angkor period in Cambodian history, beginning with the grandiose consecration ritual conducted by Jayavarman II (reign 790-835) in 802 on sacred Mount Mahendraparvata, now known as Phnom Kulen, to celebrate the independence of Kambuja from Javanese dominion (presumably the \"neighboring Chams\", or \"chvea\"). At that ceremony Prince Jayavarman II was proclaimed a universal monarch (\"Kamraten jagad ta Raja\" in Cambodian) or God King (\"Deva Raja\" in Sanskrit). According to some sources, Jayavarman II had resided for some time in Java during the reign of Sailendras, or \"The Lords of Mountains\", hence the concept of Devaraja or God King was ostensibly imported from Java. At that time, Sailendras allegedly ruled over Java, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula and parts of Cambodia.\nAn inscription from the Sdok Kak Thom temple recounts that at Mahendraparvata, Jayavarman II took part in a ritual by the Brahman Hiranyadama, and his chief priest Lord Sivakaivalya, known as devaraja () which placed him as a \"chakravartin\", Lord of the Universe.\nThailand.\nThis concept of \"\" ( (or \"divine king\") was adopted by the Thai kings from the ancient Khmer tradition of devaraja followed in the region, and the Hindu concept of kingship was applied to the status of the Thai king. The concept centered on the idea that the king was an incarnation (avatar) of the god Vishnu and that he was a Bodhisattva (enlightened one), therefore basing his power on his religious power, his moral power, and his purity of blood.\nBrahmins took charge in the royal coronation. The king was treated as a reincarnation of Hindu gods. Ayutthaya historical documents show the official titles of the kings in great variation: Indra, Shiva and Vishnu, or Rama. Seemingly, Rama was the most popular, as in \"Ramathibodhi\". However, Buddhist influence was also evident, as many times the king's title and \"unofficial\" name \"Dhammaraja\", an abbreviation of the Buddhist Dharmaraja. The two former concepts were re-established, with a third, older concept taking hold.\nThe king, portrayed by state interests as a semi-divine figure, then became\u2014through a rigid cultural implementation\u2014an object of worship and veneration to his people. From then on the monarchy was largely removed from the people and continued under a system of absolute rule. Living in palaces designed after Mount Meru (\"home of the gods\" in Hinduism), the kings turned themselves into a \"Chakravartin\", where the king became an absolute and universal lord of his realm. Kings demanded that the universe be envisioned as revolving around them, and expressed their powers through elaborate rituals and ceremonies. For four centuries these kings ruled Ayutthaya, presiding over some of the greatest period of cultural, economic, and military growth in Thai History.\nRajas and Sultans of Indianized polities in Southeast Asia.\nIn the Malay Annals, the rajas and sultans of the Malay States (today Malaysia, Brunei and Philippines) as well as their predecessors, such as the Indonesian kingdom of Majapahit, also claimed divine right to rule. The sultan is mandated by God and thus is expected to lead his country and people in religious matters, ceremonies as well as prayers. This divine right is called \"Daulat\" (which means 'state' in Arabic), and although the notion of divine right is somewhat obsolete, it is still found in the phrase \"Daulat Tuanku\" that is used to publicly acclaim the reigning Yang di-Pertuan Agong and the other sultans of Malaysia. The exclamation is similar to the European \"Long live the King\", and often accompanies pictures of the reigning monarch and his consort on banners during royal occasions. In Indonesia, especially on the island of Java, the sultan's divine right is more commonly known as the \"way\", or 'revelation', but it is not hereditary and can be passed on to distant relatives.\nOpposition to the divine right of kings.\nIn the sixteenth century, both Catholic and Protestant political thinkers began to question the idea of a monarch's \"divine right\".\nThe Spanish Catholic historian Juan de Mariana put forward the argument in his book \"De rege et regis institutione\" (1598) that since society was formed by a \"pact\" among all its members, \"there can be no doubt that they are able to call a king to account\". Mariana thus challenged divine right theories by stating in certain circumstances, tyrannicide could be justified. Cardinal Robert Bellarmine also \"did not believe that the institute of monarchy had any divine sanction\" and shared Mariana's belief that there were times where Catholics could lawfully remove a monarch.\nAmong groups of English Protestant exiles fleeing from Queen Mary I, some of the earliest anti-monarchist publications emerged. \"Weaned off uncritical royalism by the actions of Queen Mary ... The political thinking of men like Ponet, Knox, Goodman and Hales.\"\nIn 1553, Mary I, a Roman Catholic, succeeded her Protestant half-brother, Edward VI, to the English throne. Mary set about trying to restore Roman Catholicism by making sure that: Edward's religious laws were abolished in the Statute of Repeal Act (1553); the Protestant religious laws passed in the time of Henry VIII were repealed; and the Revival of the Heresy Acts were passed in 1554. The Marian Persecutions began soon afterwards. In January 1555, the first of nearly 300 Protestants were burnt at the stake under \"Bloody Mary\". When Thomas Wyatt the Younger instigated what became known as Wyatt's rebellion, John Ponet, the highest-ranking ecclesiastic among the exiles, allegedly participated in the uprising. He escaped to Strasbourg after the Rebellion's defeat and, the following year, he published \"A Shorte Treatise of Politike Power\", in which he put forward a theory of justified opposition to secular rulers.\n\"Ponet's treatise comes first in a new wave of anti-monarchical writings ... It has never been assessed at its true importance, for it antedates by several years those more brilliantly expressed but less radical Huguenot writings which have usually been taken to represent the Tyrannicide-theories of the Reformation.\"\nPonet's pamphlet was republished on the eve of King Charles I's execution.\nAccording to U.S. President John Adams, Ponet's work contained \"all the essential principles of liberty, which were afterward dilated on by Sidney and Locke\", including the idea of a three-branched government.\nIn due course, opposition to the divine right of kings came from a number of sources, including poet John Milton in his pamphlet \"The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates\", and Thomas Paine in his pamphlet \"Common Sense\". Probably the two most famous declarations of a right to revolution against tyranny in the English language are John Locke's \"Essay concerning The True Original, Extent, and End of Civil-Government\" and Thomas Jefferson's formulation in the United States Declaration of Independence that \"all men are created equal\"."}
{"id": "9138", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9138", "title": "Davros", "text": "Davros () is a character from the long-running British science fiction television series \"Doctor Who\". He was created by screenwriter Terry Nation, originally for the 1975 serial \"Genesis of the Daleks\". Davros is a major enemy of the series' protagonist, the Doctor, and is the creator of the Doctor's deadliest enemies, the Daleks. Davros is a genius who has mastered many areas of science, but also a megalomaniac who believes that through his creations he can become the supreme being and ruler of the Universe. The character has been compared to the infamous dictator Adolf Hitler several times, including by the actor Terry Molloy, while Julian Bleach defined him as a cross between Hitler and the renowned scientist Stephen Hawking.\nDavros is from the planet Skaro, whose people, the Kaleds, were engaged in a bitter thousand-year war of attrition with their enemies, the Thals. He is horribly scarred and disabled, a condition that various spin-off media attribute to his laboratory being attacked by a Thal shell. He has one functioning hand and one cybernetic eye mounted on his forehead to take the place of his real eyes, which he is not able to open for long; for much of his existence he depends completely upon a self-designed mobile life-support chair in place of his lower body. It would become an obvious inspiration for his eventual design of the Dalek. The lower half of his body is absent and he is physically incapable of leaving the chair for more than a few minutes without dying. Davros' voice, like those of the Daleks, is electronically distorted. His manner of speech is generally soft and contemplative, but when angered or excited he is prone to ranting outbursts that resemble the hysterical, staccatissimo speech of the Daleks.\nConcept.\nDavros first appeared in the 1975 serial \"Genesis of the Daleks\", written by Terry Nation. Nation, creator of the Dalek concept, had deliberately modelled elements of the Daleks' character on Nazi ideology, and conceived of their creator as a scientist with strong fascist tendencies. The physical appearance of Davros was developed by visual effects designer Peter Day and sculptor John Friedlander, who based Davros' chair on the lower half of a Dalek. Producer Philip Hinchcliffe told Friedlander to consider a design similar to the Mekon from the \"Eagle\" comic \"Dan Dare\", with a large dome-like head and a withered body.\nCast in the role of Davros was Michael Wisher, who had previously appeared in several different roles on \"Doctor Who\" and had provided Dalek voices in the serials \"Frontier in Space\", \"Planet of the Daleks\" and \"Death to the Daleks\". Wisher based his performance as Davros on the philosopher Bertrand Russell. In order to prepare for filming under the heavy mask, Wisher rehearsed wearing a paper bag over his head. Friedlander's mask was cast in hard latex, with only the mouth revealing Wisher's features; make-up artist Sylvia James shaded the mask's tones and blackened Wisher's lips and teeth to hide the transition.\nIn the serial \"Destiny of the Daleks\", Davros is played by David Gooderson using the mask Friedlander made for Wisher after it was split into intersecting sections to get as good a fit as possible. When Terry Molloy took over the role in \"Resurrection of the Daleks\", a new mask was designed by Stan Mitchell.\nCharacter history.\nEncounters with the Fourth Doctor.\nThe Fourth Doctor (Tom Baker) first encountered Davros (Michael Wisher) in \"Genesis of the Daleks\" when he and his companions were sent to Skaro to avert the creation of the Daleks. As chief scientist of the Kaleds and leader of their elite scientific division, Davros devised new military strategies in order to win his people's thousand-year war against the Thal race that also occupies Skaro. When Davros learned his people were evolving from exposure to nuclear and biological weapons used in the war, he artificially accelerates the process to his design and stores the resulting tentacle creatures in tank-like \"Mark III travel machines\" partly based on the design of his wheelchair. He later names these creatures \"Daleks\", an anagram of Kaleds.\nDavros quickly becomes obsessed with his creations, considering them to be the ultimate form of life compared to others. When other Kaleds attempted to thwart his project, Davros arranges the extinction of his own people by using the Thals, whom he mostly killed with the Daleks later. Davros then weeds out those in elite scientific division who are loyal to him so he can have the Daleks eliminate the rest. However, the Daleks ultimately turn on Davros, killing his supporters before shooting him when he tries to halt the Dalek production line.\nIn \"Destiny of the Daleks\", it is revealed that Davros (now played by David Gooderson) was not killed, but placed in suspended animation and buried underground. The Daleks unearth their creator to help them break a logical impasse in their war against the android Movellans. However, the Dalek force is destroyed by the Doctor, and Davros is captured and imprisoned in suspended animation by the humans, before being taken to Earth to face trial.\nThe Dalek Civil War.\nIn the Fifth Doctor story \"Resurrection of the Daleks\", Davros (Terry Molloy) is released from his space station prison by small Dalek force aided by human mercenaries and Dalek duplicates. The Daleks require Davros to find an antidote for a Movellan-created virus that has all but wiped them out. Believing his creations to be treacherous, Davros begins using mind control on Daleks and humans, ultimately releasing the virus to kill off the Daleks before they can exterminate him. Davros expresses a desire to build a new and improved race of Daleks, but he apparently succumbs to the virus himself, his physiology being close enough to that of the Daleks for the virus to affect him.\nIn the Sixth Doctor story \"Revelation of the Daleks\", it is revealed that Davros managed to escape at the end of \"Resurrection\" and has gone into hiding as \"The Great Healer\" of the funeral and cryogenic preservation centre Tranquil Repose on the planet Necros. There, creating a clone of his head to serve as a decoy while modifying his body so that it can fire electric bolts and his chair is able to hover, Davros uses the frozen bodies to engineer a new variety of white armoured Daleks loyal to him, but he is captured by the original Daleks and taken to Skaro to face trial.\nDavros appears as the Emperor Dalek in \"Remembrance of the Daleks\", with his white and gold Daleks now based on Skaro and termed \"Imperial Daleks\", fighting against the grey \"Renegade Dalek\" faction. By this time, Davros has been physically transplanted into a customised Dalek casing. He is only revealed as the Emperor in the final episode. Both Skaro and the Imperial Dalek mothership are apparently destroyed (in the future) when the Seventh Doctor tricks Davros into using the Time Lord artefact known as the Hand of Omega which makes Skaro's Sun go supernova. However, a Dalek on the bridge of Davros' ship reports that the Emperor's escape pod is being launched and a white light is seen speeding away from the ship moments before its destruction, leaving a clear route to bring Davros back in the future.\nThe Time War and the Reality Bomb.\nDuring the revived series, Davros was referred to in the episode \"Dalek\" (2005) by the Ninth Doctor (Christopher Eccleston), who explains that the Daleks were created by \"a genius... a man who was king of his own little world\", and again by the Tenth Doctor (David Tennant) in the episode \"Evolution of the Daleks\" (2007), where he refers to the Daleks' creator as believing that \"removing emotions makes you stronger\". Davros makes his first appearance in the episode \"The Stolen Earth\" (2008), portrayed by Julian Bleach. The episode reveals that Davros was thought to have died during the first year of the Time War, when his command ship \"flew into the jaws of the Nightmare Child\" at the Gates of Elysium despite the Doctor's failed efforts to save him. But Davros was pulled out of the time lock of the war by Dalek Caan (voiced by Nicholas Briggs), using his own flesh to create a \"new empire\" of Daleks who place him in the Vault as their prisoner to make use of his knowledge. Under Davros' guidance, the Daleks steal 27 planets, including Earth, and hide them in the Medusa Cascade, one second out of sync with the rest of the universe.\nIn the follow-up episode \"Journey's End\" (2008), it is revealed that the stolen planets are required as a power source for Davros' ideal final solution: the reality bomb, which produces a wavelength that would cancel out the electrical field binding atoms to reduce all life outside the Crucible into nothingness in both his universe and countless other realities. But Davros learns too late that Dalek Caan, who came to the realisation of his race's atrocities as a consequence of saving his creator, used his prophecies and influence to ensure the Daleks' destruction while manipulating events to bring the Tenth Doctor and Donna Noble (Catherine Tate) together for the role the latter would play. Though the Doctor attempts to save him, having earlier taunted the Doctor for turning his companions into killers and being the cause of the deaths of countless people during his travels, Davros furiously refuses the Doctor's help and accuses him of being responsible for the destruction while screaming: \"Never forget, Doctor, you did this! I name you forever: \"You\" are the Destroyer of Worlds!\" Thus the Doctor is forced to leave Davros to his fate as the Crucible self-destructs.\nRemembering the Twelfth Doctor.\nDavros returns in the two-part Series 9 opening \"The Magician's Apprentice\" and \"The Witch's Familiar\" (2015), having escaped the Crucible's destruction and ending up on a restored Skaro with his life being prolonged by the Daleks. But when the aged Davros' health begins to fail, he remembers his childhood self, played by Joey Price, meeting the Twelfth Doctor (Peter Capaldi) during the Kaleds' thousand-year war prior to \"Genesis of the Daleks\". The young Davros finds himself lost on the battlefield and surrounded by handmines, with the Doctor throwing his sonic screwdriver to the boy with the intent to save him before learning his name and leaving the child to his fate. Davros, seeking a final revenge on the Doctor, employs Colony Sarff (Jami Reid-Quarrell) to bring him to Skaro. When it appears that the Doctor has lost his companion Clara Oswald (Jenna Coleman) to the Daleks, Davros manages to trick the Doctor into using his regeneration energy to heal him, extending his own life while infusing every Dalek on Skaro with the energy. But the Doctor reveals Davros' scheme has also revitalised the decomposing Daleks left to rot in Skaro's sewers, causing them to revolt and destroy the city. The Doctor then discovers the Daleks have a concept of mercy and are allowed to have the word in their vocabulary when he encounters Clara having disguised herself in a Dalek's robotic chassis. The Doctor and Clara escape, the former having an epiphany as to how Davros somehow put a sliver of compassion into the Daleks. He then returns to the battlefield in Davros' childhood, using a Dalek gun to destroy the handmines with the one bit of compassion in Davros' life instilled in the Daleks' design to ensure Clara being saved.\nOther appearances.\nComic strips.\n\"Doctor Who Magazine\" printed several comics stories involving Davros. The first, \"Nemesis of the Daleks\" (#152\u2013155), with the Seventh Doctor, features an appearance of a Dalek Emperor. Speaking with the Emperor, the Doctor addresses him as Davros, but the Emperor responds \"Who is Davros?\" The Doctor initially assumes Davros' personality has been totally subsumed, but in the later strip \"Emperor of the Daleks\" (#197\u2013202) this Emperor is shown as a different entity from Davros. Set prior to \"Remembrance of the Daleks\" in Davros' timeline, but after in the timeline of the Doctor, the latter, accompanied by Bernice Summerfield, together with help from the Sixth Doctor, ensures that Davros will survive the wrath of the Daleks so that he can assume the title of Emperor, allowing history to take its course. \"Up Above the Gods\" (#227), a vignette following up on this, features the Sixth Doctor and Davros having a conversation in the TARDIS.\nAudio plays.\nTerry Molloy has reprised his role as Davros in the spin-off audio plays produced by Big Finish Productions, mostly notably \"Davros\" (taking place during the Sixth Doctor's era), which, through flashbacks, explored the scientist's life prior to his crippling injury, which is attributed to a Thal nuclear attack (an idea that first appeared in Terrance Dicks' novelisation of \"Genesis of the Daleks\").\n\"Davros\", which does not feature the Daleks, apparently fills in the gaps between \"Resurrection of the Daleks\" and \"Revelation of the Daleks\", and has the scientist trying to manipulate the galaxy's economy into a war footing similar to Skaro's. The Sixth Doctor manages to defeat his plans, and Davros is last heard when his ship explodes, an event obliquely mentioned in \"Revelation\". However the Doctor thinks he has survived. Davros also mentions he will work on a plan to combat famine, tying into \"Revelation of the Daleks\".\n\"The Davros Mission\" is an original audio adventure (without the Doctor) available on the Complete Davros Collection DVD box set. It takes place directly after the television story \"Revelation\", while leaving the planet Necros and beginning Davros' trial. At the end of \"Davros Mission\", he turns the tables on the Daleks, forcing them to do his bidding. The Big Finish miniseries \"I, Davros\", also features trial scenes, but mostly explores his early life. In those four stories, his journey is seen from his boyhood, to just before \"Genesis of the Daleks\".\n\"The Curse of Davros\" begins with Davros and the Daleks working together to try and alter the outcome of the Battle of Waterloo using technology that Davros has created that allows him to swap peoples' minds, allowing him to switch various soldiers in Napoleon's army with his own Daleks, ultimately intending to replace Napoleon with a Dalek after Waterloo is won so that he can change history and lead humanity in a direction where they may ally with the Daleks. The plan is complicated when the Sixth Doctor arrives and uses the device to swap bodies with Davros in an attempt to subvert the Daleks' plans from the inside, but Davros-in-the-Doctor is eventually able to convince the Daleks of his true identity, planning to remain in the Doctor's healthy body while leaving the Doctor trapped in his original form. At the end, Davros and the Doctor are returned to their original bodies with the aid of the Doctor's new companion Flip Jackson, the Doctor exposes Davros's true agenda to Napoleon, and Davros is left with an army of Daleks who have had their minds wiped. These Daleks presumably become the \"Imperial Daleks\", first seen in \"Remembrance of the Daleks\".\nIn \"The Juggernauts\", Davros is on the run from the original Daleks. He hatches a plan to add human tissue to robotic Mechanoids, using them, along with his own Daleks, to destroy the originals, but the Doctor learns the truth about this plan, and his companion Mel Bush- who unwittingly assisted in the programming of the new Mechanoids- uses a backdoor she installed in their programming to turn them against Davros. At the end of the story, the self-destruct mechanism of Davros' life-support chair explodes after he is attacked by the Mechanoids, destroying an entire human colony. It is not clear how Davros survives to become the Dalek Emperor as seen in \"Remembrance\". However, in the DVD, the Davros Connections, director Gary Russell points out that the explosion of Davros' life-support chair leaves the listener to believe there is little of Davros left. This fits chronologically the fact that \"Remembrance\" depicts Davros as just a head inside the Emperor Dalek.\nIn \"Daleks Among Us\", set after \"Remembrance\", Davros returns to Azimuth, a planet that was invaded by the Daleks long ago, presenting himself as a victim of Dalek enslavement to infiltrate an underground movement against the repressive government- so desperate to prevent riots about individual actions during the Dalek occupation that official policy is now that the Dalek invasion never happened- seeking the remnants of an old experiment he carried out on the planet. This experiment is revealed to be Falkus, a clone of Davros's original body that was intended to be a new host for his mind, with Falkus having evolved an independent personality since the Daleks left Azimuth. Falkus attempts to acquire the Persuasion Machine, a dangerous device that the Seventh Doctor has been tracking with his companions Elizabeth Klein and Will Arrowsmith, but the Doctor is able to trick Falkus into using the reprogrammed Persuasion Machine to destroy himself and his Daleks, while Davros flees in an escape pod. Davros is last shown trapped on the planet Lamuria, faced with the spectral former residents of the planet who sought to punish all criminals in the universe.\nBy the time of the Eighth Doctor audio play \"Terror Firma\" (set after \"Remembrance\"), Davros is commanding a Dalek army which has successfully conquered the Earth. His mental instability has grown to the point where \"Davros\" and \"the Emperor\" exist within him as different personalities. His Daleks recognise this instability and rebel against Davros. By the story's end the Emperor personality is dominant, and the Daleks agree to follow him and leave Earth.\nIn the fourth volume of the \"\" series, looking at the Eighth Doctor's role in the Time War, after The Valeyard uses a Dalek weapon to erase the Daleks from history, the Dalek Time Strategist escapes the erasure by travelling into a parallel universe where the Kaleds and Thals have been at peace for centuries, with Davros still fully human and married to a Thal woman. The Dalek Time Strategist manipulates this alternate Davros into using his dimensional portal technology to merge various alternate Skaros together to recreate the Daleks in the prime universe, convincing Davros that the Doctor is an enemy of the \"Kaleds\" rather than the Thals. Reference is made to the 'prime' Davros having been killed in the first year of the War (as mentioned in \"The Stolen Earth\"). The process of merging with his alternate selves causes the alternate Davros to gain the injuries and memories of his counterparts, to the extent that he forgets his wife and the peace with the Thals. Eventually his presence restores the Daleks in the prime universe, but the Dalek Emperor has Davros put into stasis to prevent his influence causing another civil war by causing the Daleks to become divided between loyalty to the Emperor and Davros.\nNovels.\n\"Terror Firma\" may contradict the events of the Eighth Doctor Adventures novel \"War of the Daleks\" by John Peel, in which an unmerged Davros is placed on trial by the Dalek Prime, a combination of the Dalek Emperor and the Dalek Supreme. In the novel the Dalek Prime claimed that the planet Antalin had been terraformed to resemble Skaro and was destroyed in its place. A subterfuge to destroy Daleks aligned to Davros; both on Skaro (Antalin) and those that remained hidden within Dalek ranks on Skaro (original). Despite finding evidence of threat to Skaro via evidence found on 22nd century earth of Davros' mission to 1960s Earth and seeing the event via time-tracking equipment, the Dalek Prime allowed the destruction of Skaro to destroy Daleks allied to Davros. Dalek Prime also claimed that the Dalek/Movellan war (and indeed most of Dalek history before the destruction of \"Skaro\") was actually faked for Davros' benefit; in fact another ruse designed to bait Davros into giving evidence against himself (as he does in his trial.) Skaro is later seen to be intact and undamaged, and one character notes that it is quite possible the Dalek Prime is lying in order to weaken Davros' claim to leadership of the Daleks, while using foreknowledge of events to destroy and entrap Davros and his allies.\n\"War of the Daleks\", like the comic strips and audio plays, is of uncertain canonicity when it comes to the television series. At the conclusion of \"War\", Davros was seemingly disintegrated by a Spider Dalek on the order of the Dalek Prime. However, Davros had previously recruited one of the Spider Daleks as a sleeper agent for just such an eventuality, and even he was not certain in the end if he was being disintegrated or being teleported away to safety, leaving the possibility open for his return.\nShort fiction.\nPaul Cornell's dark vignette in the \"Doctor Who Magazine\" Brief Encounters series, \"An Incident Concerning the Bombardment of the Phobos Colony\" occurs sometime between \"Resurrection of the Daleks\" and his assumption of the role of Emperor.\nTheatre.\nIn 1993, Michael Wisher, the original Davros, with Peter Miles, who had played his confederate, Nyder, reprised the role in an unlicensed one-off amateur stage production, \"The Trial of Davros\". The plot of the play involved the Time Lords putting Davros on trial, with Nyder as a witness.\nTerry Molloy played Davros in the remounting of the play, again with Miles, for another one-off production in 2005. During the production, specially shot footage portrayed Dalek atrocities.\nIn 2008, Julian Bleach appeared live as Davros at the Doctor Who Prom, announcing that the Royal Albert Hall would become his new palace, and the audience his \"obedient slaves\".\nUnofficial BBC representation.\nBBC staff have traditionally created parodies of its own programming to be shown to colleagues at Christmas events and parties. The BBC's 1993 Christmas tape parodied the allegedly robotic, dictatorial and ruthless management style of its then Director-General, John Birt, by portraying him as Davros taking over the BBC, carrying out bizarre mergers of departments, awarding himself a bonus and singing a song to the tune of I Wan'na Be Like You describing his plans.\nOther media.\nOn 26 November 2007, a DVD boxset was released featuring all of the Davros stories from the shows original run, including \"Genesis of the Daleks\", \"Destiny of the Daleks\", \"Resurrection of the Daleks\", \"Revelation of the Daleks\", and \"Remembrance of the Daleks\"."}
{"id": "9139", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9139", "title": "DreamCast", "text": ""}
{"id": "9140", "revid": "220924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9140", "title": "Dalek", "text": "The Daleks ( ) are a fictional extraterrestrial race of mutants principally portrayed in the British science fiction television programme \"Doctor Who\". The Daleks were conceived by science-fiction writer Terry Nation and first appeared in the 1963 \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Daleks\", in shells designed by Raymond Cusick.\nDrawing inspiration from the Nazis, Nation portrayed the Daleks as violent, merciless and pitiless cyborg aliens, who demand total conformity to their will and are bent on the conquest of the universe and the extermination of what they see as inferior races. Collectively they are the greatest enemies of \"Doctor Who\"s protagonist, the Time Lord known as \"the Doctor.\" During the second year of the original \"Doctor Who\" programme (1963-1989), the Daleks developed their own form of time travel. In the beginning of the second \"Doctor Who\" TV series that debuted in 2005, it was established that the Daleks had engaged in a Time War against the Time-Lords that affected much of the universe and altered parts of history.\nIn the programme's narrative, the planet Skaro suffered a thousand-year war between two societies: the Kaleds and the Thals. During this time-period, many natives of Skaro became badly mutated by fallout from nuclear weapons and chemical warfare. The Kaled government believed in genetic purity and swore to \"exterminate the Thals\" for being inferior. Believing his own society was becoming weak and that it was his duty to create a new master race from the ashes of his people, the Kaled scientist Davros genetically modified several Kaleds into squid-like life-forms he called Daleks, removing \"weaknesses\" such as mercy and sympathy while increasing aggression and survival-instinct. He then integrated them with tank-like robotic shells equipped with advanced technology based on the same life-support system he himself used since being burned and blinded by a nuclear attack. His creations became intent on dominating the universe by enslaving or purging all \"inferior\" non-Dalek life. \nThe Daleks are the show's most popular and famous villains and their returns to the series over the decades have often gained media attention. Their frequent declaration \"Exterminate!\" has become common usage.\nCreation.\nThe Daleks were created by Terry Nation and designed by the BBC designer Raymond Cusick. They were introduced in December 1963 in the second \"Doctor Who\" serial, colloquially known as \"The Daleks\". They became an immediate and huge hit with viewers, featuring in many subsequent serials and, in the 1960s, two films. They have become as synonymous with \"Doctor Who\" as the Doctor himself, and their behaviour and catchphrases are now part of British popular culture. \"Hiding behind the sofa whenever the Daleks appear\" has been cited as an element of British cultural identity, and a 2008 survey indicated that nine out of ten British children were able to identify a Dalek correctly. In 1999 a Dalek photographed by Lord Snowdon appeared on a postage stamp celebrating British popular culture. In 2010, readers of science fiction magazine \"SFX\" voted the Dalek as the all-time greatest monster, beating competition including Japanese movie monster Godzilla and J. R. R. Tolkien's Gollum, of \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nEntry into popular culture.\nAs early as one year after first appearing on \"Doctor Who\", the Daleks had become popular enough to be recognized even by non-viewers. In December 1964 editorial cartoonist Leslie Gilbert Illingworth published a cartoon in the \"Daily Mail\" captioned \"THE DEGAULLEK\", caricaturing French President Charles de Gaulle arriving at a NATO meeting as a Dalek with de Gaulle's prominent nose.\nThe word \"Dalek\" has entered major dictionaries, including the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", which defines \"Dalek\" as \"a type of robot appearing in 'Dr. Who', a B.B.C. Television science-fiction programme; hence used allusively.\" English-speakers sometimes use the term metaphorically to describe people, usually authority figures, who act like robots unable to break from their programming. For example, John Birt, the Director-General of the BBC from 1992 to 2000, was called a \"croak-voiced Dalek\" by playwright Dennis Potter in the MacTaggart Lecture at the 1993 Edinburgh Television Festival.\nPhysical characteristics.\nExternally Daleks resemble human-sized pepper pots with a single mechanical eyestalk mounted on a rotating dome, a gun-mount containing an energy-weapon (\"gunstick\" or \"death ray\") resembling an egg-whisk, and a telescopic manipulator arm usually tipped by an appendage resembling a sink-plunger. Daleks have been known to use their plungers to interface with technology, crush a man's skull by suction, measure the intelligence of a subject, and extract information from a man's mind. Dalek casings are made of a bonded polycarbide material called \"Dalekanium\" by a member of the human resistance in \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\" and the Dalek comics, as well as by the Cult of Skaro in \"Daleks in Manhattan.\"\nThe lower half of a Dalek's shell is covered with hemispherical protrusions, or 'Dalek-bumps', which are shown in the episode \"Dalek\" to be spheres embedded in the casing. Both the BBC-licensed \"Dalek Book\" (1964) and \"The Doctor Who Technical Manual\" (1983) describe these items as being part of a sensory array, while in the 2005 series episode \"Dalek\" they are integral to a Dalek's forcefield mechanism, which evaporates most bullets and resists most types of energy weapons. The forcefield seems to be concentrated around the Dalek's midsection (where the mutant is located), as normally ineffective firepower can be concentrated on the eyestalk to blind a Dalek. In 2019 episode \"Resolution\" the bumps give way to reveal missile launchers capable of wiping out a military tank with ease. Daleks have a very limited visual field, with no peripheral sight at all, and are relatively easy to hide from in fairly exposed places. Their own energy weapons are capable of destroying them. Their weapons fire a beam that has electrical tendencies, is capable of propagating through water, and may be a form of plasma or electrolaser. The eyepiece is a Dalek's most vulnerable spot; impairing its vision often leads to a blind, panicked firing of its weapon while exclaiming \"My vision is impaired; I cannot see!\" Russell T Davies subverted the catchphrase in his 2008 episode \"The Stolen Earth\", in which a Dalek vaporises a paintball that has blocked its vision while proclaiming, \"My vision is \"not\" impaired!\"\nThe creature inside the mechanical casing is soft and repulsive in appearance, and vicious in temperament. The first-ever glimpse of a Dalek mutant, in \"The Daleks\", was a claw peeking out from under a Thal cloak after it had been removed from its casing. The mutants' actual appearance has varied, but often adheres to the Doctor's description of the species in \"Remembrance of the Daleks\" as \"little green blobs in bonded polycarbide armour\". In \"Resurrection of the Daleks\" a Dalek creature, separated from its casing, attacks and severely injures a human soldier; in \"Remembrance of the Daleks\" there are two Dalek factions (Imperial and Renegade), and the creatures inside have a different appearance in each case, one resembling the amorphous creature from \"Resurrection\", the other the crab-like creature from the original Dalek serial. As the creature inside is rarely seen on screen there is a common misconception that Daleks are wholly mechanical robots. In the new series Daleks are retconned to be mollusc-like in appearance, with small tentacles, one or two eyes, and an exposed brain. In the new series, a Dalek creature separated from its casing is shown capable of inserting a tentacle into the back of a human's neck and controlling them.\nDaleks' voices are electronic; when out of its casing the mutant is able only to squeak. Once the mutant is removed the casing itself can be entered and operated by humanoids; for example, in \"The Daleks\", Ian Chesterton (William Russell) enters a Dalek shell to masquerade as a guard as part of an escape plan.\nFor many years it was assumed that, due to their design and gliding motion, Daleks were unable to climb stairs, and that this provided a simple way of escaping them. A cartoon from \"Punch\" pictured a group of Daleks at the foot of a flight of stairs with the caption, \"Well, this certainly buggers our plan to conquer the Universe\". In a scene from the serial \"Destiny of the Daleks\", the Doctor and companions escape from Dalek pursuers by climbing into a ceiling duct. The Fourth Doctor calls down, \"If you're supposed to be the superior race of the universe, why don't you try climbing after us?\" The Daleks generally make up for their lack of mobility with overwhelming firepower; a joke among \"Doctor Who\" fans is that \"Real Daleks don't climb stairs; they level the building.\" Dalek mobility has improved over the history of the series: in their first appearance, in \"The Daleks\", they were capable of movement only on the conductive metal floors of their city; in \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\" a Dalek emerges from the waters of the River Thames, indicating not only that they had become freely mobile, but that they are amphibious; \"Planet of the Daleks\" showed that they could ascend a vertical shaft by means of an external anti-gravity mat placed on the floor; \"Revelation of the Daleks\" showed Davros in his life-support chair and one of his Daleks hovering and \"Remembrance of the Daleks\" depicted them as capable of hovering up a flight of stairs. Despite this, journalists covering the series frequently refer to the Daleks' supposed inability to climb stairs; characters escaping up a flight of stairs in the 2005 episode \"Dalek\" made the same joke and were shocked when the Dalek began to hover up the stairs after uttering the phrase \"ELEVATE\", in a similar manner to their normal phrase \"EXTERMINATE\". The new series depicts the Daleks as fully capable of flight, even space flight.\nProp details.\nThe non-humanoid shape of the Dalek did much to enhance the creatures' sense of menace. A lack of familiar reference points differentiated them from the traditional \"bug-eyed monster\" of science fiction, which \"Doctor Who\" creator Sydney Newman had wanted the show to avoid. The unsettling Dalek form, coupled with their alien voices, made many believe that the props were wholly mechanical and operated by remote control.\nThe Daleks were actually controlled from inside by short operators, who had to manipulate their eyestalks, domes and arms, as well as flashing the lights on their heads in sync with the actors supplying their voices. The Dalek cases were built in two pieces; an operator would step into the lower section and then the top would be secured. The operators looked out between the cylindrical louvres just beneath the dome, which were lined with mesh to conceal their faces.\nIn addition to being hot and cramped, the Dalek casings also muffled external sounds, making it difficult for operators to hear the director or dialogue. John Scott Martin, a Dalek operator from the original series, said that Dalek operation was a challenge: \"You had to have about six hands: one to do the eyestalk, one to do the lights, one for the gun, another for the smoke canister underneath, yet another for the sink plunger. If you were related to an octopus then it helped.\"\nFor \"Doctor Who\"'s 21st-century revival the Dalek casings retain the same overall shape and dimensional proportions of previous Daleks, although many details have been redesigned to give the Dalek a heavier and more solid look. Changes include a larger, more pointed base; a glowing eyepiece; an all-over metallic-brass finish (specified by Davies); thicker, nailed strips on the \"neck\" section; a housing for the eyestalk pivot; and significantly larger dome lights. The new prop made its on-screen debut in the 2005 episode \"Dalek\". These Dalek casings use a short operator inside the housing while the 'head' and eyestalk are operated via remote control. A third person, Nicholas Briggs, supplies the voice in their various appearances. In the 2010 season, a new, larger model appeared in several colours representing different parts of the Dalek command hierarchy.\nMovement.\nTerry Nation's original plan was for the Daleks to glide across the floor. Early versions of the Daleks rolled on nylon castors, propelled by the operator's feet. Although castors were adequate for the Daleks' debut serial, which was shot entirely at the BBC's Lime Grove Studios, for \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\" Terry Nation wanted the Daleks to be filmed on the streets of London. To enable the Daleks to travel smoothly on location, designer Spencer Chapman built the new Dalek shells around miniature tricycles with sturdier wheels, which were hidden by enlarged fenders fitted below the original base. The uneven flagstones of Central London caused the Daleks to rattle as they moved and it was not possible to remove this noise from the final soundtrack. A small parabolic dish was added to the rear of the prop's casing to explain why these Daleks, unlike the ones in their first serial, were not dependent on static electricity drawn up from the floors of the Dalek city for their motive power.\nLater versions of the prop had more efficient wheels and were once again simply propelled by the seated operators' feet, but they remained so heavy that when going up ramps they often had to be pushed by stagehands out of camera shot. The difficulty of operating all the prop's parts at once contributed to the occasionally jerky Dalek movements. This problem has largely been eradicated with the advent of the \"new series\" version, as its remotely controlled dome and eyestalk allow the operator to concentrate on the smooth movement of the Dalek and its arms.\nVoices.\nThe staccato delivery, harsh tone and rising inflection of the Dalek voice were initially developed by two voice actors, Peter Hawkins and David Graham, who varied the pitch and speed of the lines according to the emotion needed. Their voices were further processed electronically by Brian Hodgson at the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. The sound-processing devices used have varied over the decades. In 1963 Hodgson and his colleagues used equalisation to boost the mid-range of the actor's voice, then subjected it to ring modulation with a 30\u00a0Hz sine wave. The distinctive harsh, grating vocal timbre this produced has remained the pattern for all Dalek voices since (with the exception of those in the 1985 serial \"Revelation of the Daleks\", for which the director, Graeme Harper, deliberately used less distortion).\nBesides Hawkins and Graham, other voice actors for the Daleks have included Roy Skelton, who first voiced the Daleks in the 1967 story \"The Evil of the Daleks\" and provided voices for five additional Dalek serials including \"Planet of the Daleks\", and for the one-off anniversary special \"The Five Doctors\". Michael Wisher, the actor who originated the role of Dalek creator Davros in \"Genesis of the Daleks\", provided Dalek voices for that same story, as well as for \"Frontier in Space\", \"Planet of the Daleks\", and \"Death to the Daleks\". Other Dalek voice actors include Royce Mills (three stories), Brian Miller (two stories), and Oliver Gilbert and Peter Messaline (one story). John Leeson, who performed the voice of K9 in several \"Doctor Who\" stories, and Davros actors Terry Molloy and David Gooderson also contributed supporting voices for various Dalek serials.\nSince 2005 the Dalek voice in the television series has been provided by Nicholas Briggs, speaking into a microphone connected to a voice modulator. Briggs had previously provided Dalek and other alien voices for Big Finish Productions audio plays, and continues to do so. In a 2006 BBC Radio interview, Briggs said that when the BBC asked him to do the voice for the new television series, they instructed him to bring his own analogue ring modulator that he had used in the audio plays. The BBC's sound department had changed to a digital platform and could not adequately create the distinctive Dalek sound with their modern equipment. Briggs went as far as to bring the voice modulator to the actors' readings of the scripts.\nConstruction.\nManufacturing the props was expensive. In scenes where many Daleks had to appear, some of them would be represented by wooden replicas (\"Destiny of the Daleks\") or life-size photographic enlargements in the early black-and-white episodes (\"The Daleks\", \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\", and \"The Power of the Daleks\"). In stories involving armies of Daleks, the BBC effects team even turned to using commercially available toy Daleks, manufactured by Louis Marx &amp; Co and Herts Plastic Moulders Ltd. Examples of this can be observed in the serials \"The Power of the Daleks\", \"The Evil of the Daleks\", and \"Planet of the Daleks\". Judicious editing techniques also gave the impression that there were more Daleks than were actually available, such as using a split screen in \"The Parting of the Ways\".\nFour fully functioning props were commissioned for the first serial \"The Daleks\" in 1963, and were constructed from BBC plans by Shawcraft Engineering. These became known in fan circles as \"Mk I Daleks\". Shawcraft were also commissioned to construct approximately 20 Daleks for the two Dalek movies in 1965 and 1966 (see below). Some of these movie props filtered back to the BBC and were seen in the televised serials, notably \"The Chase\", which was aired before the first movie's debut. The remaining props not bought by the BBC were either donated to charity or given away as prizes in competitions.\nThe BBC's own Dalek props were reused many times, with components of the original Shawcraft \"Mk I Daleks\" surviving right through to their final classic series appearance in 1988. But years of storage and repainting took their toll. By the time of the Sixth Doctor's \"Revelation of the Daleks\" new props were being manufactured out of fibreglass. These models were lighter and more affordable to construct than their predecessors. These newer models were slightly bulkier in appearance around the mid-shoulder section, and also had a redesigned skirt section which was more vertical at the back. Other minor changes were made to the design due to these new construction methods, including altering the fender and incorporating the arm boxes, collars, and slats into a single fibreglass moulding. These props were repainted in grey for the Seventh Doctor serial \"Remembrance of the Daleks\" and designated as \"Renegade Daleks\"; another redesign, painted in cream and gold, became the \"Imperial Dalek\" faction.\nNew Dalek props were built for the 21st-century version of \"Doctor Who\". The first, which appeared alone in the 2005 episode \"Dalek\", was built by modelmaker Mike Tucker. Additional Dalek props based on Tucker's master were subsequently built out of fibreglass by Cardiff-based Specialist Models.\nDevelopment.\nWishing to create an alien creature that did not look like a \"man in a suit\", Terry Nation stated in his script for the first Dalek serial that they should have no legs. He was also inspired by a performance by the Georgian National Ballet, in which dancers in long skirts appeared to glide across the stage. For many of the shows the Daleks were operated by retired ballet dancers wearing black socks while sitting inside the Dalek. Raymond Cusick was given the task of designing the Daleks when Ridley Scott, then a designer for the BBC, proved unavailable after having been initially assigned to their debut serial. According to Jeremy Bentham's \"Doctor Who\u2014The Early Years\" (1986). After Nation wrote the script Cusick was given only an hour to come up with the design for the Daleks and was inspired in his initial sketches by a pepper pot on a table. Cusick himself, however, states that he based it on a man seated in a chair, and used the pepper pot only to demonstrate how it might move. \nIn 1964 Nation told a \"Daily Mirror\" reporter that the Dalek name came from a dictionary or encyclopaedia volume, the spine of which read \"Dal \u2013 Lek\" (or, according to another version, \"Dal \u2013 Eks\"). He later admitted that this book and the associated origin of the Dalek name were completely fictitious, and that anyone bothering to check out his story would have found him out. The name had simply rolled off his typewriter. Later Nation was pleasantly surprised to discover that in Serbo-Croatian the word \"dalek\" means \"far\" or \"distant\".\nNation grew up during the Second World War and remembered the fear caused by German bombings. He consciously based the Daleks on the Nazis, conceiving the species as faceless, authoritarian figures dedicated to conquest, racial purity and complete conformity. The allusion is most obvious in the Dalek stories written by Nation, in particular \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\" (1964) and \"Genesis of the Daleks\" (1975).\nBefore he wrote the first Dalek serial Nation was a scriptwriter for the comedian Tony Hancock. The two men had a falling out and Nation either resigned or was fired. Hancock worked on several series proposals, one of which was called \"From Plip to Plop\", a comedic history of the world that would have ended with a nuclear apocalypse, the survivors being reduced to living in dustbin-like robot casings and eating radiation to stay alive. According to Hancock's biographer Cliff Goodwin, when Hancock saw the Daleks he allegedly shouted at the screen, \"That bloody Nation\u2014he's stolen my robots!\"\nThe titling of early \"Doctor Who\" stories is complex and sometimes controversial. The first Dalek serial is called, variously, \"The Survivors\" (the pre-production title), \"The Mutants\" (its official title at the time of production and broadcast, later taken by another unrelated story), \"Beyond the Sun\" (used on some production documentation), \"The Dead Planet\" (the on-screen title of the serial's first episode), or simply \"The Daleks\".\nThe instant appeal of the Daleks caught the BBC off guard, and transformed \"Doctor Who\" into a national phenomenon. Children were alternately frightened and fascinated by the alien look of the monsters, and the \"Doctor Who\" production office was inundated with letters and calls asking about the creatures. Newspaper articles focused attention on the series and the Daleks, further enhancing their popularity.\nNation jointly owned the intellectual property rights to the Daleks with the BBC, and the money-making concept proved nearly impossible to sell to anyone else, so he was dependent on the BBC wanting to produce stories featuring the creatures. Several attempts to market the Daleks outside the series were unsuccessful. Since Nation's death in 1997, his share of the rights is now administered by his former agent, Tim Hancock.\nEarly plans for what eventually became the 1996 \"Doctor Who\" television movie included radically redesigned Daleks whose cases unfolded like spiders' legs. The concept for these \"Spider Daleks\" was abandoned, but it was picked up again in several \"Doctor Who\" spin-offs.\nWhen the new series was announced many fans hoped that the Daleks would return once more to the programme. The Nation estate however demanded levels of creative control over the Daleks' appearances and scripts that were unacceptable to the BBC. Eventually the Daleks were cleared to appear in the first series.\nFictional history.\nDalek in-universe history has seen many retroactive changes, which have caused continuity problems. When the Daleks first appeared, they were presented as the descendants of the Dals, mutated after a brief nuclear war between the Dal and Thal races 500 years ago. This race of Daleks is destroyed when their power supply is wrecked. However, when they reappear in \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\", they have conquered Earth in the 22nd century. Later stories saw them develop time travel and a space empire. In 1975, Terry Nation revised the Daleks' origins in \"Genesis of the Daleks\", where the Dals were now called Kaleds (of which \"Daleks\" is an anagram), and the Dalek design was attributed to one man, the paralyzed Kaled chief scientist and evil genius, Davros. Later Big Finish Productions audio plays attempted to explain this retcon by saying that the Skaro word \"dal\" simply means warrior, which is how the Kaleds described themselves, while \"dal-ek\" means \"god.\" According to \"Genesis of the Daleks\", instead of a short nuclear exchange, the Kaled-Thal war was a thousand-year-long war of attrition, fought with nuclear, biological and chemical weapons which caused widespread mutations among the life forms of Skaro. Davros experimented on living Kaled cells to find the ultimate mutated form of the Kaled species, believing his own people had become weak and needed to be replaced by a greater life form. He placed his new Dalek creations in tank-like \"travel machines\" of advanced technology whose design was based on his own life-support chair.\n\"Genesis of the Daleks\" marked a new era for the depiction of the species, with most of their previous history either forgotten or barely referred to again. Future stories in the original \"Doctor Who\" series, which followed a rough story arc, would also focus more on Davros, much to the dissatisfaction of some fans who felt that the Daleks should take centre stage rather than merely becoming minions of their creator. Davros made his last televised appearance for 20 years in \"Remembrance of the Daleks\", which depicted a civil war between two factions of Daleks. One faction, the \"Imperial Daleks\", were loyal to Davros, who had become their Emperor, whilst the other, the \"Renegade Daleks\", followed a black Supreme Dalek. By the end of the story, armies of both factions have been wiped out and the Doctor has tricked them into destroying Skaro. However, Davros escapes and based on the fact that Daleks possess time travel and were spread throughout the universe, there was still a possibility that many had survived these events.\nThe original \"classic\" \"Doctor Who\" series ended in 1989. In the 1996 \"Doctor Who\" TV-movie (which introduced the Eighth Doctor), Skaro has seemingly been recreated and the Daleks are shown to still rule it. Though the aliens are never seen on-screen, the story shows the Time Lord villain the Master being executed on Skaro as Dalek voices chant \"Exterminate.\" In Eighth Doctor audio plays produced by Big Finish from 2000-2005, Paul McGann reprised his role. The audio play \"The Time of the Daleks\" featured the Daleks without Davros and nearly removing William Shakespeare from history. In \"Terror Firma\", the Eighth Doctor met a Dalek faction led by Davros who was devolving more into a Dalek-like life form himself while attempting to create new Daleks from mutated humans of Earth. The audio dramas \"The Apocalypse Element\" and \"Dalek Empire\" also depicted the alien villains invading Gallifrey and then creating their own version of the Time Lord power source known as the Eye of Harmony, allowing the Daleks to rebuild an empire and become a greater threat against the Time Lords and other races that possess time travel.\nA new \"Doctor Who\" series premiered in 2005, introducing the Ninth Doctor and revealing that the \"Last Great Time War\" had just ended, resulting in the seeming destruction of the Time Lord society. The episode \"Dalek\", written by Robert Shearman, was broadcast on BBC One on 30 April 2005 and confirmed that the Time War had mainly involved the Daleks fighting the Time Lords, with the Doctor ending the conflict by seemingly destroying both sides, remarking that his own survival was \"not by choice.\" The episode featured a single Dalek who appeared to be the sole survivor of his race from the Time War. Later audio plays by Big Finish Productions expanded on the Time War in different audio drama series such as \"Gallifrey: Time War, The Eighth Doctor: Time War, The War Doctor,\" and \"The War Master.\"\nA Dalek Emperor returned at the end of the 2005 series, having survived the Time War and then rebuilt the Dalek race with genetic material harvested from human subjects. It saw itself as a god, and the new human-based Daleks were shown worshipping it. The Emperor and this Dalek fleet were destroyed in \"The Parting of the Ways\". The 2006 season finale \"Army of Ghosts\"/\"Doomsday\" featured a squad of four Dalek survivors from the old Empire, known as the Cult of Skaro, composed of Daleks who were tasked with developing imagination to better predict and combat enemies. These Daleks took on names: Jast, Thay, Caan, and their black Dalek leader Sec. The Cult had survived the Time War by escaping into the Void between dimensions. They emerged along with the Genesis Ark, a Time Lord prison vessel containing millions of Daleks, at Canary Wharf due to the actions of the Torchwood Institute and Cybermen from a parallel world. This resulted in a Cyberman-Dalek clash in London, which was resolved when the Tenth Doctor caused both groups to be sucked into the Void. The Cult survived by utilising an \"emergency temporal shift\" to escape.\nThese four Daleks - Sec, Jast, Thay and Caan - returned in the two-part story \"Daleks in Manhattan\"/\"Evolution of the Daleks\", in which whilst stranded in 1930s New York, they set up a base in the partially built Empire State Building and attempt to rebuild the Dalek race. To this end, Dalek Sec merges with a human being to become a Human/Dalek hybrid. The Cult then set about creating \"Human Daleks\" by \"formatting\" the brains of a few thousand captured humans so they can have Dalek minds. Dalek Sec, however, becomes more human in personality and alters the plan so the hybrids will be more human like him. The rest of the Cult mutinies. Sec is killed, while Thay and Jast are later wiped out with the hybrids. Dalek Caan, believing it may be the last of its kind now, escapes once more via an emergency temporal shift.\nThe Daleks returned in the 2008 season's two-part finale, \"The Stolen Earth\"/\"Journey's End\", accompanied once again by their creator Davros. The story reveals that Caan's temporal shift sent him into the Time War, despite the War being \"Time-Locked.\" The experience of piercing the Time-Lock resulted in Caan seeing parts several futures, destroying his sanity in the process. Caan rescued many Time War era Daleks and Davros, who created new Dalek troops using his own body's cells. A red Supreme Dalek leads the new army while keeping Caan and Davros imprisoned on the Dalek flagship, the \"Crucible\". Davros and the Daleks plan to destroy reality itself with a \"reality bomb.\" The plan fails due to the interference of Donna Noble, a companion of the Doctor, and Caan, who has been manipulating events to destroy the Daleks after realising the severity of the atrocities they have committed.\nThe Daleks returned in the 2010 episode \"Victory of the Daleks\", wherein it is revealed that some Daleks survived the destruction of their army in \"Journey's End\" and retrieved the \"Progenitor,\" a tiny apparatus containing 'original' Dalek DNA. The activation of the Progenitor results in the creation of New Paradigm Daleks who deem the Time War era Daleks to be inferior. The new Daleks are organised into different roles (drone, scientist, strategists, supreme and eternal), which are identifiable with colour-coded armour instead of the identification plates under the eyestalk used by their predecessors. They escape the Doctor at the end of the episode via time travel with the intent to rebuild their Empire.\nThe Daleks appeared only briefly in subsequent finales \"The Pandorica Opens\"/\"The Big Bang\" (2010) and The Wedding of River Song (2011) as Steven Moffat decided to \"give them a rest\" and stated, \"There's a problem with the Daleks. They are the most famous of the Doctor's adversaries and the most frequent, which means they are the most reliably defeatable enemies in the universe.\" These episodes also reveal that Skaro has been recreated yet again. They next appear in \"Asylum of the Daleks\" (2012), where the Daleks are shown to have greatly increased numbers and now have a Parliament; in addition to the traditional \"modern\" Daleks, several designs from both the original and new series appear, all co-existing rather than judging each other as inferior or outdated (except for those Daleks whose personalities deem them \"insane\" or can no longer battle). All record of the Doctor is removed from their collective consciousness at the end of the episode.\nThe Daleks then appear in the 50th Anniversary special \"The Day of the Doctor\", where they are seen being defeated in the Time War. The same special reveals that many Time Lords survived the war since the Doctor found a way to transfer their planet Gallifrey out of phase with reality and into a pocket dimension. In \"The Time of the Doctor\", the Daleks are one of the races that besieges Trenzalore in an attempt to stop the Doctor from releasing the Time Lords from imprisonment. After converting Tasha Lem into a Dalek puppet, they regain knowledge of the Doctor.\nThe Twelfth Doctor's first encounter with the Daleks is in his second full episode, \"Into the Dalek\" (2014), where he encounters a damaged Dalek he names 'Rusty.' Connecting to the Doctor's love of the universe and his hatred of the Daleks, Rusty assumes a mission to destroy other Daleks. In \"The Magician's Apprentice\"/\"The Witch's Familiar\" (2015), the Doctor is summoned to Skaro where he learns Davros has rebuilt the Dalek Empire. In \"The Pilot\" (2017), the Doctor briefly visits a battle during the Dalek-Movellan war.\nThe Thirteenth Doctor encountered a Dalek in a New Year's Day episode, \"Resolution\" (2019). A Dalek mutant, separated from its armoured casing, takes control of a human in order to build a new travel device for itself and summon more Daleks to conquer Earth. This Dalek is cloned by a scientist in \"Revolution of the Daleks (2021), and attempts to take over Earth using further clones, but are killed by other Daleks for perceived genetic impurity. The Dalek army is later sent by the Doctor into the \"void\" between worlds to be destroyed, using a spare TARDIS she recently acquired on Gallifrey.\nDalek culture.\nDaleks have little, if any, individual personality, ostensibly no emotions other than hatred and anger, and a strict command structure in which they are conditioned to obey superiors' orders without question. Dalek speech is characterised by repeated phrases, and by orders given to themselves and to others. Unlike the stereotypical emotionless robots often found in science fiction, Daleks are often angry; author Kim Newman has described the Daleks as behaving \"like toddlers in perpetual hissy fits\", gloating when in power and flying into a rage when thwarted. They tend to be excitable and will repeat the same word or phrase over and over again in heightened emotional states, most famously \"Exterminate! Exterminate!\"\nDaleks are extremely aggressive, and seem driven by an instinct to attack. This instinct is so strong that Daleks have been depicted fighting the urge to kill or even attacking when unarmed. The Fifth Doctor characterises this impulse by saying, \"However you respond [to Daleks] is seen as an act of provocation.\" The fundamental feature of Dalek culture and psychology is an unquestioned belief in the superiority of the Dalek race, and their default directive is to destroy all non-Dalek life-forms. Other species are either to be exterminated immediately or enslaved and then exterminated once they are no longer useful.\nThe Dalek obsession with their own superiority is illustrated by the schism between the Renegade and Imperial Daleks seen in \"Revelation of the Daleks\" and \"Remembrance of the Daleks\": the two factions each consider the other to be a perversion despite the relatively minor differences between them. This intolerance of any \"contamination\" within themselves is also shown in \"Dalek\", \"The Evil of the Daleks\" and in the Big Finish Productions audio play \"The Mutant Phase\". This superiority complex is the basis of the Daleks' ruthlessness and lack of compassion. This is shown in extreme in \"Victory of the Daleks\", where the new, pure Daleks destroy their creators, impure Daleks, with the latters' consent. It is nearly impossible to negotiate or reason with a Dalek, a single-mindedness that makes them dangerous and not to be underestimated. The Eleventh Doctor (Matt Smith) is later puzzled in the \"Asylum of the Daleks\" as to why the Daleks don't just kill the sequestered ones that have \"gone wrong\". Although the Asylum is subsequently obliterated, the Prime Minister of the Daleks explains that \"it is offensive to us to destroy such divine hatred\", and the Doctor is sickened at the revelation that hatred is actually considered beautiful by the Daleks.\nDalek society is depicted as one of extreme scientific and technological advancement; the Third Doctor states that \"it was their inventive genius that made them one of the greatest powers in the universe.\" However, their reliance on logic and machinery is also a strategic weakness which they recognise, and thus use more emotion-driven species as agents to compensate for these shortcomings.\nAlthough the Daleks are not known for their regard for due process, they have taken at least two enemies back to Skaro for a \"trial\", rather than killing them immediately. The first was their creator, Davros, in \"Revelation of the Daleks\", and the second was the renegade Time Lord known as the Master in the 1996 television movie. The reasons for the Master's trial, and why the Doctor would be asked to retrieve the Master's remains, have never been explained on screen. The \"Doctor Who Annual 2006\" implies that the trial may have been due to a treaty signed between the Time Lords and the Daleks. The framing device for the ' audio plays is a Dalek trial to determine if Davros should be the Daleks' leader once more.\nSpin-off novels contain several tongue-in-cheek mentions of Dalek poetry, and an anecdote about an opera based upon it, which was lost to posterity when the entire cast was exterminated on the opening night. Two stanzas are given in the novel \"The Also People\" by Ben Aaronovitch. In an alternative timeline portrayed in the Big Finish Productions audio adventure \"The Time of the Daleks\", the Daleks show a fondness for the works of Shakespeare. A similar idea was satirised by comedian Frankie Boyle in the BBC comedy quiz programme \"Mock the Week\"; he gave the fictional Dalek poem \"Daffodils; EXTERMINATE DAFFODILS!\" as an \"unlikely line to hear in \"Doctor Who\"\".\nBecause the Doctor has defeated the Daleks so often, he has become their collective arch-enemy and they have standing orders to capture or exterminate him on sight. In later fiction, the Daleks know the Doctor as \"Ka Faraq Gatri\" (\"Bringer of Darkness\" or \"Destroyer of Worlds\"), and \"The Oncoming Storm\". Both the Ninth Doctor (Christopher Eccleston) and Rose Tyler (Billie Piper) suggest that the Doctor is one of the few beings the Daleks fear. In \"Doomsday\", Rose notes that while the Daleks see the extermination of five million Cybermen as \"pest control\", \"one Doctor\" visibly un-nerves them (to the point they physically recoil). To his indignant surprise, in \"Asylum of the Daleks\", the Eleventh Doctor (Matt Smith) learns that the Daleks have designated him as \"The Predator\".\nMeasurements.\nA \"rel\" is a Dalek and Kaled unit of measurement. It was usually a measurement of time, with a duration of slightly more than one second, as mentioned in \"Doomsday\", \"Evolution of the Daleks\" and \"Journey's End\", counting down to the ignition of the reality bomb. (One earth minute most likely equals about 50 \"rels\".) However, in some comic books it was also used as a unit of velocity. Finally, in some cases it was used as a unit of hydroelectric energy (not to be confused with a vep, the unit used to measure artificial sunlight).\nThe \"rel\" was first used in the non-canonical feature film \"\", soon after appearing in early Doctor Who comic books.\nLicensed appearances.\nTwo \"Doctor Who\" movies starring Peter Cushing featured the Daleks as the main villains: \"Dr. Who and the Daleks\", and \"Daleks - Invasion Earth 2150 AD\", based on the television serials \"The Daleks\" and \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\", respectively. The movies were not direct remakes; for example, the Doctor in the Cushing films was a human inventor called \"Dr. Who\" who built a time-travelling device named \"Tardis\", instead of a mysterious alien who stole a device called \"the TARDIS\".\nFour books focusing on the Daleks were published in the 1960s. \"The Dalek Book\" (1964, written by Terry Nation and David Whitaker), \"The Dalek World\" (1965, written by Nation and Whitaker) and \"The Dalek Outer Space Book\" (1966, by Nation and Brad Ashton) were all hardcover books formatted like annuals, containing text stories and comics about the Daleks, along with fictional information (sometimes based on the television serials, other times made up for the books). Nation also published \"The Dalek Pocketbook and Space-Travellers Guide\", which collected articles and features treating the Daleks as if they were real. Four more annuals were published in the 1970s by World Distributors under the title \"Terry Nation's Dalek Annual\" (with cover dates 1976\u20131979, but published 1975\u20131978). Two original novels by John Peel, \"War of the Daleks\" (1997) and \"Legacy of the Daleks\" (1998), were released as part of the Eighth Doctor Adventures series of \"Doctor Who\" novels. A novella, \"The Dalek Factor\" by Simon Clark, was published in 2004, and two books featuring the Daleks and the Tenth Doctor (\"I am a Dalek\" by Gareth Roberts, 2006, and \"Prisoner of the Daleks\" by Trevor Baxendale, 2009) have been released as part of the New Series Adventures.\nNation authorised the publication of the comic strip \"The Daleks\" in the comic \"TV Century 21\" in 1965. The weekly one-page strip, written by Whitaker but credited to Nation, featured the Daleks as protagonists and \"heroes\", and continued for two years, from their creation of the mechanised Daleks by the humanoid Dalek scientist, Yarvelling, to their eventual discovery in the ruins of a crashed space-liner of the co-ordinates for Earth, which they proposed to invade. Although much of the material in these strips was directly contradicted by what was later shown on television, some concepts like the Daleks using humanoid duplicates and the design of the Dalek Emperor did show up later on in the programme.\nAt the same time, a \"Doctor Who\" strip was also being published in \"TV Comic\". Initially, the strip did not have the rights to use the Daleks, so the First Doctor battled the \"Trods\" instead, cone-shaped robotic creatures that ran on static electricity. By the time the Second Doctor appeared in the strip in 1967 the rights issues had been resolved, and the Daleks began making appearances starting in \"The Trodos Ambush\" (TVC #788-#791), where they massacred the Trods. The Daleks also made appearances in the Third Doctor-era \"Dr. Who\" comic strip that featured in the combined \"Countdown/TV Action\" comic during the early 1970s.\nAn animated series called \"Daleks!\", which consists of five 10-minute long episodes, was released on the official \"Doctor Who\" YouTube channel in 2020.\nOther licensed appearances have included a number of stage plays (see Stage plays below) and television adverts for Wall's \"Sky Ray\" ice lollies (1966), Weetabix breakfast cereal (1977), Kit Kat chocolate bars (2001), and the ANZ Bank (2005). In 2003, Daleks also appeared in UK billboard ads for Energizer batteries, alongside the slogan \"Are You Power Mad?\"\nOther appearances.\nNon\u2013\"Doctor Who\" television and film.\nDaleks have made cameo appearances in television programmes and films unrelated to \"Doctor Who\" from the 1960s to the present day.\nMusic.\nDaleks have been referred to or associated in many musical compositions.\nDalek is also mentioned and pictured in the Doc Brown vs Doctor Who. Epic Rap Battles of History Season 2, being summoned by Brown to exterminate the Tenth Doctor.\nSamples of Dalek voices uttering the phrases \"the prisoners have escaped\" and \"exterminate them\" appear in the song \"Shakespeare's Tacklebox\" by the Australian band Spiderbait on their 1993 debut LP \"ShaShaVaGlava\".\nVideo games.\nLicensed \"Doctor Who\" games featuring Daleks include 1984's \"The Key to Time\", a text adventure game for the Sinclair ZX Spectrum. The first graphical game to feature daleks was the eponymous, turn-based title released by Johan Strandberg for the Macintosh in the same year. Daleks also appeared in minor roles or as thinly disguised versions in other, minor games throughout the 80s, but did not feature as central adversaries in a licensed game until 1992, when Admiral Software published \"Dalek Attack\". The game allowed the player to play various Doctors or companions, running them through several environments to defeat the Daleks. In 1997 the BBC released a PC game entitled \"Destiny of the Doctors\" which also featured the Daleks, among other adversaries.\nUnauthorized games featuring Daleks continued to appear through the 1990s and 2000s, including Dalek-based modifications of \"Dark Forces\", \"Quake\", and \"Half-Life\", and even more recently, a mod of '; many of these can be found online, including an Adobe Flash game, \"Dalek:Dissolution Earth\". In 1998 \"QWho\", a modification for \"Quake\", featured the Daleks as adversaries. This also formed the basis of \"TimeQuake\", a total conversion written in 2000 which included other \"Doctor Who\" monsters such as Sontarans. Another unauthorised game is \"DalekTron\", a based on ' written to coincide with the 2005 series.\nOne authorised online game is \"The Last Dalek\", a Flash game created by New Media Collective for the BBC. It is based on the 2005 episode \"Dalek\" and can be played at the official BBC \"Doctor Who\" website. The \"Doctor Who\" website also features another game, \"Daleks vs Cybermen\" (also known as \"Cyber Troop Control Interface\"), based on the 2006 episode \"Doomsday\"; in this game, the player controls troops of Cybermen which must fight Daleks as well as Torchwood Institute members.\nOn 5 June 2010, the BBC released the first of four official computer games on its website, \"Doctor Who: The Adventure Games\", which are intended as part of the official TV series adventures. In the first of these, 'The City of the Daleks', the Doctor in his 11th incarnation and Amy Pond must stop the Daleks re-writing time and reviving Skaro, their homeland.\nThey also appear in the Nintendo DS and Wii games ' and '.\nSeveral Daleks appear in the iOS game \"\" as rare enemies the player faces, appearing only in the first and final levels.\nThe robot model \"883\" in the game \"Paradroid\" for the \"Commodore 64\" looks like a Dalek. The game was later ported to other platforms, and several free software clones have been developed since, among them \"Freedroid Classic\". Based on this game is a \"Diablo\" style role-playing game called \"Freedroid RPG\" where several Dalek-like robots appear. The base version is called \"Dalex\", its powerful, but slow weapon, the \"Exterminator\", is also available to the player.\nThe Daleks also appear in \"Lego Dimensions\" where they ally themselves with Lord Vortech and possess the size-altering scale keystone. When Batman, Gandalf, and Wyldstyle encounter them, they assume that they are allies of the Doctor and attack the trio. The main characters continue to fight the Daleks until they call the Doctor to save them. A Dalek saucer also appears in the level based on Metropolis, in which the top of it serves as the stage for the boss battle against Sauron and includes Daleks among the various enemies summoned to attack the player. A Dalek is also among the elements summoned by the player to deal with the obstacles in the \"Portal 2\" story level.\nThe Daleks also appear in Doctor Who: The Edge of Time, a Virtual Reality Game for the PlayStation VR, Oculus Rift, Oculus Quest, HTC Vive, and Vive Cosmos, which is set to be released in September 2019.\nPolitics.\nAt the 1966 Conservative Party conference in Blackpool, delegate Hugh Dykes publicly compared the Labour government's Defence Secretary Denis Healey to the creatures. \"Mr. Healey is the Dalek of defence, pointing a metal finger at the armed forces and saying 'I will eliminate you'.\"\nIn a British Government Parliamentary Debate in the House of Commons on 12 February 1968, the then Minister of Technology Tony Benn mentioned the Daleks during a reply to a question from the Labour MP Hugh Jenkins concerning the Concorde aircraft project. In the context of the dangers of solar flares, he said, \"Because we are exploring the frontiers of technology, some people think Concorde will be avoiding solar flares like Dr. Who avoiding Daleks. It is not like this at all.\"\nAustralian Labor Party luminary Robert Ray described his right wing Labor Unity faction successor, Victorian Senator Stephen Conroy, and his Socialist Left faction counterpart, Kim Carr, as \"factional Daleks\" during a 2006 Australian Fabian Society lunch in Sydney.\nDaleks have been used in political cartoons to caricature: Douglas Hurd, as the 'Douglek', in Private Eye's Dan Dire \u2013 Pilot of the Future; Tony Benn, John Birt, Tony Blair (also portrayed as Davros), Alastair Campbell, Alec Douglas-Home, Charles de Gaulle, Peter Mandelson, Mark Thompson.\nMagazine covers.\nDaleks have appeared on magazine covers promoting \"Doctor Who\" since the \"Dalekmania\" fad of the 1960s. \"Radio Times\" has featured the Daleks on its cover several times, beginning with the 21\u201327 November 1964 issue which promoted \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\". Other magazines also used Daleks to attract readers' attention, including \"Girl Illustrated\".\nIn April 2005, \"Radio Times\" created a special cover to commemorate both the return of the Daleks to the screen in \"Dalek\" and the forthcoming general election. This cover recreated a scene from \"The Dalek Invasion of Earth\" in which the Daleks were seen crossing Westminster Bridge, with the Houses of Parliament in the background. The cover text read \"VOTE DALEK!\" In a 2008 contest sponsored by the Periodical Publishers Association, this cover was voted the best British magazine cover of all time. In 2013 it was voted \"Cover of the century\" by the Professional Publishers Association. The 2010 United Kingdom general election campaign also prompted a collector's set of three near-identical covers of the \"Radio Times\" on 17 April with exactly the same headline but with the newly redesigned Daleks in their primary colours representing the three main political parties, Red being Labour, Blue as Conservative and Yellow as Liberal Democrats.\nParodies.\nDaleks have been the subject of many parodies, including Spike Milligan's \"Pakistani Dalek\" sketch in his comedy series \"Q\", and Victor Lewis-Smith's \"Gay Daleks\". Occasionally the BBC has used the Daleks to parody other subjects: in 2002, BBC Worldwide published the \"Dalek Survival Guide\", a parody of \"The Worst-Case Scenario Survival Handbooks\". Comedian Eddie Izzard has an extended stand-up routine about Daleks, which was included in his 1993 stand-up show \"Live at the Ambassadors\". The Daleks made two brief appearances in a pantomime version of \"Aladdin\" at the Birmingham Hippodrome which starred \"Torchwood\" star John Barrowman in the lead role. A joke-telling robot, possessing a Dalek-like boom, and loosely modelled after the Dalek, also appeared in the \"South Park\" episode \"Funnybot\", even spouting out \"exterminate\". A Dalek can also be seen in the background at timepoints 1:13 and 1:17 in the Sam &amp; Max episode \"The Trouble with Gary\". In the \"Community\" parody of \"Doctor Who\" called \"Inspector Spacetime\", they are referred to as Blorgons.\nMerchandising.\nThe BBC approached Walter Tuckwell, a New Zealand-born entrepreneur who was handling product merchandising for other BBC shows, and asked him to do the same for the Daleks and \"Doctor Who\". Tuckwell created a glossy sales brochure that sparked off a Dalek craze, dubbed \"Dalekmania\" by the press, which peaked in 1965.\nToys and models.\nThe first Dalek toys were released in 1965 as part of the \"Dalekmania\" craze. These included battery-operated, friction drive and \"Rolykins\" Daleks from Louis Marx &amp; Co., as well as models from Cherilea, Herts Plastic Moulders Ltd and Cowan, de Groot Ltd, and \"Bendy\" Daleks made by Newfeld Ltd. At the height of the Daleks' popularity, in addition to toy replicas, there were Dalek board games and activity sets, slide projectors for children and even Dalek playsuits made from PVC. Collectible cards, stickers, toy guns, music singles, punching bags and many other items were also produced in this period. Dalek toys released in the 1970s included a new version of Louis Marx's battery-operated Dalek (1974), a \"talking Dalek\" from Palitoy (1975) and a Dalek board game (1975) and Dalek action figure (1977), both from Denys Fisher. From 1988 to 2002, Dapol released a line of Dalek toys in conjunction with its \"Doctor Who\" action figure series.\nIn 1984, Sevans Models released a self-assembly model kit for a one-fifth scale Dalek, which \"Doctor Who\" historian David Howe has described as \"the most accurate model of a Dalek ever to be released\". Comet Miniatures released two Dalek self-assembly model kits in the 1990s.\nIn 1992, Bally released a Doctor Who pinball machine which prominently featured the Daleks both as a primary playfield feature and as a motorised toy in the topper.\nBluebird Toys produced a Dalek-themed \"Doctor Who\" playset in 1998.\nBeginning in 2000, Product Enterprise (who later operated under the names \"Iconic Replicas\" and \"Sixteen 12 Collectibles\") produced various Dalek toys. These included Dalek \"Rolykins\" (based on the Louis Marx toy from 1965); push-along \"talking\" Daleks; Dalek \"Rollamatics\" with a pull back and release mechanism; and a remote control Dalek.\nIn 2005 Character Options was granted the \"Master Toy License\" for the revived \"Doctor Who\" series, including the Daleks. Their product lines have included static/push-along and radio controlled Daleks, radio controlled versions and radio controlled / 1:3 scale variants. The 12-inch remote control Dalek won the 2005 award for Best Electronic Toy of the Year from the Toy Retailers Association. Some versions of the 18-inch model included semi-autonomous and voice command-features. In 2008, the company acquired a license to produce Daleks of the various \"classic series\" variants. For the fifth revived series, both Ironside (Post-Time war Daleks in camouflage khaki), Drone (new, red) and, later, Strategist Daleks (new, blue) were released as both RC Infrared Battle Daleks and action figures.\nA pair of Lego based Daleks were included in the Lego Ideas \"Doctor Who\" set, and another appeared in the \"Lego Dimensions\" Cyberman Fun-Pack.\nFull-size reproductions.\nDalek fans have been building life-size reproduction Daleks for many years. The BBC and Terry Nation estate officially disapprove of self-built Daleks, but usually intervene only if attempts are made to trade unlicensed Daleks and Dalek components commercially, or if it is considered that actual or intended use may damage the BBC's reputation or the Doctor Who/Dalek brand. The Crewe, Cheshire-based company \"This Planet Earth\" is the only business which has been licensed by the BBC and the Terry Nation Estate to produce full-size TV Dalek replicas, and by Canal+ Image UK Ltd. to produce full size Movie Dalek replicas commercially."}
{"id": "9141", "revid": "39599587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9141", "title": "Davy Jones (musician)", "text": "David Thomas Jones (30 December 1945\u00a0\u2013 29 February 2012) was an English musician, singer, actor and businessman, best known as a member of the band the Monkees, and for starring in the TV series of the same name.\nHis acting credits include a Tony-nominated performance as the Artful Dodger in the original London and Broadway productions of \"Oliver!\" as well as a guest star role in a hallmark episode of \"The Brady Bunch\" television show and later reprised parody film; \"Love, American Style\"; and \"My Two Dads\". \nJones was considered a teen idol.\nEarly life.\nDavid Thomas Jones was born at 20 Leamington Street, Openshaw, Manchester, on 30 December 1945. His television acting debut was on the British television soap opera \"Coronation Street\", in which he appeared as Colin Lomax, grandson of the regular character Ena Sharples, for one episode on 6 March 1961. He also appeared in the BBC police series \"Z-Cars\". After the death of his mother from emphysema when he was 14 years old, Jones rejected acting in favour of a career as a jockey, commencing an apprenticeship with Newmarket trainer Basil Foster. He dropped out of secondary school to begin his career in that field. This career was short-lived, however. Even though Foster believed Jones would be successful as a jockey, he encouraged his young prot\u00e9g\u00e9 to take a role as the Artful Dodger in a production of \"Oliver!\" in London's West End. In 1969 he bought a boat and named it the Flying Dutchman.\nEarly acting and recording career.\nBentley (who?) was approached by a friend who worked in a theatre in the West End of London during casting for the musical \"Oliver!\". Foster replied, \"I've got the kid.\" Jones was cast and appeared to great acclaim as the Artful Dodger. He played the role in London and then on Broadway and was nominated for a Tony Award. On 9 February 1964, he appeared on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" with Georgia Brown who was playing Nancy in the Broadway production of \"Oliver!\". This was the same episode of the show in which the Beatles made their first appearance on American television. Jones said of that night, \"I watched the Beatles from the side of the stage, I saw the girls going crazy, and I said to myself, this is it, I want a piece of that.\"\nFollowing his \"Ed Sullivan\" appearance, Jones signed a contract with Ward Sylvester of Screen Gems (then the television division of Columbia Pictures). A pair of American television appearances followed, as Jones received screen time in episodes of \"Ben Casey\" and \"The Farmer's Daughter\".\nJones debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 in the week of 14 August 1965, with the single \"What Are We Going To Do?\" The 19-year-old singer was signed to Colpix Records, a label owned by Columbia. His debut album \"David Jones\", on the same label, followed soon after (CP493). In 1967 the album was issued in the UK, in mono only, on the Pye Records label (NPL 18178).\nThe Monkees.\nFrom 1966 to 1970, Jones was a member of The Monkees, a pop-rock group formed expressly for a television show of the same name. With Screen Gems producing the series, Jones was shortlisted for auditions, as he was the only Monkee who was signed to a deal with the studio, but still had to meet producers Bob Rafelson's and Bert Schneider's standards. Jones sang lead vocals on many of the Monkees' recordings, including \"I Wanna Be Free\" and \"Daydream Believer\". The DVD release of the first season of the show contained commentary from the various bandmates. In Peter Tork's commentary, he stated that Jones was a good drummer and had the live performance lineups been based solely on playing ability, it should have been Tork on guitar, Mike Nesmith on bass, and Jones on drums, with Micky Dolenz taking the fronting role, rather than as it was done (with Nesmith on guitar, Tork on bass, and Dolenz on drums). Jones, mostly playing tambourine or maracas, filled in briefly for Tork on bass when he played keyboards.\nThe NBC television series \"The Monkees\" was popular, and remained in syndication. After the group disbanded in 1970, Jones reunited with Micky Dolenz as well as Monkees songwriters Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart in 1976 as a short-lived group called Dolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart.\nA \"Monkees\" television show marathon (\"Pleasant Valley Sunday\") broadcast on 23 February 1986 by MTV resulted in a wave of Monkeemania not seen since the group's heyday. Jones reunited with Dolenz and Peter Tork from 1986 to 1989 to celebrate the band's renewed success and promote the 20th anniversary of the group. A new top 20 hit, \"That Was Then, This Is Now\" was released (though Jones did not perform on the song) as well as an album, \"Pool It!\".\nMonkees activity ceased until 1996 when Jones reunited with Dolenz, Tork and Michael Nesmith to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the band. The group released a new album entitled \"Justus\", the first album since 1967's \"Headquarters\" that featured the band members performing all instrumental duties. It was the last time all four Monkees performed together.\nIn February 2011, Jones confirmed rumours of another Monkees reunion. \"There's even talk of putting the Monkees back together again in the next year or so for a U.S. and UK tour,\" he told Disney's Backstage Pass newsletter. \"You're always hearing all those great songs on the radio, in commercials, movies, almost everywhere.\" The tour (Jones's last) came to fruition entitled, \".\"\nAfter Micky Dolenz, Jones was the member of The Monkees who had performed the most of their songs. The exceptions are the new songs recorded in 1986 and since his death (see below).\nPost-Monkees career.\nIn 1967, Jones opened his first store, called Zilch, at 217 Thompson Street in the Greenwich Village section of New York City. The store sold \"hip\" clothing and accessories and also allowed customers to design their own clothes.\nAfter the Monkees officially disbanded in 1970, Jones kept himself busy by establishing a New York City-style street market in Los Angeles, called \"The Street\" which cost approximately $40,000. He also collaborated with musical director Doug Trevor on a one-hour ABC television special entitled \"Pop Goes Davy Jones\", which featured new artists The Jackson 5 and the Osmonds.\nBell Records, then having a string of hits with \"The Partridge Family\", signed Jones to a somewhat inflexible solo record contract in 1971. Jones was not allowed to choose his songs or producer, resulting in several lacklustre and aimless records. His second solo album, \"Davy Jones\" (1971) was notable for the song \"Rainy Jane\", which reached No. 52 in the \"Billboard\" charts. To promote the album, Jones performed \"Girl\" on an episode of \"The Brady Bunch\" entitled \"Getting Davy Jones\". Although the single sold poorly, the popularity of Jones's appearance on the show resulted in \"Girl\" becoming his best-remembered solo hit, even though it was not included in the album. The final single, \"I'll Believe In You\"/\"Road to Love,\" was poorly received.\nDolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart.\nThanks in part to reruns of \"The Monkees\" on Saturday mornings and in syndication, \"The Monkees Greatest Hits\" charted in 1976. The LP, issued by Arista (a subsidiary of Screen Gems), was actually a repackaging of a 1972 compilation LP called \"Refocus\" that had been issued by Arista's previous label imprint, Bell Records, also owned by Screen Gems.\nDolenz and Jones took advantage of this, joining ex-Monkees songwriters Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart to tour the United States. From 1975 to 1977, as the \"Golden Hits of The Monkees\" show (\"The Guys who Wrote 'Em and the Guys who Sang 'Em!\"), they successfully performed in smaller venues such as state fairs and amusement parks as well as making stops in Japan, Thailand, and Singapore (although they were forbidden from using the \"Monkees\" name, as it was owned by Screen Gems at the time). They also released an album of new material appropriately as \"Dolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart\"; a live album entitled \"Concert in Japan\" was also released by Capitol in 1976).\nMike Nesmith had not been interested in a reunion (due largely to his dislike of touring). Peter Tork claimed later that he had not been asked, which agreed with what one of the CD booklets stated that they did not know where he was at that time. A Christmas single (credited to Micky Dolenz, Davy Jones and Peter Tork) was produced by former Monkees producer Chip Douglas and released on his own label in 1976. The single featured Douglas's and Howard Kaylan's \"Christmas Is My Time of Year\" (originally recorded by a 1960s supergroup, Christmas Spirit), with a B-side of Irving Berlin's \"White Christmas\" (Douglas released a remixed version of the single, with additional overdubbed instruments, in 1986). Tork also joined Dolenz, Jones, Boyce &amp; Hart on stage at Disneyland on 4 July 1976, and also joined Dolenz and Jones on stage at the Starwood in Hollywood, California, in 1977.\nFurther stage and screen appearances.\nJones also continued his acting career after the Monkees, either as himself or another character.\nHe returned to theatre several times after the Monkees. 1977 saw him performing with former bandmate Micky Dolenz in a stage production of the Harry Nilsson musical \"The Point!\" in London at the Mermaid Theatre, playing and singing the starring role of \"Oblio\" to Dolenz' roles as the \"Count's Kid\" and the \"Leafman\", (according to the CD booklet). An original cast recording was made and released. The comedic chemistry of Jones and Dolenz proved so strong that the show was revived in 1978 with Nilsson inserting additional comedy for the two, plus two more songs, with one of them (\"Gotta Get Up\") being sung by Jones and Dolenz. The show was considered so good that it was planned to be revived again in 1979 but it proved cost prohibitive (source CD booklet \"Harry Nilsson's The Point\"). Jones also appeared in several productions of \"Oliver!\" as the Artful Dodger, and in 1989 toured the US portraying \"Fagin\".\nHe appeared in two episodes each of \"Love, American Style\" and \"My Two Dads\". Jones also appeared in animated form as himself in 1972 in an hour-long episode of \"The New Scooby-Doo Movies\". Other television appearances include \"Sledge Hammer!\", \"Boy Meets World\", \"Hey Arnold!\", \"The Single Guy\" (where he is mistaken for Dudley Moore) and \"Sabrina, the Teenage Witch\" in which he sang \"Daydream Believer\" to Sabrina (Melissa Joan Hart) as well as (I'll) Love You Forever.\nIn 1995 Jones played in a notable episode of the sitcom \"Boy Meets World\". His two former fellow Monkees Micky Dolenz and Peter Tork had already appeared separately as characters on previous episodes. Suddenly in episode eight of the 3rd season (titled \"Rave On\"), all three former-Monkees turn up, although they did not play the Monkees per se (Davy Jones is \"Reginald Fairfield\", while Dolenz is \"Gordy\" and Tork is \"Jedediah Lawrence\"). Much of the comedy of the show is thrown to Jones. However at the climax of the program the three are put on stage together and perform the classic Buddy Holly song \"Not Fade Away\", and the Temptations' \"My Girl\". As an inside-joke, actor Dave Madden who'd played the manager on \"The Partridge Family\" cameoed as a manager who suddenly appeared wanting to handle the \"new\" group telling them that they \"could be bigger than the Beatles\". Purportedly both ex-Monkee Mike Nesmith and Pattie Boyd (ex-wife of Beatle George Harrison) were in attendance at the taping. (per IMDB entry \"Boy Meets World\" episode \"Rave On\").\nIn 2009, Jones made a cameo appearance as himself in the \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" episode \"SpongeBob SquarePants vs. The Big One\" (his appearance was meant as a pun on the phrase \"Davy Jones' Locker\").\nDespite his initial high profile after the end of the Monkees, Jones struggled to establish himself as a solo music artist. Glenn A. Baker, author of \"Monkeemania: The True Story of the Monkees\", commented in 1986 that \"for an artist as versatile and confident as (Davy) Jones, the relative failure of his post-Monkees activities is puzzling. For all his cocky predictions to the press about his future plans, Davy fell into a directionless heap when left to his own devices.\"\nThe continued popularity of his 1971 \"Brady Bunch\" appearance led to his being cast as himself in \"The Brady Bunch Movie\". Jones sang his signature solo hit \"Girl\", with a grunge band providing backing, this time with middle-aged women swooning over him. Micky Dolenz and Peter Tork also appeared alongside Jones as judges.\nLater recording career.\nOn 21 June 1997, during a concert at the Los Angeles Coliseum, Jones joined U2's The Edge onstage for a karaoke performance of \"Daydream Believer,\" which had become a fixture of the band's set during that year's PopMart Tour.\nIn 2001, Jones released \"Just Me\", an album of his own songs, some written for the album and others originally on Monkees releases. In the early 2000s he was performing in the Flower Power Concert Series during Epcot's Flower and Garden Festival, a yearly gig he would continue until his death.\nIn April 2006, Jones recorded the single \"Your Personal Penguin\", written by children's author Sandra Boynton, as a companion piece to her new board book of the same title.\nIn 2007, Davy Jones performed the main title theme song for the movie \"Sexina: Popstar P.I.\". On 1 November 2007, the Boynton book and CD titled \"Blue Moo\" was released and Jones is featured in both the book and CD, singing \"Your Personal Penguin\". In 2009, Jones released a collection of classics and standards from the 1940s through the 1970s entitled \"She\".\nIn December 2008, \"Yahoo! Music\" named Jones the \"Number 1 teen idol of all time\". In 2009, Jones was rated second in a list of 10\u00a0best teen idols compiled by Fox News Channel.\nPersonal life.\nFamily life.\nJones was married three times. In December 1967, he married Dixie Linda Haines, with whom he had been living. Their relationship had been kept out of the public eye until after the birth of their first child in October 1968. It caused a considerable backlash for Jones from his fans when it was finally made public. Jones later stated in \"Tiger Beat\" magazine, \"I kept my marriage a secret because I believe stars should be allowed a private life.\" Jones and Haines had two daughters, Talia Elizabeth (born 2 October 1968) and Sarah Lee (born 3 July 1971). The marriage ended in 1975.\nJones married his second wife, Anita Pollinger, on 24 January 1981, and also had two daughters with her: Jessica Lillian (born 4 September 1981) and Annabel Charlotte (born 26 June 1988). They divorced in 1996 during the Monkees' 30th-anniversary reunion tour. Jones married for a third time in 2009 to Jessica Pacheco. This was Pacheco's third marriage as well. Jones and his wife appeared on the Dr. Phil show in April 2011. On 28 July 2011, Pacheco filed to divorce Jones in Miami-Dade County, Florida, but dropped the suit in October. They were still married when he died in February 2012. Pacheco was omitted from Jones's will, which he had made before their marriage. His oldest daughter Talia, whom he named his executrix, was granted by the court the unusual request that her father's will be sealed, on the basis that \"planning documents and financial affairs as public opinion could have a material effect on his copyrights, royalties and ongoing goodwill.\"\nHorse racing.\nIn addition to his career as an entertainer, Jones's other great love was horses. Training as a jockey in his teens in the UK, he had intended to pursue a career as a professional race jockey. He held an amateur rider's licence and rode in his first race at Newbury in Berkshire for renowned trainer Toby Balding.\nOn 1 February 1996, Jones won his first race, on Digpast, in the one-mile Ontario Amateur Riders Handicap at Lingfield in Surrey. Jones also had horse ownership interests in both the US and the UK, and served as a commercial spokesman for Colonial Downs racetrack in Virginia. Following Jones's death, Lingfield announced that the first two races on the card for 3 March 2012 would be renamed the \"Hey Hey We're The Monkees Handicap\" and the \"In Memory of Davy Jones Selling Stakes\", with successful horses in those races accompanied into the winners' enclosure by some of the Monkees' biggest hits. Plans were also announced to erect a plaque to commemorate Jones next to a Monkey Puzzle tree on the course.\nDeath.\nOn the morning of 29 February 2012, Jones went to tend to his 14 horses at a farm in Indiantown, Florida. After riding one of his favourite horses around the track, he complained of chest pains and difficulty breathing, and was rushed to Martin Memorial South Hospital in Stuart, Florida, where he was pronounced dead of a severe heart attack resulting from arteriosclerosis.\nOn 7 March, a private funeral service was held at Holy Cross Catholic parish in Indiantown. To avoid drawing attention to the grieving family, the three surviving Monkees did not attend. Instead, the group attended memorial services in New York City and organized their own private memorial in Los Angeles along with Jones's family and close friends. A public memorial service was held on 10 March in Beavertown, Pennsylvania, near a church Jones had purchased for future renovation.\nOn 12 March, a private memorial service was held in Jones's home town of Openshaw, Manchester, at Lees Street Congregational Church, where Jones performed as a child in church plays. Jones's wife and daughters travelled to England to join his relatives based there for the service, and placed his ashes on his parents' graves for a time.\nReaction.\nThe news of Jones's death triggered a surge of Internet traffic, causing sales of the Monkees' music to increase dramatically.\nGuitarist Michael Nesmith stated that Jones's \"spirit and soul live well in my heart, among all the lovely people, who remember with me the good times, and the healing times, that were created for so many, including us. I have fond memories. I wish him safe travels.\" In an 8 March 2012 interview with \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, Nesmith commented, \"For me, David was the Monkees. They were his band. We were his side men.\" Bassist Peter Tork said, \"Adios to the Manchester Cowboy\", and speaking to CNN, drummer/singer Micky Dolenz said, \"He was the brother I never had and this leaves a gigantic hole in my heart.\" Dolenz claimed that he knew that something bad was about to happen and said \"Can't believe it.. Still in shock.. had bad dreams all night long.\" Dolenz was gratified by the public affection expressed for both Jones and the Monkees in the wake of his bandmate's death. \"He was a very well-known and well-loved character and person. There are a lot of people who are grieving pretty hard. The Monkees obviously had a following, and so did (Jones) on his own. So I'm not surprised, but I was flattered and honored to be considered one of his friends and a cohort in Monkee business.\"\n\"The Monkees\" co-creator Bob Rafelson commented that Jones \"deserves a lot of credit, let me tell you. He may not have lived as long as we wanted him to, but he survived about seven lifetimes, including being perhaps the biggest rock star of his time.\"\n\"Brady Bunch\" co-star Maureen McCormick commented that \"Davy was a beautiful soul,\" and that he \"spread love and goodness around the world. He filled our lives with happiness, music, and joy. He will live on in our hearts forever. May he rest in peace.\"\nYahoo! Music commented that Jones's death \"hit so many people so hard\" because \"Monkees nostalgia cuts across generations: from the people who discovered the band during their original 1960s run; to the kids who came of age watching 1970s reruns; to the 20- and 30-somethings who discovered the Monkees when MTV (a network that owes much to the Monkees' influence) began airing old episodes in 1986.\"\n\"Time\" contributor James Poniewozik praised the Monkees' classic sitcom, and Jones in particular, saying, \"even if the show never meant to be more than entertainment and a hit-single generator, we shouldn\u2019t sell \"The Monkees\" short. It was far better television than it had to be; during an era of formulaic domestic sitcoms and wacky comedies, it was a stylistically ambitious show, with a distinctive visual style, absurdist sense of humor and unusual story structure. Whatever Jones and the Monkees were meant to be, they became creative artists in their own right, and Jones's chipper Brit-pop presence was a big reason they were able to produce work that was commercial, wholesome, and yet impressively weird.\"\n\"Mediaite\" columnist Paul Levinson noted, \"The Monkees were the first example of something created in a medium\u00a0\u2013 in this case, a rock group on television\u00a0\u2013 that jumped off the screen to have big impact in the real world.\""}
{"id": "9142", "revid": "1971344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9142", "title": "Discharge", "text": "Discharge may refer to"}
{"id": "9145", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9145", "title": "Druzism", "text": ""}
{"id": "9146", "revid": "23829864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9146", "title": "Dolly (sheep)", "text": "Dolly (5 July 1996 \u2013 14 February 2003) was a female domestic sheep, and the first mammal cloned from an adult somatic cell, using the process of nuclear transfer.\nGenesis.\nDolly was cloned by Keith Campbell, Ian Wilmut and colleagues at the Roslin Institute, part of the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and the biotechnology company PPL Therapeutics, based near Edinburgh. The funding for Dolly's cloning was provided by PPL Therapeutics and the Ministry of Agriculture. She was born on 5 July 1996 and died from a progressive lung disease five months before her seventh birthday (the disease was not considered related to her being a clone) on 14 February 2003. She has been called \"the world's most famous sheep\" by sources including BBC News and \"Scientific American\".\nThe cell used as the donor for the cloning of Dolly was taken from a mammary gland, and the production of a healthy clone, therefore, proved that a cell taken from a specific part of the body could recreate a whole individual. On Dolly's name, Wilmut stated \"Dolly is derived from a mammary gland cell and we couldn't think of a more impressive pair of glands than Dolly Parton's.\"\nBirth.\nDolly was born on 5 July 1996 and had three mothers: one provided the egg, another the DNA, and a third carried the cloned embryo to term. She was created using the technique of somatic cell nuclear transfer, where the cell nucleus from an adult cell is transferred into an unfertilized oocyte (developing egg cell) that has had its cell nucleus removed. The hybrid cell is then stimulated to divide by an electric shock, and when it develops into a blastocyst it is implanted in a surrogate mother. Dolly was the first clone produced from a cell taken from an adult mammal. The production of Dolly showed that genes in the nucleus of such a mature differentiated somatic cell are still capable of reverting to an embryonic totipotent state, creating a cell that can then go on to develop into any part of an animal.\nDolly's existence was announced to the public on 22 February 1997. It gained much attention in the media. A commercial with Scottish scientists playing with sheep was aired on TV, and a special report in \"Time\" magazine featured Dolly the sheep. \"Science\" featured Dolly as the breakthrough of the year. Even though Dolly was not the first animal cloned, she received media attention because she was the first cloned from an adult cell.\nLife.\nDolly lived her entire life at the Roslin Institute in Midlothian. There she was bred with a Welsh Mountain ram and produced six lambs in total. Her first lamb, named Bonnie, was born in April 1998. The next year Dolly produced twin lambs Sally and Rosie, and she gave birth to triplets Lucy, Darcy and Cotton in 2000. In late 2001, at the age of four, Dolly developed arthritis and began to walk stiffly. This was treated with anti-inflammatory drugs.\nDeath.\nOn 14 February 2003, Dolly was euthanised because she had a progressive lung disease and severe arthritis. A Finn Dorset such as Dolly has a life expectancy of around 11 to 12 years, but Dolly lived 6.5 years. A post-mortem examination showed she had a form of lung cancer called ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma, also known as Jaagsiekte, which is a fairly common disease of sheep and is caused by the retrovirus JSRV. Roslin scientists stated that they did not think there was a connection with Dolly being a clone, and that other sheep in the same flock had died of the same disease. Such lung diseases are a particular danger for sheep kept indoors, and Dolly had to sleep inside for security reasons.\nSome in the press speculated that a contributing factor to Dolly's death was that she could have been born with a genetic age of six years, the same age as the sheep from which she was cloned. One basis for this idea was the finding that Dolly's telomeres were short, which is typically a result of the aging process. The Roslin Institute stated that intensive health screening did not reveal any abnormalities in Dolly that could have come from advanced aging.\nIn 2016, scientists reported no defects in thirteen cloned sheep, including four from the same cell line as Dolly. The first study to review the long-term health outcomes of cloning, the authors found no evidence of late-onset, non-communicable diseases other than some minor examples of osteoarthritis and concluded \"We could find no evidence, therefore, of a detrimental long-term effect of cloning by SCNT on the health of aged offspring among our cohort.\"\nLegacy.\nAfter cloning was successfully demonstrated through the production of Dolly, many other large mammals were cloned, including pigs, deer, horses and bulls. The attempt to clone argali (mountain sheep) did not produce viable embryos. The attempt to clone a banteng bull was more successful, as were the attempts to clone mouflon (a form of wild sheep), both resulting in viable offspring. The reprogramming process that cells need to go through during cloning is not perfect and embryos produced by nuclear transfer often show abnormal development. Making cloned mammals was highly inefficientin 1996 Dolly was the only lamb that survived to adulthood from 277 attempts. By 2014 Chinese scientists were reported to have 70\u201380% success rates cloning pigs and in 2016, a Korean company, Sooam Biotech, was producing 500 cloned embryos a day. Wilmut, who led the team that created Dolly, announced in 2007 that the nuclear transfer technique may never be sufficiently efficient for use in humans.\nCloning may have uses in preserving endangered species and may become a viable tool for reviving extinct species. In January 2009, scientists from the Centre of Food Technology and Research of Aragon, in northern Spain announced the cloning of the Pyrenean ibex, a form of wild mountain goat, which was officially declared extinct in 2000. Although the newborn ibex died shortly after birth due to physical defects in its lungs, it is the first time an extinct animal has been cloned, and may open doors for saving endangered and newly extinct species by resurrecting them from frozen tissue.\nIn July 2016, four identical clones of Dolly (Daisy, Debbie, Dianna, and Denise) were alive and healthy at nine years old.\n\"Scientific American\" concluded in 2016 that the main legacy of Dolly the sheep has not been cloning of animals but in advances into stem cell research. After Dolly, researchers realised that ordinary cells could be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem cells which can be grown into any tissue.\nThe first successful cloning of a primate species using the same method for producing Dolly was reported in January 2018. Two identical clones of a macaque monkey, Zhong Zhong and Hua Hua, were created by researchers in China and were born in late 2017.\nIn January 2019, scientists in China reported the creation of five identical cloned gene-edited monkeys, using the same cloning technique that was used with Zhong Zhong and Hua Huathe first ever cloned monkeysand Dolly the sheep, and the same gene-editing CRISPR-Cas9 technique allegedly used by He Jiankui in creating the first ever gene-modified human babies Lulu and Nana. The monkey clones were made in order to study several medical diseases."}
{"id": "9151", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9151", "title": "Didjeridoo", "text": ""}
{"id": "9152", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9152", "title": "Diablo II Lord of Destruction", "text": ""}
{"id": "9154", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9154", "title": "Dakar Rallye", "text": ""}
{"id": "9156", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9156", "title": "Dolores Fuller", "text": "Dolores Agnes Fuller (n\u00e9e Eble; March 10, 1923 \u2013 May 9, 2011) was an American actress and songwriter best known as the one-time girlfriend of the low-budget film director Ed Wood. She played the protagonist's girlfriend in \"Glen or Glenda\", co-starred in Wood's \"Jail Bait\", and had a minor role in his \"Bride of the Monster\". Later, Elvis Presley recorded a number of her songs written for his films.\nFilm career.\nHer first screen appearance was at the age of 10, when she appeared briefly in Frank Capra\u2019s \"It Happened One Night\". According to Fuller, the female lead in \"Bride of the Monster\" was written for her but Wood gave it to Loretta King instead.\nIn August 1954, Fuller was cast in Wood's \"The Vampire's Tomb\", intended to star Bela Lugosi. Frank Yaconelli was named as her co-star and 'comic killer'. The film was never made. She ended up making an appearance in \"Bride of the Monster\" (1956), also with Lugosi. Fuller hosted a benefit for Lugosi which preceded the showing of \"Bride of the Atom\" (early working title of \"Bride of the Monster\") on May 11, 1955. A cocktail party was held at the Gardens Restaurant at 4311 Magnolia Avenue in Burbank, California. Vampira attended and was escorted by Paul Marco. A single screening of the film was presented at the Hollywood Paramount.\nAccording to Fuller, as quoted in Wood biography \"Nightmare of Ecstasy\" (1992), she first met Ed Wood when she attended a casting call with a friend for a movie he was supposed to direct called \"Behind Locked Doors\"; it has also been stated that they met in a restaurant.\nShe became his girlfriend shortly thereafter and began acting in his films. Her movie career included a bit part in \"It Happened One Night\" (1934) and roles in \"Outlaw Women\" (1952), \"Glen or Glenda\" (1953), \"Body Beautiful\" (1953), \"The Blue Gardenia\" (1953), \"Count the Hours\" (1953), \"Mesa of Lost Women\" (1953), \"College Capers\" (1954), \"Jail Bait\" (1954), \"The Raid\" (1954), \"This Is My Love\" (1954), \"The Opposite Sex\" (1956), \"The Ironbound Vampire\" (1997), and \"Dimensions in Fear\" (1998).\nTelevision performer and songwriter.\nFuller had already had earlier experience on television in \"Queen for a Day\" and \"The Dinah Shore Show\".\nShe also appeared on an episode of \"It's a Great Life\" as \"the blonde in the mink coat.\"\nFuller's ability as a songwriter manifested itself through the intervention of her friend, producer Hal Wallis; Fuller had wanted to get an acting role in the Elvis Presley movie \"Blue Hawaii\", which Wallis was producing, but instead he put her in touch with Hill &amp; Range, the publisher that provided Presley with songs. Fuller went into a collaborative partnership with composer Ben Weisman and co-wrote one song, \"Rock-A-Hula Baby\", for the film. It was a beginning that eventually led to Elvis Presley recording a dozen of her songs, including \"I Got Lucky\" and \"Spinout\". Fuller's music was recorded by Nat 'King' Cole, Peggy Lee, and other leading talents of the time.\nPrivate life.\nWood biographer Rudolph Grey quotes Fuller as saying of the period before her success, \"He (Ed Wood) begged me to marry him. I loved him in a way, but I couldn't handle the transvestism. I'm a very normal person. It's hard for me to deviate! I wanted a man that was all man. After we broke up, he would stand outside my home in Burbank and cry. 'Let me in, I love you!' What good would I have done if I had married him? We would have starved together. I bettered myself. I had to uplift myself.\" She has also been quoted as saying that \"His dressing up didn\u2019t bother me \u2014 we all have our little queer habits\" and giving Wood's drinking as the reason for their breakup.\nFuller's autobiography, \"A Fuller Life: Hollywood, Ed Wood and Me\", co-authored by Winnipeg writer Stone Wallace and her husband Philip Chamberlin, was published in 2008.\nPortrayal in \"Ed Wood\".\nFuller was portrayed by Sarah Jessica Parker in Tim Burton's 1994 Wood biographical film \"Ed Wood\", a portrayal of which she disapproved due to the fact that she was depicted smoking in the film, while Fuller said she herself was a lifelong non-smoker. She also complained that she was only portrayed as \"sort of as an actress\" and did not feel she was given credit for her other accomplishments and contributions towards Wood's career. However, she stated that she liked the film overall, praising Johnny Depp's performance in the title role.\nDiscography.\nSongs recorded by Elvis Presley with lyrics by Dolores Fuller:\nAccording to AllMusic, other songs co-written by her include \"I'll Touch a Star\" by Terry Stafford, \"Lost Summer Love\" by Shelley Fabares and \"Someone to Tell It To\" by Nat King Cole."}
{"id": "9158", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9158", "title": "Dr Strangelove", "text": ""}
{"id": "9160", "revid": "58319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9160", "title": "De jure", "text": "In law and government, de jure ( ; , \"by law\") describes practices that are legally recognised, regardless of whether the practice exists in reality. In contrast, (\"in fact\") describes situations that exist in reality, even if not legally recognised.\nExamples.\nIt is possible to have multiple simultaneous conflicting (de jure) legalities, possibly none of which is in force (de facto). After seizing power in 1526, Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi made his brother, Umar Din, the lawful (de jure) Sultan of Adal. Ahmad, however, was in practice (de facto) the actual Sultan, and his brother was a figurehead. Between 1805 and 1914, the ruling dynasty of Egypt ruled as de jure viceroys of the Ottoman Empire, but acted as de facto independent rulers who maintained a polite fiction of Ottoman suzerainty. However, starting from around 1882, the rulers had only de jure rule over Egypt, as it had by then become a British puppet state. Thus, Egypt was by Ottoman law de jure a province of the Ottoman Empire, but de facto was part of the British Empire.\nIn U.S. law, particularly after \"Brown v. Board of Education\" (1954), the difference between de facto segregation (segregation that existed because of the voluntary associations and neighborhoods) and de jure segregation (segregation that existed because of local laws that mandated the segregation) became important distinctions for court-mandated remedial purposes.\nIn a hypothetical situation, a king or emperor could be the de jure head of state. However, if they are unfit to lead the country, the prime minister or chancellor would assumedly become the practical, or de facto leader, while the king remains the de jure leader."}
{"id": "9163", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9163", "title": "Des Moines, Iowa", "text": "Des Moines () is the capital and the most populous city in the U.S. state of Iowa. It is also the county seat of Polk County. A small part of the city extends into Warren County. It was incorporated on September 22, 1851, as Fort Des Moines, which was shortened to \"Des Moines\" in 1857. It is located on, and named after, the Des Moines River, which likely was adapted from the early French name, \"Rivi\u00e8re des Moines,\" meaning \"River of the Monks\". The city's population was 214,237 as of the 2019 population estimate. The six-county metropolitan area is ranked 83rd in terms of population in the United States with 699,292 residents according to the 2019 estimate by the United States Census Bureau, and is the largest metropolitan area fully located within the state.\nDes Moines is a major center of the US insurance industry and has a sizable financial services and publishing business base. The city was credited as the \"number one spot for U.S. insurance companies\" in a \"Business Wire\" article and named the third-largest \"insurance capital\" of the world. The city is the headquarters for the Principal Financial Group, the Meredith Corporation, Ruan Transportation, TMC Transportation, EMC Insurance Companies, and Wellmark Blue Cross Blue Shield. Other major corporations such as Wells Fargo, Voya Financial, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, ACE Limited, Marsh, Monsanto, and Corteva have large operations in or near the metropolitan area. In recent years, Microsoft, Hewlett-Packard, and Facebook have built data-processing and logistical facilities in the Des Moines area.\nDes Moines is an important city in U.S. presidential politics; as the state's capital, it is the site of the first caucuses of the presidential primary cycle. Many presidential candidates set up campaign headquarters in Des Moines. A 2007 article in \"The New York Times\" said, \"If you have any desire to witness presidential candidates in the most close-up and intimate of settings, there is arguably no better place to go than Des Moines.\"\nEtymology.\nDes Moines takes its name from Fort Des Moines (1843\u201346), which was named for the Des Moines River. This was adopted from the name given by French colonists. \"Des Moines\" (; formerly ) translates literally to either \"from the monks\" or \"of the monks\".\nThe historian Virgil Vogel claimed that the name was derived from \"Moingona,\" an Algonquian clan name, which means \"Loon\".\nSome historians and researchers lacking linguistic or Algonquianist training concluded that \"Moingona\" meant \"people by the portage\" or something similar, a reference to the Des Moines Rapids. This was where the earliest known encounters between the Moingona and European explorers took place.\nIn 2015, Michael McCafferty of Indiana University, while studying the Miami-Illinois language, concluded that the name was actually a derisive term coined by the Peoria tribe. McCafferty agrees with other linguists that the \"Moines\" in Des Moines is a French derivation of Moingoana. What he discovered, however, was that it wasn't the actual name of the neighboring tribe; it was an insulting nickname they hurled at their rivals. It translates, essentially, as \"the feces-faces.\"\nOne popular interpretation of \"Des Moines\" ignores Vogel's research, and concludes that it refers to a group of French Trappist monks, who in the 17th century lived in huts built on top of what is now known as the ancient Monks Mound at Cahokia, the major center of Mississippian culture, which developed in what is present-day Illinois, east of the Mississippi River and the city of St. Louis. This was some from the Des Moines River.\nPrehistory.\nPrehistoric inhabitants of early Des Moines.\nBased on archeological evidence, the junction of the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers has attracted humans for at least 7,000 years. Several prehistoric occupation areas have been identified by archeologists in downtown Des Moines. Discovered in December 2010, the \"Palace\" is an expansive, 7,000-year-old site found during excavations prior to construction of the new wastewater treatment plant in southeastern Des Moines. It contains well-preserved house deposits and numerous graves. More than 6,000 artifacts were found at this site. State of Iowa archaeologist John Doershuk was assisted by University of Iowa archaeologists at this dig.\nAt least three Late Prehistoric villages, dating from about AD 1300 to 1700, stood in or near what developed later as downtown Des Moines. In addition, 15 to 18 prehistoric American Indian mounds were observed in this area by early settlers. All have been destroyed during development of the city.\nHistory.\nOrigin of Fort Des Moines.\nDes Moines traces its origins to May 1843, when Captain James Allen supervised the construction of a fort on the site where the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers merge. Allen wanted to use the name Fort Raccoon; however, the U.S. War Department preferred Fort Des Moines. The fort was built to control the Sauk and Meskwaki tribes, whom the government had moved to the area from their traditional lands in eastern Iowa. The fort was abandoned in 1846 after the Sauk and Meskwaki were removed from the state and shifted to the Indian Territory.\nThe Sauk and Meskwaki did not fare well in Des Moines. The illegal whiskey trade, combined with the destruction of traditional lifeways, led to severe problems for their society. One newspaper reported:\n\"It is a fact that the location of Fort Des Moines among the Sac and Fox Indians (under its present commander) for the last two years, had corrupted them more and lowered them deeper in the scale of vice and degradation, than all their intercourse with the whites for the ten years previous\".After official removal, the Meskwaki continued to return to Des Moines until around 1857.\nArchaeological excavations have shown that many fort-related features survived under what is now Martin Luther King Jr. Parkway and First Street. Soldiers stationed at Fort Des Moines opened the first coal mines in the area, mining coal from the riverbank for the fort's blacksmith.\nEarly, non-Native American, settlement.\nSettlers occupied the abandoned fort and nearby areas. On May 25, 1846, the state legislature designated Fort Des Moines as the seat of Polk County. Arozina Perkins, a school teacher who spent the winter of 1850\u20131851 in the town of Fort Des Moines, was not favorably impressed:\nThis is one of the strangest looking \"cities\" I ever saw... This town is at the juncture of the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers. It is mostly a level prairie with a few swells or hills around it. We have a court house of \"brick\" and one church, a plain, framed building belonging to the Methodists. There are two taverns here, one of which has a most important little bell that rings together some fifty boarders. I cannot tell you how many dwellings there are, for I have not counted them; some are of logs, some of brick, some framed, and some are the remains of the old dragoon houses... The people support two papers and there are several dry goods shops. I have been into but four of them... Society is as varied as the buildings are. There are people from nearly every state, and Dutch, Swedes, etc.\nIn May 1851, much of the town was destroyed during the Flood of 1851. \"The Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers rose to an unprecedented height, inundating the entire country east of the Des Moines River. Crops were utterly destroyed, houses and fences swept away.\" The city started to rebuild from scratch.\nEra of growth.\nOn September 22, 1851, Des Moines was incorporated as a city; the charter was approved by voters on October 18. In 1857, the name \"Fort Des Moines\" was shortened to \"Des Moines\", and it was designated as the second state capital, previously at Iowa City. Growth was slow during the Civil War period, but the city exploded in size and importance after a railroad link was completed in 1866.\nIn 1864, the Des Moines Coal Company was organized to begin the first systematic mining in the region. Its first mine, north of town on the river's west side, was exhausted by 1873. The Black Diamond mine, near the south end of the West Seventh Street Bridge, sank a mine shaft to reach a coal bed. By 1876, this mine employed 150 men and shipped 20 carloads of coal per day. By 1885, numerous mine shafts were within the city limits, and mining began to spread into the surrounding countryside. By 1893, 23 mines were in the region. By 1908, Des Moines' coal resources were largely exhausted. In 1912, Des Moines still had eight locals of the United Mine Workers union, representing 1,410 miners. This was about 1.7% of the city's population in 1910.\nBy 1880, Des Moines had a population of 22,408, making it Iowa's largest city. It displaced the three Mississippi River ports: Burlington, Dubuque, and Davenport, that had alternated holding the position since the territorial period. Des Moines has remained Iowa's most populous city. In 1910, the Census Bureau reported Des Moines' population as 97.3% white and 2.7% black, reflecting its early settlement pattern primarily by ethnic Europeans.\n\"City Beautiful\" project, decline and rebirth.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, encouraged by the Civic Committee of the Des Moines Women's Club, Des Moines undertook a \"City Beautiful\" project in which large Beaux Arts public buildings and fountains were constructed along the Des Moines River. The former Des Moines Public Library building (now the home of the World Food Prize); the United States central Post Office, built by the federal government (now the Polk County Administrative Building, with a newer addition); and the City Hall are surviving examples of the 1900\u20131910 buildings. They form the Civic Center Historic District.\nThe ornate riverfront balustrades that line the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers were built by the federal Civilian Conservation Corps in the mid-1930s, during the Great Depression under Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt, as a project to provide local employment and improve infrastructure. The ornamental fountains that stood along the riverbank were buried in the 1950s when the city began a postindustrial decline that lasted until the late 1980s. The city has since rebounded, transforming from a blue-collar industrial city to a white-collar professional city.\nIn 1907, the city adopted a city commission government known as the Des Moines Plan, comprising an elected mayor and four commissioners, all elected at-large, who were responsible for public works, public property, public safety, and finance. Considered progressive at the time, it diluted the votes of ethnic and national minorities, who generally could not command the majority to elect a candidate of their choice.\nThat form of government was scrapped in 1950 in favor of a council-manager government, with the council members elected at-large. In 1967, the city changed its government to elect four of the seven city council members from single-member districts or wards, rather than at-large. This enabled a broader representation of voters. As with many major urban areas, the city core began losing population to the suburbs in the 1960s (the peak population of 208,982 was recorded in 1960), as highway construction led to new residential construction outside the city. The population was 198,682 in 2000 and grew slightly to 200,538 in 2009. The growth of the outlying suburbs has continued, and the overall metropolitan-area population is over 600,000 today.\nDuring the Great Flood of 1993, heavy rains throughout June and early July caused the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers to rise above flood stage levels. The Des Moines Water Works was submerged by floodwaters during the early morning hours of July 11, 1993, leaving an estimated 250,000 people without running water for 12 days and without drinking water for 20 days. Des Moines suffered major flooding again in June 2008 with a major levee breach. The Des Moines river is controlled upstream by Saylorville Reservoir. In both 1993 and 2008, the flooding river overtopped the reservoir spillway.\nToday, Des Moines is a member of ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability USA. Through ICLEI, Des Moines has implemented \"The Tomorrow Plan\", a regional plan focused on developing central Iowa in a sustainable fashion, centrally-planned growth, and resource consumption to manage the local population.\nCityscape.\nThe skyline of Des Moines changed in the 1970s and the 1980s, when several new skyscrapers were built. Additional skyscrapers were built in the 1990s, including Iowa's tallest. Before then, the 19-story Equitable Building, from 1924, was the tallest building in the city and the tallest building in Iowa. The 25-story Financial Center was completed in 1973 and the 36-story Ruan Center was completed in 1974. They were later joined by the 33-story Des Moines Marriott Hotel (1981), the 25-story HUB Tower and 25-story Plaza Building (1985). Iowa's tallest building, Principal Financial Group's 45-story tower at 801 Grand was built in 1991, and the 19-story EMC Insurance Building was erected in 1997.\nDuring this time period, the Civic Center of Greater Des Moines (1979) was developed; it hosts Broadway shows and special events. Also constructed were the Greater Des Moines Botanical Garden (1979), a large city botanical garden/greenhouse on the east side of the river; the Polk County Convention Complex (1985), and the State of Iowa Historical Museum (1987). The Des Moines skywalk also began to take shape during the 1980s. The skywalk system is long and connects many downtown buildings.\nIn the early 21st century, the city has had more major construction in the downtown area. The new Science Center of Iowa and Blank IMAX Dome Theater and the Iowa Events Center opened in 2005. The new central branch of the Des Moines Public Library, designed by renowned architect David Chipperfield of London, opened on April 8, 2006.\nThe World Food Prize Foundation, which is based in Des Moines, completed adaptation and restoration of the former Des Moines Public Library building in October 2011. The former library now serves as the home and headquarters of the Norman Borlaug/World Food Prize Hall of Laureates.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and is covered by water. It is 850 feet above sea level at the confluence of the Raccoon and Des Moines Rivers.\nIn November 2005, Des Moines voters approved a measure that allowed the city to annex parcels of land in the northeast, southeast, and southern corners of Des Moines without agreement by local residents, particularly areas bordering the Iowa Highway 5/U.S. 65 bypass. The annexations became official on June 26, 2009, as and around 868 new residents were added to the city of Des Moines. An additional were voluntarily annexed to the city over that same period.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe Des Moines-West Des Moines Metropolitan Statistical Area consists of six central Iowa counties: Dallas, Guthrie, Jasper, Madison, Polk, and Warren. The area had a 2010 census population of 606,3475 and an estimated 2019 population of 699,292. The Des Moines-Ames-West Des Moines Combined Statistical Area consists of the Des Moines-West Des Moines Metropolitan Statistical Area, the Ames Metropolitan Statistical Area, the Oskaloosa Micropolitan Statistical Area, and the Pella Micropolitan Statistical Area. The 2010 census population of this area was 778,013, and the estimated 2019 population was 877,991. Des Moines' suburban communities include Altoona, Ankeny, Bondurant, Carlisle, Clive, Grimes, Johnston, Norwalk, Pleasant Hill, Urbandale, Waukee, West Des Moines, and Windsor Heights.\nClimate.\nAt the center of North America and far removed from large bodies of water, the Des Moines area has a hot summer type humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), with warm to hot, humid summers and cold, snowy winters. Summer temperatures can often climb into the range, occasionally reaching . Humidity can be high in spring and summer, with frequent afternoon thunderstorms. Fall brings pleasant temperatures and colorful fall foliage. Winters vary from moderately cold to bitterly cold, with low temperatures venturing below quite often. Snowfall averages per season, and annual precipitation averages , with a peak in the warmer months. Winters are slightly colder than Chicago, but still warmer than Minneapolis, with summer temperatures being very similar between the Upper Midwest metropolitan areas.\nDemographics.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 203,433 people, 81,369 households, and 47,491 families residing in the city. Population density was . There were 88,729 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city for Unincorporated areas not merged with the city proper was 66.2% White, 15.5% African Americans, 0.5% Native American, 4.0% Asian, and 2.6% from Two or more races. People of Hispanic or Latino origin, of any race, made up 12.1% of the population. The city's racial make up during the 2010 census was 76.4% White, 10.2% African American, 0.5% Native American, 4.4% Asian (1.2% Vietnamese, 0.9% Laotian, 0.4% Burmese, 0.3% Asian Indian, 0.3% Thai, 0.2% Chinese, 0.2% Cambodian, 0.2% Filipino, 0.1% Hmong, 0.1% Korean, 0.1% Nepalese), 0.1% Pacific Islander, 5.0% from other races, and 3.4% from two or more races. People of Hispanic or Latino origin, of any race, formed 12.0% of the population (9.4% Mexican, 0.7% Salvadoran, 0.3% Guatemalan, 0.3% Puerto Rican, 0.1% Honduran, 0.1% Ecuadorian, 0.1% Cuban, 0.1% Spaniard, 0.1% Spanish). Non-Hispanic Whites were 70.5% of the population in 2010.\nThere were 81,369 households, of which 31.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.9% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 5.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 41.6% were non-families. 32.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 3.11.\nThe median age in the city was 33.5 years. 24.8% of residents were under the age of 18; 10.9% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 29.4% were from 25 to 44; 23.9% were from 45 to 64; and 11% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.9% male and 51.1% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 198,682 people, 80,504 households, and 48,704 families in the city. The population density was 2,621.3 people per square mile (1,012.0/km). There were 85,067 housing units at an average density of 1,122.3 per square mile (433.3/km). The racial makeup of the city was 82.3% white, 8.07% Black, 0.35% American Indian, 3.50% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 3.52% from other races, and 2.23% from two or more races. 6.61% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 20.9% were of German, 10.3% Irish, 9.1% \"American\" and 8.0% English ancestry, according to Census 2000.\nThere were 80,504 households, out of which 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.7% were married couples living together, 12.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.5% were non-families. 31.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.2% had someone living alone who was 65\u00a0years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.04.\nAge spread: 24.8% under the age of 18, 10.6% from 18 to 24, 31.8% from 25 to 44, 20.4% from 45 to 64, and 12.4% who were 65\u00a0years of age or older. The median age was 34\u00a0years. For every 100 females, there were 93.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $38,408, and the median income for a family was $46,590. Males had a median income of $31,712 versus $25,832 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,467. About 7.9% of families and 11.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.9% of those under age 18 and 7.6% of those ages 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nMany insurance companies are headquartered in Des Moines, including the Principal Financial Group, EMC Insurance Group, Fidelity &amp; Guaranty Life, Allied Insurance, GuideOne Insurance, Wellmark Blue Cross Blue Shield of Iowa, and American Republic Insurance Company. Des Moines has been referred to as the \"Hartford of the West\" because of this. The Principal is one of two Fortune 500 companies with headquarters in Iowa (the other being Casey's General Stores), ranking 201st on the magazine's list in 2020.\nAs a center of financial and insurance services, other major corporations headquartered outside of Iowa have a presence in the Des Moines Metro area, including Wells Fargo, Voya Financial, and Electronic Data Systems (EDS). The Meredith Corporation, a leading publishing and marketing company, is also based in Des Moines. Meredith publishes \"Better Homes and Gardens\", one of the most widely circulated publications in the United States. Des Moines was also the headquarters of \"Golf Digest\" magazine.\nOther major employers in Des Moines include UnityPoint Health, Mercy Medical Center, MidAmerican Energy Company, CDS Global, UPS, Firestone Agricultural Tire Company, EDS, Drake University, Titan Tire, \"The Des Moines Register\", Anderson Erickson, Dee Zee and EMCO.\nIn 2017, Kemin Industries opened a state-of-the-art worldwide headquarters building in Des Moines.\nCulture.\nArts and theatre.\nThe City of Des Moines is a cultural center for Iowa and home to several art and history museums and performing arts groups. The Des Moines Performing Arts routinely hosts touring Broadway shows and other live professional theater. Its president and CEO, Jeff Chelsvig, is a member of the League of American Theatres and Producers, Inc. The Temple for Performing Arts and Des Moines Playhouse are other venues for live theatre, comedy, and performance arts.\nThe Des Moines Metro Opera has been a cultural resource in Des Moines since 1973. The Opera offers educational and outreach programs and is one of the largest performing arts organizations in the state. Ballet Des Moines was established in 2002. Performing three productions each year, the Ballet also provides opportunities for education and outreach.\nThe Des Moines Symphony performs frequently at different venues. In addition to performing seven pairs of classical concerts each season, the Symphony also entertains with New Year's Eve Pops and its annual Yankee Doodle Pops concerts.\nThe Metro Arts Alliance produces \"Jazz in July\" every year, that offers free jazz shows daily at various venues throughout the city during the entire month of July.\nWells Fargo Arena is the Des Moines area's primary venue for sporting events and concerts since its opening in 2005. Named for title sponsor Wells Fargo Financial Services, Wells Fargo Arena holds 16,980 and books large, national touring acts for arena concert performances, while several smaller venues host local, regional, and national bands. It is the home of the Iowa Wolves of the NBA G League, the Iowa Wild of the American Hockey League, and the Iowa Barnstormers of the Indoor Football League.\nThe Simon Estes Riverfront Amphitheater is an outdoor concert venue on the east bank of the Des Moines River which hosts music events such as the Alive Concert Series.\nThe Des Moines Art Center, with a wing designed by architect I. M. Pei, presents art exhibitions and educational programs as well as studio art classes. The Center houses a collection of artwork from the 19th century to the present. An extension of the art center is downtown in an urban museum space, featuring three or four exhibitions each year.\nThe Pappajohn Sculpture Park was established in 2009. It showcases a collection of 24 sculptures donated by Des Moines philanthropists John and Mary Pappajohn. Nearby is the Temple for Performing Arts, a cultural center for the city. Next to the Temple is the Central Library, designed by renowned English architect David Chipperfield.\nSalisbury House and Gardens is a 42-room historic house museum on of woodlands in the South of Grand neighborhood of Des Moines. It is named after\u2014and loosely inspired by\u2014King's House in Salisbury, England. Built in the 1920s by cosmetics magnate Carl Weeks and his wife, Edith, the Salisbury House contains authentic 16th-century English oak and rafters dating to Shakespeare's days, numerous other architectural features re-purposed from other historic English homes, and an internationally significant collection of original fine art, tapestries, decorative art, furniture, musical instruments, and rare books and documents. The Salisbury House is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and has been featured on A&amp;E's \"America's Castles\" and PBS's \"Antiques Roadshow\". Prominent artists in the Salisbury House collection include Joseph Stella, Lillian Genth, Anthony van Dyck and Lawrence Alma-Tadema.\nBuilt in 1877 by prominent pioneer businessman Hoyt Sherman, Hoyt Sherman Place mansion was Des Moines' first public art gallery and houses a distinctive collection of 19th and 20th century artwork. Its restored 1,250-seat theater features an intricate rococo plaster ceiling and excellent acoustics and is used for a variety of cultural performances and entertainment.\nAttractions.\nArising in the east and facing westward toward downtown, the Iowa State Capitol building with its , 23-karat gold leafed dome towering above the city is a favorite of sightseers. Four smaller domes flank the main dome. The Capitol houses the governor's offices, legislature, and the old Supreme Court Chambers. The ornate interior also features a grand staircase, mural \"Westward\", five-story law library, scale model of the USS \"Iowa\", and collection of first lady dolls. Guided tours are available.\nThe Capitol grounds include a World War II memorial with sculpture and Wall of Memories, the 1894 Soldiers and Sailors Monument of the Civil War and memorials honoring those who served in the Spanish\u2013American, Korean, and Vietnam Wars.\nThe West Capitol Terrace provides the entrance from the west to the state's grandest building, the State Capitol Building. The \"people's park\" at the foot of the Capitol complex includes a promenade and landscaped gardens, in addition to providing public space for rallies and special events. A granite map of Iowa depicting all 99 counties rests at the base of the terrace and has become an attraction for in-state visitors, many of whom walk over the map to find their home county.\nIowa's history lives on in the State of Iowa Historical Museum. This modern granite and glass structure at the foot of the State Capitol Building houses permanent and temporary exhibits exploring the people, places, events, and issues of Iowa's past. The showcase includes native wildlife, American Indian and pioneer artifacts, and political and military items. The museum features a genealogy and Iowa history library, museum gift shop, and cafe.\nTerrace Hill, a National Historic Landmark and Iowa Governor's Residence, is among the best examples of American Victorian Second Empire architecture. This opulent 1869 home was built by Iowa's first millionaire, Benjamin F. Allen, and restored to the late 19th century period. It overlooks downtown Des Moines and is situated on with a re-created Victorian formal garden. Tours are conducted Tuesdays through Saturdays from March through December.\nThe Science Center of Iowa and Blank IMAX Dome Theater offers seven interactive learning areas, live programs, and hands-on activities encouraging learning and fun for all ages. Among its three theaters include the 216-seat Blank IMAX Dome Theater, 175-seat John Deere Adventure Theater featuring live performances, and a domed Star Theater.\nThe Greater Des Moines Botanical Garden, an indoor conservatory of over 15,000 exotic plants, is one of the largest collections of tropical, subtropical, and desert-growing plants in the Midwest. The Center blooms with thousands of flowers year-round. Nearby are the Robert D. Ray Asian Gardens and Pavilion, named in honor of the former governor whose influence helped relocate thousands of Vietnamese refugees to Iowa homes in the 1970s and 1980s. Developed by the city's Asian community, the Gardens include a three-story Chinese pavilion, bonsai landscaping, and granite sculptures to highlight the importance of diversity and recognize Asian American contributions in Iowa.\nBlank Park Zoo is a landscaped zoological park on the south side. Among the exhibits include a tropical rain forest, Australian Outback, and Africa. The Zoo offers education classes, tours, and rental facilities.\nThe Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary was established as a scientific research facility with a campus housing bonobos and orangutans for the noninvasive interdisciplinary study of their cognitive and communicative capabilities.\nThe East Village, on the east side of the Des Moines River, begins at the river and extends about five blocks east to the State Capitol Building, offering an eclectic blend of historic buildings, hip eateries, boutiques, art galleries, and a wide variety of other retail establishments mixed with residences.\nAdventureland Park is an amusement park in neighboring Altoona, just northeast of Des Moines. The park boasts more than 100 rides, shows, and attractions, including four roller coasters. A hotel and campground is just outside the park. Also in Altoona is Prairie Meadows Racetrack and Casino, an entertainment venue for gambling and horse racing. Open 24 hours a day, year-round, the racetrack and casino features live racing, plus over 1,750 slot machines, table games, and concert and show entertainment.\nLiving History Farms in suburban Urbandale tells the story of Midwestern agriculture and rural life in an open-air museum with interpreters dressed in period costume who recreate the daily routines of early Iowans. Open daily from May through October, the Living History Farms include a 1700 Ioway Indian village, 1850 pioneer farm, 1875 frontier town, 1900 horse-powered farm, and a modern crop center.\nWallace House was the home of the first Henry Wallace, a national leader in agriculture and conservation and the first editor of \"Wallaces' Farmer\" farm journal. This restored 1883 Italianate Victorian houses exhibits, artifacts, and information covering four generations of Henry Wallaces and other family members.\nHistoric Jordan House in West Des Moines is a stately Victorian home built in 1850 and added to in 1870 by the first white settler in West Des Moines, James C. Jordan. Completely refurbished, this mansion was part of the Underground Railroad and today houses 16 period rooms, a railroad museum, West Des Moines community history, and a museum dedicated to the Underground Railroad in Iowa. In 1893 Jordan's daughter Eda was sliding down the banister when she fell off and broke her neck. She died two days later, and her ghost is reputed to haunt the house.\nThe \"Chicago Tribune\" wrote that Iowa's capital city has \"walker-friendly downtown streets and enough outdoor sculpture, sleek buildings, storefronts and cafes to delight the most jaded stroller\".\nFestivals and events.\nDes Moines plays host to a growing number of nationally acclaimed cultural events, including the annual Des Moines Arts Festival in June, Metro Arts Jazz in July, Iowa State Fair in August, and the World Food &amp; Music Festival in September. On Saturdays from May through October, the Downtown Farmers' Market draws visitors from across the state. Local parades include Saint Patrick's Day Parade, Drake Relays Parade, Capitol City Pride Parade, Iowa State Fair Parade, Labor Day Parade, and Beaverdale Fall Festival Parade.\nOther annual festivals and events include: Des Moines Beer Week, 80/35 Music Festival, 515 Alive Music Festival, ArtFest Midwest, Blue Ribbon Bacon Fest, CelebrAsian Heritage Festival, Des Moines Pride Festival, Des Moines Renaissance Faire, Festa Italiana, Festival of Trees and Lights, World Food &amp; Music Festival, I'll Make Me a World Iowa, Latino Heritage Festival, Oktoberfest, Winefest, ImaginEve!, Iowa's Premier Beer, Wine &amp; Food Show, and Wild Rose Film Festival.\nGovernment.\nDes Moines operates under a council\u2013manager form of government. The council consists of a mayor (Frank Cownie) and is elected in citywide vote, two at-large members, and four members representing each of the city's four wards. In 2014, Jonathan Gano was appointed as the new Public Works Director. In 2015, Dana Wingert was appointed as Police Chief. In 2018, Steven L. Naber was appointed as the new City Engineer.\nThe council members include:\nA plan to merge the governments of Des Moines and Polk County was rejected by voters during the November 2, 2004, election. The consolidated city-county government would have had a full-time mayor and a 15-member council that would have been divided among the city and its suburbs. Each suburb would still have retained its individual government but with the option to join the consolidated government at any time. Although a full merger was soundly rejected, many city and county departments and programs have been consolidated.\nTransportation.\nDes Moines has an extensive skywalk system within its downtown core. With over four miles of enclosed walkway, it is one of the largest of such systems in the United States. The Des Moines Skywalk System has been criticized for hurting street-level business, though a recent initiative has been made to make street-level Skywalk entrances more visible.\nInterstate 235 (I-235) cuts through the city, and I-35 and I-80 both pass through the Des Moines metropolitan area, as well as the city of Des Moines. On the northern side of the city of Des Moines and passing through the cities of Altoona, Clive, Johnston, Urbandale and West Des Moines, I-35 and I-80 converge into a long concurrency while I-235 takes a direct route through Des Moines, Windsor Heights, and West Des Moines before meeting up with I-35 and I-80 on the western edge of the metro. The Des Moines Bypass passes south and east of the city. Other routes in and around the city include US\u00a06, US\u00a069, Iowa\u00a028, Iowa\u00a0141, Iowa\u00a0163, Iowa\u00a0330, and Iowa\u00a0415.\nDes Moines's public transit system, operated by DART (Des Moines Area Regional Transit), which was the Des Moines Metropolitan Transit Authority until October 2006, consists entirely of buses, including regular in-city routes and express and commuter buses to outlying suburban areas.\nCharacteristics of household ownership of cars in Des Moines are similar to national averages. In 2015, 8.5 percent of Des Moines households lacked a car, and increased to 9.6 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Des Moines averaged 1.71 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nBurlington Trailways, Jefferson Lines, and Megabus run long-distance, inter-city bus routes through Des Moines.\nAlthough Des Moines was historically a train hub, it does not have passenger train service. For east-west traffic it was served by The Rock Island's \"Corn Belt Rocket\" express from Omaha to the west, to Chicago in the east. The Rock Island also offered the \"Twin Star Rocket\" to Minneapolis to the north and Dallas and Houston to the south. Northward and northwest bound, there were Chicago and North Western trains to destinations including Minneapolis. The Wabash Railroad ran service to the southeast to St. Louis.\nThe nearest Amtrak station is Osceola, about south of Des Moines, with no connecting Amtrak Thruway Motorcoach. Osceola is served by the California Zephyr, running between Chicago and Emeryville, CA. There have been proposals to extend the upcoming Quad Cities Amtrak service along the Iowa Interstate Railroad main line to Des Moines proper. \nThe Des Moines International Airport (DSM), on Fleur Drive in the southern part of Des Moines, offers nonstop service to destinations within the United States. The only international service is cargo service, but there have been discussions about adding an international terminal.\nEducation.\nThe Des Moines Public Schools district is the largest community school district in Iowa with 32,062 enrolled students as of the 2012\u20132013 school year. The district consists of 63 schools: 38 elementary schools, eleven middle schools, five high schools (East, Hoover, Lincoln, North, and Roosevelt), and ten special schools and programs. Small parts of the city are instead served by Carlisle Community Schools, Johnston Community School District, the Southeast Polk Community School District and the Saydel School District Grand View Christian School is the only private school in the city, although Des Moines Christian School (in Des Moines from 1947 to 2006) in Urbandale, Iowa Christian Academy and Dowling Catholic High School in West Des Moines, and Ankeny Christian Academy on the north side of the metro area serve some city residents.\nDes Moines is also home to the main campuses of three four-year private colleges: Drake University, Grand View University, and Mercy College of Health Sciences. The University of Iowa has a satellite facility in the city's Western Gateway Park, while Iowa State University hosts Master of Business Administration classes downtown. Simpson College, Upper Iowa University, William Penn University, and Purdue University Global. Des Moines Area Community College is the area's community college with campuses in Ankeny, Des Moines, and West Des Moines. The city is also home to Des Moines University, an osteopathic medical school.\nMedia.\nThe Des Moines market, which originally consisted of Polk, Dallas, Story, and Warren counties, was ranked 91st by Arbitron as of the fall of 2007 with a population of 512,000 aged 12 and older. But in June 2011 it was moved up to 72nd with the addition of Boone, Clarke, Greene, Guthrie, Jasper, Lucas, Madison and Marion counties.\nRadio.\nCommercial stations.\niHeartMedia owns five radio stations in the area, including WHO 1040\u00a0AM, a 50,000-watt AM news/talk station that has the highest ratings in the area and once employed future President Ronald Reagan as a sportscaster. In addition to WHO, iHeartMedia owns KDRB 100.3 FM (adult hits), KKDM 107.5 FM (contemporary hits), KXNO-FM 106.3, and KXNO 1460\u00a0AM (sports radio). They also own news/talk station KASI 1430\u00a0am and hot adult contemporary station KCYZ 105.1 FM, both of which broadcast from Ames.\nCumulus Media owns five stations that broadcast from facilities in Urbandale: KBGG 1700\u00a0am (sports), KGGO 94.9 FM (classic rock), KHKI 97.3 FM (country music), KJJY 92.5 FM (country music), and KWQW 98.3 FM (classic hip hop).\nSaga Communications owns seven stations in the area: KAZR 103.3 FM (rock), KIOA 93.3 FM (oldies), KIOA-HD2 99.9FM &amp; 93.3 HD2 (Rhythmic Top 40), KOEZ 104.1 FM (soft adult contemporary), KPSZ 940\u00a0am (contemporary Christian music &amp; religious teaching), KRNT 1350\u00a0am (ESPN Radio), and KSTZ 102.5 FM (adult contemporary hits).\nOther stations in the Des Moines area include religious stations KWKY 1150\u00a0am, and KPUL 101.7 FM.\nNon-commercial stations.\nNon-commercial radio stations in the Des Moines area include KDPS 88.1 FM, a station operated by the Des Moines Public Schools; KWDM 88.7 FM, a station operated by Valley High School; KJMC 89.3 FM, an urban contemporary station; K213DV 90.5 FM, the contemporary Christian K-Love affiliate for the area; and KDFR 91.3 FM, operated by Family Radio. Iowa Public Radio broadcasts several stations in the Des Moines area, all of which are owned by Iowa State University and operated on campus. WOI 640\u00a0am, the networks flagship station, and WOI-FM 90.1, the networks flagship \"Studio One\" station, are both based out of Ames and serve as the area's National Public Radio outlets. The network also operates classical stations KICG, KICJ, KICL and KICP. The University of Northwestern \u2013 St. Paul operates Contemporary Christian simulcasts of KNWI-FM at 107.1 Osceola/Des Moines, KNWM-FM at 96.1 Madrid/Ames/Des Moines, and K264CD at 100.7 in downtown Des Moines.\nLow-power FM stations include KFMG-LP 99.1, a community radio station broadcasting from the Hotel Fort Des Moines and also webstreamed.\nTelevision.\nThe Des Moines-Ames media market consists of 35 central Iowa counties: Adair, Adams, Appanoose, Audubon, Boone, Calhoun, Carroll, Clarke, Dallas, Decatur, Franklin, Greene, Guthrie, Hamilton, Hardin, Humboldt, Jasper, Kossuth, Lucas, Madison, Mahaska, Marion, Marshall, Monroe, Pocahontas, Polk, Poweshiek, Ringgold, Story, Taylor, Union, Warren, Wayne, Webster, and Wright. It was ranked 71st by Nielsen Media Research for the 2008\u20132009 television season with 432,410 television households.\nCommercial television stations serving Des Moines include CBS affiliate KCCI channel 8, NBC affiliate WHO-DT channel 13, and Fox affiliate KDSM-TV channel 17. ABC affiliate WOI-TV channel 5 and CW affiliate KCWI-TV channel 23 are both licensed to Ames and broadcast from studios in West Des Moines. KFPX-TV channel 39, the local ION affiliate, is licensed to Newton. Two non-commercial stations are also licensed to Des Moines: KDIN channel 11, the local PBS member station and flagship of the Iowa Public Television network, and KDMI channel 19, a TCT affiliate. Mediacom is the Des Moines area's cable television provider. Television sports listings for Des Moines and Iowa can be found on the Des Moines Register website.\nPrint.\n\"The Des Moines Register\" is the city's primary daily newspaper. As of March 31, 2007, the \"Register\" ranked 71st in circulation among daily newspapers in the United States according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations with 146,050 daily and 233,229 Sunday subscribers. Weekly newspapers include \"Juice\", a publication aimed at the 25\u201334 demographic published by the \"Register\" on Wednesdays; \"Cityview\", an alternative weekly published on Thursdays; and the \"Des Moines Business Record\", a business journal published on Sundays, along with the West Des Moines Register, the Johnston Register, and the Waukee Register on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, or Thursdays depending on the address of the subscriber. Additionally, magazine publisher Meredith Corporation is based in Des Moines.\nSports and recreation.\nSports.\nDes Moines hosts professional minor league teams in several sports \u2014 baseball, basketball, hockey, indoor football, and soccer \u2014 and is home to the sports teams of Drake University which play in NCAA Division I.\nDes Moines is also home to the Drake University Bulldogs, an NCAA Division I member of the Missouri Valley Conference, primarily playing northwest of downtown at the on-campus Drake Stadium and Knapp Center. Drake Stadium is home to the famed Drake Relays each April. In addition to the Drake Relays, Drake Stadium has hosted multiple NCAA Outdoor Track and Field Championships and USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships.\nThe Des Moines Menace soccer club, a member of USL League Two, also play at Drake Stadium.\nDes Moines is home to the Iowa Cubs baseball team of the Pacific Coast League. The I-Cubs, which are the Class AAA team of the major league Chicago Cubs, play their home games at Principal Park near the confluence of the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers.\nWells Fargo Arena of the Iowa Events Center is home to the Iowa Barnstormers of the Indoor Football League, the Iowa Wild of the American Hockey League, and the Iowa Wolves of the NBA G League. The Barnstormers relaunched as an af2 club in 2008 before joining a relaunched Arena Football League in 2010 and the Indoor Football League in 2015; the Barnstormers had previously played in the Arena Football League from 1994 to 2000 (featuring future NFL Hall of Famer and Super Bowl MVP quarterback Kurt Warner) before relocating to New York. The Iowa Energy, a D-League team, began play in 2007. They were bought by the Minnesota Timberwolves in 2017 and were renamed the Iowa Wolves to reflect the new ownership. The Wild, the AHL affiliate of the National Hockey League's Minnesota Wild have played at Wells Fargo Arena since 2013; previously, the Iowa Chops played four seasons in Des Moines (known as the Iowa Stars for three of those seasons.)\nAdditionally, the Des Moines Buccaneers of the United States Hockey League play at Buccaneer Arena in suburban Urbandale.\nThe Vikings of Grand View University also compete in intercollegiate athletics in Des Moines. A member of the Heart of America Athletic Conference, within the NAIA, they field 21 varsity athletic teams. They were NAIA National Champions in football in 2013.\nThe Principal Charity Classic, a Champions Tour golf event, is held at Wakonda Club in late May or early June. The IMT Des Moines Marathon is held throughout the city each October.\nParks and recreation.\nDes Moines has 76 city parks and three golf courses, as well as three family aquatic centers, five community centers and three swimming pools. The city has of trails. The first major park was Greenwood park. The park commissioners purchased the land on April 21, 1894.\nThe Principal Riverwalk is a riverwalk park district being constructed along the banks of the Des Moines River in the downtown. Primarily funded by the Principal Financial Group, the Riverwalk is a multi-year jointly funded project also funded by the city and state. Upon completion, it will feature a recreational trail connecting the east and west sides of downtown via two pedestrian bridges. A landscaped promenade along the street level is planned. The Riverwalk includes the downtown Brenton Skating Plaza, open from November through March.\nGray's Lake, part of the of Gray's Lake Park, features a boat rental facility, fishing pier, floating boardwalks, and a park resource center. Located just south of the downtown, the centerpiece of the park is a lighted Kruidenier Trail, encircling it entirely.\nFrom downtown Des Moines primarily along the east bank of the Des Moines River, the Neil Smith and John Pat Dorrian Trails are paved recreational trails that connect Gray's Lake northward to the east shore of Saylorville Lake, Big Creek State Park, and the recreational trails of Ankeny including the High Trestle Trail. These trails are near several recreational facilities including the Pete Crivaro Park, Principal Park, the Principal Riverwalk, the Greater Des Moines Botanical Garden, Union Park and its Heritage Carousel of Des Moines, Birdland Park and the Birdland Marina/Boatramp on the Des Moines River, Riverview Park, McHenry Park, and River Drive Park. Although outside of Des Moines, Jester Park has of land along the western shore of Saylorville Lake and can be reached from the Neil Smith Trail over the Saylorville Dam.\nJust west of Gray's Lake are the of the Des Moines Water Works Park. The Water Works Park is along the banks of the Raccoon River immediately upstream from where the Raccoon River empties into the Des Moines River. The Des Moines Water Works Facility, which obtains the city's drinking water from the Raccoon River, is entirely within the Water Works Park. A bridge in the park crosses the Raccoon River. The Water Works Park recreational trails link to downtown Des Moines by travelling past Gray's Lake and back across the Raccoon River via either along the Meredith Trail near Principal Park, or along the Martin Luther King Jr. Parkway. The Water Works Park trails connect westward to Valley Junction and the recreational trails of the western suburbs: Windsor Heights, Urbandale, Clive, and Waukee. Also originating from Water Works Park, the Great Western Trail is an journey southward from Des Moines to Martensdale through the Willow Creek Golf Course, Orilla, and Cumming. Often, the location for summer music festivals and concerts, Water Works Park was the overnight campground for thousands of bicyclists on Tuesday, July 23, 2013, during RAGBRAI XLI.\nSister cities.\nThe Greater Des Moines Sister City Commission, with members from the City of Des Moines and the suburbs of Cumming, Norwalk, Windsor Heights, Johnston, Urbandale, and Ankeny, maintains sister city relationships with:"}
{"id": "9164", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9164", "title": "Donald Campbell", "text": "Donald Malcolm Campbell, (23 March 1921\u00a0\u2013 4 January 1967) was a British speed record breaker who broke eight absolute world speed records on water and on land in the 1950s and 1960s. He remains the only person to set both world land and water speed records in the same year (1964). He died during a water speed record attempt at Coniston Water in the Lake District, England.\nFamily and personal life.\nDonald Campbell was born at Canbury House, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the son of Malcolm, later Sir Malcolm Campbell, holder of 13 world speed records in the 1920s and 1930s in the \"Bluebird\" cars and boats, and his second wife, Dorothy Evelyn n\u00e9e Whittall.\nCampbell attended St Peter's School, Seaford and Uppingham School. At the outbreak of the Second World War he volunteered for the Royal Air Force, but was unable to serve because of a case of childhood rheumatic fever. He joined Briggs Motor Bodies Ltd in West Thurrock, where he became a maintenance engineer. Subsequently, he was a shareholder in a small engineering company called Kine engineering, producing machine tools. Following his father's death on New Year's Eve, 31 December 1948 and aided by Malcolm's chief engineer, Leo Villa, the younger Campbell strove to set speed records first on water and then land.\nHe married three times\u00a0\u2014 to Daphne Harvey in 1945, producing daughter Georgina (Gina) Campbell, born on 19 September 1946; to Dorothy McKegg (1928\u20132008) in 1952; and to Tonia Bern in December 1958, which lasted until his death in 1967. Campbell was intensely superstitious, hating the colour green, the number thirteen and believing nothing good ever happened on a Friday. He also had some interest in the paranormal, which he nurtured as a member of the Ghost Club.\nCampbell was a restless man and seemed driven to emulate, if not surpass, his father's achievements. He was generally light-hearted and was generally, at least until his 1960 crash at the Bonneville Salt Flats, optimistic in his outlook.\nWater speed records.\nCampbell began his speed record attempts in the summer of 1949, using his father's old boat, \"Blue Bird K4\", which he renamed \"Bluebird K4\". His initial attempts that summer were unsuccessful, although he did come close to raising his father's existing record. The team returned to Coniston Water, Lancashire in 1950 for further trials. While there, they heard that an American, Stanley Sayres, had raised the record from , beyond K4's capabilities without substantial modification.\nOver the winter of 1950 to 1951, \"Bluebird K4\" was modified to make it a \"prop-rider\" as opposed to her original immersed propeller configuration. This greatly reduced hydrodynamic drag, as the third planing point would now be the propeller hub, meaning one of the two propeller blades was always out of the water at high speed. She now sported two cockpits, the second one being for Leo Villa.\n\"Bluebird K4\" now had a chance of exceeding Sayers' record and also enjoyed success as a circuit racer, winning the Oltranza Cup in Italy in the spring of that year. Returning to Coniston in September, they finally got \"Bluebird\" up to 170\u00a0mph after further trials, only to suffer a structural failure at which wrecked the boat. Sayers raised the record the following year to in Slo-Mo-Shun IV.\nAlong with Campbell, Britain had another potential contender for water speed record honours\u00a0\u2014 John Cobb. He had commissioned the world's first purpose-built turbojet Hydroplane, \"Crusader\", with a target speed of over , and began trials on Loch Ness in autumn 1952. Cobb was killed later that year, when Crusader broke up, during an attempt on the record. Campbell was devastated at Cobb's loss, but he resolved to build a new \"Bluebird\" boat to bring the water speed record back to Britain.\nIn early 1953, Campbell began development of his own advanced all-metal jet-powered \"Bluebird K7\" hydroplane to challenge the record, by now held by the American prop rider hydroplane Slo-Mo-Shun IV.[1] Designed by Ken and Lew Norris, the K7 was a steel-framed, aluminium-bodied, three-point hydroplane with a Metropolitan-Vickers Beryl axial-flow turbojet engine, producing 3,500-pound-force (16\u00a0kN) of thrust.\nLike Slo-Mo-Shun, but unlike Cobb's tricycle Crusader, the three planing points were arranged with two forward, on outrigged sponsons and one aft, in a \"pickle-fork\" layout, prompting \"Bluebird\"s early comparison to a blue lobster. K7 was of very advanced design and construction, and its load bearing steel space frame ultra rigid and stressed to 25 g (exceeding contemporary military jet aircraft). It had a design speed of and remained the only successful jet-boat in the world until the late 1960s.\nThe designation \"K7\" was derived from its Lloyd's unlimited rating registration. It was carried on a prominent white roundel on each sponson, underneath an infinity symbol. \"Bluebird K7\" was the seventh boat registered at Lloyds in the \"Unlimited\" series.\nCampbell set seven world water speed records in K7 between July 1955 and December 1964. The first of these marks was set at Ullswater on 23 July 1955, where he achieved a speed of but only after many months of trials and a major redesign of \"Bluebird\"s forward sponson attachments points. Campbell achieved a steady series of subsequent speed-record increases with the boat during the rest of the decade, beginning with a mark of in 1955 on Lake Mead in Nevada. Subsequently, four new marks were registered on Coniston Water, where Campbell and \"Bluebird\" became an annual fixture in the latter half of the 1950s, enjoying significant sponsorship from the Mobil oil company and then subsequently BP.\nCampbell also made an attempt in the summer of 1957 at Canandaigua, New York, which failed due to lack of suitable calm water conditions. \"Bluebird K7\" became a well known and popular attraction, and as well as her annual Coniston appearances, \"K7\" was displayed extensively in the UK, United States, Canada and Europe, and then subsequently in Australia during Campbell's prolonged attempt on the land speed record in 1963\u20131964.\nTo extract more speed, and endow the boat with greater high-speed stability, in both pitch and yaw, \"K7\" was subtly modified in the second half of the 1950s to incorporate more effective streamlining with a blown Perspex cockpit canopy and fluting to the lower part of the main hull. In 1958, a small wedge shaped tail fin, housing an arrester parachute, modified sponson fairings, that gave a significant reduction in forward aerodynamic lift, and a fixed hydrodynamic stabilising fin, attached to the transom to aid directional stability, and exert a marginal down-force on the nose were incorporated into the design to increase the safe operating envelope of the hydroplane. Thus she reached in 1956, where an unprecedented peak speed of was achieved on one run, in 1957, in 1958 and in 1959.\nCampbell was awarded the CBE in January 1957 for his water speed record breaking, and in particular his record at Lake Mead in the United States, which earned him and Britain very positive acclaim.\nOn 23 November 1964, Donald Campbell achieved the Australian water speed record of on Lake Bonney Riverland in South Australia, although he was unable to smash the world record on that attempt.\nLand speed record attempt.\nIt was after the Lake Mead water speed record success in 1955 that the seeds of Campbell's ambition to hold the land speed record as well were planted. The following year, the serious planning was under way\u00a0\u2014 to build a car to break the land speed record, which then stood at set by John Cobb in 1947. The Norris brothers designed \"Bluebird-Proteus CN7\" with in mind.\nThe brothers were even more enthusiastic about the car than the boat and like all of his projects, Campbell wanted \"Bluebird CN7\", to be the best of its type, a showcase of British engineering skills. The British motor industry, in the guise of Dunlop, BP, Smiths Industries, Lucas Automotive, Rubery Owen as well as many others, became heavily involved in the project to build the most advanced car the world had yet seen. CN7 was powered by a specially modified Bristol-Siddeley Proteus free-turbine engine of driving all four wheels. \"Bluebird CN7\" was designed to achieve 475\u2013500\u00a0mph and was completed by the spring of 1960.\nFollowing low-speed tests conducted at the Goodwood motor racing circuit in Sussex, in July, the \"CN7\" was taken to the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, United States, scene of his father's last land speed record triumph, some 25 years earlier in September 1935. The trials initially went well, and various adjustments were made to the car. On the sixth run in CN7, Campbell lost control at over 360\u00a0mph and crashed. It was the car's tremendous structural integrity that saved his life. He was hospitalised with a fractured skull and a burst eardrum, as well as minor cuts and bruises, but \"CN7\" was a write-off. Almost immediately, Campbell announced he was determined to have another go. Sir Alfred Owen, whose Rubery Owen industrial group had built CN7, offered to rebuild it for him. That single decision was to have a profound influence on the rest of Campbell's life. His original plan had been to break the land speed record at over 400\u00a0mph in 1960, return to Bonneville the following year to really bump up the speed to something near to 500\u00a0mph, get his seventh water speed record with K7 and then retire, as undisputed champion of speed and perhaps just as important, secure in the knowledge that he was worthy of his father's legacy.\nCampbell decided not to go back to Utah for the new trials. He felt the Bonneville course was too short at and the salt surface was in poor condition. BP offered to find another venue and eventually after a long search, Lake Eyre, in South Australia, was chosen. It hadn't rained there for nine years and the vast dry bed of the salt lake offered a course of up to . By the summer of 1962, \"Bluebird CN7\" was rebuilt, some nine months later than Campbell had hoped. It was essentially the same car, but with the addition of a large stabilising tail fin and a reinforced fibreglass cockpit cover. At the end of 1962, \"CN7\" was shipped out to Australia ready for the new attempt. Low-speed runs had just started when the rains came. The course was compromised and further rain meant, that by May 1963, Lake Eyre was flooded to a depth of 3 inches, causing the attempt to be abandoned. Campbell was heavily criticised in the press for alleged time wasting and mismanagement of the project, despite the fact that he could hardly be held responsible for the unprecedented weather.\nTo make matters worse for Campbell, American Craig Breedlove drove his pure thrust jet car \"Spirit of America\" to a speed of at Bonneville in July 1963. Although the \"car\" did not conform to FIA (Federation Internationale de L'Automobile) regulations, that stipulated it had to be wheel-driven and have a minimum of four wheels, in the eyes of the world, Breedlove was now the fastest man on Earth.\nCampbell returned to Australia in March 1964, but the Lake Eyre course failed to fulfil the early promise it had shown in 1962 and there were further spells of rain. BP pulled out as his main sponsor after a dispute, but he was able to secure backing from Australian oil company Ampol.\nThe track never properly dried out and Campbell was forced to make the best of the conditions. Finally, in July 1964, he was able to post some speeds that approached the record. On the 17th of that month, he took advantage of a break in the weather and made two courageous runs along the shortened and still damp track, posting a new land speed record of . The surreal moment was captured in a number of well-known images by photographers, including Australia's Jeff Carter. Campbell was bitterly disappointed with the record as the vehicle had been designed for much higher speeds. \"CN7\" covered the final third of the measured mile at an average of , peaking as it left the measured distance at over . He resented the fact that it had all been so difficult. \"We've made it\u00a0\u2014 we got the bastard at last,\" was his reaction to the success. Campbell's 403.1\u00a0mph represented the official land speed record.\nIn 1969, after Campbell's fatal accident, his widow, Tonia Bern-Campbell negotiated a deal with Lynn Garrison, president of Craig Breedlove and Associates, that would see Craig Breedlove run \"Bluebird\" on Bonneville's Salt Flats. This concept was cancelled when the parallel Spirit of America supersonic car project failed to find support.\nThe Double.\nCampbell now planned to go after the water speed record one more time with \"Bluebird K7\"\u00a0\u2014 to do what he had aimed for so many years ago, during the initial planning stages of CN7\u00a0\u2014 break both records in the same year. After more delays, he finally achieved his seventh water speed record at Lake Dumbleyung near Perth, Western Australia, on the last day of 1964, at a speed of . He had become the first, and so far only, person to set both land and water speed records in the same year.\nCampbell's land speed record was short-lived, because FIA rule changes meant that pure jet cars would be eligible to set records from October 1964. Campbell's speed on his final Lake Eyre run remained the highest speed achieved by a wheel-driven car until 2001; \"Bluebird CN7\" is now on display at the National Motor Museum at Beaulieu in Hampshire, England, its potential only partly realised.\nRocket car plans and final water speed record attempt.\nBluebird Mach 1.1.\nCampbell decided a massive jump in speed was called for following his successful 1964 land speed record attempt in \"Bluebird CN7\". His vision was of a supersonic rocket car with a potential maximum speed of . Norris Brothers were requested to undertake a design study. \"Bluebird Mach 1.1\" was a design for a rocket-powered supersonic land speed record car. Campbell chose a lucky date to hold a press conference at the Charing Cross Hotel on 7 July 1965 to announce his future record breaking plans:\n\"Bluebird Mach 1.1\" was to be rocket-powered. Ken Norris had calculated using rocket motors would result in a vehicle with very low frontal area, greater density, and lighter weight than if he were to employ a jet engine. \"Bluebird Mach 1.1\" would also be a relatively compact and simple design. Norris specified two off-the-shelf Bristol Siddeley BS.605 rocket engines. The 605 had been developed as a rocket-assisted take-off engine for military aircraft and was fuelled with kerosene, using hydrogen peroxide as the oxidiser. Each engine was rated at thrust. In \"Bluebird Mach 1.1\" application, the combined thrust would be equivalent of 36,000\u00a0bhp (27,000\u00a0kW; 36,000 PS) at .\nFinal record attempt.\nTo increase publicity for his rocket car venture, in the spring of 1966, Campbell decided to try once more for a water speed record. This time the target was . \"Bluebird K7\" was fitted with a lighter and more powerful Bristol Orpheus engine, taken from a Folland Gnat jet aircraft, which developed of thrust. The modified boat was taken back to Coniston in the first week of November 1966. The trials did not go well. The weather was appalling, and \"K7\" suffered an engine failure when her air intakes collapsed and debris was drawn into the engine. By the middle of December, some high-speed runs were made, in excess of but still well below Campbell's existing record. Problems with \"Bluebird\"s fuel system meant that the engine could not reach full speed, and so would not develop maximum power. Eventually, by the end of December, after further modifications to her fuel system, and the replacement of a fuel pump, the fuel starvation problem was fixed, and Campbell awaited better weather to mount an attempt.\nDeath.\nOn 4 January 1967, weather conditions were finally suitable for an attempt. Campbell commenced the first run of his last record attempt at just after 8:45\u00a0am. \"Bluebird\" moved slowly out towards the middle of the lake, where she paused briefly as Campbell lined her up. With a deafening blast of power, Campbell now applied full throttle and \"Bluebird\" began to surge forward. Clouds of spray issued from the jet-pipe, water poured over the rear spar and after a few hundred yards, at , \"Bluebird\" unstuck from the surface and rocketed off towards the southern end of the lake, producing her characteristic comet's tail of spray. She entered the measured kilometre at 8:46\u00a0am. Leo Villa witnessed her passing the first marker buoy at about in perfect steady planing trim, her nose slightly down, still accelerating. 7.525 seconds later, Keith Harrison saw her leave the measured kilometre at a speed of over . The average speed for the first run was . Campbell lifted his foot from the throttle about 3/10 of a second before passing the southern kilometre marker. As \"Bluebird\" left the measured kilometre, Keith Harrison and Eric Shaw in a course boat at the southern end of the measured kilometre both noticed that she was very light around the bows, riding on her front stabilising fins. Her planing trim was no worse than she had exhibited when equipped with the Beryl engine, but it was markedly different from that observed by Leo Villa at the northern end of the kilometre, when she was under full acceleration. Campbell had made his usual commentary throughout the run.\nCampbell's words on his first run were, via radio intercom:\nInstead of refuelling and waiting for the wash of this run to subside, Campbell decided to make the return run immediately. This was not an unprecedented diversion from normal practice, as Campbell had used the advantage presented i.e. no encroachment of water disturbances on the measured kilometre by the quick turn-a-round, in many previous runs. The second run was even faster once severe tramping subsided on the run-up from Peel Island (caused by the water-brake disturbance). Once smooth water was reached some or so from the start of the kilometre, K7 demonstrated cycles of ground effect hovering before accelerating hard at 0.63 g to a peak speed of some 200 metres or so from the southern marker buoy. \"Bluebird\" was now experiencing bouncing episodes of the starboard sponson with increasing ferocity. At the peak speed, the most intense and long-lasting bounce precipitated a severe decelerating episode \u2014 to , -1.86g \u2014 as \"K7\" dropped back onto the water. Engine flame-out then occurred and, shorn of thrust nose-down momentum, K7 experienced a gliding episode in strong ground effect with increasing angle-of-attack, before completely leaving the water at her static stability pitch-up limit of 5.2\u00b0. \"Bluebird\" then executed an almost complete somersault (~ 320\u00b0 and slightly off-axis) before plunging into the water (port sponson marginally in advance of the starboard), approximately 230 metres from the end of the measured kilometre. The boat then cartwheeled across the water before coming to rest. The impact broke \"K7\" forward of the air intakes (where Campbell was sitting) and the main hull sank shortly afterwards.\nMr Whoppit, Campbell's teddy bear mascot, was found among the floating debris and the pilot's helmet was recovered. Royal Navy divers made efforts to find and recover the body but, although the wreck of \"K7\" was found, they called off the search, after two weeks, without locating his body. Campbell's body was finally located in 2001.\nCampbell's last words, during a 31-second transmission, on his final run were, via radio intercom:\nThe cause of the crash has been variously attributed to several possible causes (or a combination of these causes):\nOn 28 January 1967 Campbell was posthumously awarded the Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct \"for courage and determination in attacking the world water speed record.\"\nRecovery of \"Bluebird K7\" and the body of Donald Campbell.\nThe wreckage of Campbell's craft was recovered by the Bluebird Project between October 2000, when the first sections were raised, and May 2001, when Campbell's body was recovered. The largest section comprising approximately two-thirds of the centre hull was raised on 8 March 2001. The project began when diver Bill Smith was inspired to look for the wreck after hearing the Marillion song \"Out of this World\" (from the album \"Afraid of Sunlight\"), which was written about Campbell and \"Bluebird\".\nThe recovered wreck revealed that the water brake had deployed after the accident as a result of stored accumulator pressure; Campbell would not have had time to deploy the relatively slow-moving brake as the boat flipped out of control. The boat still contained fuel in the engine fuel lines, discounting the fuel-starvation theory. The wreckage all evidenced an impact from left to right, wiping the whole front of the boat off in that direction. Campbell's lower harness mounts had failed and were found to be effectively useless. Further dives recovered various parts of \"K7\", which had separated from the main hull when it broke up on impact.\nCampbell's body was finally located just over two months later and recovered from the lake on 28 May 2001, still wearing his blue nylon overalls. On the night before his death, while playing cards he had drawn the queen and the ace of spades. Reflecting upon the fact that Mary, Queen of Scots had drawn the same two cards the night before she was beheaded, he told his mechanics, who were playing cards with him, that he had a fearful premonition that he was going to \"get the chop\". It was not possible to determine the cause of Campbell's death, though a consultant engineer giving evidence to the inquest said that the force of the impact could have caused him to be decapitated. When his remains were found, his skull was not present and is still missing.\nCampbell was buried in Coniston Cemetery on 12 September 2001 after his coffin was carried down the lake, and through the measured kilometre, on a launch, one last time. A funeral service was then held at St Andrew's Church in Coniston, after an earlier, and positive DNA examination had been carried out. The funeral was attended by his widow Tonia, daughter Gina, other members of his family, members of his former team and admirers. The funeral was overshadowed in the media by coverage of the 9/11 attacks in the United States. Campbell's sister, Jean Wales, had been against the recovery of her brother's body out of respect for his stated wish that, in the event of something going wrong, \"Skipper and boat stay together\". Jean Wales did, however, remain in daily telephone contact with project leader Bill Smith during the recovery operation in anticipation of any news of her brother's remains. When Campbell was buried in Coniston Cemetery on 12 September 2001 she did not attend the service. Steve Hogarth, lead singer for Marillion, was present at the funeral and performed the song \"Out of this World\" solo.\nLegacy.\nBetween them, Donald Campbell and his father had set eleven speed records on water and ten on land.\nThe story of Campbell's last attempt at the water speed record on Coniston Water was told in the BBC television film \"Across the Lake\" in 1988, with Anthony Hopkins as Campbell. Nine years earlier, Robert Hardy had played Campbell's father, Sir Malcolm Campbell, in the \"BBC2 Playhouse\" television drama \"Speed King\"; both were written by Roger Milner and produced by Innes Lloyd. In 2003, the BBC showed a documentary reconstruction of Campbell's fateful water-speed record attempt in an episode of \"Days That Shook the World\". It featured a mixture of modern reconstruction and original film footage. All of the original colour clips were taken from a film capturing the event, \"Campbell at Coniston\" by John Lomax, a local amateur filmmaker from Wallasey, England. Lomax's film won awards worldwide in the late 1960s for recording the final weeks of Campbell's life.\nIn 1956, he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews for the seventh episode of the new television show \"This Is Your Life\".\nAn English Heritage blue plaque commemorates Campbell and his father at Canbury School, Kingston Hill, Kingston upon Thames, where they lived.\nIn the village of Coniston, the Ruskin Museum has a display of Donald Campbell memorabilia, and the Bristol Orpheus engine recovered in 2001 is also displayed. The engine's casing is mostly missing, having acted as a sacrificial anode in its time underwater, but the internals are remarkably preserved. Campbell's helmet from the ill-fated run is also on display.\nRestoration.\nOn Thursday 7 December 2006 Gina Campbell, Donald's daughter, formally gifted the recovered wreckage of \"Bluebird K7\" to the Ruskin Museum in Coniston on behalf of the Campbell Family Heritage Trust. In agreement with the Trust and the museum Bill Smith is to organise the restoration of the boat, which is now under way.[9] Now the joint property of the Ruskin Museum and The Bluebird Project, the intention is to rebuild K7 back to running order circa 4 January 1967. Bill Smith has said that this will take an undisclosed number of years to accomplish. Gina Campbell commented: \"I've decided to secure the future of Bluebird for the people of Coniston, the Ruskin Museum and the people of the world\". Museum Director Vicky Slowe spoke of Gina's generosity and then said: \"Bill Smith has assured us he can get Bluebird fully conserved and reconfigured at no cost to the museum. As of 2008, K7 is being fully restored by The Bluebird Project, to a very high standard of working condition in North Shields, Tyne and Wear, using a significant proportion of her original fabric, but with a replacement BS Orpheus engine of the same type albeit incorporating many original components.\"\nAs of May 2009 permission has been given for a one-off set of proving trials of \"Bluebird\" on Coniston Water, where she will be tested to a safe speed for demonstration purposes only. There is no fixed date for completion of \"Bluebird K7\" or the trials. When not running, \"K7\" will be housed in her own purpose built wing at the Ruskin Museum in Coniston, while remaining in the care of The Bluebird Project.\nOn 20 March 2018 the restoration was featured on the BBC's The One Show, where it was announced that \"Bluebird K7\" would return to the water on Loch Fad, on the Isle of Bute in Scotland, in August 2018 for handling trials.\nIn August 2018, initial restoration work on \"Bluebird\" was completed. She was transported to Loch Fad where she was refloated on 4 August 2018. Following initial engine trials on 5 August, \"Bluebird\" completed a series of test runs on the loch, reaching speeds of about . For safety reasons, there are no plans to attempt to reach any higher speeds."}
{"id": "9165", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9165", "title": "Directed set", "text": "In mathematics, a directed set (or a directed preorder or a filtered set) is a nonempty set \"A\" together with a reflexive and transitive binary relation \u2264 (that is, a preorder), with the additional property that every pair of elements has an upper bound. In other words, for any \"a\" and \"b\" in \"A\" there must exist \"c\" in \"A\" with \"a\" \u2264 \"c\" and \"b\" \u2264 \"c\". A directed set's preorder is called a direction.\nThe notion defined above is sometimes called an upward directed set. A downward directed set is defined analogously, meaning that every pair of elements is bounded below. \nSome authors (and this article) assume that a directed set is directed upward, unless otherwise stated. Be aware that other authors call a set directed if and only if it is directed both upward and downward.\nDirected sets are a generalization of nonempty totally ordered sets. That is, all totally ordered sets are directed sets (contrast \"partially\" ordered sets, which need not be directed). Join semilattices (which are partially ordered sets) are directed sets as well, but not conversely. Likewise, lattices are directed sets both upward and downward.\nIn topology, directed sets are used to define nets, which generalize sequences and unite the various notions of limit used in analysis. Directed sets also give rise to direct limits in abstract algebra and (more generally) category theory.\nEquivalent definition.\nIn addition to the definition above, there is an equivalent definition. A directed set is a set \"A\" with a preorder such that every finite subset of \"A\" has an upper bound. In this definition, the existence of an upper bound of the empty subset implies that \"A\" is nonempty.\nExamples.\nExamples of directed sets include:\nContrast with semilattices.\nDirected sets are a more general concept than (join) semilattices: every join semilattice is a directed set, as the join or least upper bound of two elements is the desired \"c\". The converse does not hold however, witness the directed set {1000,0001,1101,1011,1111} ordered bitwise (e.g. 1000 \u2264 1011 holds, but 0001 \u2264 1000 does not, since in the last bit 1 &gt; 0), where {1000,0001} has three upper bounds but no \"least\" upper bound, cf. picture. (Also note that without 1111, the set is not directed.)\nDirected subsets.\nThe order relation in a directed set is not required to be antisymmetric, and therefore directed sets are not always partial orders. However, the term \"directed set\" is also used frequently in the context of posets. In this setting, a subset \"A\" of a partially ordered set (\"P\",\u2264) is called a directed subset if it is a directed set according to the same partial order: in other words, it is not the empty set, and every pair of elements has an upper bound. Here the order relation on the elements of \"A\" is inherited from \"P\"; for this reason, reflexivity and transitivity need not be required explicitly.\nA directed subset of a poset is not required to be downward closed; a subset of a poset is directed if and only if its downward closure is an ideal. While the definition of a directed set is for an \"upward-directed\" set (every pair of elements has an upper bound), it is also possible to define a downward-directed set in which every pair of elements has a common lower bound. A subset of a poset is downward-directed if and only if its upper closure is a filter.\nDirected subsets are used in domain theory, which studies directed-complete partial orders. These are posets in which every upward-directed set is required to have a least upper bound. In this context, directed subsets again provide a generalization of convergent sequences."}
{"id": "9166", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9166", "title": "EncycloPedia", "text": ""}
{"id": "9167", "revid": "1521335", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9167", "title": "EuroCurrency", "text": ""}
{"id": "9172", "revid": "9374339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9172", "title": "EquivalenceRelation", "text": ""}
{"id": "9173", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9173", "title": "EsperantujO", "text": ""}
{"id": "9174", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9174", "title": "EastGermany", "text": ""}
{"id": "9175", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9175", "title": "EsperantoLanguage", "text": ""}
{"id": "9177", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9177", "title": "EcheloN", "text": ""}
{"id": "9181", "revid": "3188090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9181", "title": "EconomicS", "text": ""}
{"id": "9182", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9182", "title": "EdwinAustinAbbey", "text": ""}
{"id": "9183", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9183", "title": "EricHoffer", "text": ""}
{"id": "9185", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9185", "title": "ErnestHemingway", "text": ""}
{"id": "9186", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9186", "title": "EnroN", "text": ""}
{"id": "9187", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9187", "title": "ExistencE", "text": ""}
{"id": "9188", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9188", "title": "EpistemOlogy", "text": ""}
{"id": "9191", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9191", "title": "ErnestHemingway/FromBoytoManHemingwaysFirstWorldWar", "text": ""}
{"id": "9192", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9192", "title": "ErnestHemingway/FromRealitytoFictionAFarewelltoArms", "text": ""}
{"id": "9193", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9193", "title": "ErnestHemingway/TheTimeinBetween", "text": ""}
{"id": "9195", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9195", "title": "ErnestHemingway/ForWhomtheBellTolls", "text": ""}
{"id": "9196", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9196", "title": "ErnestHemingway/FredericHenry", "text": ""}
{"id": "9197", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9197", "title": "ErnestHemingway/RobertJordan", "text": ""}
{"id": "9198", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9198", "title": "ErnestHemingway/YoungandInnocent", "text": ""}
{"id": "9199", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9199", "title": "ErnestHemingway/ThingsTurnSour", "text": ""}
{"id": "9200", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9200", "title": "ErnestHemingway/TheEndlessDarkNothingness", "text": ""}
{"id": "9201", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9201", "title": "ErnestHemingway/SureShotsTheSecondWorldWar", "text": ""}
{"id": "9202", "revid": "15907106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9202", "title": "ErnestHemingway/TheDownwardSpiral", "text": ""}
{"id": "9203", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9203", "title": "ErnestHemingway/ViolenceandRedemption", "text": ""}
{"id": "9204", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9204", "title": "ErnestHemingway/WhyItWentWrong", "text": ""}
{"id": "9205", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9205", "title": "ErnestHemingway/BibliographY", "text": ""}
{"id": "9208", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9208", "title": "EthicalNaturalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "9209", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9209", "title": "Edward Bellamy", "text": "Edward Bellamy (March 26, 1850 \u2013 May 22, 1898) was an American author, journalist, and political activist most famous for his utopian novel, \"Looking Backward\". Bellamy's vision of a harmonious future world inspired the formation of numerous \"Nationalist Clubs\" dedicated to the propagation of Bellamy's political ideas.\nAfter working as a journalist and writing several unremarkable novels, Bellamy published \"Looking Backward\" in 1888. \"Looking Backward\" was one of the most commercially successful books published in the United States in the 19th century, and it especially appealed to a generation of intellectuals alienated from the dark side of Gilded Age. In the early 1890s, Bellamy established a newspaper known as \"The New Nation\" and began to promote united action between the various Nationalist Clubs and the emerging Populist Party. He published \"Equality\", a sequel to \"Looking Backward\", in 1897, and died the following year.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nEdward Bellamy was born in Chicopee, Massachusetts. His father was Rufus King Bellamy (1816\u20131886), a Baptist minister and a descendant of Joseph Bellamy. His mother, Maria Louisa Putnam Bellamy, was a Calvinist. She was the daughter of a Baptist minister named Benjamin Putnam, who was forced to withdraw from the ministry in Salem, Massachusetts, following objections to his becoming a Freemason.\nBellamy attended public school at Chicopee Falls before leaving for Union College of Schenectady, New York, where he studied for just two semesters. Upon leaving school, Bellamy made his way to Europe for a year, spending extensive time in Germany. Bellamy briefly studied law but abandoned that field without ever having practiced as a lawyer, instead entering the world of journalism. In this capacity Bellamy briefly served on the staff of the \"New York Post\" before returning to his native Massachusetts to take a position at the \"Springfield Union.\"\nAt the age of 25, Bellamy developed tuberculosis, the disease that would ultimately kill him. He suffered with its effects throughout his adult life. In an effort to regain his health, Bellamy spent a year in the Hawaiian Islands (1877 to 1878). Returning to the United States, Bellamy decided to abandon the daily grind of journalism in favor of literary work, which put fewer demands upon his time and his health.\nBellamy married Emma Augusta Sanderson in 1882. The couple had two children.\nLiterary career.\nBellamy's early novels, including \"Six to One\" (1878), \"Dr. Heidenhoff's Process\" (1880), and \"Miss Ludington's Sister\" (1885) were unremarkable works, making use of standard psychological plots.\nA turn to utopian science fiction with \"Looking Backward, 2000\u20131887,\" published in January 1888, captured the public imagination and catapulted Bellamy to literary fame. The publisher of the book could scarcely keep up with demand. Within a year the book had sold some 200,000 copies and by the end of the 19th century it had sold more copies than any other book published in America up to that time except for \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" by Harriet Beecher Stowe and \"\" by Lew Wallace. The book gained an extensive readership in Great Britain, as well, with more than 235,000 copies sold there between its first release in 1890 and 1935.\nIn \"Looking Backward\", a non-violent revolution had transformed the American economy and thereby society; private property had been abolished in favor of state ownership of capital and the elimination of social classes and the ills of society that he thought inevitably followed from them. In the new world of the year 2000, there was no longer war, poverty, crime, prostitution, corruption, money, or taxes. Neither did there exist such occupations seen by Bellamy as of dubious worth to society, such as politicians, lawyers, merchants, or soldiers. Instead, Bellamy's utopian society of the future was based upon the voluntary employment of all citizens between the ages of 21 and 45, after which time all would retire. Work was simple, aided by machine production, working hours short and vacation time long. The new economic basis of society effectively remade human nature itself in Bellamy's idyllic vision, with greed, maliciousness, untruthfulness, and insanity all relegated to the past.\nBellamyite movement.\nAlthough Bellamy retrospectively claimed he did not write \"Looking Backward\" as a blueprint for political action, but rather sought to write \"a literary fantasy, a fairy tale of social felicity\", the book inspired legions of inspired readers to establish so-called Nationalist Clubs, beginning in Boston late in 1888. Bellamy's vision of a country relieved of its social ills through abandonment of the principle of competition and establishment of state ownership of industry proved an appealing panacea to a generation of intellectuals alienated from the dark side of Gilded Age America. By 1891 it was reported that no fewer than 162 Nationalist Clubs were in existence.\nBellamy's use of the term \"Nationalism\" rather than \"socialism\" as a descriptor of his governmental vision was calculated, as he did not want to limit either sales of his novel or the potential influence of its political ideas. In an 1888 letter to literary critic William Dean Howells, Bellamy wrote:\nBellamy himself came to actively participate in the political movement which emerged around his book, particularly after 1891 when he founded his own magazine, \"The New Nation,\" and began to promote united action between the various Nationalist Clubs and the emerging People's Party. For the next three and a half years, Bellamy gave his all to politics, publishing his magazine, working to influence the platform of the People's Party, and publicizing the Nationalist movement in the popular press. This phase of Bellamy's life came to an end in 1894, when \"The New Nation\" was forced to suspend publication owing to financial difficulties.\nWith the key activists of the Nationalist Clubs largely absorbed into the apparatus of the People's Party (although a Nationalist Party did run three candidates for office in Wisconsin as late as 1896), Bellamy abandoned politics for a return to literature. He set to work on a sequel to \"Looking Backward\" titled \"Equality,\" attempting to deal with the ideal society of the post-revolutionary future in greater detail. In this final work, Bellamy turned his mind's eye to the question of feminism, dealing with the taboo subject of female reproductive rights in a future, post-revolutionary America. Other subjects overlooked in \"Looking Backward,\" such as animal rights and wilderness preservation, were dealt with in a similar context. The book saw print in 1897 and would prove to be Bellamy's final creation.\nSeveral short stories of Bellamy's were published in 1898, and \"The Duke of Stockbridge; a Romance of Shays' Rebellion\" was published in 1900.\nDeath and legacy.\nEdward Bellamy died of tuberculosis in Chicopee Falls, Massachusetts. He was 48 years old at the time of his death.\nHis lifelong home in Chicopee Falls, built by his father, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1971.\nBellamy was the cousin of Francis Bellamy, famous for creation of the Pledge of Allegiance.\nBellamy Road, a residential road in Toronto, is named for the author."}
{"id": "9212", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9212", "title": "ElectricalEngineering", "text": ""}
{"id": "9213", "revid": "37982659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9213", "title": "EuleR", "text": ""}
{"id": "9215", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9215", "title": "EartH", "text": ""}
{"id": "9220", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9220", "title": "EduCation", "text": ""}
{"id": "9221", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9221", "title": "EiffelTower", "text": ""}
{"id": "9222", "revid": "36378339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9222", "title": "E", "text": "E, or e, is the fifth letter and the second vowel letter in the modern English alphabet and the ISO basic Latin alphabet. Its name in English is \"e\" (pronounced ), plural \"ees\". It is the most commonly used letter in many languages, including Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Hungarian, Latin, Latvian, Norwegian, Spanish, and Swedish.\nHistory.\nThe Latin letter 'E' differs little from its source, the Greek letter epsilon, '\u0395'. This in turn comes from the Semitic letter \"h\u00ea\", which has been suggested to have started as a praying or calling human figure (\"hillul\" 'jubilation'), and was most likely based on a similar Egyptian hieroglyph that indicated a different pronunciation. In Semitic, the letter represented (and in foreign words); in Greek, \"h\u00ea\" became the letter epsilon, used to represent . The various forms of the Old Italic script and the Latin alphabet followed this usage.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nAlthough Middle English spelling used to represent long and short , the Great Vowel Shift changed long (as in 'me' or 'bee') to while short (as in 'met' or 'bed') remained a mid vowel. In other cases, the letter is silent, generally at the end of words.\nOther languages.\nIn the orthography of many languages it represents either , , , or some variation (such as a nasalized version) of these sounds, often with diacritics (as: ) to indicate contrasts. Less commonly, as in French, German, or Saanich, represents a mid-central vowel . Digraphs with are common to indicate either diphthongs or monophthongs, such as or for or in English, for in German, and for in French or in German.\nOther systems.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet uses for the close-mid front unrounded vowel or the mid front unrounded vowel.\nMost common letter.\n'E' is the most common (or highest-frequency) letter in the English language alphabet (starting off the typographer's phrase ETAOIN SHRDLU) and several other European languages, which has implications in both cryptography and data compression. In the story \"The Gold-Bug\" by Edgar Allan Poe, a character figures out a random character code by remembering that the most used letter in English is E. This makes it a hard and popular letter to use when writing lipograms. Ernest Vincent Wright's \"Gadsby\" (1939) is considered a \"dreadful\" novel, and supposedly \"at least part of Wright's narrative issues were caused by language limitations imposed by the lack of \"E\".\" Both Georges Perec's novel \"A Void\" (\"La Disparition\") (1969) and its English translation by Gilbert Adair omit 'e' and are considered better works.\nOther representations.\nIn British Sign Language (BSL), the letter 'e' is signed by extending the index finger of the right hand touching the tip of index on the left hand, with all fingers of left hand open."}
{"id": "9223", "revid": "34626170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9223", "title": "Economics", "text": "Economics () is the social science that studies how people interact with value; in particular, the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.\nEconomics focuses on the behaviour and interactions of economic agents and how economies work. Microeconomics analyzes basic elements in the economy, including individual agents and markets, their interactions, and the outcomes of interactions. Individual agents may include, for example, households, firms, buyers, and sellers. Macroeconomics analyzes the economy as a system where production, consumption, saving, and investment interact, and factors affecting it: employment of the resources of labour, capital, and land, currency inflation, economic growth, and public policies that have impact on these elements.\nOther broad distinctions within economics include those between positive economics, describing \"what is\", and normative economics, advocating \"what ought to be\"; between economic theory and applied economics; between rational and behavioural economics; and between mainstream economics and heterodox economics.\nEconomic analysis can be applied throughout society, in real estate, business, finance, health care, engineering\nand government. Economic analysis is sometimes also applied to such diverse subjects as crime, education, the family, law, politics, religion, social institutions, war, science, and the environment.\nThe multiple aspects of economic science.\nThe discipline was renamed in the late 19th century, primarily due to Alfred Marshall, from \"political economy\" to \"economics\" as a shorter term for \"economic science\". At that time, it became more open to rigorous thinking and made increased use of mathematics, which helped support efforts to have it accepted as a science and as a separate discipline outside of political science and other social sciences.\nThere are a variety of modern definitions of economics; some reflect evolving views of the subject or different views among economists. Scottish philosopher Adam Smith (1776) defined what was then called political economy as \"an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations\", in particular as:\nJean-Baptiste Say (1803), distinguishing the subject from its public-policy uses, defines it as the science \"of\" production, distribution, and consumption of wealth. On the satirical side, Thomas Carlyle (1849) coined \"the dismal science\" as an epithet for classical economics, in this context, commonly linked to the pessimistic analysis of Malthus (1798). John Stuart Mill (1844) defines the subject in a social context as:\nAlfred Marshall provides a still widely cited definition in his textbook \"Principles of Economics\" (1890) that extends analysis beyond wealth and from the societal to the microeconomic level:\nLionel Robbins (1932) developed implications of what has been termed \"[p]erhaps the most commonly accepted current definition of the subject\":\nRobbins describes the definition as not \"classificatory\" in \"pick[ing] out certain \"kinds\" of behaviour\" but rather \"analytical\" in \"focus[ing] attention on a particular \"aspect\" of behaviour, the form imposed by the influence of scarcity.\" He affirmed that previous economists have usually centred their studies on the analysis of wealth: how wealth is created (production), distributed, and consumed; and how wealth can grow. But he said that economics can be used to study other things, such as war, that are outside its usual focus. This is because war has as the goal winning it (as a sought after end), generates both cost and benefits; and, resources (human life and other costs) are used to attain the goal. If the war is not winnable or if the expected costs outweigh the benefits, the deciding actors (assuming they are rational) may never go to war (a decision) but rather explore other alternatives. We cannot define economics as the science that studies wealth, war, crime, education, and any other field economic analysis can be applied to; but, as the science that studies a particular common aspect of each of those subjects (they all use scarce resources to attain a sought after end).\nSome subsequent comments criticized the definition as overly broad in failing to limit its subject matter to analysis of markets. From the 1960s, however, such comments abated as the economic theory of maximizing behaviour and rational-choice modelling expanded the domain of the subject to areas previously treated in other fields. There are other criticisms as well, such as in scarcity not accounting for the macroeconomics of high unemployment.\nGary Becker, a contributor to the expansion of economics into new areas, describes the approach he favours as \"combin[ing the] assumptions of maximizing behaviour, stable preferences, and market equilibrium, used relentlessly and unflinchingly.\" One commentary characterizes the remark as making economics an approach rather than a subject matter but with great specificity as to the \"choice process and the type of social interaction that [such] analysis involves.\" The same source reviews a range of definitions included in principles of economics textbooks and concludes that the lack of agreement need not affect the subject-matter that the texts treat. Among economists more generally, it argues that a particular definition presented may reflect the direction toward which the author believes economics is evolving, or should evolve.\nHistory.\nEconomic writings date from earlier Mesopotamian, Greek, Roman, Indian subcontinent, Chinese, Persian, and Arab civilizations. Economic precepts occur throughout the writings of the Boeotian poet Hesiod and several economic historians have described Hesiod himself as the \"first economist\". Other notable writers from Antiquity through to the Renaissance include Aristotle, Xenophon, Chanakya (also known as Kautilya), Qin Shi Huang, Thomas Aquinas, and Ibn Khaldun. Joseph Schumpeter described Aquinas as \"coming nearer than any other group to being the \"founders' of scientific economics\" as to monetary, interest, and value theory within a natural-law perspective.\nTwo groups, who later were called \"mercantilists\" and \"physiocrats\", more directly influenced the subsequent development of the subject. Both groups were associated with the rise of economic nationalism and modern capitalism in Europe. Mercantilism was an economic doctrine that flourished from the 16th to 18th century in a prolific pamphlet literature, whether of merchants or statesmen. It held that a nation's wealth depended on its accumulation of gold and silver. Nations without access to mines could obtain gold and silver from trade only by selling goods abroad and restricting imports other than of gold and silver. The doctrine called for importing cheap raw materials to be used in manufacturing goods, which could be exported, and for state regulation to impose protective tariffs on foreign manufactured goods and prohibit manufacturing in the colonies.\nPhysiocrats, a group of 18th-century French thinkers and writers, developed the idea of the economy as a circular flow of income and output. Physiocrats believed that only agricultural production generated a clear surplus over cost, so that agriculture was the basis of all wealth. Thus, they opposed the mercantilist policy of promoting manufacturing and trade at the expense of agriculture, including import tariffs. Physiocrats advocated replacing administratively costly tax collections with a single tax on income of land owners. In reaction against copious mercantilist trade regulations, the physiocrats advocated a policy of \"laissez-faire\", which called for minimal government intervention in the economy.\nAdam Smith (1723\u20131790) was an early economic theorist. Smith was harshly critical of the mercantilists but described the physiocratic system \"with all its imperfections\" as \"perhaps the purest approximation to the truth that has yet been published\" on the subject.\nClassical political economy.\nThe publication of Adam Smith's \"The Wealth of Nations\" in 1776, has been described as \"the effective birth of economics as a separate discipline.\" The book identified land, labour, and capital as the three factors of production and the major contributors to a nation's wealth, as distinct from the physiocratic idea that only agriculture was productive.\nSmith discusses potential benefits of specialization by division of labour, including increased labour productivity and gains from trade, whether between town and country or across countries. His \"theorem\" that \"the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market\" has been described as the \"core of a theory of the functions of firm and industry\" and a \"fundamental principle of economic organization.\" To Smith has also been ascribed \"the most important substantive proposition in all of economics\" and foundation of resource-allocation theory \u2013 that, under competition, resource owners (of labour, land, and capital) seek their most profitable uses, resulting in an equal rate of return for all uses in equilibrium (adjusted for apparent differences arising from such factors as training and unemployment).\nIn an argument that includes \"one of the most famous passages in all economics,\" Smith represents every individual as trying to employ any capital they might command for their own advantage, not that of the society, and for the sake of profit, which is necessary at some level for employing capital in domestic industry, and positively related to the value of produce. In this:\nThe Rev. Thomas Robert Malthus (1798) used the concept of diminishing returns to explain low living standards. Human population, he argued, tended to increase geometrically, outstripping the production of food, which increased arithmetically. The force of a rapidly growing population against a limited amount of land meant diminishing returns to labour. The result, he claimed, was chronically low wages, which prevented the standard of living for most of the population from rising above the subsistence level. Economist Julian Lincoln Simon has criticized Malthus's conclusions.\nWhile Adam Smith emphasized the production of income, David Ricardo (1817) focused on the distribution of income among landowners, workers, and capitalists. Ricardo saw an inherent conflict between landowners on the one hand and labour and capital on the other. He posited that the growth of population and capital, pressing against a fixed supply of land, pushes up rents and holds down wages and profits. Ricardo was the first to state and prove the principle of comparative advantage, according to which each country should specialize in producing and exporting goods in that it has a lower \"relative\" cost of production, rather relying only on its own production. It has been termed a \"fundamental analytical explanation\" for gains from trade.\nComing at the end of the classical tradition, John Stuart Mill (1848) parted company with the earlier classical economists on the inevitability of the distribution of income produced by the market system. Mill pointed to a distinct difference between the market's two roles: allocation of resources and distribution of income. The market might be efficient in allocating resources but not in distributing income, he wrote, making it necessary for society to intervene.\nValue theory was important in classical theory. Smith wrote that the \"real price of every thing\u00a0... is the toil and trouble of acquiring it\". Smith maintained that, with rent and profit, other costs besides wages also enter the price of a commodity. Other classical economists presented variations on Smith, termed the 'labour theory of value'. Classical economics focused on the tendency of any market economy to settle in a final stationary state made up of a constant stock of physical wealth (capital) and a constant population size.\nMarxism.\nMarxist (later, Marxian) economics descends from classical economics and it derives from the work of Karl Marx. The first volume of Marx's major work, \"Das Kapital\", was published in German in 1867. In it, Marx focused on the labour theory of value and the theory of surplus value which, he believed, explained the exploitation of labour by capital. The labour theory of value held that the value of an exchanged commodity was determined by the labour that went into its production and the theory of surplus value demonstrated how the workers only got paid a proportion of the value their work had created.\nNeoclassical economics.\nAt the dawn as a social science, economics was defined and discussed at length as the study of production, distribution, and consumption of wealth by Jean-Baptiste Say in his \"Treatise on Political Economy or, The Production, Distribution, and Consumption of Wealth\" (1803). These three items are considered by the science only in relation to the increase or diminution of wealth, and not in reference to their processes of execution. Say's definition has prevailed up to our time, saved by substituting the word \"wealth\" for \"goods and services\" meaning that wealth may include non-material objects as well. One hundred and thirty years later, Lionel Robbins noticed that this definition no longer sufficed, because many economists were making theoretical and philosophical inroads in other areas of human activity. In his \"Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science\", he proposed a definition of economics as a study of a particular aspect of human behaviour, the one that falls under the influence of scarcity, which forces people to choose, allocate scarce resources to competing ends, and economize (seeking the greatest welfare while avoiding the wasting of scarce resources). For Robbins, the insufficiency was solved, and his definition allows us to proclaim, with an easy conscience, education economics, safety and security economics, health economics, war economics, and of course, production, distribution and consumption economics as valid subjects of the economic science.\" Citing Robbins: \"Economics is the science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses\". After discussing it for decades, Robbins' definition became widely accepted by mainstream economists, and it has opened way into current textbooks. Although far from unanimous, most mainstream economists would accept some version of Robbins' definition, even though many have raised serious objections to the scope and method of economics, emanating from that definition. Due to the lack of strong consensus, and that production, distribution and consumption of goods and services is the prime area of study of economics, the old definition still stands in many quarters.\nA body of theory later termed \"neoclassical economics\" or \"marginalism\" formed from about 1870 to 1910. The term \"economics\" was popularized by such neoclassical economists as Alfred Marshall as a concise synonym for \"economic science\" and a substitute for the earlier \"political economy\". This corresponded to the influence on the subject of mathematical methods used in the natural sciences.\nNeoclassical economics systematized supply and demand as joint determinants of price and quantity in market equilibrium, affecting both the allocation of output and the distribution of income. It dispensed with the labour theory of value inherited from classical economics in favour of a marginal utility theory of value on the demand side and a more general theory of costs on the supply side. In the 20th century, neoclassical theorists moved away from an earlier notion suggesting that total utility for a society could be measured in favour of ordinal utility, which hypothesizes merely behaviour-based relations across persons.\nIn microeconomics, neoclassical economics represents incentives and costs as playing a pervasive role in shaping decision making. An immediate example of this is the consumer theory of individual demand, which isolates how prices (as costs) and income affect quantity demanded. In macroeconomics it is reflected in an early and lasting neoclassical synthesis with Keynesian macroeconomics.\nNeoclassical economics is occasionally referred as \"orthodox economics\" whether by its critics or sympathizers. Modern mainstream economics builds on neoclassical economics but with many refinements that either supplement or generalize earlier analysis, such as econometrics, game theory, analysis of market failure and imperfect competition, and the neoclassical model of economic growth for analysing long-run variables affecting national income.\nNeoclassical economics studies the behaviour of individuals, households, and organizations (called economic actors, players, or agents), when they manage or use scarce resources, which have alternative uses, to achieve desired ends. Agents are assumed to act rationally, have multiple desirable ends in sight, limited resources to obtain these ends, a set of stable preferences, a definite overall guiding objective, and the capability of making a choice. There exists an economic problem, subject to study by economic science, when a decision (choice) is made by one or more resource-controlling players to attain the best possible outcome under bounded rational conditions. In other words, resource-controlling agents maximize value subject to the constraints imposed by the information the agents have, their cognitive limitations, and the finite amount of time they have to make and execute a decision. Economic science centres on the activities of the economic agents that comprise society. They are the focus of economic analysis.\nAn approach to understanding these processes, through the study of agent behaviour under scarcity, may go as follows:\nThe continuous interplay (exchange or trade) done by economic actors in all markets sets the prices for all goods and services which, in turn, make the rational managing of scarce resources possible. At the same time, the decisions (choices) made by the same actors, while they are pursuing their own interest, determine the level of output (production), consumption, savings, and investment, in an economy, as well as the remuneration (distribution) paid to the owners of labour (in the form of wages), capital (in the form of profits) and land (in the form of rent). Each period, as if they were in a giant feedback system, economic players influence the pricing processes and the economy, and are in turn influenced by them until a steady state (equilibrium) of all variables involved is reached or until an external shock throws the system toward a new equilibrium point. Because of the autonomous actions of rational interacting agents, the economy is a complex adaptive system.\nKeynesian economics.\nKeynesian economics derives from John Maynard Keynes, in particular his book \"The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money\" (1936), which ushered in contemporary macroeconomics as a distinct field. The book focused on determinants of national income in the short run when prices are relatively inflexible. Keynes attempted to explain in broad theoretical detail why high labour-market unemployment might not be self-correcting due to low \"effective demand\" and why even price flexibility and monetary policy might be unavailing. The term \"revolutionary\" has been applied to the book in its impact on economic analysis.\nKeynesian economics has two successors. Post-Keynesian economics also concentrates on macroeconomic rigidities and adjustment processes. Research on micro foundations for their models is represented as based on real-life practices rather than simple optimizing models. It is generally associated with the University of Cambridge and the work of Joan Robinson.\nNew-Keynesian economics is also associated with developments in the Keynesian fashion. Within this group researchers tend to share with other economists the emphasis on models employing micro foundations and optimizing behaviour but with a narrower focus on standard Keynesian themes such as price and wage rigidity. These are usually made to be endogenous features of the models, rather than simply assumed as in older Keynesian-style ones.\nChicago school of economics.\nThe Chicago School of economics is best known for its free market advocacy and monetarist ideas. According to Milton Friedman and monetarists, market economies are inherently stable if the money supply does not greatly expand or contract. Ben Bernanke, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, is among the economists today generally accepting Friedman's analysis of the causes of the Great Depression.\nMilton Friedman effectively took many of the basic principles set forth by Adam Smith and the classical economists and modernized them. One example of this is his article in the 13 September 1970 issue of \"The New York Times Magazine\", in which he claims that the social responsibility of business should be \"to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits\u00a0... (through) open and free competition without deception or fraud.\"\nOther schools and approaches.\nOther well-known schools or trends of thought referring to a particular style of economics practised at and disseminated from well-defined groups of academicians that have become known worldwide, include the Austrian School, the Freiburg School, the School of Lausanne, post-Keynesian economics and the Stockholm school. Contemporary mainstream economics is sometimes separated into the Saltwater approach of those universities along the Eastern and Western coasts of the US, and the Freshwater, or Chicago-school approach.\nWithin macroeconomics there is, in general order of their historical appearance in the literature; classical economics, neoclassical economics, Keynesian economics, the neoclassical synthesis, monetarism, new classical economics, New Keynesian economics and the new neoclassical synthesis. Alternative developments include ecological economics, constitutional economics, institutional economics, evolutionary economics, dependency theory, structuralist economics, world systems theory, econophysics, feminist economics and biophysical economics.\nEconomic systems.\nEconomic systems is the of economics that studies the methods and institutions by which societies determine the ownership, direction, and allocation of economic resources. An \"economic system\" of a society is the unit of analysis.\nAmong contemporary systems at different ends of the organizational spectrum are socialist systems and capitalist systems, in which most production occurs in respectively state-run and private enterprises. In between are mixed economies. A common element is the interaction of economic and political influences, broadly described as political economy. \"Comparative economic systems\" studies the relative performance and behaviour of different economies or systems.\nThe U.S. Export-Import Bank defines a Marxist\u2013Leninist state as having a centrally planned economy. They are now rare; examples can still be seen in Cuba, North Korea and Laos.\nTheory.\nMainstream economic theory relies upon \"a priori\" quantitative economic models, which employ a variety of concepts. Theory typically proceeds with an assumption of \"ceteris paribus\", which means holding constant explanatory variables other than the one under consideration. When creating theories, the objective is to find ones which are at least as simple in information requirements, more precise in predictions, and more fruitful in generating additional research than prior theories. While neoclassical economic theory constitutes both the dominant or orthodox theoretical as well as methodological framework, economic theory can also take the form of other schools of thought such as in heterodox economic theories.\nIn microeconomics, principal concepts include supply and demand, marginalism, rational choice theory, opportunity cost, budget constraints, utility, and the theory of the firm. Early macroeconomic models focused on modelling the relationships between aggregate variables, but as the relationships appeared to change over time macroeconomists, including new Keynesians, reformulated their models in microfoundations.\nThe aforementioned microeconomic concepts play a major part in macroeconomic models\u00a0\u2013 for instance, in monetary theory, the quantity theory of money predicts that increases in the growth rate of the money supply increase inflation, and inflation is assumed to be influenced by rational expectations. In development economics, slower growth in developed nations has been sometimes predicted because of the declining marginal returns of investment and capital, and this has been observed in the Four Asian Tigers. Sometimes an economic hypothesis is only \"qualitative\", not \"quantitative\".\nExpositions of economic reasoning often use two-dimensional graphs to illustrate theoretical relationships. At a higher level of generality, Paul Samuelson's treatise \"Foundations of Economic Analysis\" (1947) used mathematical methods beyond graphs to represent the theory, particularly as to maximizing behavioural relations of agents reaching equilibrium. The book focused on examining the class of statements called \"operationally meaningful theorems\" in economics, which are theorems that can conceivably be refuted by empirical data.\nBranches of economics.\nMicroeconomics.\nMicroeconomics examines how entities, forming a market structure, interact within a market to create a market system. These entities include private and public players with various classifications, typically operating under scarcity of tradable units and light government regulation. The item traded may be a tangible product such as apples or a service such as repair services, legal counsel, or entertainment.\nIn theory, in a free market the aggregates (sum of) of \"quantity demanded\" by buyers and \"quantity supplied\" by sellers may reach economic equilibrium over time in reaction to price changes; in practice, various issues may prevent equilibrium, and any equilibrium reached may not necessarily be morally equitable. For example, if the supply of healthcare services is limited by external factors, the equilibrium price may be unaffordable for many who desire it but cannot pay for it.\nVarious market structures exist. In perfectly competitive markets, no participants are large enough to have the market power to set the price of a homogeneous product. In other words, every participant is a \"price taker\" as no participant influences the price of a product. In the real world, markets often experience imperfect competition.\nForms include monopoly (in which there is only one seller of a good), duopoly (in which there are only two sellers of a good), oligopoly (in which there are few sellers of a good), monopolistic competition (in which there are many sellers producing highly differentiated goods), monopsony (in which there is only one buyer of a good), and oligopsony (in which there are few buyers of a good). Unlike perfect competition, imperfect competition invariably means market power is unequally distributed. Firms under imperfect competition have the potential to be \"price makers\", which means that, by holding a disproportionately high share of market power, they can influence the prices of their products.\nMicroeconomics studies individual markets by simplifying the economic system by assuming that activity in the market being analysed does not affect other markets. This method of analysis is known as partial-equilibrium analysis (supply and demand). This method aggregates (the sum of all activity) in only one market. General-equilibrium theory studies various markets and their behaviour. It aggregates (the sum of all activity) across \"all\" markets. This method studies both changes in markets and their interactions leading towards equilibrium.\nProduction, cost, and efficiency.\nIn microeconomics, production is the conversion of inputs into outputs. It is an economic process that uses inputs to create a commodity or a service for exchange or direct use. Production is a flow and thus a rate of output per period of time. Distinctions include such production alternatives as for consumption (food, haircuts, etc.) vs. investment goods (new tractors, buildings, roads, etc.), public goods (national defence, smallpox vaccinations, etc.) or private goods (new computers, bananas, etc.), and \"guns\" vs \"butter\".\nOpportunity cost is the economic cost of production: the value of the next best opportunity foregone. Choices must be made between desirable yet mutually exclusive actions. It has been described as expressing \"the basic relationship between scarcity and choice\". For example, if a baker uses a sack of flour to make pretzels one morning, then the baker cannot use either the flour or the morning to make bagels instead. Part of the cost of making pretzels is that neither the flour nor the morning are available any longer, for use in some other way. The opportunity cost of an activity is an element in ensuring that scarce resources are used efficiently, such that the cost is weighed against the value of that activity in deciding on more or less of it. Opportunity costs are not restricted to monetary or financial costs but could be measured by the real cost of output forgone, leisure, or anything else that provides the alternative benefit (utility).\nInputs used in the production process include such primary factors of production as labour services, capital (durable produced goods used in production, such as an existing factory), and land (including natural resources). Other inputs may include intermediate goods used in production of final goods, such as the steel in a new car.\nEconomic efficiency measures how well a system generates desired output with a given set of inputs and available technology. Efficiency is improved if more output is generated without changing inputs, or in other words, the amount of \"waste\" is reduced. A widely accepted general standard is Pareto efficiency, which is reached when no further change can make someone better off without making someone else worse off.\nThe production\u2013possibility frontier (PPF) is an expository figure for representing scarcity, cost, and efficiency. In the simplest case an economy can produce just two goods (say \"guns\" and \"butter\"). The PPF is a table or graph (as at the right) showing the different quantity combinations of the two goods producible with a given technology and total factor inputs, which limit feasible total output. Each point on the curve shows potential total output for the economy, which is the maximum feasible output of one good, given a feasible output quantity of the other good.\nScarcity is represented in the figure by people being willing but unable in the aggregate to consume \"beyond the PPF\" (such as at \"X\") and by the negative slope of the curve. If production of one good \"increases\" along the curve, production of the other good \"decreases\", an inverse relationship. This is because increasing output of one good requires transferring inputs to it from production of the other good, decreasing the latter.\nThe slope of the curve at a point on it gives the trade-off between the two goods. It measures what an additional unit of one good costs in units forgone of the other good, an example of a \"real opportunity cost\". Thus, if one more Gun costs 100 units of butter, the opportunity cost of one Gun is 100 Butter. \"Along the PPF\", scarcity implies that choosing \"more\" of one good in the aggregate entails doing with \"less\" of the other good. Still, in a market economy, movement along the curve may indicate that the choice of the increased output is anticipated to be worth the cost to the agents.\nBy construction, each point on the curve shows \"productive efficiency\" in maximizing output for given total inputs. A point \"inside\" the curve (as at \"A\"), is feasible but represents \"production inefficiency\" (wasteful use of inputs), in that output of \"one or both goods\" could increase by moving in a northeast direction to a point on the curve. Examples cited of such inefficiency include high unemployment during a business-cycle recession or economic organization of a country that discourages full use of resources. Being on the curve might still not fully satisfy allocative efficiency (also called Pareto efficiency) if it does not produce a mix of goods that consumers prefer over other points.\nMuch applied economics in public policy is concerned with determining how the efficiency of an economy can be improved. Recognizing the reality of scarcity and then figuring out how to organize society for the most efficient use of resources has been described as the \"essence of economics\", where the subject \"makes its unique contribution.\"\nSpecialization.\nSpecialization is considered key to economic efficiency based on theoretical and empirical considerations. Different individuals or nations may have different real opportunity costs of production, say from differences in stocks of human capital per worker or capital/labour ratios. According to theory, this may give a comparative advantage in production of goods that make more intensive use of the relatively more abundant, thus \"relatively\" cheaper, input.\nEven if one region has an absolute advantage as to the ratio of its outputs to inputs in every type of output, it may still specialize in the output in which it has a comparative advantage and thereby gain from trading with a region that lacks any absolute advantage but has a comparative advantage in producing something else.\nIt has been observed that a high volume of trade occurs among regions even with access to a similar technology and mix of factor inputs, including high-income countries. This has led to investigation of economies of scale and agglomeration to explain specialization in similar but differentiated product lines, to the overall benefit of respective trading parties or regions.\nThe general theory of specialization applies to trade among individuals, farms, manufacturers, service providers, and economies. Among each of these production systems, there may be a corresponding \"division of labour\" with different work groups specializing, or correspondingly different types of capital equipment and differentiated land uses.\nAn example that combines features above is a country that specializes in the production of high-tech knowledge products, as developed countries do, and trades with developing nations for goods produced in factories where labour is relatively cheap and plentiful, resulting in different in opportunity costs of production. More total output and utility thereby results from specializing in production and trading than if each country produced its own high-tech and low-tech products.\nTheory and observation set out the conditions such that market prices of outputs and productive inputs select an allocation of factor inputs by comparative advantage, so that (relatively) low-cost inputs go to producing low-cost outputs. In the process, aggregate output may increase as a by-product or by design. Such specialization of production creates opportunities for gains from trade whereby resource owners benefit from trade in the sale of one type of output for other, more highly valued goods. A measure of gains from trade is the \"increased income levels\" that trade may facilitate.\nSupply and demand.\nPrices and quantities have been described as the most directly observable attributes of goods produced and exchanged in a market economy. The theory of supply and demand is an organizing principle for explaining how prices coordinate the amounts produced and consumed. In microeconomics, it applies to price and output determination for a market with perfect competition, which includes the condition of no buyers or sellers large enough to have price-setting power.\nFor a given market of a commodity, \"demand\" is the relation of the quantity that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit price of the good. Demand is often represented by a table or a graph showing price and quantity demanded (as in the figure). Demand theory describes individual consumers as rationally choosing the most preferred quantity of each good, given income, prices, tastes, etc. A term for this is \"constrained utility maximization\" (with income and wealth as the constraints on demand). Here, utility refers to the hypothesized relation of each individual consumer for ranking different commodity bundles as more or less preferred.\nThe law of demand states that, in general, price and quantity demanded in a given market are inversely related. That is, the higher the price of a product, the less of it people would be prepared to buy (other things unchanged). As the price of a commodity falls, consumers move toward it from relatively more expensive goods (the substitution effect). In addition, purchasing power from the price decline increases ability to buy (the income effect). Other factors can change demand; for example an increase in income will shift the demand curve for a normal good outward relative to the origin, as in the figure. All determinants are predominantly taken as constant factors of demand and supply.\n\"Supply\" is the relation between the price of a good and the quantity available for sale at that price. It may be represented as a table or graph relating price and quantity supplied. Producers, for example business firms, are hypothesized to be \"profit maximizers\", meaning that they attempt to produce and supply the amount of goods that will bring them the highest profit. Supply is typically represented as a function relating price and quantity, if other factors are unchanged.\nThat is, the higher the price at which the good can be sold, the more of it producers will supply, as in the figure. The higher price makes it profitable to increase production. Just as on the demand side, the position of the supply can shift, say from a change in the price of a productive input or a technical improvement. The \"Law of Supply\" states that, in general, a rise in price leads to an expansion in supply and a fall in price leads to a contraction in supply. Here as well, the determinants of supply, such as price of substitutes, cost of production, technology applied and various factors inputs of production are all taken to be constant for a specific time period of evaluation of supply.\nMarket equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, the intersection of the supply and demand curves in the figure above. At a price below equilibrium, there is a shortage of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This is posited to bid the price up. At a price above equilibrium, there is a surplus of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This pushes the price down. The model of supply and demand predicts that for given supply and demand curves, price and quantity will stabilize at the price that makes quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded. Similarly, demand-and-supply theory predicts a new price-quantity combination from a shift in demand (as to the figure), or in supply.\nFirms.\nPeople frequently do not trade directly on markets. Instead, on the supply side, they may work in and produce through \"firms\". The most obvious kinds of firms are corporations, partnerships and trusts. According to Ronald Coase, people begin to organize their production in firms when the costs of doing business becomes lower than doing it on the market. Firms combine labour and capital, and can achieve far greater economies of scale (when the average cost per unit declines as more units are produced) than individual market trading.\nIn perfectly competitive markets studied in the theory of supply and demand, there are many producers, none of which significantly influence price. Industrial organization generalizes from that special case to study the strategic behaviour of firms that do have significant control of price. It considers the structure of such markets and their interactions. Common market structures studied besides perfect competition include monopolistic competition, various forms of oligopoly, and monopoly.\nManagerial economics applies microeconomic analysis to specific decisions in business firms or other management units. It draws heavily from quantitative methods such as operations research and programming and from statistical methods such as regression analysis in the absence of certainty and perfect knowledge. A unifying theme is the attempt to optimize business decisions, including unit-cost minimization and profit maximization, given the firm's objectives and constraints imposed by technology and market conditions.\nUncertainty and game theory.\nUncertainty in economics is an unknown prospect of gain or loss, whether quantifiable as risk or not. Without it, household behaviour would be unaffected by uncertain employment and income prospects, financial and capital markets would reduce to exchange of a single instrument in each market period, and there would be no communications industry. Given its different forms, there are various ways of representing uncertainty and modelling economic agents' responses to it.\nGame theory is a branch of applied mathematics that considers strategic interactions between agents, one kind of uncertainty. It provides a mathematical foundation of industrial organization, discussed above, to model different types of firm behaviour, for example in a solipsistic industry (few sellers), but equally applicable to wage negotiations, bargaining, contract design, and any situation where individual agents are few enough to have perceptible effects on each other. In behavioural economics, it has been used to model the strategies agents choose when interacting with others whose interests are at least partially adverse to their own.\nIn this, it generalizes maximization approaches developed to analyse market actors such as in the supply and demand model and allows for incomplete information of actors. The field dates from the 1944 classic \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\" by John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. It has significant applications seemingly outside of economics in such diverse subjects as formulation of nuclear strategies, ethics, political science, and evolutionary biology.\nRisk aversion may stimulate activity that in well-functioning markets smooths out risk and communicates information about risk, as in markets for insurance, commodity futures contracts, and financial instruments. Financial economics or simply finance describes the allocation of financial resources. It also analyses the pricing of financial instruments, the financial structure of companies, the efficiency and fragility of financial markets, financial crises, and related government policy or regulation.\nSome market organizations may give rise to inefficiencies associated with uncertainty. Based on George Akerlof's \"Market for Lemons\" article, the paradigm example is of a dodgy second-hand car market. Customers without knowledge of whether a car is a \"lemon\" depress its price below what a quality second-hand car would be. Information asymmetry arises here, if the seller has more relevant information than the buyer but no incentive to disclose it. Related problems in insurance are adverse selection, such that those at most risk are most likely to insure (say reckless drivers), and moral hazard, such that insurance results in riskier behaviour (say more reckless driving).\nBoth problems may raise insurance costs and reduce efficiency by driving otherwise willing transactors from the market (\"incomplete markets\"). Moreover, attempting to reduce one problem, say adverse selection by mandating insurance, may add to another, say moral hazard. Information economics, which studies such problems, has relevance in subjects such as insurance, contract law, mechanism design, monetary economics, and health care. Applied subjects include market and legal remedies to spread or reduce risk, such as warranties, government-mandated partial insurance, restructuring or bankruptcy law, inspection, and regulation for quality and information disclosure.\nMarket failure.\nThe term \"market failure\" encompasses several problems which may undermine standard economic assumptions. Although economists categorize market failures differently, the following categories emerge in the main texts.\nInformation asymmetries and incomplete markets may result in economic inefficiency but also a possibility of improving efficiency through market, legal, and regulatory remedies, as discussed above.\nNatural monopoly, or the overlapping concepts of \"practical\" and \"technical\" monopoly, is an extreme case of \"failure of competition\" as a restraint on producers. Extreme economies of scale are one possible cause.\nPublic goods are goods which are under-supplied in a typical market. The defining features are that people can consume public goods without having to pay for them and that more than one person can consume the good at the same time.\nExternalities occur where there are significant social costs or benefits from production or consumption that are not reflected in market prices. For example, air pollution may generate a negative externality, and education may generate a positive externality (less crime, etc.). Governments often tax and otherwise restrict the sale of goods that have negative externalities and subsidize or otherwise promote the purchase of goods that have positive externalities in an effort to correct the price distortions caused by these externalities. Elementary demand-and-supply theory predicts equilibrium but not the speed of adjustment for changes of equilibrium due to a shift in demand or supply.\nIn many areas, some form of price stickiness is postulated to account for quantities, rather than prices, adjusting in the short run to changes on the demand side or the supply side. This includes standard analysis of the business cycle in macroeconomics. Analysis often revolves around causes of such price stickiness and their implications for reaching a hypothesized long-run equilibrium. Examples of such price stickiness in particular markets include wage rates in labour markets and posted prices in markets deviating from perfect competition.\nSome specialized fields of economics deal in market failure more than others. The economics of the public sector is one example. Much environmental economics concerns externalities or \"public bads\".\nPolicy options include regulations that reflect cost-benefit analysis or market solutions that change incentives, such as emission fees or redefinition of property rights.\nPublic sector.\nPublic finance is the field of economics that deals with budgeting the revenues and expenditures of a public sector entity, usually government. The subject addresses such matters as tax incidence (who really pays a particular tax), cost-benefit analysis of government programmes, effects on economic efficiency and income distribution of different kinds of spending and taxes, and fiscal politics. The latter, an aspect of public choice theory, models public-sector behaviour analogously to microeconomics, involving interactions of self-interested voters, politicians, and bureaucrats.\nMuch of economics is positive, seeking to describe and predict economic phenomena. Normative economics seeks to identify what economies \"ought\" to be like.\nWelfare economics is a normative branch of economics that uses microeconomic techniques to simultaneously determine the allocative efficiency within an economy and the income distribution associated with it. It attempts to measure social welfare by examining the economic activities of the individuals that comprise society.\nMacroeconomics.\nMacroeconomics examines the economy as a whole to explain broad aggregates and their interactions \"top down\", that is, using a simplified form of general-equilibrium theory. Such aggregates include national income and output, the unemployment rate, and price inflation and subaggregates like total consumption and investment spending and their components. It also studies effects of monetary policy and fiscal policy.\nSince at least the 1960s, macroeconomics has been characterized by further integration as to micro-based modelling of sectors, including rationality of players, efficient use of market information, and imperfect competition. This has addressed a long-standing concern about inconsistent developments of the same subject.\nMacroeconomic analysis also considers factors affecting the long-term level and growth of national income. Such factors include capital accumulation, technological change and labour force growth.\nGrowth.\n\"Growth economics\" studies factors that explain economic growth\u00a0\u2013 the increase in output \"per capita\" of a country over a long period of time. The same factors are used to explain differences in the \"level\" of output \"per capita\" \"between\" countries, in particular why some countries grow faster than others, and whether countries converge at the same rates of growth.\nMuch-studied factors include the rate of investment, population growth, and technological change. These are represented in theoretical and empirical forms (as in the neoclassical and endogenous growth models) and in growth accounting.\nBusiness cycle.\nThe economics of a depression were the spur for the creation of \"macroeconomics\" as a separate discipline. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, John Maynard Keynes authored a book entitled \"The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money\" outlining the key theories of Keynesian economics. Keynes contended that aggregate demand for goods might be insufficient during economic downturns, leading to unnecessarily high unemployment and losses of potential output.\nHe therefore advocated active policy responses by the public sector, including monetary policy actions by the central bank and fiscal policy actions by the government to stabilize output over the business cycle.\nThus, a central conclusion of Keynesian economics is that, in some situations, no strong automatic mechanism moves output and employment towards full employment levels. John Hicks' IS/LM model has been the most influential interpretation of \"The General Theory\".\nOver the years, understanding of the business cycle has branched into various research programmes, mostly related to or distinct from Keynesianism. The neoclassical synthesis refers to the reconciliation of Keynesian economics with neoclassical economics, stating that Keynesianism is correct in the short run but qualified by neoclassical-like considerations in the intermediate and long run.\nNew classical macroeconomics, as distinct from the Keynesian view of the business cycle, posits market clearing with imperfect information. It includes Friedman's permanent income hypothesis on consumption and \"rational expectations\" theory, led by Robert Lucas, and real business cycle theory.\nIn contrast, the new Keynesian approach retains the rational expectations assumption, however it assumes a variety of market failures. In particular, New Keynesians assume prices and wages are \"sticky\", which means they do not adjust instantaneously to changes in economic conditions.\nThus, the new classicals assume that prices and wages adjust automatically to attain full employment, whereas the new Keynesians see full employment as being automatically achieved only in the long run, and hence government and central-bank policies are needed because the \"long run\" may be very long.\nUnemployment.\nThe amount of unemployment in an economy is measured by the unemployment rate, the percentage of workers without jobs in the labour force. The labour force only includes workers actively looking for jobs. People who are retired, pursuing education, or discouraged from seeking work by a lack of job prospects are excluded from the labour force. Unemployment can be generally broken down into several types that are related to different causes.\nClassical models of unemployment occurs when wages are too high for employers to be willing to hire more workers. Consistent with classical unemployment, frictional unemployment occurs when appropriate job vacancies exist for a worker, but the length of time needed to search for and find the job leads to a period of unemployment.\nStructural unemployment covers a variety of possible causes of unemployment including a mismatch between workers' skills and the skills required for open jobs. Large amounts of structural unemployment can occur when an economy is transitioning industries and workers find their previous set of skills are no longer in demand. Structural unemployment is similar to frictional unemployment since both reflect the problem of matching workers with job vacancies, but structural unemployment covers the time needed to acquire new skills not just the short term search process.\nWhile some types of unemployment may occur regardless of the condition of the economy, cyclical unemployment occurs when growth stagnates. Okun's law represents the empirical relationship between unemployment and economic growth. The original version of Okun's law states that a 3% increase in output would lead to a 1% decrease in unemployment.\nInflation and monetary policy.\nMoney is a \"means of final payment\" for goods in most price system economies, and is the unit of account in which prices are typically stated. Money has general acceptability, relative consistency in value, divisibility, durability, portability, elasticity in supply, and longevity with mass public confidence. It includes currency held by the nonbank public and checkable deposits. It has been described as a social convention, like language, useful to one largely because it is useful to others. In the words of Francis Amasa Walker, a well-known 19th-century economist, \"Money is what money does\" (\"Money is \"that\" money does\" in the original).\nAs a medium of exchange, money facilitates trade. It is essentially a measure of value and more importantly, a store of value being a basis for credit creation. Its economic function can be contrasted with barter (non-monetary exchange). Given a diverse array of produced goods and specialized producers, barter may entail a hard-to-locate double coincidence of wants as to what is exchanged, say apples and a book. Money can reduce the transaction cost of exchange because of its ready acceptability. Then it is less costly for the seller to accept money in exchange, rather than what the buyer produces.\nAt the level of an economy, theory and evidence are consistent with a positive relationship running from the total money supply to the nominal value of total output and to the general price level. For this reason, management of the money supply is a key aspect of monetary policy.\nFiscal policy.\nGovernments implement fiscal policy to influence macroeconomic conditions by adjusting spending and taxation policies to alter aggregate demand. When aggregate demand falls below the potential output of the economy, there is an output gap where some productive capacity is left unemployed. Governments increase spending and cut taxes to boost aggregate demand. Resources that have been idled can be used by the government.\nFor example, unemployed home builders can be hired to expand highways. Tax cuts allow consumers to increase their spending, which boosts aggregate demand. Both tax cuts and spending have multiplier effects where the initial increase in demand from the policy percolates through the economy and generates additional economic activity.\nThe effects of fiscal policy can be limited by crowding out. When there is no output gap, the economy is producing at full capacity and there are no excess productive resources. If the government increases spending in this situation, the government uses resources that otherwise would have been used by the private sector, so there is no increase in overall output. Some economists think that crowding out is always an issue while others do not think it is a major issue when output is depressed.\nSceptics of fiscal policy also make the argument of Ricardian equivalence. They argue that an increase in debt will have to be paid for with future tax increases, which will cause people to reduce their consumption and save money to pay for the future tax increase. Under Ricardian equivalence, any boost in demand from tax cuts will be offset by the increased saving intended to pay for future higher taxes.\nInternational economics.\nInternational trade studies determinants of goods-and-services flows across international boundaries. It also concerns the size and distribution of gains from trade. Policy applications include estimating the effects of changing tariff rates and trade quotas. International finance is a macroeconomic field which examines the flow of capital across international borders, and the effects of these movements on exchange rates. Increased trade in goods, services and capital between countries is a major effect of contemporary globalization.\nDevelopment economics.\nDevelopment economics examines economic aspects of the economic development process in relatively low-income countries focusing on structural change, poverty, and economic growth. Approaches in development economics frequently incorporate social and political factors.\nLabor economics.\nLabor economics seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for wage labor. Labor markets function through the interaction of workers and employers. Labor economics looks at the suppliers of labor services (workers), the demands of labor services (employers), and attempts to understand the resulting pattern of wages, employment, and income. In economics, labor is a measure of the work done by human beings. It is conventionally contrasted with such other factors of production as land and capital. There are theories which have developed a concept called human capital (referring to the skills that workers possess, not necessarily their actual work), although there are also counter posing macro-economic system theories that think human capital is a contradiction in terms.\nWelfare economics.\nWelfare economics uses microeconomics techniques to evaluate well-being from allocation of productive factors as to desirability and economic efficiency within an economy, often relative to competitive general equilibrium. It analyzes \"social welfare\", however measured, in terms of economic activities of the individuals that compose the theoretical society considered. Accordingly, individuals, with associated economic activities, are the basic units for aggregating to social welfare, whether of a group, a community, or a society, and there is no \"social welfare\" apart from the \"welfare\" associated with its individual units.\nAgreements.\nAccording to various random and anonymous surveys of members of the American Economic Association, economists have agreement about the following propositions by percentage:\nCriticisms.\nGeneral criticisms.\n\"The dismal science\" is a derogatory alternative name for economics devised by the Victorian historian Thomas Carlyle in the 19th century. It is often stated that Carlyle gave economics the nickname \"the dismal science\" as a response to the late 18th century writings of The Reverend Thomas Robert Malthus, who grimly predicted that starvation would result, as projected population growth exceeded the rate of increase in the food supply. However, the actual phrase was coined by Carlyle in the context of a debate with John Stuart Mill on slavery, in which Carlyle argued for slavery, while Mill opposed it.\nIn \"The Wealth of Nations\", Adam Smith addressed many issues that are currently also the subject of debate and dispute. Smith repeatedly attacks groups of politically aligned individuals who attempt to use their collective influence to manipulate a government into doing their bidding. In Smith's day, these were referred to as factions, but are now more commonly called special interests, a term which can comprise international bankers, corporate conglomerations, outright oligopolies, monopolies, trade unions and other groups.\nEconomics \"per se\", as a social science, is independent of the political acts of any government or other decision-making organization; however, many policymakers or individuals holding highly ranked positions that can influence other people's lives are known for arbitrarily using a plethora of economic concepts and rhetoric as vehicles to legitimize agendas and value systems, and do not limit their remarks to matters relevant to their responsibilities. The close relation of economic theory and practice with politics is a focus of contention that may shade or distort the most unpretentious original tenets of economics, and is often confused with specific social agendas and value systems.\nNotwithstanding, economics legitimately has a role in informing government policy. It is, indeed, in some ways an outgrowth of the older field of political economy. Some academic economic journals have increased their efforts to gauge the consensus of economists regarding certain policy issues in hopes of effecting a more informed political environment. Often there exists a low approval rate from professional economists regarding many public policies. Policy issues featured in one survey of American Economic Association economists include trade restrictions, social insurance for those put out of work by international competition, genetically modified foods, curbside recycling, health insurance (several questions), medical malpractice, barriers to entering the medical profession, organ donations, unhealthy foods, mortgage deductions, taxing internet sales, Wal-Mart, casinos, ethanol subsidies, and inflation targeting.\nIssues like central bank independence, central bank policies and rhetoric in central bank governors discourse or the premises of macroeconomic policies (monetary and fiscal policy) of the state, are focus of contention and criticism.\nDeirdre McCloskey has argued that many empirical economic studies are poorly reported, and she and Stephen Ziliak argue that although her critique has been well-received, practice has not improved. This latter contention is controversial.\nCriticisms of assumptions.\nEconomics has historically been subject to criticism that it relies on unrealistic, unverifiable, or highly simplified assumptions, in some cases because these assumptions simplify the proofs of desired conclusions. Examples of such assumptions include perfect information, profit maximization and rational choices, axioms of neoclassical economics. Such criticisms often conflate neoclassical economics with all of contemporary economics. The field of information economics includes both mathematical-economical research and also behavioural economics, akin to studies in behavioural psychology, and confounding factors to the neoclassical assumptions are the subject of substantial study in many areas of economics.\nProminent historical mainstream economists such as Keynes and Joskow observed that much of the economics of their time was conceptual rather than quantitative, and difficult to model and formalize quantitatively. In a discussion on oligopoly research, Paul Joskow pointed out in 1975 that in practice, serious students of actual economies tended to use \"informal models\" based upon qualitative factors specific to particular industries. Joskow had a strong feeling that the important work in oligopoly was done through informal observations while formal models were \"trotted out \"ex post\"\". He argued that formal models were largely not important in the empirical work, either, and that the fundamental factor behind the theory of the firm, behaviour, was neglected. Woodford noted in 2009 that this was no longer the case, and that modelling had improved significantly in both theoretical rigour and empiricism, with a strong focus on testable quantitative work.\nIn the 1990s, feminist critiques of neoclassical economic models gained prominence, leading to the formation of feminist economics. Feminist economists call attention to the social construction of economics and claims to highlight the ways in which its models and methods reflect masculine preferences. Primary criticisms focus on alleged failures to account for: the selfish nature of actors (homo economicus); exogenous tastes; the impossibility of utility comparisons; the exclusion of unpaid work; and the exclusion of class and gender considerations.\nRelated subjects.\nEconomics is one social science among several and has fields bordering on other areas, including economic geography, economic history, public choice, energy economics, , family economics and institutional economics.\nLaw and economics, or economic analysis of law, is an approach to legal theory that applies methods of economics to law. It includes the use of economic concepts to explain the effects of legal rules, to assess which legal rules are economically efficient, and to predict what the legal rules will be. A seminal article by Ronald Coase published in 1961 suggested that well-defined property rights could overcome the problems of externalities.\nPolitical economy is the interdisciplinary study that combines economics, law, and political science in explaining how political institutions, the political environment, and the economic system (capitalist, socialist, mixed) influence each other. It studies questions such as how monopoly, rent-seeking behaviour, and externalities should impact government policy. Historians have employed \"political economy\" to explore the ways in the past that persons and groups with common economic interests have used politics to effect changes beneficial to their interests.\nEnergy economics is a broad scientific subject area which includes topics related to energy supply and energy demand. Georgescu-Roegen reintroduced the concept of entropy in relation to economics and energy from thermodynamics, as distinguished from what he viewed as the mechanistic foundation of neoclassical economics drawn from Newtonian physics. His work contributed significantly to thermoeconomics and to ecological economics. He also did foundational work which later developed into evolutionary economics.\nThe sociological subfield of economic sociology arose, primarily through the work of \u00c9mile Durkheim, Max Weber and Georg Simmel, as an approach to analysing the effects of economic phenomena in relation to the overarching social paradigm (i.e. modernity). Classic works include Max Weber's \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\" (1905) and Georg Simmel's \"The Philosophy of Money\" (1900). More recently, the works of Mark Granovetter, Peter Hedstrom and Richard Swedberg have been influential in this field.\nPractice.\nContemporary economics uses mathematics. Economists draw on the tools of calculus, linear algebra, statistics, game theory, and computer science. Professional economists are expected to be familiar with these tools, while a minority specialize in econometrics and mathematical methods.\nEmpirical investigation.\nEconomic theories are frequently tested empirically, largely through the use of econometrics using economic data. The controlled experiments common to the physical sciences are difficult and uncommon in economics, and instead broad data is observationally studied; this type of testing is typically regarded as less rigorous than controlled experimentation, and the conclusions typically more tentative. However, the field of experimental economics is growing, and increasing use is being made of natural experiments.\nStatistical methods such as regression analysis are common. Practitioners use such methods to estimate the size, economic significance, and statistical significance (\"signal strength\") of the hypothesized relation(s) and to adjust for noise from other variables. By such means, a hypothesis may gain acceptance, although in a probabilistic, rather than certain, sense. Acceptance is dependent upon the falsifiable hypothesis surviving tests. Use of commonly accepted methods need not produce a final conclusion or even a consensus on a particular question, given different tests, data sets, and prior beliefs.\nCriticisms based on professional standards and non-replicability of results serve as further checks against bias, errors, and over-generalization, although much economic research has been accused of being non-replicable, and prestigious journals have been accused of not facilitating replication through the provision of the code and data. Like theories, uses of test statistics are themselves open to critical analysis, although critical commentary on papers in economics in prestigious journals such as the \"American Economic Review\" has declined precipitously in the past 40 years. This has been attributed to journals' incentives to maximize citations in order to rank higher on the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI).\nIn applied economics, input-output models employing linear programming methods are quite common. Large amounts of data are run through computer programs to analyse the impact of certain policies; IMPLAN is one well-known example.\nExperimental economics has promoted the use of scientifically controlled experiments. This has reduced the long-noted distinction of economics from natural sciences because it allows direct tests of what were previously taken as axioms. In some cases these have found that the axioms are not entirely correct; for example, the ultimatum game has revealed that people reject unequal offers.\nIn behavioural economics, psychologist Daniel Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in economics in 2002 for his and Amos Tversky's empirical discovery of several cognitive biases and heuristics. Similar empirical testing occurs in neuroeconomics. Another example is the assumption of narrowly selfish preferences versus a model that tests for selfish, altruistic, and cooperative preferences. These techniques have led some to argue that economics is a \"genuine science\".\nProfession.\nThe professionalization of economics, reflected in the growth of graduate programmes on the subject, has been described as \"the main change in economics since around 1900\". Most major universities and many colleges have a major, school, or department in which academic degrees are awarded in the subject, whether in the liberal arts, business, or for professional study.\nSee Bachelor of Economics and Master of Economics.\nIn the private sector, professional economists are employed as consultants and in industry, including banking and finance. Economists also work for various government departments and agencies, for example, the national treasury, central bank or bureau of statistics.\nThere are dozens of prizes awarded to economists each year for outstanding intellectual contributions to the field, the most prominent of which is the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, though it is not a Nobel Prize."}
{"id": "9225", "revid": "23914831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9225", "title": "Electronic paper", "text": "Electronic paper, also sometimes electronic ink, e-ink or electrophoretic display, are display devices that mimic the appearance of ordinary ink on paper. Unlike conventional flat panel displays that emit light, electronic paper displays reflect light like paper. This may make them more comfortable to read, and provide a wider viewing angle than most light-emitting displays. The contrast ratio in electronic displays available as of 2008 approaches newspaper, and newly (2008) developed displays are slightly better. An ideal e-paper display can be read in direct sunlight without the image appearing to fade.\nMany electronic paper technologies hold static text and images indefinitely without electricity. Flexible electronic paper uses plastic substrates and plastic electronics for the display backplane. Applications of electronic visual displays include electronic shelf labels and digital signage, time tables at bus stations, electronic billboards, smartphone displays, and e-readers able to display digital versions of books and magazines.\nTechnologies.\nGyricon.\nElectronic paper was first developed in the 1970s by Nick Sheridon at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center. The first electronic paper, called Gyricon, consisted of polyethylene spheres between 75 and 106 micrometers across. Each sphere is a Janus particle composed of negatively charged black plastic on one side and positively charged white plastic on the other (each bead is thus a dipole). The spheres are embedded in a transparent silicone sheet, with each sphere suspended in a bubble of oil so that it can rotate freely. The polarity of the voltage applied to each pair of electrodes then determines whether the white or black side is face-up, thus giving the pixel a white or black appearance.\nAt the FPD 2008 exhibition, Japanese company Soken demonstrated a wall with electronic wall-paper using this technology. In 2007, the Estonian company Visitret Displays was developing this kind of display using polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as the material for the spheres, dramatically improving the video speed and decreasing the control voltage needed.\nElectrophoretic.\nIn the simplest implementation of an electrophoretic display, titanium dioxide (titania) particles approximately one micrometer in diameter are dispersed in a hydrocarbon oil. A dark-colored dye is also added to the oil, along with surfactants and charging agents that cause the particles to take on an electric charge. This mixture is placed between two parallel, conductive plates separated by a gap of 10 to 100 micrometres. When a voltage is applied across the two plates, the particles migrate electrophoretically to the plate that bears the opposite charge from that on the particles. When the particles are located at the front (viewing) side of the display, it appears white, because the light is scattered back to the viewer by the high-index titania particles. When the particles are located at the rear side of the display, it appears dark, because the incident light is absorbed by the colored dye. If the rear electrode is divided into a number of small picture elements (pixels), then an image can be formed by applying the appropriate voltage to each region of the display to create a pattern of reflecting and absorbing regions.\nAn electrophoretic display is also known as an EPD. They are typically addressed using MOSFET-based thin-film transistor (TFT) technology. TFTs are required to form a high-density image in an EPD. A common application for TFT-based EPDs are e-readers. Electrophoretic displays are considered prime examples of the electronic paper category, because of their paper-like appearance and low power consumption. Examples of commercial electrophoretic displays include the high-resolution active matrix displays used in the Amazon Kindle, Barnes &amp; Noble Nook, Sony Reader, Kobo eReader, and iRex iLiad e-readers. These displays are constructed from an electrophoretic imaging film manufactured by E Ink Corporation. A mobile phone that used the technology is the Motorola Fone.\nElectrophoretic Display technology has also been developed by SiPix and Bridgestone/Delta. SiPix is now part of E Ink Corporation. The SiPix design uses a flexible 0.15\u00a0mm Microcup architecture, instead of E Ink's 0.04\u00a0mm diameter microcapsules. Bridgestone Corp.'s Advanced Materials Division cooperated with Delta Optoelectronics Inc. in developing Quick Response Liquid Powder Display technology.\nElectrophoretic displays can be manufactured using the Electronics on Plastic by Laser Release (EPLaR) process developed by Philips Research to enable existing AM-LCD manufacturing plants to create flexible plastic displays.\nMicroencapsulated electrophoretic display.\nAn electrophoretic display forms images by rearranging charged pigment particles with an applied electric field.\nIn the 1990s another type of electronic ink based on a microencapsulated electrophoretic display was conceived and prototyped by a team of undergraduates at MIT as described in their Nature paper. J.D. Albert, Barrett Comiskey, Joseph Jacobson, Jeremy Rubin and Russ Wilcox co-founded E Ink Corporation in 1997 to commercialize the technology. E ink subsequently formed a partnership with Philips Components two years later to develop and market the technology. In 2005, Philips sold the electronic paper business as well as its related patents to Prime View International. \"It has for many years been an ambition of researchers in display media to create a flexible low-cost system that is the electronic analog of paper. In this context, microparticle-based displays have long intrigued researchers. Switchable contrast in such displays is achieved by the electromigration of highly scattering or absorbing microparticles (in the size range 0.1\u20135 \u03bcm), quite distinct from the molecular-scale properties that govern the behavior of the more familiar liquid-crystal displays. Micro-particle-based displays possess intrinsic bistability, exhibit extremely low power d.c. field addressing and have demonstrated high contrast and reflectivity. These features, combined with a near-lambertian viewing characteristic, result in an 'ink on paper' look. But such displays have to date suffered from short lifetimes and difficulty in manufacture. Here we report the synthesis of an electrophoretic ink based on the microencapsulation of an electrophoretic dispersion. The use of a microencapsulated electrophoretic medium solves the lifetime issues and permits the fabrication of a bistable electronic display solely by means of printing. This system may satisfy the practical requirements of electronic paper.\"\nThis used tiny microcapsules filled with electrically charged white particles suspended in a colored oil. In early versions, the underlying circuitry controlled whether the white particles were at the top of the capsule (so it looked white to the viewer) or at the bottom of the capsule (so the viewer saw the color of the oil). This was essentially a reintroduction of the well-known electrophoretic display technology, but microcapsules meant the display could be made on flexible plastic sheets instead of glass.\nOne early version of the electronic paper consists of a sheet of very small transparent capsules, each about 40 micrometers across. Each capsule contains an oily solution containing black dye (the electronic ink), with numerous white titanium dioxide particles suspended within. The particles are slightly negatively charged, and each one is naturally white.\nThe screen holds microcapsules in a layer of liquid polymer, sandwiched between two arrays of electrodes, the upper of which is transparent. The two arrays are aligned to divide the sheet into pixels, and each pixel corresponds to a pair of electrodes situated on either side of the sheet. The sheet is laminated with transparent plastic for protection, resulting in an overall thickness of 80 micrometers, or twice that of ordinary paper.\nThe network of electrodes connects to display circuitry, which turns the electronic ink 'on' and 'off' at specific pixels by applying a voltage to specific electrode pairs. A negative charge to the surface electrode repels the particles to the bottom of local capsules, forcing the black dye to the surface and turning the pixel black. Reversing the voltage has the opposite effect. It forces the particles to the surface, turning the pixel white. A more recent implementation of this concept requires only one layer of electrodes beneath the microcapsules. These are commercially referred to as Active Matrix Electrophoretic Displays (AMEPD).\nElectrowetting.\nElectrowetting display (EWD) is based on controlling the shape of a confined water/oil interface by an applied voltage. With no voltage applied, the (colored) oil forms a flat film between the water and a hydrophobic (water-repellent) insulating coating of an electrode, resulting in a colored pixel. When a voltage is applied between the electrode and the water, the interfacial tension between the water and the coating changes. As a result, the stacked state is no longer stable, causing the water to move the oil aside. This makes a partly transparent pixel, or, if a reflective white surface is under the switchable element, a white pixel. Because of the small pixel size, the user only experiences the average reflection, which provides a high-brightness, high-contrast switchable element.\nDisplays based on electrowetting provide several attractive features. The switching between white and colored reflection is fast enough to display video content. It's a low-power, low-voltage technology, and displays based on the effect can be made flat and thin. The reflectivity and contrast are better than or equal to other reflective display types and approach the visual qualities of paper. In addition, the technology offers a unique path toward high-brightness full-color displays, leading to displays that are four times brighter than reflective LCDs and twice as bright as other emerging technologies. Instead of using red, green, and blue (RGB) filters or alternating segments of the three primary colors, which effectively result in only one-third of the display reflecting light in the desired color, electrowetting allows for a system in which one sub-pixel can switch two different colors independently.\nThis results in the availability of two-thirds of the display area to reflect light in any desired color. This is achieved by building up a pixel with a stack of two independently controllable colored oil films plus a color filter.\nThe colors are cyan, magenta, and yellow, which is a subtractive system, comparable to the principle used in inkjet printing. Compared to LCD, brightness is gained because no polarisers are required.\nElectrofluidic.\nElectrofluidic display is a variation of an electrowetting display. Electrofluidic displays place an aqueous pigment dispersion inside a tiny reservoir. The reservoir comprises &lt;5-10% of the viewable pixel area and therefore the pigment is substantially hidden from view. Voltage is used to electromechanically pull the pigment out of the reservoir and spread it as a film directly behind the viewing substrate. As a result, the display takes on color and brightness similar to that of conventional pigments printed on paper. When voltage is removed liquid surface tension causes the pigment dispersion to rapidly recoil into the reservoir. The technology can potentially provide &gt;85 % white state reflectance for electronic paper.\nThe core technology was invented at the Novel Devices Laboratory at the University of Cincinnati. The technology is currently being commercialized by Gamma Dynamics.\nInterferometric modulator (Mirasol).\nThe technology used in electronic visual displays that can create various colors via interference of reflected light. The color is selected with an electrically switched light modulator comprising a microscopic cavity that is switched on and off using driver integrated circuits similar to those used to address liquid crystal displays (LCD).\nPlasmonic electronic display.\nPlasmonic nanostructures with conductive polymers have also been suggested as one kind of electronic paper. The material has two parts. The first part is a highly reflective metasurface made by metal-insulator-metal films tens of nanometers in thickness including nanoscale holes. The metasurfaces can reflect different colors depending on the thickness of the insulator. The standard RGB color schema can be used as pixels for full-color displays. The second part is a polymer with optical absorption controllable by an electrochemical potential. After growing the polymer on the plasmonic metasurfaces, the reflection of the metasurfaces can be modulated by the applied voltage. This technology presents broad range colors, high polarization-independent reflection (&gt;50 %), strong contrast (&gt;30 %), the fast response time (hundreds of ms), and long-term stability. In addition, it has ultralow power consumption (&lt; 0.5\u00a0mW/cm2) and potential for high resolution (&gt;10000 dpi). Since the ultrathin metasurfaces are flexible and the polymer is soft, the whole system can be bent. Desired future improvements for this technology include bistability, cheaper materials and implementation with TFT arrays.\nOther technologies.\nOther research efforts into e-paper have involved using organic transistors embedded into flexible substrates, including attempts to build them into conventional paper.\nSimple color e-paper consists of a thin colored optical filter added to the monochrome technology described above. The array of pixels is divided into triads, typically consisting of the standard cyan, magenta and yellow, in the same way as CRT monitors (although using subtractive primary colors as opposed to additive primary colors). The display is then controlled like any other electronic color display.\nHistory.\nE Ink Corporation of E Ink Holdings Inc. released the first colored E Ink displays to be used in a marketed product. The Ectaco Jetbook Color was released in 2012 as the first colored electronic ink device, which used E Ink's Triton display technology. E Ink in early 2015 also announced another color electronic ink technology called Prism. This new technology is a color changing film that can be used for e-reader, but Prism is also marketed as a film that can be integrated into architectural design such as \"wall, ceiling panel, or entire room instantly.\" The disadvantage of these current color displays is that they are considerably more expensive than standard E Ink displays. The JetBook Color costs roughly nine times more than other popular e-readers such as the Amazon Kindle. As of January 2015, Prism had not been announced to be used in the plans for any e-reader devices.\nApplications.\nSeveral companies are simultaneously developing electronic paper and ink. While the technologies used by each company provide many of the same features, each has its own distinct technological advantages. All electronic paper technologies face the following general challenges:\nElectronic ink can be applied to flexible or rigid materials. For flexible displays, the base requires a thin, flexible material tough enough to withstand considerable wear, such as extremely thin plastic. The method of how the inks are encapsulated and then applied to the substrate is what distinguishes each company from others. These processes are complex and are carefully guarded industry secrets. Nevertheless, making electronic paper is less complex and costly than LCDs.\nThere are many approaches to electronic paper, with many companies developing technology in this area. Other technologies being applied to electronic paper include modifications of liquid crystal displays, electrochromic displays, and the electronic equivalent of an Etch A Sketch at Kyushu University. Advantages of electronic paper include low power usage (power is only drawn when the display is updated), flexibility and better readability than most displays. Electronic ink can be printed on any surface, including walls, billboards, product labels and T-shirts. The ink's flexibility would also make it possible to develop rollable displays for electronic devices.\nWristwatches.\nIn December 2005, Seiko released the first electronic ink based watch called the Spectrum SVRD001 wristwatch, which has a flexible electrophoretic display and in March 2010 Seiko released a second generation of this famous electronic ink watch with an active matrix display. The Pebble smart watch (2013) uses a low-power memory LCD manufactured by Sharp for its e-paper display.\nIn 2019, Fossil launched a hybrid smartwatch called the Hybrid HR, integrating an always on electronic ink display with physical hands and dial to simulate the look of a traditional analog watch.\nE-book readers.\nIn 2004 Sony released the Libri\u00e9 in Japan, the first e-book reader with an electronic paper E Ink display. In September 2006, Sony released the PRS-500 Sony Reader e-book reader in the USA. On October 2, 2007, Sony announced the PRS-505, an updated version of the Reader. In November 2008, Sony released the PRS-700BC, which incorporated a backlight and a touchscreen.\nIn late 2007, Amazon began producing and marketing the Amazon Kindle, an e-book reader with an e-paper display. In February 2009, Amazon released the Kindle 2 and in May 2009 the larger Kindle DX was announced. In July 2010 the third-generation Kindle was announced, with notable design changes. The fourth generation of Kindle, called Touch, was announced in September 2011 that was the Kindle's first departure from keyboards and page turn buttons in favor of touchscreens. In September 2012, Amazon announced the fifth generation of the Kindle called the Paperwhite, which incorporates a LED frontlight and a higher contrast display.\nIn November 2009, Barnes and Noble launched the Barnes &amp; Noble Nook, running an Android operating system. It differs from other e-readers in having a replaceable battery, and a separate touch-screen color LCD below the main electronic paper reading screen.\nIn 2017, Sony and reMarkable offered e-books tailored for writing with a smart stylus.\nIn 2020, Onyx released the first frontlit 13.3 inch electronic paper Android tablet, the Boox Max Lumi. At the end of the same year, Bigme released the first 10.3 inch color electronic paper Android tablet, the Bigme B1 Pro. This was also the first large electronic paper tablet to support 4g cellular data.\nNewspapers.\nIn February 2006, the Flemish daily \"De Tijd\" distributed an electronic version of the paper to select subscribers in a limited marketing study, using a pre-release version of the iRex iLiad. This was the first recorded application of electronic ink to newspaper publishing.\nThe French daily \"Les \u00c9chos\" announced the official launch of an electronic version of the paper on a subscription basis, in September 2007. Two offers were available, combining a one-year subscription and a reading device. The offer included either a light (176g) reading device (adapted for Les Echos by Ganaxa) or the iRex iLiad. Two different processing platforms were used to deliver readable information of the daily, one based on the newly developed GPP electronic ink platform from \"Ganaxa\", and the other one developed internally by Les Echos.\nDisplays embedded in smart cards.\nFlexible display cards enable financial payment cardholders to generate a one-time password to reduce online banking and transaction fraud. Electronic paper offers a flat and thin alternative to existing key fob tokens for data security. The world's first ISO compliant smart card with an embedded display was developed by Innovative Card Technologies and nCryptone in 2005. The cards were manufactured by Nagra ID.\nStatus displays.\nSome devices, like USB flash drives, have used electronic paper to display status information, such as available storage space. Once the image on the electronic paper has been set, it requires no power to maintain, so the readout can be seen even when the flash drive is not plugged in.\nMobile phones.\nMotorola's low-cost mobile phone, the Motorola F3, uses an alphanumeric black-and-white electrophoretic display.\nThe Samsung Alias 2 mobile phone incorporates electronic ink from E Ink into the keypad, which allows the keypad to change character sets and orientation while in different display modes.\nOn December 12, 2012, Yota Devices announced the first \"YotaPhone\" prototype and was later released in December 2013, a unique double-display smartphone. It has a 4.3-inch, HD LCD on the front and an electronic ink display on the back.\nOn May and June 2020, Hisense released the hisense A5c and A5 pro cc, the first color electronic ink smartphones. With a single color display, with toggable front light running android 9 and Android 10.\nElectronic shelf labels.\nE-paper based electronic shelf labels (ESL) are used to digitally display the prices of goods at retail stores. Electronic-paper-based labels are updated via two-way infrared or radio technology.\nPublic transport timetables.\nE-paper displays at bus or trams stops can be remotely updated. Compared to LED or liquid crystal displays (LCDs), they consume lower energy and the text or graphics stays visible during a power failure. Compared to LCDs, it is well visible also under full sunshine.\nDigital signage.\nBecause of its energy-saving properties, electronic paper has proved a technology suited to digital signage applications.\nComputer monitor.\nElectronic paper is used on computer monitors like the 13.3 inch Dasung Paperlike 3 HD and 25.3 inch Paperlike 253.\nLaptop.\nSome laptops like Lenovo ThinkBook Plus use electronic paper as a secondary screen.\nOther.\nOther proposed applications include clothes, digital photo frames, information boards, and keyboards. Keyboards with dynamically changeable keys are useful for less represented languages, non-standard keyboard layouts such as Dvorak, or for special non-alphabetical applications such as video editing or games.\nThe reMarkable is a writer tablet for reading and taking notes."}
{"id": "9228", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9228", "title": "Earth", "text": "Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life. About 29% of Earth's surface is land consisting of continents and islands. The remaining 71% is covered with water, mostly by oceans but also by lakes, rivers, and other fresh water, which together constitute the hydrosphere. Much of Earth's polar regions are covered in ice. Earth's outer layer is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that migrate across the surface over many millions of years. Earth's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates Earth's magnetic field, and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics.\nAccording to radiometric dating estimation and other evidence, Earth formed over 4.5 billion years ago. Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the oceans and began to affect Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the proliferation of anaerobic and, later, aerobic organisms. Some geological evidence indicates that life may have arisen as early as 4.1\u00a0billion years ago. Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive. In the history of life on Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass extinctions. Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct. Almost 8\u00a0billion humans live on Earth and depend on its biosphere and natural resources for their survival. Humans increasingly impact Earth's surface, hydrology, atmospheric processes and other life.\nEarth's atmosphere consists mostly of nitrogen and oxygen. More solar energy is received by tropical regions than polar regions, and is redistributed by atmospheric and ocean circulation. Greenhouse gases also play an important role in regulating the surface temperature. A region's climate is not only determined by latitude, but also by elevation, and by proximity to moderating oceans, among other factors. Extreme weather, such as tropical cyclones and heat waves, occurs in most areas and has a large impact on life.\nEarth's gravity interacts with other objects in space, especially the Sun and the Moon, which is Earth's only natural satellite. Earth orbits around the Sun in about 365.25 days. Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to its orbital plane, producing seasons on Earth. The gravitational interaction between Earth and the Moon causes tides, stabilizes Earth's orientation on its axis, and gradually slows its rotation. Earth is the densest planet in the Solar System and the largest and most massive of the four rocky planets.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"Earth\" developed, via Middle English, from an Old English noun most often spelled '. It has cognates in every Germanic language, and their ancestral root has been reconstructed as *\"er\u00fe\u014d\". In its earliest attestation, the word \"eor\u00f0e\" was already being used to translate the many senses of Latin ' and Greek \"g\u0113\": the ground, its soil, dry land, the human world, the surface of the world (including the sea), and the globe itself. As with Roman Terra/Tell\u016bs and Greek Gaia, Earth may have been a personified goddess in Germanic paganism: late Norse mythology included J\u00f6r\u00f0 ('Earth'), a giantess often given as the mother of Thor.\nHistorically, \"earth\" has been written in lowercase. From early Middle English, its definite sense as \"the globe\" was expressed as \"the\" earth. By Early Modern English, many nouns were capitalized, and \"the earth\" was also written \"the Earth\", particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies. More recently, the name is sometimes simply given as \"Earth\", by analogy with the names of the other planets, though \"earth\" and forms with \"the\" remain common. House styles now vary: Oxford spelling recognizes the lowercase form as the most common, with the capitalized form an acceptable variant. Another convention capitalizes \"Earth\" when appearing as a name (for example, \"Earth's atmosphere\") but writes it in lowercase when preceded by \"the\" (for example, \"the atmosphere of the earth\"). It almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial expressions such as \"what on earth are you doing?\"\nOccasionally, the name \"Terra\" is used in scientific writing and especially in science fiction to distinguish humanity's inhabited planet from others, while in poetry \"Tellus\" has been used to denote personification of the Earth. The Greek poetic name \"Gaia\" (\"G\u00e6a\") is rare, though the alternative spelling \"Gaia\" has become common due to the Gaia hypothesis, in which case its pronunciation is rather than the more Classical .\nThere are a number of adjectives for the planet Earth. From \"Earth\" itself comes \"earthly\". From the Latin \"Terra\" comes \"terran\" , terrestrial , and (via French) \"terrene\" , and from the Latin \"Tellus\" comes \"tellurian\" and \"telluric\".\nChronology.\nFormation.\nThe oldest material found in the Solar System is dated to Ga (billion years) ago. By the primordial Earth had formed. The bodies in the Solar System formed and evolved with the Sun. In theory, a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disk, and then the planets grow out of that disk with the Sun. A nebula contains gas, ice grains, and dust (including primordial nuclides). According to nebular theory, planetesimals formed by accretion, with the primordial Earth being estimated as likely taking anywhere from 70\u2013100 million years to form.\nEstimates of the age of the Moon range from 4.5 Ga to significantly younger. A leading hypothesis is that it was formed by accretion from material loosed from Earth after a Mars-sized object with about 10% of Earth's mass, named Theia, collided with Earth. It hit Earth with a glancing blow and some of its mass merged with Earth. Between approximately 4.1 and , numerous asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the greater surface environment of the Moon and, by inference, to that of Earth.\nGeological history.\nEarth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing. Water vapor from these sources condensed into the oceans, augmented by water and ice from asteroids, protoplanets, and comets. Sufficient water to fill the oceans may have always been on Earth since the beginning of the planet's formation. In this model, atmospheric greenhouse gases kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity. By , Earth's magnetic field was established, which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.\nAs the molten outer layer of Earth cooled it formed the first solid crust, which is thought to have been mafic in composition. The first continental crust, which was more felsic in composition, formed by the partial melting of this mafic crust. The presence of grains of the mineral zircon of Hadean age in Eoarchean sedimentary rocks suggests that at least some felsic crust existed as early as , only after Earth's formation. There are two main models of how this initial small volume of continental crust evolved to reach its current abundance: (1) a relatively steady growth up to the present day, which is supported by the radiometric dating of continental crust globally and (2) an initial rapid growth in the volume of continental crust during the Archean, forming the bulk of the continental crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary rocks. The two models and the data that support them can be reconciled by large-scale recycling of the continental crust, particularly during the early stages of Earth's history.\nNew continental crust forms as a result of plate tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from Earth's interior. Over the period of hundreds of millions of years, tectonic forces have caused areas of continental crust to group together to form supercontinents that have subsequently broken apart. At approximately , one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart. The continents later recombined to form Pannotia at , then finally Pangaea, which also began to break apart at .\nThe most recent pattern of ice ages began about , and then intensified during the Pleistocene about . High- and middle-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every 21,000, 41,000 and 100,000 years. The Last Glacial Period, colloquially called the \"last ice age\", covered large parts of the continents, up to the middle latitudes, in ice and ended about 11,700 years ago.\nOrigin of life and evolution.\nChemical reactions led to the first self-replicating molecules about four billion years ago. A half billion years later, the last common ancestor of all current life arose. The evolution of photosynthesis allowed the Sun's energy to be harvested directly by life forms. The resultant molecular oxygen () accumulated in the atmosphere and due to interaction with ultraviolet solar radiation, formed a protective ozone layer () in the upper atmosphere. The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of complex cells called eukaryotes. True multicellular organisms formed as cells within colonies became increasingly specialized. Aided by the absorption of harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized Earth's surface. Among the earliest fossil evidence for life is microbial mat fossils found in 3.48\u00a0billion-year-old sandstone in Western Australia, biogenic graphite found in 3.7\u00a0billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks in Western Greenland, and remains of biotic material found in 4.1\u00a0billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia. The earliest direct evidence of life on Earth is contained in 3.45 billion-year-old Australian rocks showing fossils of microorganisms.\nDuring the Neoproterozoic, , much of Earth might have been covered in ice. This hypothesis has been termed \"Snowball Earth\", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity. Following the Cambrian explosion, , there have been at least five major mass extinctions and many minor ones. Apart from the proposed current Holocene extinction event, the most recent was , when an asteroid impact triggered the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but largely spared small animals such as insects, mammals, lizards and birds. Mammalian life has diversified over the past , and several million years ago an African ape gained the ability to stand upright. This facilitated tool use and encouraged communication that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain, which led to the evolution of humans. The development of agriculture, and then civilization, led to humans having an influence on Earth and the nature and quantity of other life forms that continues to this day. Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct.\nFuture.\nBecause carbon dioxide () has a long life time in the atmosphere, moderate human emissions may postpone the next glacial inception by 100,000 years. Earth's expected long-term future is tied to that of the Sun. Over the next , solar luminosity will increase by 10%, and over the next by 40%. Earth's increasing surface temperature will accelerate the inorganic carbon cycle, reducing concentration to levels lethally low for plants ( for C4 photosynthesis) in approximately . The lack of vegetation will result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, making animal life impossible. Due to the increased luminosity, Earth's mean temperature may reach in 1.5 billion years, and all ocean water will evaporate and be lost to space within an estimated 1.6 to 3 billion years. Even if the Sun were stable, a fraction of the water in the modern oceans will descend to the mantle, due to reduced steam venting from mid-ocean ridges.\nThe Sun will evolve to become a red giant in about . Models predict that the Sun will expand to roughly , about 250 times its present radius. Earth's fate is less clear. As a red giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects, Earth will move to an orbit from the Sun when the star reaches its maximum radius.\nPhysical characteristics.\nShape.\nThe shape of Earth is nearly spherical. There is a small flattening at the poles and bulging around the equator due to Earth's rotation. so that a better approximation of Earth's shape is an oblate spheroid, whose equatorial diameter is larger than the pole-to-pole diameter.\nThe point on the surface farthest from Earth's center of mass is the summit of the equatorial Chimborazo volcano in Ecuador (). The average diameter of the reference spheroid is . Local topography deviates from this idealized spheroid, although on a global scale these deviations are small compared to Earth's radius: the maximum deviation of only 0.17% is at the Mariana Trench ( below local sea level), whereas Mount Everest ( above local sea level) represents a deviation of 0.14%.\nIn geodesy, the exact shape that Earth's oceans would adopt in the absence of land and perturbations such as tides and winds is called the geoid. More precisely, the geoid is the surface of gravitational equipotential at mean sea level.\nChemical composition.\nEarth's mass is approximately (5,970 Yg). It is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminum (1.4%), with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements. Due to mass segregation, the core region is estimated to be primarily composed of iron (88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% trace elements.\nThe most common rock constituents of the crust are nearly all oxides: chlorine, sulfur, and fluorine are the important exceptions to this and their total amount in any rock is usually much less than 1%. Over 99% of the crust is composed of 11 oxides, principally silica, alumina, iron oxides, lime, magnesia, potash and soda.\nInternal structure.\nEarth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties. The outer layer is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle. The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovi\u010di\u0107 discontinuity. The thickness of the crust varies from about under the oceans to for the continents. The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, which is divided into independently moving tectonic plates.\nBeneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides. Important changes in crystal structure within the mantle occur at below the surface, spanning a transition zone that separates the upper and lower mantle. Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core. Earth's inner core may be rotating at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.1\u20130.5\u00b0 per year, although both somewhat higher and much lower rates have also been proposed. The radius of the inner core is about one fifth of that of Earth.\nDensity increases with depth, as described in the table on the right.\nHeat.\nThe major heat-producing isotopes within Earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, and thorium-232. At the center, the temperature may be up to , and the pressure could reach . Because much of the heat is provided by radioactive decay, scientists postulate that early in Earth's history, before isotopes with short half-lives were depleted, Earth's heat production was much higher. At approximately , twice the present-day heat would have been produced, increasing the rates of mantle convection and plate tectonics, and allowing the production of uncommon igneous rocks such as komatiites that are rarely formed today.\nThe mean heat loss from Earth is , for a global heat loss of . A portion of the core's thermal energy is transported toward the crust by mantle plumes, a form of convection consisting of upwellings of higher-temperature rock. These plumes can produce hotspots and flood basalts. More of the heat in Earth is lost through plate tectonics, by mantle upwelling associated with mid-ocean ridges. The final major mode of heat loss is through conduction through the lithosphere, the majority of which occurs under the oceans because the crust there is much thinner than that of the continents.\nTectonic plates.\nEarth's mechanically rigid outer layer, the lithosphere, is divided into tectonic plates. These plates are rigid segments that move relative to each other at one of three boundaries types: at convergent boundaries, two plates come together; at divergent boundaries, two plates are pulled apart; and at transform boundaries, two plates slide past one another laterally. Along these plate boundaries, earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation can occur. The tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates.\nAs the tectonic plates migrate, oceanic crust is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries. At the same time, the upwelling of mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges. The combination of these processes recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle. Due to this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than old. The oldest oceanic crust is located in the Western Pacific and is estimated to be old. By comparison, the oldest dated continental crust is , although zircons have been found preserved as clasts within Eoarchean sedimentary rocks that give ages up to , indicating that at least some continental crust existed at that time.\nThe seven major plates are the Pacific, North American, Eurasian, African, Antarctic, Indo-Australian, and South American. Other notable plates include the Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Nazca Plate off the west coast of South America and the Scotia Plate in the southern Atlantic Ocean. The Australian Plate fused with the Indian Plate between . The fastest-moving plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at a rate of and the Pacific Plate moving . At the other extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the South American Plate, progressing at a typical rate of .\nSurface.\nThe total surface area of Earth is about . Of this, 70.8%, or , is below sea level and covered by ocean water. Below the ocean's surface are much of the continental shelf, mountains, volcanoes, oceanic trenches, submarine canyons, oceanic plateaus, abyssal plains, and a globe-spanning mid-ocean ridge system. The remaining 29.2%, or , not covered by water has terrain that varies greatly from place to place and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms. The elevation of the land surface varies from the low point of at the Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of at the top of Mount Everest. The mean height of land above sea level is about .\nThe continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous rocks granite and andesite. Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that is the primary constituent of the ocean floors. Sedimentary rock is formed from the accumulation of sediment that becomes buried and compacted together. Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form about 5% of the crust. The third form of rock material found on Earth is metamorphic rock, which is created from the transformation of pre-existing rock types through high pressures, high temperatures, or both. The most abundant silicate minerals on Earth's surface include quartz, feldspars, amphibole, mica, pyroxene and olivine. Common carbonate minerals include calcite (found in limestone) and dolomite.\nErosion and tectonics, volcanic eruptions, flooding, weathering, glaciation, the growth of coral reefs, and meteorite impacts are among the processes that constantly reshape Earth's surface over geological time.\nThe pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes. The total arable land is 10.9% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland. Close to 40% of Earth's land surface is used for agriculture, or an estimated of cropland and of pastureland.\nGravitational field.\nThe gravity of Earth is the acceleration that is imparted to objects due to the distribution of mass within Earth. Near Earth's surface, gravitational acceleration is approximately . Local differences in topography, geology, and deeper tectonic structure cause local and broad, regional differences in Earth's gravitational field, known as gravity anomalies.\nMagnetic field.\nThe main part of Earth's magnetic field is generated in the core, the site of a dynamo process that converts the kinetic energy of thermally and compositionally driven convection into electrical and magnetic field energy. The field extends outwards from the core, through the mantle, and up to Earth's surface, where it is, approximately, a dipole. The poles of the dipole are located close to Earth's geographic poles. At the equator of the magnetic field, the magnetic-field strength at the surface is , with a magnetic dipole moment of at epoch 2000, decreasing nearly 6% per century. The convection movements in the core are chaotic; the magnetic poles drift and periodically change alignment. This causes secular variation of the main field and field reversals at irregular intervals averaging a few times every million years. The most recent reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.\nMagnetosphere.\nThe extent of Earth's magnetic field in space defines the magnetosphere. Ions and electrons of the solar wind are deflected by the magnetosphere; solar wind pressure compresses the dayside of the magnetosphere, to about 10 Earth radii, and extends the nightside magnetosphere into a long tail. Because the velocity of the solar wind is greater than the speed at which waves propagate through the solar wind, a supersonic bow shock precedes the dayside magnetosphere within the solar wind. Charged particles are contained within the magnetosphere; the plasmasphere is defined by low-energy particles that essentially follow magnetic field lines as Earth rotates. The ring current is defined by medium-energy particles that drift relative to the geomagnetic field, but with paths that are still dominated by the magnetic field, and the Van Allen radiation belts are formed by high-energy particles whose motion is essentially random, but contained in the magnetosphere.\nDuring magnetic storms and substorms, charged particles can be deflected from the outer magnetosphere and especially the magnetotail, directed along field lines into Earth's ionosphere, where atmospheric atoms can be excited and ionized, causing the aurora.\nOrbit and rotation.\nRotation.\nEarth's rotation period relative to the Sun\u2014its mean solar day\u2014is of mean solar time (). Because Earth's solar day is now slightly longer than it was during the 19th century due to tidal deceleration, each day varies between longer than the mean solar day.\nEarth's rotation period relative to the fixed stars, called its \"stellar day\" by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), is of mean solar time (UT1), or Earth's rotation period relative to the precessing or moving mean March equinox (when the Sun is at 90\u00b0 on the equator), is of mean solar time (UT1) . Thus the sidereal day is shorter than the stellar day by about 8.4\u00a0ms.\nApart from meteors within the atmosphere and low-orbiting satellites, the main apparent motion of celestial bodies in Earth's sky is to the west at a rate of 15\u00b0/h = 15'/min. For bodies near the celestial equator, this is equivalent to an apparent diameter of the Sun or the Moon every two minutes; from Earth's surface, the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon are approximately the same.\nOrbit.\nEarth orbits the Sun at an average distance of about every 365.2564 mean solar days, or one sidereal year. This gives an apparent movement of the Sun eastward with respect to the stars at a rate of about 1\u00b0/day, which is one apparent Sun or Moon diameter every 12\u00a0hours. Due to this motion, on average it takes 24\u00a0hours\u2014a solar day\u2014for Earth to complete a full rotation about its axis so that the Sun returns to the meridian. The orbital speed of Earth averages about , which is fast enough to travel a distance equal to Earth's diameter, about , in seven minutes, and the distance to the Moon, , in about 3.5 hours.\nThe Moon and Earth orbit a common barycenter every 27.32\u00a0days relative to the background stars. When combined with the Earth\u2013Moon system's common orbit around the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is 29.53\u00a0days. Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon, and their axial rotations are all counterclockwise. Viewed from a vantage point above the north poles of both the Sun and Earth, Earth orbits in a counterclockwise direction about the Sun. The orbital and axial planes are not precisely aligned: Earth's axis is tilted some 23.44\u00a0degrees from the perpendicular to the Earth\u2013Sun plane (the ecliptic), and the Earth\u2013Moon plane is tilted up to \u00b15.1\u00a0degrees against the Earth\u2013Sun plane. Without this tilt, there would be an eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar eclipses and solar eclipses.\nThe Hill sphere, or the sphere of gravitational influence, of Earth is about in radius. This is the maximum distance at which Earth's gravitational influence is stronger than the more distant Sun and planets. Objects must orbit Earth within this radius, or they can become unbound by the gravitational perturbation of the Sun.\nEarth, along with the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way and orbits about 28,000\u00a0light-years from its center. It is about 20\u00a0light-years above the galactic plane in the Orion Arm.\nAxial tilt and seasons.\nThe axial tilt of Earth is approximately 23.439281\u00b0 with the axis of its orbit plane, always pointing towards the Celestial Poles. Due to Earth's axial tilt, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over the course of the year. This causes the seasonal change in climate, with summer in the Northern Hemisphere occurring when the Tropic of Cancer is facing the Sun, and winter taking place when the Tropic of Capricorn in the Southern Hemisphere faces the Sun. During the summer, the day lasts longer, and the Sun climbs higher in the sky. In winter, the climate becomes cooler and the days shorter. Above the Arctic Circle and below the Antarctic Circle there is no daylight at all for part of the year, causing a polar night, and this night extends for several months at the poles themselves. These same latitudes also experience a midnight sun, where the sun remains visible all day.\nBy astronomical convention, the four seasons can be determined by the solstices\u2014the points in the orbit of maximum axial tilt toward or away from the Sun\u2014and the equinoxes, when Earth's rotational axis is aligned with its orbital axis. In the Northern Hemisphere, winter solstice currently occurs around 21 December; summer solstice is near 21 June, spring equinox is around 20 March and autumnal equinox is about 22 or 23 September. In the Southern Hemisphere, the situation is reversed, with the summer and winter solstices exchanged and the spring and autumnal equinox dates swapped.\nThe angle of Earth's axial tilt is relatively stable over long periods of time. Its axial tilt does undergo nutation; a slight, irregular motion with a main period of 18.6\u00a0years. The orientation (rather than the angle) of Earth's axis also changes over time, precessing around in a complete circle over each 25,800\u00a0year cycle; this precession is the reason for the difference between a sidereal year and a tropical year. Both of these motions are caused by the varying attraction of the Sun and the Moon on Earth's equatorial bulge. The poles also migrate a few meters across Earth's surface. This polar motion has multiple, cyclical components, which collectively are termed quasiperiodic motion. In addition to an annual component to this motion, there is a 14-month cycle called the Chandler wobble. Earth's rotational velocity also varies in a phenomenon known as length-of-day variation.\nIn modern times, Earth's perihelion occurs around 3 January, and its aphelion around 4 July. These dates change over time due to precession and other orbital factors, which follow cyclical patterns known as Milankovitch cycles. The changing Earth\u2013Sun distance causes an increase of about 6.8% in solar energy reaching Earth at perihelion relative to aphelion. Because the Southern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun at about the same time that Earth reaches the closest approach to the Sun, the Southern Hemisphere receives slightly more energy from the Sun than does the northern over the course of a year. This effect is much less significant than the total energy change due to the axial tilt, and most of the excess energy is absorbed by the higher proportion of water in the Southern Hemisphere.\nEarth-Moon system.\nMoon.\nThe Moon is a relatively large, terrestrial, planet-like natural satellite, with a diameter about one-quarter of Earth's. It is the largest moon in the Solar System relative to the size of its planet, although Charon is larger relative to the dwarf planet Pluto. The natural satellites of other planets are also referred to as \"moons\", after Earth's. The most widely accepted theory of the Moon's origin, the giant-impact hypothesis, states that it formed from the collision of a Mars-size protoplanet called Theia with the early Earth. This hypothesis explains (among other things) the Moon's relative lack of iron and volatile elements and the fact that its composition is nearly identical to that of Earth's crust.\nThe gravitational attraction between Earth and the Moon causes tides on Earth. The same effect on the Moon has led to its tidal locking: its rotation period is the same as the time it takes to orbit Earth. As a result, it always presents the same face to the planet. As the Moon orbits Earth, different parts of its face are illuminated by the Sun, leading to the lunar phases. Due to their tidal interaction, the Moon recedes from Earth at the rate of approximately . Over millions of years, these tiny modifications\u2014and the lengthening of Earth's day by about 23\u00a0\u00b5s/yr\u2014add up to significant changes. During the Ediacaran period, for example, (approximately ) there were 400\u00b17 days in a year, with each day lasting 21.9\u00b10.4 hours.\nThe Moon may have dramatically affected the development of life by moderating the planet's climate. Paleontological evidence and computer simulations show that Earth's axial tilt is stabilized by tidal interactions with the Moon. Some theorists think that without this stabilization against the torques applied by the Sun and planets to Earth's equatorial bulge, the rotational axis might be chaotically unstable, exhibiting large changes over millions of years, as is the case for Mars, though this is disputed.\nViewed from Earth, the Moon is just far enough away to have almost the same apparent-sized disk as the Sun. The angular size (or solid angle) of these two bodies match because, although the Sun's diameter is about 400 times as large as the Moon's, it is also 400 times more distant. This allows total and annular solar eclipses to occur on Earth.\nAsteroids and artificial satellites.\nEarth's co-orbital asteroids population consists of quasi-satellites, objects with a horseshoe orbit and trojans. There are at least five quasi-satellites, including 469219 Kamo\u02bboalewa. A trojan asteroid companion, , is librating around the leading Lagrange triangular point, L4, in Earth's orbit around the Sun. The tiny near-Earth asteroid makes close approaches to the Earth\u2013Moon system roughly every twenty years. During these approaches, it can orbit Earth for brief periods of time.\n, there are 2,666 operational, human-made satellites orbiting Earth. There are also inoperative satellites, including Vanguard 1, the oldest satellite currently in orbit, and over 16,000 pieces of tracked space debris. Earth's largest artificial satellite is the International Space Station.\nHydrosphere.\nThe abundance of water on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes the \"Blue Planet\" from other planets in the Solar System. Earth's hydrosphere consists chiefly of the oceans, but technically includes all water surfaces in the world, including inland seas, lakes, rivers, and underground waters down to a depth of . The mass of the oceans is approximately 1.35\u00a0metric tons or about 1/4400 of Earth's total mass. The oceans cover an area of with a mean depth of , resulting in an estimated volume of . If all of Earth's crustal surface were at the same elevation as a smooth sphere, the depth of the resulting world ocean would be . About 97.5% of the water is saline; the remaining 2.5% is fresh water. Most fresh water, about 68.7%, is present as ice in ice caps and glaciers.\nIn Earth's coldest regions, snow survives over the summer and changes into ice. This accumulated snow and ice eventually forms into glaciers, bodies of ice that flow under the influence of their own gravity. Alpine glaciers form in mountainous areas, whereas vast ice sheets form over land in polar regions. The flow of glaciers erodes the surface changing it dramatically, with the formation of U-shaped valleys and other landforms. Sea ice in the Arctic covers an area about as big as the United States, although it is quickly retreating as a consequence of climate change.\nThe average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35\u00a0grams of salt per kilogram of sea water (3.5% salt). Most of this salt was released from volcanic activity or extracted from cool igneous rocks. The oceans are also a reservoir of dissolved atmospheric gases, which are essential for the survival of many aquatic life forms. Sea water has an important influence on the world's climate, with the oceans acting as a large heat reservoir. Shifts in the oceanic temperature distribution can cause significant weather shifts, such as the El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation.\nAtmosphere.\nThe atmospheric pressure at Earth's sea level averages , with a scale height of about . A dry atmosphere is composed of 78.084% nitrogen, 20.946% oxygen, 0.934% argon, and trace amounts of carbon dioxide and other gaseous molecules. Water vapor content varies between 0.01% and 4% but averages about 1%. The height of the troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between at the poles to at the equator, with some variation resulting from weather and seasonal factors.\nEarth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere. Oxygenic photosynthesis evolved , forming the primarily nitrogen\u2013oxygen atmosphere of today. This change enabled the proliferation of aerobic organisms and, indirectly, the formation of the ozone layer due to the subsequent conversion of atmospheric into. The ozone layer blocks ultraviolet solar radiation, permitting life on land. Other atmospheric functions important to life include transporting water vapor, providing useful gases, causing small meteors to burn up before they strike the surface, and moderating temperature. This last phenomenon is known as the greenhouse effect: trace molecules within the atmosphere serve to capture thermal energy emitted from the ground, thereby raising the average temperature. Water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Without this heat-retention effect, the average surface temperature would be , in contrast to the current , and life on Earth probably would not exist in its current form.\nWeather and climate.\nEarth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading into outer space. Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within the first of the surface. This lowest layer is called the troposphere. Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below, causing expansion of the air. This lower-density air then rises and is replaced by cooler, higher-density air. The result is atmospheric circulation that drives the weather and climate through redistribution of thermal energy.\nThe primary atmospheric circulation bands consist of the trade winds in the equatorial region below 30\u00b0 latitude and the westerlies in the mid-latitudes between 30\u00b0 and 60\u00b0. Ocean currents are also important factors in determining climate, particularly the thermohaline circulation that distributes thermal energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.\nThe amount of solar energy reaching Earth's surface decreases with increasing latitude. At higher latitudes, the sunlight reaches the surface at lower angles, and it must pass through thicker columns of the atmosphere. As a result, the mean annual air temperature at sea level decreases by about per degree of latitude from the equator. Earth's surface can be subdivided into specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate. Ranging from the equator to the polar regions, these are the tropical (or equatorial), subtropical, temperate and polar climates.\nFurther factors that affect a location's climates are its proximity to oceans, the oceanic and atmospheric circulation, and topology. Places close to oceans typically have colder summers and warmer winters, due to the fact that oceans can store large amounts of heat. The wind transports the cold or the heat of the ocean to the land. Atmospheric circulation also plays an important role: San Francisco and Washington DC are both coastal cities at about the same latitude. San Francisco's climate is significantly more moderate as the prevailing wind direction is from sea to land. Finally, temperatures decrease with height causing mountainous areas to be colder than low-lying areas.\nWater vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory patterns in the atmosphere. When atmospheric conditions permit an uplift of warm, humid air, this water condenses and falls to the surface as precipitation. Most of the water is then transported to lower elevations by river systems and usually returned to the oceans or deposited into lakes. This water cycle is a vital mechanism for supporting life on land and is a primary factor in the erosion of surface features over geological periods. Precipitation patterns vary widely, ranging from several meters of water per year to less than a millimeter. Atmospheric circulation, topographic features, and temperature differences determine the average precipitation that falls in each region.\nThe commonly used K\u00f6ppen climate classification system has five broad groups (humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which are further divided into more specific subtypes. The K\u00f6ppen system rates regions based on observed temperature and precipitation. Surface air temperature can rise to around in hot deserts, such as Death Valley, and can fall as low as in Antarctica.\nUpper atmosphere.\nAbove the troposphere, the atmosphere is usually divided into the stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere. Each layer has a different lapse rate, defining the rate of change in temperature with height. Beyond these, the exosphere thins out into the magnetosphere, where the geomagnetic fields interact with the solar wind. Within the stratosphere is the ozone layer, a component that partially shields the surface from ultraviolet light and thus is important for life on Earth. The K\u00e1rm\u00e1n line, defined as 100\u00a0km above Earth's surface, is a working definition for the boundary between the atmosphere and outer space.\nThermal energy causes some of the molecules at the outer edge of the atmosphere to increase their velocity to the point where they can escape from Earth's gravity. This causes a slow but steady loss of the atmosphere into space. Because unfixed hydrogen has a low molecular mass, it can achieve escape velocity more readily, and it leaks into outer space at a greater rate than other gases. The leakage of hydrogen into space contributes to the shifting of Earth's atmosphere and surface from an initially reducing state to its current oxidizing one. Photosynthesis provided a source of free oxygen, but the loss of reducing agents such as hydrogen is thought to have been a necessary precondition for the widespread accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere. Hence the ability of hydrogen to escape from the atmosphere may have influenced the nature of life that developed on Earth. In the current, oxygen-rich atmosphere most hydrogen is converted into water before it has an opportunity to escape. Instead, most of the hydrogen loss comes from the destruction of methane in the upper atmosphere.\nLife on Earth.\nA planet's life forms inhabit ecosystems, whose total forms the biosphere. The biosphere is divided into a number of biomes, inhabited by broadly similar plants and animals. On land, biomes are separated primarily by differences in latitude, height above sea level and humidity. Terrestrial biomes lying within the Arctic or Antarctic Circles, at high altitudes or in extremely arid areas are relatively barren of plant and animal life; species diversity reaches a peak in humid lowlands at equatorial latitudes. Estimates of the number of species on Earth today vary; most species have not been described.\nA planet that can sustain life is termed habitable, even if life did not originate there. Earth provides liquid water\u2014an environment where complex organic molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient energy to sustain metabolism. Plants can take up nutrients from the atmosphere, soils and water. These nutrients are constantly recycled between different species. The distance of Earth from the Sun, as well as its orbital eccentricity, rate of rotation, axial tilt, geological history, sustaining atmosphere, and magnetic field all contribute to the current climatic conditions at the surface.\nExtreme weather, such as tropical cyclones (including hurricanes and typhoons), occurs over most of Earth's surface and has a large impact on life in those areas. From 1980 to 2000, these events caused an average of 11,800 human deaths per year. Many places are subject to earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, tornadoes, blizzards, floods, droughts, wildfires, and other calamities and disasters. Human impact is felt in many areas due to pollution of the air and water, acid rain, loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, species extinction, soil degradation, soil depletion and erosion. There is a scientific consensus that humans are causing global warming by releasing greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. This is driving changes such as the melting of glaciers and ice sheets, a global rise in average sea levels, and significant shifts in weather.\nHuman geography.\nEarth's human population passed seven billion in the early 2010s, and is projected to peak at around ten billion in the second half of the 21st century. Most of the growth is expected to take place in sub-Saharan Africa. Human population density varies widely around the world, but a majority live in Asia. By 2050, 68% of the world's population is expected to be living in urban, rather than rural, areas. 68% of the land mass of the world is in the Northern Hemisphere. Partly due to the predominance of land mass, 90% of humans live in the Northern Hemisphere.\nIt is estimated that one-eighth of Earth's surface is suitable for humans to live on\u2014three-quarters of Earth's surface is covered by oceans, leaving one-quarter as land. Half of that land area is desert (14%), high mountains (27%), or other unsuitable terrains. States claim the planet's entire land surface, except for parts of Antarctica and a few other unclaimed areas. Earth has never had a planetwide government, but the United Nations is the leading worldwide intergovernmental organization.\nThe first human to orbit Earth was Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961. In total, about 550 people have visited outer space and reached orbit , and, of these, twelve have walked on the Moon. Normally, the only humans in space are those on the International Space Station. The station's crew, made up of six people, is usually replaced every six months. The farthest that humans have traveled from Earth is , achieved during the Apollo 13 mission in 1970.\nNatural resources and land use.\nEarth has resources that have been exploited by humans. Those termed non-renewable resources, such as fossil fuels, only renew over geological timescales. Large deposits of fossil fuels are obtained from Earth's crust, consisting of coal, petroleum, and natural gas. These deposits are used by humans both for energy production and as feedstock for chemical production. Mineral ore bodies have also been formed within the crust through a process of ore genesis, resulting from actions of magmatism, erosion, and plate tectonics. These metals and other elements are extracted by mining, a process which often brings environmental and health damage.\nEarth's biosphere produces many useful biological products for humans, including food, wood, pharmaceuticals, oxygen, and the recycling of organic waste. The land-based ecosystem depends upon topsoil and fresh water, and the oceanic ecosystem depends on dissolved nutrients washed down from the land. In 2019, of Earth's land surface consisted of forest and woodlands, was shrub and grassland, were used for animal feed production and grazing, and were cultivated as croplands. Of the 1214% of ice-free land that is used for croplands, 2 percent point was irrigated in 2015. Humans use building materials to construct shelters.\nCultural and historical viewpoint.\nHuman cultures have developed many views of the planet. The standard astronomical symbol of Earth consists of a cross circumscribed by a circle, , representing the four corners of the world. Earth is sometimes personified as a deity. In many cultures it is a mother goddess that is also the primary fertility deity. Creation myths in many religions involve the creation of Earth by a supernatural deity or deities. The Gaia Principle, developed mid-20th century, compared Earth's environments and life as a single self-regulating organism leading to broad stabilization of the conditions of habitability. Images of Earth taken from space, particularly during the Apollo program, have been credited with altering the way that people viewed the planet that they lived on, emphasising its beauty, uniqueness and apparent fragility.\nScientific investigation has resulted in several culturally transformative shifts in people's view of the planet. Initial belief in a flat Earth was gradually displaced in Ancient Greece by the idea of a spherical Earth, which was attributed to both the philosophers Pythagoras and Parmenides. Earth was generally believed to be the center of the universe until the 16th century, when scientists first conclusively demonstrated that it was a moving object, comparable to the other planets in the Solar System.\nIt was only during the 19th century that geologists realized Earth's age was at least many millions of years. Lord Kelvin used thermodynamics to estimate the age of Earth to be between 20 million and 400\u00a0million years in 1864, sparking a vigorous debate on the subject; it was only when radioactivity and radioactive dating were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that a reliable mechanism for determining Earth's age was established, proving the planet to be billions of years old.\nNotes.\n&lt;/math&gt;, where \"m\" is the mass of Earth, \"a\" is an astronomical unit, and \"M\" is the mass of the Sun. So the radius in AU is about formula_1.&lt;/ref&gt;"}
{"id": "9229", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9229", "title": "EnglishChannel", "text": ""}
{"id": "9230", "revid": "1012380009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9230", "title": "English Channel", "text": "The English Channel, also called simply the Channel, is an arm of the Atlantic Ocean that separates Southern England from northern France and links to the southern part of the North Sea by the Strait of Dover at its northeastern end. It is the busiest shipping area in the world.\nIt is about long and varies in width from at its widest to in the Strait of Dover. It is the smallest of the shallow seas around the continental shelf of Europe, covering an area of some .\nName.\nKnown colloquially to the English as the \"Narrow Sea\", until the 18th century, the English Channel had no fixed name either in English or in French. It was never defined as a political border, and the names were more or less descriptive. It was not considered as the property of a nation. Before the development of the modern nations, British scholars very often referred to it as \"Gaulish\" () and French scholars as \"British\" or \"English\". The name \"English Channel\" has been widely used since the early 18th century, possibly originating from the designation in Dutch sea maps from the 16th century onwards. In modern Dutch, however, it is known as (with no reference to the word \"English\"). Later, it has also been known as the \"British Channel\" or the \"British Sea\". It was called by the 2nd-century geographer Ptolemy. The same name is used on an Italian map of about 1450, which gives the alternative name of \u2014possibly the first recorded use of the \"Channel\" designation. The Anglo-Saxon texts often call it ('South Sea') as opposed to ('North Sea' = Bristol Channel). The common word \"channel\" was first recorded in Middle English in the 13th century and was borrowed from Old French , variant form of 'canal'.\nThe French name has been used since at least the 17th century. The name is usually said to refer to the Channel's sleeve () shape. Folk etymology has derived it from a Celtic word meaning 'channel' that is also the source of the name for the Minch in Scotland, but this name is not attested before the 17th century, and French and British sources of that time are perfectly clear about its etymology. The name in French has been directly adapted in other Romance languages (, , ). The name in Breton () means 'Breton Sea', and its Cornish name () means 'British Sea'.\nNature.\nGeography.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the English Channel as follows:\nThe IHO defines the southwestern limit of the North Sea as \"a line joining the Walde Lighthouse (France, 1\u00b055'E) and Leathercoat Point (England, 51\u00b010'N)\". The Walde Lighthouse is 6\u00a0km east of Calais (), and Leathercoat Point is at the north end of St Margaret's Bay, Kent ().\nThe Strait of Dover (), at the Channel's eastern end, is its narrowest point, while its widest point lies between Lyme Bay and the Gulf of Saint Malo, near its midpoint. It is relatively shallow, with an average depth of about at its widest part, reducing to a depth of about between Dover and Calais. Eastwards from there the adjoining North Sea reduces to about in the Broad Fourteens where it lies over the watershed of the former land bridge between East Anglia and the Low Countries. It reaches a maximum depth of in the submerged valley of Hurd's Deep, west-northwest of Guernsey.\nThe eastern region along the French coast between Cherbourg and the mouth of the Seine river at Le Havre is frequently referred to as the \"Bay of the Seine\" ().\nThere are several major islands in the Channel, the most notable being the Isle of Wight off the English coast, and the Channel Islands, British Crown dependencies off the coast of France. The coastline, particularly on the French shore, is deeply indented; several small islands close to the coastline, including Chausey and Mont Saint-Michel, are within French jurisdiction. The Cotentin Peninsula in France juts out into the Channel, whilst on the English side there is a small parallel strait known as the Solent between the Isle of Wight and the mainland. The Celtic Sea is to the west of the Channel.\nThe Channel acts as a funnel that amplifies the tidal range from less than a metre as observed at sea to more than 6 metres as observed in the Channel Islands, the west coast of the Cotentin Peninsula and the north coast of Brittany. The time difference of about six hours between high water at the eastern and western limits of the Channel is indicative of the tidal range being amplified further by resonance.\nIn the UK Shipping Forecast the Channel is divided into the following areas, from the east:\nGeological origins.\nThe Channel is of geologically recent origin, having been dry land for most of the Pleistocene period. Before the Devensian glaciation (the most recent glacial period, which ended around 10,000 years ago), Britain and Ireland were part of continental Europe, linked by an unbroken Weald\u2013Artois anticline, a ridge that acted as a natural dam holding back a large freshwater pro-glacial lake in the Doggerland region, now submerged under the North Sea. During this period the North Sea and almost all of the British Isles were covered by ice. The lake was fed by meltwater from the Baltic and from the Caledonian and Scandinavian ice sheets that joined to the north, blocking its exit. The sea level was about lower than it is today. Then, between 450,000 and 180,000\u00a0years ago, at least two catastrophic glacial lake outburst floods breached the Weald\u2013Artois anticline.\nThe first flood would have lasted for several months, releasing as much as one million cubic metres of water per second. The flood started with large but localized waterfalls over the ridge, which excavated depressions now known as the \"Fosses Dangeard\". The flow eroded the retaining ridge, causing the rock dam to fail and releasing lake water into the Atlantic. After multiple episodes of changing sea level, during which the \"Fosses Dangeard\" were largely infilled by various layers of sediment, another catastrophic flood carved a large bedrock-floored valley, the Lobourg Channel, some 500 m wide and 25 m deep, from the southern North Sea basin through the centre of the Straits of Dover and into the English Channel. It left streamlined islands, longitudinal erosional grooves, and other features characteristic of catastrophic megaflood events, still present on the sea floor and now revealed by high-resolution sonar. Through the scoured channel passed a river, which drained the combined Rhine and Thames westwards to the Atlantic.\nThe flooding destroyed the ridge that connected Britain to continental Europe, although a land connection across the southern North Sea would have existed intermittently at later times when periods of glaciation resulted in lowering of sea levels. At the end of the last glacial period, rising sea levels finally severed the last land connection.\nEcology.\nAs a busy shipping lane, the Channel experiences environmental problems following accidents involving ships with toxic cargo and oil spills. Indeed, over 40% of the UK incidents threatening pollution occur in or very near the Channel. One of the recent occurrences was the MSC \"Napoli\", which on 18 January 2007 was beached with nearly 1700\u00a0tonnes of dangerous cargo in Lyme Bay, a protected World Heritage Site coastline. The ship had been damaged and was en route to Portland Harbour.\nHuman history.\nThe channel, which delayed human reoccupation of Great Britain for more than 100,000 years, has in historic times been both an easy entry for seafaring people and a key natural defence, halting invading armies while in conjunction with control of the North Sea allowing Britain to blockade the continent. The most significant failed invasion threats came when the Dutch and Belgian ports were held by a major continental power, e.g. from the Spanish Armada in 1588, Napoleon during the Napoleonic Wars, and Nazi Germany during World War II. Successful invasions include the Roman conquest of Britain and the Norman Conquest in 1066, while the concentration of excellent harbours in the Western Channel on Britain's south coast made possible the largest amphibious invasion in history, the Normandy Landings in 1944. Channel naval battles include the Battle of the Downs (1639), Battle of Dover (1652), the Battle of Portland (1653), the Battle of La Hougue (1692) and the engagement between USS \"Kearsarge\" and CSS \"Alabama\" (1864).\nIn more peaceful times the Channel served as a link joining shared cultures and political structures, particularly the huge Angevin Empire from 1135 to 1217. For nearly a thousand years, the Channel also provided a link between the Modern Celtic regions and languages of Cornwall and Brittany. Brittany was founded by Britons who fled Cornwall and Devon after Anglo-Saxon encroachment. In Brittany, there is a region known as \"Cornouaille\" (Cornwall) in French and \"Kernev\" in Breton In ancient times there was also a \"Domnonia\" (Devon) in Brittany as well.\nIn February 1684, ice formed on the sea in a belt wide off the coast of Kent and wide on the French side.\nRoute to Britain.\nRemnants of a mesolithic boatyard have been found on the Isle of Wight. Wheat was traded across the Channel about 8,000 years ago. \"... Sophisticated social networks linked the Neolithic front in southern Europe to the Mesolithic peoples of northern Europe.\" The Ferriby Boats, Hanson Log Boats and the later Dover Bronze Age Boat could carry a substantial cross-Channel cargo.\nDiodorus Siculus and Pliny both suggest trade between the rebel Celtic tribes of Armorica and Iron Age Britain flourished. In 55 BC Julius Caesar invaded, claiming that the Britons had aided the Veneti against him the previous year. He was more successful in 54 BC, but Britain was not fully established as part of the Roman Empire until completion of the invasion by Aulus Plautius in 43 AD. A brisk and regular trade began between ports in Roman Gaul and those in Britain. This traffic continued until the end of Roman rule in Britain in 410 AD, after which the early Anglo-Saxons left less clear historical records.\nIn the power vacuum left by the retreating Romans, the Germanic Angles, Saxons, and Jutes began the next great migration across the North Sea. Having already been used as mercenaries in Britain by the Romans, many people from these tribes crossed during the Migration Period, conquering and perhaps displacing the native Celtic populations.\nNorsemen and Normans.\nThe attack on Lindisfarne in 793 is generally considered the beginning of the Viking Age. For the next 250\u00a0years the Scandinavian raiders of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark dominated the North Sea, raiding monasteries, homes, and towns along the coast and along the rivers that ran inland. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" they began to settle in Britain in 851. They continued to settle in the British Isles and the continent until around 1050.\nThe fiefdom of Normandy was created for the Viking leader Rollo (also known as Robert of Normandy). Rollo had besieged Paris but in 911 entered vassalage to the king of the West Franks Charles the Simple through the Treaty of St.-Claire-sur-Epte. In exchange for his homage and fealty, Rollo legally gained the territory he and his Viking allies had previously conquered. The name \"Normandy\" reflects Rollo's Viking (i.e. \"Northman\") origins.\nThe descendants of Rollo and his followers adopted the local Gallo-Romance language and intermarried with the area's inhabitants and became the Normans \u2013 a Norman French-speaking mixture of Scandinavians, Hiberno-Norse, Orcadians, Anglo-Danish, and indigenous Franks and Gauls.\nRollo's descendant William, Duke of Normandy became king of England in 1066 in the Norman Conquest beginning with the Battle of Hastings, while retaining the fiefdom of Normandy for himself and his descendants. In 1204, during the reign of King John, mainland Normandy was taken from England by France under Philip II, while insular Normandy (the Channel Islands) remained under English control. In 1259, Henry III of England recognised the legality of French possession of mainland Normandy under the Treaty of Paris. His successors, however, often fought to regain control of mainland Normandy.\nWith the rise of William the Conqueror the North Sea and Channel began to lose some of their importance. The new order oriented most of England and Scandinavia's trade south, toward the Mediterranean and the Orient.\nAlthough the British surrendered claims to mainland Normandy and other French possessions in 1801, the monarch of the United Kingdom retains the title Duke of Normandy in respect to the Channel Islands. The Channel Islands (except for Chausey) are Crown dependencies of the British Crown. Thus the Loyal toast in the Channel Islands is \"La Reine, notre Duc\" (\"The Queen, our Duke\"). The British monarch is understood to \"not\" be the Duke of Normandy in regards of the French region of Normandy described herein, by virtue of the Treaty of Paris of 1259, the surrender of French possessions in 1801, and the belief that the rights of succession to that title are subject to Salic Law which excludes inheritance through female heirs.\nFrench Normandy was occupied by English forces during the Hundred Years' War in 1346\u20131360 and again in 1415\u20131450.\nEngland and Britain: Naval superpower.\nFrom the reign of Elizabeth I, English foreign policy concentrated on preventing invasion across the Channel by ensuring no major European power controlled the potential Dutch and Flemish invasion ports. Her climb to the pre-eminent sea power of the world began in 1588 as the attempted invasion of the Spanish Armada was defeated by the combination of outstanding naval tactics by the English and the Dutch under command of Charles Howard, 1st Earl of Nottingham with Sir Francis Drake second in command, and the following stormy weather. Over the centuries the Royal Navy slowly grew to be the most powerful in the world.\nThe building of the British Empire was possible only because the Royal Navy eventually managed to exercise unquestioned control over the seas around Europe, especially the Channel and the North Sea. During the Seven Years' War, France attempted to launch an invasion of Britain. To achieve this France needed to gain control of the Channel for several weeks, but was thwarted following the British naval victory at the Battle of Quiberon Bay in 1759.\nAnother significant challenge to British domination of the seas came during the Napoleonic Wars. The Battle of Trafalgar took place off the coast of Spain against a combined French and Spanish fleet and was won by Admiral Horatio Nelson, ending Napoleon's plans for a cross-Channel invasion and securing British dominance of the seas for over a century.\nFirst World War.\nThe exceptional strategic importance of the Channel as a tool for blockading was recognised by the First Sea Lord Admiral Fisher in the years before World War I. \"Five keys lock up the world! Singapore, the Cape, Alexandria, Gibraltar, Dover.\" However, on 25 July 1909 Louis Bl\u00e9riot made the first Channel crossing from Calais to Dover in an aeroplane. Bl\u00e9riot's crossing signalled a change in the function of the Channel as a barrier-moat for England against foreign enemies.\nBecause the \"Kaiserliche Marine\" surface fleet could not match the British Grand Fleet, the Germans developed submarine warfare, which was to become a far greater threat to Britain. The Dover Patrol, set up just before the war started, escorted cross-Channel troopships and prevented submarines from sailing in the Channel, obliging them to travel to the Atlantic via the much longer route around Scotland.\nOn land, the German army attempted to capture French Channel ports in the Race to the Sea but although the trenches are often said to have stretched \"from the frontier of Switzerland to the English Channel\", they reached the coast at the North Sea. Much of the British war effort in Flanders was a bloody but successful strategy to prevent the Germans reaching the Channel coast.\nAt the outset of the war, an attempt was made to block the path of U-boats through the Dover Strait with naval minefields. By February 1915, this had been augmented by a stretch of light steel netting called the Dover Barrage, which it was hoped would ensnare submerged submarines. After initial success, the Germans learned how to pass through the barrage, aided by the unreliability of British mines. On 31 January 1917, the Germans restarted unrestricted submarine warfare leading to dire Admiralty predictions that submarines would defeat Britain by November, the most dangerous situation Britain faced in either world war.\nThe Battle of Passchendaele in 1917 was fought to reduce the threat by capturing the submarine bases on the Belgian coast, though it was the introduction of convoys and not capture of the bases that averted defeat. In April 1918 the Dover Patrol carried out the Zeebrugge Raid against the U-boat bases. During 1917, the Dover Barrage was re-sited with improved mines and more effective nets, aided by regular patrols by small warships equipped with powerful searchlights. A German attack on these vessels resulted in the Battle of Dover Strait in 1917. A much more ambitious attempt to improve the barrage, by installing eight massive concrete towers across the strait was called the Admiralty M-N Scheme but only two towers were nearing completion at the end of the war and the project was abandoned.\nThe naval blockade in the Channel and North Sea was one of the decisive factors in the German defeat in 1918.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, naval activity in the European theatre was primarily limited to the Atlantic. During the Battle of France in May 1940, the German forces succeeded in capturing both Boulogne and Calais, thereby threatening the line of retreat for the British Expeditionary Force. By a combination of hard fighting and German indecision, the port of Dunkirk was kept open allowing 338,000 Allied troops to be evacuated in Operation Dynamo. More than 11,000 were evacuated from Le Havre during Operation Cycle and a further 192,000 were evacuated from ports further down the coast in Operation Ariel in June 1940. The early stages of the Battle of Britain featured German air attacks on Channel shipping and ports; despite these early successes against shipping the Germans did not win the air supremacy necessary for Operation Sealion, the projected cross-Channel invasion.\nThe Channel subsequently became the stage for an intensive coastal war, featuring submarines, minesweepers, and Fast Attack Craft.\nThe narrow waters of the Channel were considered too dangerous for major warships until the Normandy Landings with the exception, for the German Kriegsmarine, of the Channel Dash (Operation Cerberus) in February 1942, and this required the support of the Luftwaffe in Operation Thunderbolt.\nDieppe was the site of an ill-fated Dieppe Raid by Canadian and British armed forces. More successful was the later Operation Overlord (D-Day), a massive invasion of German-occupied France by Allied troops. Caen, Cherbourg, Carentan, Falaise and other Norman towns endured many casualties in the fight for the province, which continued until the closing of the so-called Falaise gap between Chambois and Montormel, then liberation of Le Havre.\nThe Channel Islands were the only part of the British Commonwealth occupied by Germany (excepting the part of Egypt occupied by the Afrika Korps at the time of the Second Battle of El Alamein, which was a protectorate and not part of the Commonwealth). The German occupation of 1940\u20131945 was harsh, with some island residents being taken for slave labour on the Continent; native Jews sent to concentration camps; partisan resistance and retribution; accusations of collaboration; and slave labour (primarily Russians and eastern Europeans) being brought to the islands to build fortifications. The Royal Navy blockaded the islands from time to time, particularly following the liberation of mainland Normandy in 1944. Intense negotiations resulted in some Red Cross humanitarian aid, but there was considerable hunger and privation during the occupation, particularly in the final months, when the population was close to starvation. The German troops on the islands surrendered on 9 May 1945, a day after the final surrender in mainland Europe.\nPopulation.\nThe English Channel coast is far more densely populated on the English shore. The most significant towns and cities along both the English and French sides of the Channel (each with more than 20,000 inhabitants, ranked in descending order; populations are the urban area populations from the 1999 French census, 2001 UK census, and 2001 Jersey census) are as follows:\nCulture and languages.\nThe two dominant cultures are English on the north shore of the Channel, French on the south. However, there are also a number of minority languages that are or were found on the shores and islands of the English Channel, which are listed here, with the Channel's name in the specific language following them.\nDutch previously had a larger range, and extended into parts of modern-day France. For more information, please see French Flemish.\nMost other languages tend towards variants of the French and English forms, but notably Welsh has \"M\u00f4r Udd\".\nEconomy.\nShipping.\nThe Channel has traffic on both the UK\u2013Europe and North Sea\u2013Atlantic routes, and is the world's busiest seaway, with over 500 ships per day. Following an accident in January 1971 and a series of disastrous collisions with wreckage in February, the Dover TSS, the world's first radar-controlled traffic separation scheme, was set up by the International Maritime Organization. The scheme mandates that vessels travelling north must use the French side, travelling south the English side. There is a separation zone between the two lanes.\nIn December 2002 the MV \"Tricolor\", carrying \u00a330m of luxury cars, sank northwest of Dunkirk after collision in fog with the container ship \"Kariba\". The cargo ship \"Nicola\" ran into the wreckage the next day. There was no loss of life.\nThe shore-based long-range traffic control system was updated in 2003 and there is a series of traffic separation systems in operation. Though the system is inherently incapable of reaching the levels of safety obtained from aviation systems such as the traffic collision avoidance system, it has reduced accidents to one or two per year.\nMarine GPS systems allow ships to be preprogrammed to follow navigational channels accurately and automatically, further avoiding risk of running aground, but following the fatal collision between Dutch Aquamarine and Ash in October 2001, Britain's Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) issued a safety bulletin saying it believed that in these most unusual circumstances GPS use had actually contributed to the collision. The ships were maintaining a very precise automated course, one directly behind the other, rather than making use of the full width of the traffic lanes as a human navigator would.\nA combination of radar difficulties in monitoring areas near cliffs, a failure of a CCTV system, incorrect operation of the anchor, the inability of the crew to follow standard procedures of using a GPS to provide early warning of the ship dragging the anchor and reluctance to admit the mistake and start the engine led to the MV \"Willy\" running aground in Cawsand Bay, Cornwall, in January 2002. The MAIB report makes it clear that the harbour controllers were informed of impending disaster by shore observers before the crew were themselves aware. The village of Kingsand was evacuated for three days because of the risk of explosion, and the ship was stranded for 11 days.\nFerry.\nThe ferry routes crossing the English Channel, include (have included):-\nChannel Tunnel.\nMany travellers cross beneath the Channel using the Channel Tunnel, first proposed in the early 19th century and finally opened in 1994, connecting the UK and France by rail. It is now routine to travel between Paris or Brussels and London on the Eurostar train. Freight trains also use the tunnel. Cars, coaches and lorries are carried on Eurotunnel Shuttle trains between Folkestone and Calais.\nTourism.\nThe coastal resorts of the Channel, such as Brighton and Deauville, inaugurated an era of aristocratic tourism in the early 19th century. Short trips across the Channel for leisure purposes are often referred to as Channel Hopping.\nRenewable energy.\nThe Rampion Wind Farm is an offshore wind farm located in the Channel, off the coast of West Sussex. Other offshore wind farms planned on the French side of the Channel.\nHistory of Channel crossings.\nAs one of the narrowest and most well-known international waterways lacking dangerous currents, the Channel has been the first objective of numerous innovative sea, air, and human powered crossing technologies.\nPre-historic people sailed from the mainland to England for millennia. At the end of the last Ice Age, lower sea levels even permitted walking across.\nBy boat.\nPierre Andriel crossed the English Channel aboard the \"\u00c9lise\", ex the Scottish p.s. \"Margery\" in March 1816, one of the earliest seagoing voyages by steam ship.\nThe paddle steamer \"Defiance\", Captain William Wager, was the first steamer to cross the Channel to Holland, arriving there on 9 May 1816.\nOn 10 June 1821, English-built paddle steamer \"Rob Roy\" was the first passenger ferry to cross channel. The steamer was purchased subsequently by the French postal administration and renamed \"Henri IV\" and put into regular passenger service a year later. It was able to make the journey across the Straits of Dover in around three hours.\nIn June 1843, because of difficulties with Dover harbour, the South Eastern Railway company developed the Boulogne-sur-Mer-Folkestone route as an alternative to Calais-Dover. The first ferry crossed under the command of Captain Hayward.\nIn 1974 a Welsh coracle piloted by Bernard Thomas of Llechryd crossed the English Channel to France in 13\u00bd hours. The journey was undertaken to demonstrate how the Bull Boats of the Mandan Indians of North Dakota could have been copied from coracles introduced by Prince Madog in the 12th century.\nThe Mountbatten class hovercraft (MCH) entered commercial service in August 1968, initially between Dover and Boulogne but later also Ramsgate (Pegwell Bay) to Calais. The journey time Dover to Boulogne was roughly 35\u00a0minutes, with six trips per day at peak times. The fastest crossing of the English Channel by a commercial car-carrying hovercraft was 22\u00a0minutes, recorded by the \"Princess Anne\" MCH SR-N4 Mk3 on 14 September 1995,\nBy air.\nThe first aircraft to cross the Channel was a balloon in 1785, piloted by Jean Pierre Fran\u00e7ois Blanchard (France) and John Jeffries (US).\nLouis Bl\u00e9riot (France) piloted the first airplane to cross in 1909.\nOn Friday, 26 September 2008, Swiss Yves Rossy aka \"Jetman\" became the first person to cross the English Channel with a Jet Powered Wing,\nHe jumped from a Pilatus Porter over Calais, France, Rossy crossed the English Channel where he deployed his parachute and landed in Dover\nThe first flying car to have crossed the English Channel is a P\u00e9gase designed by the French company Vaylon on Wednesday, 14 June 2017. It was piloted by a Franco-Italian pilot Bruno Vezzoli. This crossing was carried out as part of the first road and air trip from Paris to London in a flying car. Pegase is a 2 seats road approved dune buggy and a powered paraglider. The takeoff was at 8:03 a.m. from Ambleteuse in the North of France and landing was at East Studdal, near Dover. The flight was completed in 1 hour and 15 minutes for a total distance covered of including over the English Channel at an altitude of .\nOn 4 August 2019, Frenchman Franky Zapata became the first person to cross the English Channel on a jet-powered Flyboard Air. The board was powered by a kerosene-filled backpack. Zapata made the journey in 22 minutes, having landed on a boat half-way across to refuel.\nBy swimming.\nThe sport of Channel swimming traces its origins to the latter part of the 19th century when Captain Matthew Webb made the first observed and unassisted swim across the Strait of Dover, swimming from England to France on 24\u201325 August 1875 in 21\u00a0hours 45\u00a0minutes.\nIn 1927, fewer than ten swimmers (including the first woman, Gertrude Ederle in 1926) had managed to successfully swim the English Channel, and many dubious claims were being made. The Channel Swimming Association (CSA) was founded to authenticate and ratify swimmers' claims to have swum the Channel and to verify crossing times. The CSA was dissolved in 1999 and was succeeded by two separate organisations: CSA Ltd (CSA) and the Channel Swimming and Piloting Federation (CSPF), both observe and authenticate cross-Channel swims in the Strait of Dover. The Channel Crossing Association was also set up to cater for unorthodox crossings.\nThe team with the most Channel swims to its credit is the Serpentine Swimming Club in London, followed by the international Sri Chinmoy Marathon Team.\nAs at 2005, 811 people had completed 1,185 verified crossings under the rules of the CSA and the CSPF. The number of swims conducted under and ratified by the Channel Swimming Association to 2005 was 982 by 665 people. This includes 24 two-way crossings and three three-way crossings. The number of ratified swims to 2004 was 948 by 675 people (456 men, 214 women) and there have also been 16 two-way crossings (9 by men and 7 by women). There have been three three-way crossings (2 by men and 1 by a woman).\nThe Strait of Dover is the busiest stretch of water in the world. It is governed by International Law as described in \"Unorthodox Crossing of the Dover Strait Traffic Separation Scheme\". It states: \"[In] exceptional cases the French Maritime Authorities may grant authority for unorthodox craft to cross French territorial waters within the Traffic Separation Scheme when these craft set off from the British coast, on condition that the request for authorisation is sent to them with the opinion of the British Maritime Authorities.\"\nThe fastest verified swim of the Channel was by the Australian Trent Grimsey on 8 September 2012, in 6 hours 55 minutes, beating the previous record set in 2007 by Bulgarian swimmer Petar Stoychev.\nThere may have been some unreported swims of the Channel, by people intent on entering Britain in circumvention of immigration controls. A failed attempt to cross the Channel by two Syrian refugees in October 2014 came to light when their bodies were discovered on the shores of the North Sea in Norway and the Netherlands.\nBy car.\nOn 16 September 1965, two Amphicars crossed from Dover to Calais.\nOther types.\nPLUTO was war-time fuel delivery project of \"pipelines under the ocean\" from England to France. Though plagued with technical difficulties during the Battle of Normandy, the pipelines delivered about 8% of the fuel requirements of the allied forces between D-Day and VE-Day."}
{"id": "9232", "revid": "218261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9232", "title": "Eiffel Tower", "text": "The Eiffel Tower ( ; ) is a wrought-iron lattice tower on the Champ de Mars in Paris, France. It is named after the engineer Gustave Eiffel, whose company designed and built the tower. \nLocally nicknamed \"La dame de fer\" (French for \"Iron Lady\"), it was constructed from 1887 to 1889 as the entrance to the 1889 World's Fair and was initially criticised by some of France's leading artists and intellectuals for its design, but it has become a global cultural icon of France and one of the most recognisable structures in the world. The Eiffel Tower is the most-visited paid monument in the world; 6.91\u00a0million people ascended it in 2015.\nThe tower is tall, about the same height as an 81- building, and the tallest structure in Paris. Its base is square, measuring on each side. During its construction, the Eiffel Tower surpassed the Washington Monument to become the tallest man-made structure in the world, a title it held for 41 years until the Chrysler Building in New York City was finished in 1930. It was the first structure in the world to surpass both the 200 meter and 300 meter mark in height. Due to the addition of a broadcasting aerial at the top of the tower in 1957, it is now taller than the Chrysler Building by . Excluding transmitters, the Eiffel Tower is the second tallest free-standing structure in France after the Millau Viaduct.\nThe tower has three levels for visitors, with restaurants on the first and second levels. The top level's upper platform is above the ground \u2013 the highest observation deck accessible to the public in the European Union. Tickets can be purchased to ascend by stairs or lift to the first and second levels. The climb from ground level to the first level is over 300 steps, as is the climb from the first level to the second. Although there is a staircase to the top level, it is usually accessible only by lift.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThe design of the Eiffel Tower is attributed to Maurice Koechlin and \u00c9mile Nouguier, two senior engineers working for the Compagnie des \u00c9tablissements Eiffel. It was envisioned after discussion about a suitable centrepiece for the proposed 1889 Exposition Universelle, a world's fair to celebrate the centennial of the French Revolution. Eiffel openly acknowledged that inspiration for a tower came from the Latting Observatory built in New York City in 1853. In May 1884, working at home, Koechlin made a sketch of their idea, described by him as \"a great pylon, consisting of four lattice girders standing apart at the base and coming together at the top, joined together by metal trusses at regular intervals\". Eiffel initially showed little enthusiasm, but he did approve further study, and the two engineers then asked Stephen Sauvestre, the head of company's architectural department, to contribute to the design. Sauvestre added decorative arches to the base of the tower, a glass pavilion to the first level, and other embellishments.\nThe new version gained Eiffel's support: he bought the rights to the patent on the design which Koechlin, Nougier, and Sauvestre had taken out, and the design was exhibited at the Exhibition of Decorative Arts in the autumn of 1884 under the company name. On 30 March 1885, Eiffel presented his plans to the ; after discussing the technical problems and emphasising the practical uses of the tower, he finished his talk by saying the tower would symbolise: \nLittle progress was made until 1886, when Jules Gr\u00e9vy was re-elected as president of France and \u00c9douard Lockroy was appointed as minister for trade. A budget for the exposition was passed and, on 1 May, Lockroy announced an alteration to the terms of the open competition being held for a centrepiece to the exposition, which effectively made the selection of Eiffel's design a foregone conclusion, as entries had to include a study for a four-sided metal tower on the Champ de Mars. (A 300-meter tower was then considered a herculean engineering effort). On 12 May, a commission was set up to examine Eiffel's scheme and its rivals, which, a month later, decided that all the proposals except Eiffel's were either impractical or lacking in details.\nAfter some debate about the exact location of the tower, a contract was signed on 8 January 1887. This was signed by Eiffel acting in his own capacity rather than as the representative of his company, and granted him 1.5\u00a0million francs toward the construction costs: less than a quarter of the estimated 6.5 million francs. Eiffel was to receive all income from the commercial exploitation of the tower during the exhibition and for the next 20 years. He later established a separate company to manage the tower, putting up half the necessary capital himself.\nArtists' protest.\nThe proposed tower had been a subject of controversy, drawing criticism from those who did not believe it was feasible and those who objected on artistic grounds. Prior to the Eiffel Tower's construction, no structure had ever been constructed to a height of 300 m or even 200 m for the matter, and many people believed it was impossible. These objections were an expression of a long-standing debate in France about the relationship between architecture and engineering. It came to a head as work began at the Champ de Mars: a \"Committee of Three Hundred\" (one member for each metre of the tower's height) was formed, led by the prominent architect Charles Garnier and including some of the most important figures of the arts, such as William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Guy de Maupassant, Charles Gounod and Jules Massenet. A petition called \"Artists against the Eiffel Tower\" was sent to the Minister of Works and Commissioner for the Exposition, Adolphe Alphand, and it was published by \"Le Temps\" on 14 February 1887:\nGustave Eiffel responded to these criticisms by comparing his tower to the Egyptian pyramids: \"My tower will be the tallest edifice ever erected by man. Will it not also be grandiose in its way? And why would something admirable in Egypt become hideous and ridiculous in Paris?\" These criticisms were also dealt with by \u00c9douard Lockroy in a letter of support written to Alphand, sardonically saying, \"Judging by the stately swell of the rhythms, the beauty of the metaphors, the elegance of its delicate and precise style, one can tell this protest is the result of collaboration of the most famous writers and poets of our time\", and he explained that the protest was irrelevant since the project had been decided upon months before, and construction on the tower was already under way.\nIndeed, Garnier was a member of the Tower Commission that had examined the various proposals, and had raised no objection. Eiffel was similarly unworried, pointing out to a journalist that it was premature to judge the effect of the tower solely on the basis of the drawings, that the Champ de Mars was distant enough from the monuments mentioned in the protest for there to be little risk of the tower overwhelming them, and putting the aesthetic argument for the tower: \"Do not the laws of natural forces always conform to the secret laws of harmony?\"\nSome of the protesters changed their minds when the tower was built; others remained unconvinced. Guy de Maupassant supposedly ate lunch in the tower's restaurant every day because it was the one place in Paris where the tower was not visible.\nBy 1918, it had become a symbol of Paris and of France after Guillaume Apollinaire wrote a nationalist poem in the shape of the tower (a calligram) to express his feelings about the war against Germany. Today, it is widely considered to be a remarkable piece of structural art, and is often featured in films and literature.\nConstruction.\nWork on the foundations started on 28 January 1887. Those for the east and south legs were straightforward, with each leg resting on four concrete slabs, one for each of the principal girders of each leg. The west and north legs, being closer to the river Seine, were more complicated: each slab needed two piles installed by using compressed-air caissons long and in diameter driven to a depth of to support the concrete slabs, which were thick. Each of these slabs supported a block of limestone with an inclined top to bear a supporting shoe for the ironwork.\nEach shoe was anchored to the stonework by a pair of bolts in diameter and long. The foundations were completed on 30 June, and the erection of the ironwork began. The visible work on-site was complemented by the enormous amount of exacting preparatory work that took place behind the scenes: the drawing office produced 1,700 general drawings and 3,629 detailed drawings of the 18,038 different parts needed. The task of drawing the components was complicated by the complex angles involved in the design and the degree of precision required: the position of rivet holes was specified to within and angles worked out to one second of arc. The finished components, some already riveted together into sub-assemblies, arrived on horse-drawn carts from a factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois-Perret and were first bolted together, with the bolts being replaced with rivets as construction progressed. No drilling or shaping was done on site: if any part did not fit, it was sent back to the factory for alteration. In all, 18,038 pieces were joined together using 2.5\u00a0million rivets.\nAt first, the legs were constructed as cantilevers, but about halfway to the first level construction was paused to create a substantial timber scaffold. This renewed concerns about the structural integrity of the tower, and sensational headlines such as \"Eiffel Suicide!\" and \"Gustave Eiffel Has Gone Mad: He Has Been Confined in an Asylum\" appeared in the tabloid press. At this stage, a small \"creeper\" crane designed to move up the tower was installed in each leg. They made use of the guides for the lifts which were to be fitted in the four legs. The critical stage of joining the legs at the first level was completed by the end of March 1888. Although the metalwork had been prepared with the utmost attention to detail, provision had been made to carry out small adjustments to precisely align the legs; hydraulic jacks were fitted to the shoes at the base of each leg, capable of exerting a force of 800 tonnes, and the legs were intentionally constructed at a slightly steeper angle than necessary, being supported by sandboxes on the scaffold. Although construction involved 300 on-site employees, only one person died, due to Eiffel's safety precautions and the use of movable gangways, guardrails and screens.\nLifts.\nEquipping the tower with adequate and safe passenger lifts was a major concern of the government commission overseeing the Exposition. Although some visitors could be expected to climb to the first level, or even the second, lifts clearly had to be the main means of ascent.\nConstructing lifts to reach the first level was relatively straightforward: the legs were wide enough at the bottom and so nearly straight that they could contain a straight track, and a contract was given to the French company Roux, Combaluzier &amp; Lepape for two lifts to be fitted in the east and west legs. Roux, Combaluzier &amp; Lepape used a pair of endless chains with rigid, articulated links to which the car was attached. Lead weights on some links of the upper or return sections of the chains counterbalanced most of the car's weight. The car was pushed up from below, not pulled up from above: to prevent the chain buckling, it was enclosed in a conduit. At the bottom of the run, the chains passed around diameter sprockets. Smaller sprockets at the top guided the chains.\nInstalling lifts to the second level was more of a challenge because a straight track was impossible. No French company wanted to undertake the work. The European branch of Otis Brothers &amp; Company submitted a proposal but this was rejected: the fair's charter ruled out the use of any foreign material in the construction of the tower. The deadline for bids was extended but still no French companies put themselves forward, and eventually the contract was given to Otis in July 1887. Otis were confident they would eventually be given the contract and had already started creating designs.\nThe car was divided into two superimposed compartments, each holding 25 passengers, with the lift operator occupying an exterior platform on the first level. Motive power was provided by an inclined hydraulic ram long and in diameter in the tower leg with a stroke of : this moved a carriage carrying six sheaves. Five fixed sheaves were mounted higher up the leg, producing an arrangement similar to a block and tackle but acting in reverse, multiplying the stroke of the piston rather than the force generated. The hydraulic pressure in the driving cylinder was produced by a large open reservoir on the second level. After being exhausted from the cylinder, the water was pumped back up to the reservoir by two pumps in the machinery room at the base of the south leg. This reservoir also provided power to the lifts to the first level.\nThe original lifts for the journey between the second and third levels were supplied by L\u00e9on Edoux. A pair of hydraulic rams were mounted on the second level, reaching nearly halfway up to the third level. One lift car was mounted on top of these rams: cables ran from the top of this car up to sheaves on the third level and back down to a second car. Each car only travelled half the distance between the second and third levels and passengers were required to change lifts halfway by means of a short gangway. The 10-ton cars each held 65 passengers.\nInauguration and the 1889 exposition.\nThe main structural work was completed at the end of March 1889 and, on 31 March, Eiffel celebrated by leading a group of government officials, accompanied by representatives of the press, to the top of the tower. Because the lifts were not yet in operation, the ascent was made by foot, and took over an hour, with Eiffel stopping frequently to explain various features. Most of the party chose to stop at the lower levels, but a few, including the structural engineer, \u00c9mile Nouguier, the head of construction, Jean Compagnon, the President of the City Council, and reporters from \"Le Figaro\" and \"Le Monde Illustr\u00e9\", completed the ascent. At 2:35\u00a0pm, Eiffel hoisted a large Tricolour to the accompaniment of a 25-gun salute fired at the first level.\nThere was still work to be done, particularly on the lifts and facilities, and the tower was not opened to the public until nine days after the opening of the exposition on 6 May; even then, the lifts had not been completed. The tower was an instant success with the public, and nearly 30,000 visitors made the 1,710-step climb to the top before the lifts entered service on 26 May.\nTickets cost 2 francs for the first level, 3 for the second, and 5 for the top, with half-price admission on Sundays, and by the end of the exhibition there had been 1,896,987 visitors.\nAfter dark, the tower was lit by hundreds of gas lamps, and a beacon sent out three beams of red, white and blue light. Two searchlights mounted on a circular rail were used to illuminate various buildings of the exposition. The daily opening and closing of the exposition were announced by a cannon at the top.\nOn the second level, the French newspaper \"Le Figaro\" had an office and a printing press, where a special souvenir edition, \"Le Figaro de la Tour\", was made. There was also a p\u00e2tisserie.\nAt the top, there was a post office where visitors could send letters and postcards as a memento of their visit. Graffitists were also catered for: sheets of paper were mounted on the walls each day for visitors to record their impressions of the tower. Gustave Eiffel described some of the responses as \"vraiment curieuse\" (\"truly curious\").\nFamous visitors to the tower included the Prince of Wales, Sarah Bernhardt, \"Buffalo Bill\" Cody (his Wild West show was an attraction at the exposition) and Thomas Edison. Eiffel invited Edison to his private apartment at the top of the tower, where Edison presented him with one of his phonographs, a new invention and one of the many highlights of the exposition. Edison signed the guestbook with this message: \nEiffel had a permit for the tower to stand for 20 years. It was to be dismantled in 1909, when its ownership would revert to the City of Paris. The City had planned to tear it down (part of the original contest rules for designing a tower was that it should be easy to dismantle) but as the tower proved to be valuable for communication purposes, it was allowed to remain after the expiry of the permit.\nEiffel made use of his apartment at the top of the tower to carry out meteorological observations, and also used the tower to perform experiments on the action of air resistance on falling bodies.\nSubsequent events.\nFor the 1900 \"Exposition Universelle\", the lifts in the east and west legs were replaced by lifts running as far as the second level constructed by the French firm Fives-Lille. These had a compensating mechanism to keep the floor level as the angle of ascent changed at the first level, and were driven by a similar hydraulic mechanism to the Otis lifts, although this was situated at the base of the tower. Hydraulic pressure was provided by pressurised accumulators located near this mechanism. At the same time the lift in the north pillar was removed and replaced by a staircase to the first level. The layout of both first and second levels was modified, with the space available for visitors on the second level. The original lift in the south pillar was removed 13 years later.\nOn 19 October 1901, Alberto Santos-Dumont, flying his No.6 airship, won a 100,000-franc prize offered by Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe for the first person to make a flight from St. Cloud to the Eiffel Tower and back in less than half an hour.\nMany innovations took place at the Eiffel Tower in the early 20th century. In 1910, Father Theodor Wulf measured radiant energy at the top and bottom of the tower. He found more at the top than expected, incidentally discovering what are known today as cosmic rays. Just two years later, on 4 February 1912, Austrian tailor Franz Reichelt died after jumping from the first level of the tower (a height of 57 m) to demonstrate his parachute design. In 1914, at the outbreak of World War\u00a0I, a radio transmitter located in the tower jammed German radio communications, seriously hindering their advance on Paris and contributing to the Allied victory at the First Battle of the Marne. From 1925 to 1934, illuminated signs for Citro\u00ebn adorned three of the tower's sides, making it the tallest advertising space in the world at the time. In April 1935, the tower was used to make experimental low-resolution television transmissions, using a shortwave transmitter of 200 watts power. On 17 November, an improved 180-line transmitter was installed.\nOn two separate but related occasions in 1925, the con artist Victor Lustig \"sold\" the tower for scrap metal. A year later, in February 1926, pilot Leon Collet was killed trying to fly under the tower. His aircraft became entangled in an aerial belonging to a wireless station. A bust of Gustave Eiffel by Antoine Bourdelle was unveiled at the base of the north leg on 2 May 1929. In 1930, the tower lost the title of the world's tallest structure when the Chrysler Building in New York City was completed. In 1938, the decorative arcade around the first level was removed.\nUpon the German occupation of Paris in 1940, the lift cables were cut by the French. The tower was closed to the public during the occupation and the lifts were not repaired until 1946. In 1940, German soldiers had to climb the tower to hoist a swastika-centered Reichskriegsflagge, but the flag was so large it blew away just a few hours later, and was replaced by a smaller one. When visiting Paris, Hitler chose to stay on the ground. When the Allies were nearing Paris in August 1944, Hitler ordered General Dietrich von Choltitz, the military governor of Paris, to demolish the tower along with the rest of the city. Von Choltitz disobeyed the order. On 25 June, before the Germans had been driven out of Paris, the German flag was replaced with a Tricolour by two men from the French Naval Museum, who narrowly beat three men led by Lucien Sarniguet, who had lowered the Tricolour on 13 June 1940 when Paris fell to the Germans.\nA fire started in the television transmitter on 3 January 1956, damaging the top of the tower. Repairs took a year, and in 1957, the present radio aerial was added to the top. In 1964, the Eiffel Tower was officially declared to be a historical monument by the Minister of Cultural Affairs, Andr\u00e9 Malraux. A year later, an additional lift system was installed in the north pillar.\nAccording to interviews, in 1967, Montreal Mayor Jean Drapeau negotiated a secret agreement with Charles de Gaulle for the tower to be dismantled and temporarily relocated to Montreal to serve as a landmark and tourist attraction during Expo 67. The plan was allegedly vetoed by the company operating the tower out of fear that the French government could refuse permission for the tower to be restored in its original location.\nIn 1982, the original lifts between the second and third levels were replaced after 97 years in service. These had been closed to the public between November and March because the water in the hydraulic drive tended to freeze. The new cars operate in pairs, with one counterbalancing the other, and perform the journey in one stage, reducing the journey time from eight minutes to less than two minutes. At the same time, two new emergency staircases were installed, replacing the original spiral staircases. In 1983, the south pillar was fitted with an electrically driven Otis lift to serve the Jules Verne restaurant. The Fives-Lille lifts in the east and west legs, fitted in 1899, were extensively refurbished in 1986. The cars were replaced, and a computer system was installed to completely automate the lifts. The motive power was moved from the water hydraulic system to a new electrically driven oil-filled hydraulic system, and the original water hydraulics were retained solely as a counterbalance system. A service lift was added to the south pillar for moving small loads and maintenance personnel three years later.\nRobert Moriarty flew a Beechcraft Bonanza under the tower on 31 March 1984. In 1987, A.J. Hackett made one of his first bungee jumps from the top of the Eiffel Tower, using a special cord he had helped develop. Hackett was arrested by the police. On 27 October 1991, Thierry Devaux, along with mountain guide Herv\u00e9 Calvayrac, performed a series of acrobatic figures while bungee jumping from the second floor of the tower. Facing the Champ de Mars, Devaux used an electric winch between figures to go back up to the second floor. When firemen arrived, he stopped after the sixth jump.\nFor its \"Countdown to the Year 2000\" celebration on 31 December 1999, flashing lights and high-powered searchlights were installed on the tower. During the last three minutes of the year, the lights were turned on starting from the base of the tower and continuing to the top to welcome 2000 with a huge fireworks show. An exhibition above a cafeteria on the first floor commemorates this event. The searchlights on top of the tower made it a beacon in Paris's night sky, and 20,000 flashing bulbs gave the tower a sparkly appearance for five minutes every hour on the hour.\nThe lights sparkled blue for several nights to herald the new millennium on 31 December 2000. The sparkly lighting continued for 18 months until July 2001. The sparkling lights were turned on again on 21 June 2003, and the display was planned to last for 10 years before they needed replacing.\nThe tower received its th guest on 28 November 2002. The tower has operated at its maximum capacity of about 7\u00a0million visitors since 2003. In 2004, the Eiffel Tower began hosting a seasonal ice rink on the first level. A glass floor was installed on the first level during the 2014 refurbishment.\nIn 2016, during Valentine's Day, the performance UN BATTEMENT by French artist Mil\u00e8ne Guermont unfolds among the Eiffel Tower, the Montparnasse Tower and the contemporary artwork PHARES installed on the Place de la Concorde. This interactive pyramid-shaped sculpture allows the public to transmit the beating of their hearts thanks to a cardiac sensor. The Eiffel Tower and the Montparnasse Tower also light up to the rhythm of PHARES. This is the first time that the Eiffel Tower has interacted with a work of art. \nDesign.\nMaterial.\nThe puddled iron (wrought iron) of the Eiffel Tower weighs 7,300 tons, and the addition of lifts, shops and antennae have brought the total weight to approximately 10,100\u00a0tons. As a demonstration of the economy of design, if the 7,300\u00a0tons of metal in the structure were melted down, it would fill the square base, on each side, to a depth of only assuming the density of the metal to be 7.8\u00a0tons per cubic metre. Additionally, a cubic box surrounding the tower (324\u00a0m x 125\u00a0m x 125\u00a0m) would contain \u00a0tons of air, weighing almost as much as the iron itself. Depending on the ambient temperature, the top of the tower may shift away from the sun by up to due to thermal expansion of the metal on the side facing the sun.\nWind considerations.\nWhen it was built, many were shocked by the tower's daring form. Eiffel was accused of trying to create something artistic with no regard to the principles of engineering. However, Eiffel and his team \u2013 experienced bridge builders \u2013 understood the importance of wind forces, and knew that if they were going to build the tallest structure in the world, they had to be sure it could withstand them. In an interview with the newspaper \"Le Temps\" published on 14 February 1887, Eiffel said:\nHe used graphical methods to determine the strength of the tower and empirical evidence to account for the effects of wind, rather than a mathematical formula. Close examination of the tower reveals a basically exponential shape. All parts of the tower were over-designed to ensure maximum resistance to wind forces. The top half was even assumed to have no gaps in the latticework. In the years since it was completed, engineers have put forward various mathematical hypotheses in an attempt to explain the success of the design. The most recent, devised in 2004 after letters sent by Eiffel to the French Society of Civil Engineers in 1885 were translated into English, is described as a non-linear integral equation based on counteracting the wind pressure on any point of the tower with the tension between the construction elements at that point.\nThe Eiffel Tower sways by up to 9\u00a0cm (3.5\u00a0in) in the wind.\nAccommodation.\nWhen originally built, the first level contained three restaurants \u2013 one French, one Russian and one Flemish \u2014 and an \"Anglo-American Bar\". After the exposition closed, the Flemish restaurant was converted to a 250-seat theatre. A promenade wide ran around the outside of the first level. At the top, there were laboratories for various experiments, and a small apartment reserved for Gustave Eiffel to entertain guests, which is now open to the public, complete with period decorations and lifelike mannequins of Eiffel and some of his notable guests.\nIn May 2016, an apartment was created on the first level to accommodate four competition winners during the UEFA Euro 2016 football tournament in Paris in June. The apartment has a kitchen, two bedrooms, a lounge, and views of Paris landmarks including the Seine, the Sacre Coeur, and the Arc de Triomphe.\nPassenger lifts.\nThe arrangement of the lifts has been changed several times during the tower's history. Given the elasticity of the cables and the time taken to align the cars with the landings, each lift, in normal service, takes an average of 8 minutes and 50 seconds to do the round trip, spending an average of 1 minute and 15 seconds at each level. The average journey time between levels is 1 minute. The original hydraulic mechanism is on public display in a small museum at the base of the east and west legs. Because the mechanism requires frequent lubrication and maintenance, public access is often restricted. The rope mechanism of the north tower can be seen as visitors exit the lift.\nEngraved names.\nGustave Eiffel engraved on the tower the names of 72 French scientists, engineers and mathematicians in recognition of their contributions to the building of the tower. Eiffel chose this \"invocation of science\" because of his concern over the artists' protest. At the beginning of the 20th century, the engravings were painted over, but they were restored in 1986\u201387 by the , a company operating the tower.\nAesthetics.\nThe tower is painted in three shades: lighter at the top, getting progressively darker towards the bottom to complement the Parisian sky. It was originally reddish brown; this changed in 1968 to a bronze colour known as \"Eiffel Tower Brown\".\nThe only non-structural elements are the four decorative grill-work arches, added in Sauvestre's sketches, which served to make the tower look more substantial and to make a more impressive entrance to the exposition.\nA pop-culture movie clich\u00e9 is that the view from a Parisian window always includes the tower. In reality, since zoning restrictions limit the height of most buildings in Paris to seven storeys, only a small number of tall buildings have a clear view of the tower.\nMaintenance.\nMaintenance of the tower includes applying 60\u00a0tons of paint every seven years to prevent it from rusting. The tower has been completely repainted at least 19 times since it was built. Lead paint was still being used as recently as 2001 when the practice was stopped out of concern for the environment.\nTourism.\nTransport.\nThe nearest Paris M\u00e9tro station is Bir-Hakeim and the nearest RER station is Champ de Mars-Tour Eiffel. The tower itself is located at the intersection of the quai Branly and the Pont d'I\u00e9na.\nPopularity.\nMore than 250\u00a0million people have visited the tower since it was completed in 1889. In 2015, there were 6.91\u00a0million visitors. The tower is the most-visited paid monument in the world. An average of 25,000 people ascend the tower every day which can result in long queues.\nRestaurants.\nThe tower has two restaurants: on the first level, and , a gourmet restaurant with its own lift on the second level. This restaurant has one star in the Michelin Red Guide. It was run by the multi-Michelin star chef Alain Ducasse from 2007 to 2017. Starting May 2019, it will be managed by three star chef Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Anton. It owes its name to the famous science-fiction writer Jules Verne. Additionally, there is a champagne bar at the top of the Eiffel Tower.\nFrom 1937 until 1981, there was a restaurant near the top of the tower. It was removed due to structural considerations; engineers had determined it was too heavy and was causing the tower to sag. This restaurant was sold to an American restaurateur and transported to New York and then New Orleans. It was rebuilt on the edge of New Orleans' Garden District as a restaurant and later event hall.\nReplicas.\nAs one of the most iconic landmarks in the world, the Eiffel Tower has been the inspiration for the creation of many replicas and similar towers. An early example is Blackpool Tower in England. The mayor of Blackpool, Sir John Bickerstaffe, was so impressed on seeing the Eiffel Tower at the 1889 exposition that he commissioned a similar tower to be built in his town. It opened in 1894 and is 158.1\u00a0m (518\u00a0ft) tall. Tokyo Tower in Japan, built as a communications tower in 1958, was also inspired by the Eiffel Tower.\nThere are various scale models of the tower in the United States, including a half-scale version at the Paris Las Vegas, Nevada, one in Paris, Texas built in 1993, and two 1:3 scale models at Kings Island, located in Mason, Ohio, and Kings Dominion, Virginia, amusement parks opened in 1972 and 1975 respectively. Two 1:3 scale models can be found in China, one in Durango, Mexico that was donated by the local French community, and several across Europe.\nIn 2011, the TV show \"Pricing the Priceless\" on the National Geographic Channel speculated that a full-size replica of the tower would cost approximately US$480\u00a0million to build. This would be more than ten times the cost of the original (nearly 8 million in 1890 Francs; ~US$40\u00a0million in 2018 dollars).\nCommunications.\nThe tower has been used for making radio transmissions since the beginning of the 20th century. Until the 1950s, sets of aerial wires ran from the cupola to anchors on the Avenue de Suffren and Champ de Mars. These were connected to longwave transmitters in small bunkers. In 1909, a permanent underground radio centre was built near the south pillar, which still exists today. On 20 November 1913, the Paris Observatory, using the Eiffel Tower as an aerial, exchanged wireless signals with the United States Naval Observatory, which used an aerial in Arlington, Virginia. The object of the transmissions was to measure the difference in longitude between Paris and Washington, D.C.. Today, radio and digital television signals are transmitted from the Eiffel Tower.\nDigital television.\nA television antenna was first installed on the tower in 1957, increasing its height by 18.7\u00a0m (61.4\u00a0ft). Work carried out in 2000 added a further 5.3\u00a0m (17.4\u00a0ft), giving the current height of 324\u00a0m (1,063\u00a0ft). Analogue television signals from the Eiffel Tower ceased on 8 March 2011.\nIllumination copyright.\nThe tower and its image have been in the public domain since 1993, 70 years after Eiffel's death. In June 1990 a French court ruled that a special lighting display on the tower in 1989 to mark the tower's 100th anniversary was an \"original visual creation\" protected by copyright. The Court of Cassation, France's judicial court of last resort, upheld the ruling in March 1992. The (SETE) now considers any illumination of the tower to be a separate work of art that falls under copyright. As a result, the SNTE alleges that it is illegal to publish contemporary photographs of the lit tower at night without permission in France and some other countries for commercial use.\nThe imposition of copyright has been controversial. The Director of Documentation for what was then called the (SNTE), St\u00e9phane Dieu, commented in 2005: \"It is really just a way to manage commercial use of the image, so that it isn't used in ways [of which] we don't approve\". SNTE made over \u20ac1\u00a0million from copyright fees in 2002. However, it could also be used to restrict the publication of tourist photographs of the tower at night, as well as hindering non-profit and semi-commercial publication of images of the illuminated tower.\nFrench doctrine and jurisprudence allows pictures incorporating a copyrighted work as long as their presence is incidental or accessory to the subject being represented, a reasoning akin to the \"de minimis\" rule. Therefore, SETE may be unable to claim copyright on photographs of Paris which happen to include the lit tower.\nHeight changes.\nThe pinnacle height of the Eiffel Tower has changed multiple times over the years as described in the chart below. \nTaller structures.\nThe Eiffel Tower was the world's tallest structure when completed in 1889, a distinction it retained until 1929 when the Chrysler Building in New York City was topped out. The tower also lost its standing as the world's tallest tower to the Tokyo Tower in 1958 but retains its status as the tallest freestanding (non-guyed) structure in France."}
{"id": "9235", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9235", "title": "Ethical egoism", "text": "Ethical egoism is the normative ethical position that moral agents ought to act in their own self-interest. It differs from psychological egoism, which claims that people can only act in their self-interest. Ethical egoism also differs from rational egoism, which holds that it is rational to act in one's self-interest.\nEthical egoism holds, therefore, that actions whose consequences will benefit the doer are ethical.\nEthical egoism contrasts with ethical altruism, which holds that moral agents have an obligation to help others. Egoism and altruism both contrast with ethical utilitarianism, which holds that a moral agent should treat one's self (also known as the subject) with no higher regard than one has for others (as egoism does, by elevating self-interests and \"the self\" to a status not granted to others). But it also holds that one is not obligated to sacrifice one's own interests (as altruism does) to help others' interests, so long as one's own interests (i.e. one's own desires or well-being) are substantially equivalent to the others' interests and well-being, but he has the choice to do so. Egoism, utilitarianism, and altruism are all forms of consequentialism, but egoism and altruism contrast with utilitarianism, in that egoism and altruism are both agent-focused forms of consequentialism (i.e. subject-focused or subjective). However, utilitarianism is held to be agent-neutral (i.e. objective and impartial): it does not treat the subject's (i.e. the self's, i.e. the moral \"agent's\") own interests as being more or less important than the interests, desires, or well-being of others.\nEthical egoism does not, however, require moral agents to harm the interests and well-being of others when making moral deliberation; e.g. what is in an agent's self-interest may be incidentally detrimental, beneficial, or neutral in its effect on others. Individualism allows for others' interest and well-being to be disregarded or not, as long as what is chosen is efficacious in satisfying the self-interest of the agent. Nor does ethical egoism necessarily entail that, in pursuing self-interest, one ought always to do what one wants to do; e.g. in the long term, the fulfillment of short-term desires may prove detrimental to the self. Fleeting pleasure, then, takes a back seat to protracted eudaimonia. In the words of James Rachels, \"Ethical egoism ... endorses selfishness, but it doesn't endorse foolishness.\"\nEthical egoism is often used as the philosophical basis for support of right-libertarianism and individualist anarchism. These are political positions based partly on a belief that individuals should not coercively prevent others from exercising freedom of action.\nForms.\nEthical egoism can be broadly divided into three categories: individual, personal, and universal. An \"individual ethical egoist\" would hold that all people should do whatever benefits \"my\" (\"the individual's\")\" \"self-interest; a \"personal ethical egoist\" would hold that they should act in \"their\" self-interest, but would make no claims about what anyone else ought to do; a \"universal ethical egoist\" would argue that everyone should act in ways that are in their self-interest.\nHistory.\nEthical egoism was introduced by the philosopher Henry Sidgwick in his book \"The Methods of Ethics\", written in 1874. Sidgwick compared egoism to the philosophy of utilitarianism, writing that whereas utilitarianism sought to maximize overall pleasure, egoism focused only on maximizing individual pleasure.\nPhilosophers before Sidgwick have also retroactively been identified as ethical egoists. One ancient example is the philosophy of Yang Zhu (4th century BC), Yangism, who views \"wei wo\", or \"everything for myself\", as the only virtue necessary for self-cultivation. Ancient Greek philosophers like Plato, Aristotle and the Stoics were exponents of virtue ethics, and \"did not accept the formal principle that whatever the good is, we should seek only our own good, or prefer it to the good of others.\" However, the beliefs of the Cyrenaics have been referred to as a \"form of egoistic hedonism\", and while some refer to Epicurus' hedonism as a form of virtue ethics, others argue his ethics are more properly described as ethical egoism.\nJustifications.\nPhilosopher James Rachels, in an essay that takes as its title the theory's name, outlines the three arguments most commonly touted in its favor:\nCriticism.\nIt has been argued that extreme ethical egoism is self-defeating. Faced with a situation of limited resources, egoists would consume as much of the resource as they could, making the overall situation worse for everybody. Egoists may respond that if the situation becomes worse for everybody, that would include the egoist, so it is not, in fact, in their rational self-interest to take things to such extremes. However, the (unregulated) tragedy of the commons and the (one off) prisoner's dilemma are cases in which, on the one hand, it is rational for an individual to seek to take as much as possible \"even though\" that makes things worse for everybody, and on the other hand, those cases are not self-refuting since that behaviour remains rational \"even though\" it is ultimately self-defeating, i.e. self-defeating does not imply self-refuting. Egoists might respond that a tragedy of the commons, however, assumes some degree of public land. That is, a commons forbidding homesteading requires regulation. Thus, an argument against the tragedy of the commons, in this belief system, is fundamentally an argument for private property rights and the system that recognizes both property rights and rational self-interest\u2014capitalism. More generally, egoists might say that an increasing respect for individual rights uniquely allows for increasing wealth creation and increasing usable resources despite a fixed amount of raw materials (e.g. the West pre-1776 versus post-1776, East versus West Germany, Hong Kong versus mainland China, North versus South Korea, etc.).\nIt is not clear how to apply a private ownership model to many examples of \"Commons\", however. Examples include large fisheries, the atmosphere and the ocean.\nSome perhaps decisive problems with ethical egoism have been pointed out.\nOne is that an ethical egoist would not want ethical egoism to be universalized: as it would be in the egoist's best self-interest if others acted altruistically towards him, he wouldn't want them to act egoistically; however, that is what he considers to be morally binding. His moral principles would demand of others not to follow them, which can be considered self-defeating and leads to the question: \"How can ethical egoism be considered morally binding if its advocates do not want it to be universally applied?\" \nAnother objection (e.g. by James Rachels) states that the distinction ethical egoism makes between \"yourself\" and \"the rest\" \u2013 demanding to view the interests of \"yourself\" as more important \u2013 is arbitrary, as no justification for it can be offered; considering that the merits and desires of \"the rest\" are comparable to those of \"yourself\" while lacking a justifiable distinction, Rachels concludes that \"the rest\" should be given the same moral consideration as \"yourself\".\nNotable proponents.\nThe term \"ethical egoism\" has been applied retroactively to philosophers such as Bernard de Mandeville and to many other materialists of his generation, although none of them declared themselves to be egoists. Note that materialism does not necessarily imply egoism, as indicated by Karl Marx, and the many other materialists who espoused forms of collectivism. It has been argued that ethical egoism can lend itself to individualist anarchism such as that of Benjamin Tucker, or the combined anarcho-communism and egoism of Emma Goldman, both of whom were proponents of many egoist ideas put forward by Max Stirner. In this context, egoism is another way of describing the sense that the common good should be enjoyed by all. However, most notable anarchists in history have been less radical, retaining altruism and a sense of the importance of the individual that is appreciable but does not go as far as egoism. Recent trends to greater appreciation of egoism within anarchism tend to come from less classical directions such as post-left anarchy or Situationism (e.g. Raoul Vaneigem). Egoism has also been referenced by anarcho-capitalists, such as Murray Rothbard.\nPhilosopher Max Stirner, in his book \"The Ego and Its Own\", was the first philosopher to call himself an egoist, though his writing makes clear that he desired not a new idea of morality (ethical egoism), but rather a rejection of morality (amoralism), as a nonexistent and limiting \"spook\"; for this, Stirner has been described as the first individualist anarchist. Other philosophers, such as Thomas Hobbes and David Gauthier, have argued that the conflicts which arise when people each pursue their own ends can be resolved for the best of each individual only if they all voluntarily forgo some of their aims\u2014that is, one's self-interest is often best pursued by allowing others to pursue their self-interest as well so that liberty is equal among individuals. Sacrificing one's short-term self-interest to maximize one's long-term self-interest is one form of \"rational self-interest\" which is the idea behind most philosophers' advocacy of ethical egoism. Egoists have also argued that one's actual interests are not immediately obvious, and that the pursuit of self-interest involves more than merely the acquisition of some good, but the \"maximizing\" of one's chances of survival and/or happiness.\nPhilosopher Friedrich Nietzsche suggested that egoistic or \"life-affirming\" behavior stimulates jealousy or \"ressentiment\" in others, and that this is the psychological motive for the altruism in Christianity. Sociologist Helmut Schoeck similarly considered envy the motive of collective efforts by society to reduce the disproportionate gains of successful individuals through moral or legal constraints, with altruism being primary among these. In addition, Nietzsche (in \"Beyond Good and Evil\") and Alasdair MacIntyre (in \"After Virtue\") have pointed out that the ancient Greeks did not associate morality with altruism in the way that post-Christian Western civilization has done.\nAristotle's view is that we have duties to ourselves as well as to other people (e.g. friends) and to the \"polis\" as a whole. The same is true for Thomas Aquinas, Christian Wolff and Immanuel Kant, who claim that there are duties to ourselves as Aristotle did, although it has been argued that, for Aristotle, the duty to one's self is primary.\nAyn Rand argued that there is a positive harmony of interests among free, rational humans, such that no moral agent can rationally coerce another person consistently with his own long-term self-interest. Rand argued that other people are an enormous value to an individual's well-being (through education, trade and affection), but also that this value could be fully realized only under conditions of political and economic freedom. According to Rand, voluntary trade alone can assure that human interaction is \"mutually\" beneficial. Rand's student, Leonard Peikoff has argued that the identification of one's interests itself is impossible absent the use of principles, and that self-interest cannot be consistently pursued absent a consistent adherence to certain ethical principles. Recently, Rand's position has also been defended by such writers as Tara Smith, Tibor Machan, Allan Gotthelf, David Kelley, Douglas Rasmussen, Nathaniel Branden, Harry Binswanger, Andrew Bernstein, and Craig Biddle.\nPhilosopher David L. Norton identified himself an \"ethical individualist\", and, like Rand, saw a harmony between an individual's fidelity to his own self-actualization, or \"personal destiny\", and the achievement of society's well-being."}
