{"id": "954", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=954", "title": "Albert Speer", "text": "Berthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer (; ; March 19, 1905\u00a0\u2013 September 1, 1981) served as the Minister of Armaments and War Production in Nazi Germany during most of World War II. A close ally of Adolf Hitler, he was convicted at the Nuremberg trials and sentenced to 20 years in prison.\nAn architect by training, Speer joined the Nazi Party in 1931. His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party, and he became a member of Hitler's inner circle. Hitler instructed him to design and construct structures including the Reich Chancellery and the Nazi party rally grounds in Nuremberg. In 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for Berlin. In this capacity he was responsible for the Central Department for Resettlement that evicted Jewish tenants from their homes in Berlin. In February 1942, Speer was appointed as Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production. Using misleading statistics, he promoted himself as having performed an \"armaments miracle\" that was widely credited with keeping Germany in the war. In 1944, Speer established a task force to increase production of fighter aircraft. It became instrumental in the exploitation of slave labour for the benefit of the German war effort.\nAfter the war, Speer was among the 24 \"major war criminals\" arrested and charged with the crimes of the Nazi regime at the Nuremberg trials. He was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, principally for the use of slave labor, narrowly avoiding a death sentence. Having served his full term, Speer was released in 1966. He used his writings from the time of imprisonment as the basis for two autobiographical books, \"Inside the Third Reich\" and \"\". Speer's books were a success; the public was fascinated by an inside view of the Third Reich. Speer died of a stroke in 1981. Little remains of his personal architectural work.\nThrough his autobiographies and interviews, Speer carefully constructed an image of himself as a man who deeply regretted having failed to discover the monstrous crimes of the Third Reich. He continued to deny explicit knowledge of, and responsibility for the Holocaust. This image dominated his historiography in the decades following the war, giving rise to the \"Speer Myth\": the perception of him as an apolitical technocrat responsible for revolutionizing the German war machine. The myth began to fall apart in the 1980s, when the armaments miracle was attributed to Nazi propaganda. Adam Tooze wrote in \"The Wages of Destruction\" that the idea that Speer was an apolitical technocrat was \"absurd\". Martin Kitchen, writing in \"\", stated that much of the increase in Germany's arms production was actually due to systems instituted by Speer's predecessor (Fritz Todt) and furthermore that Speer was intimately involved in the \"Final Solution\".\nEarly years and personal life.\nSpeer was born in Mannheim, into an upper-middle-class family. He was the second of three sons of Luise M\u00e1thilde Wilhelmine (Hommel) and Albert Friedrich Speer. In 1918, the family leased their Mannheim residence and moved to a home they had in Heidelberg. Henry T. King, deputy prosecutor at the Nuremberg trials who later wrote a book about Speer said, \"Love and warmth were lacking in the household of Speer's youth.\" His brothers, Ernst and Hermann, bullied him throughout his childhood. Speer was active in sports, taking up skiing and mountaineering. He followed in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture.\nSpeer began his architectural studies at the University of Karlsruhe instead of a more highly acclaimed institution because the hyperinflation crisis of 1923 limited his parents' income. In 1924 when the crisis had abated, he transferred to the \"much more reputable\" Technical University of Munich. In 1925 he transferred again, this time to the Technical University of Berlin where he studied under Heinrich Tessenow, whom Speer greatly admired. After passing his exams in 1927, Speer became Tessenow's assistant, a high honor for a man of 22. As such, Speer taught some of his classes while continuing his own postgraduate studies. In Munich Speer began a close friendship, ultimately spanning over 50 years, with Rudolf Wolters, who also studied under Tessenow.\nIn mid-1922, Speer began courting Margarete (Margret) Weber (1905\u20131987), the daughter of a successful craftsman who employed 50 workers. The relationship was frowned upon by Speer's class-conscious mother, who felt the Webers were socially inferior. Despite this opposition, the two married in Berlin on August 28, 1928; seven years elapsed before Margarete was invited to stay at her in-laws' home. The couple would have six children together, but Albert Speer grew increasingly distant from his family after 1933. He remained so even after his release from imprisonment in 1966, despite their efforts to forge closer bonds.\nParty architect and government functionary.\nJoining the Nazis (1931\u20131934).\nIn January 1931, Speer applied for Nazi Party membership, and on March 1, 1931, he became member number 474,481. The same year, with stipends shrinking amid the Depression, Speer surrendered his position as Tessenow's assistant and moved to Mannheim, hoping to make a living as an architect. After he failed to do so, his father gave him a part-time job as manager of his properties. In July\u00a01932, the Speers visited Berlin to help out the Party before the \"Reichstag\" elections. While they were there his friend, Nazi Party official Karl Hanke recommended the young architect to Joseph Goebbels to help renovate the Party's Berlin headquarters. When the commission was completed, Speer returned to Mannheim and remained there as Hitler took office in January\u00a01933.\nThe organizers of the 1933 Nuremberg Rally asked Speer to submit designs for the rally, bringing him into contact with Hitler for the first time. Neither the organizers nor Rudolf Hess were willing to decide whether to approve the plans, and Hess sent Speer to Hitler's Munich apartment to seek his approval. This work won Speer his first national post, as Nazi Party \"Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations\".\nShortly after Hitler came into power, he began to make plans to rebuild the chancellery. At the end of 1933, he contracted Paul Troost to renovate the entire building. Hitler appointed Speer, whose work for Goebbels had impressed him, to manage the building site for Troost. As Chancellor, Hitler had a residence in the building and came by every day to be briefed by Speer and the building supervisor on the progress of the renovations. After one of these briefings, Hitler invited Speer to lunch, to the architect's great excitement. Speer quickly became part of Hitler's inner circle; he was expected to call on him in the morning for a walk or chat, to provide consultation on architectural matters, and to discuss Hitler's ideas. Most days he was invited to dinner.\nIn the English version of his memoirs, Speer says that his political commitment merely consisted of paying his \"monthly dues\". He assumed his German readers would not be so gullible and told them the Nazi Party offered a \"new mission\". He was more forthright in an interview with William Hamsher in which he said he joined the party in order to save \"Germany from Communism\". After the war, he claimed to have had little interest in politics at all and had joined almost by chance. Like many of those in power in the Third Reich, he was not an ideologue, \"nor was he anything more than an instinctive anti-Semite.\" The historian Magnus Brechtken, discussing Speer, said he did not give anti-Jewish public speeches and that his anti-Semitism can best be understood through his actions\u2014which were anti-Semitic. Brechtken added that, throughout Speer's life, his central motives were to gain power, rule, and acquire wealth.\nNazi architect (1934\u20131937).\nWhen Troost died on January 21, 1934, Speer effectively replaced him as the Party's chief architect. Hitler appointed Speer as head of the Chief Office for Construction, which placed him nominally on Hess's staff.\nOne of Speer's first commissions after Troost's death was the \"Zeppelinfeld\" stadium in Nuremberg. It was used for Nazi propaganda rallies and can be seen in Leni Riefenstahl's propaganda film \"Triumph of the Will\". The building was able to hold 340,000 people. Speer insisted that as many events as possible be held at night, both to give greater prominence to his lighting effects and to hide the overweight Nazis. Nuremberg was the site of many official Nazi buildings. Many more buildings were planned. If built, the German Stadium would have accommodated 400,000 spectators. Speer modified Werner March's design for the being built for the 1936 Summer Olympics. He added a stone exterior that pleased Hitler. Speer designed the German Pavilion for the 1937 international exposition in Paris.\nBerlin's General Building Inspector (1937\u20131942).\nIn 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for the Reich Capital. This carried with it the rank of undersecretary of state in the Reich government and gave him extraordinary powers over the Berlin city government. It also made Speer a member of the \"Reichstag\", though the body by then had little effective power. Hitler ordered Speer to develop plans to rebuild Berlin. These centered on a three-mile-long grand boulevard running from north to south, which Speer called the \"Prachtstrasse\", or Street of Magnificence; he also referred to it as the \"North\u2013South Axis\". At the northern end of the boulevard, Speer planned to build the \"Volkshalle\", a huge domed assembly hall over high, with floor space for 180,000 people. At the southern end of the avenue, a great triumphal arch, almost high and able to fit the Arc de Triomphe inside its opening, was planned. The existing Berlin railroad termini were to be dismantled, and two large new stations built. Speer hired Wolters as part of his design team, with special responsibility for the \"Prachtstrasse\". The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the postponement, and later the abandonment, of these plans.\nPlans to build a new Reich chancellery had been underway since 1934. Land had been purchased by the end of 1934 and starting in March 1936 the first buildings were demolished to create space at Vo\u00dfstra\u00dfe. Speer was involved virtually from the beginning. In the aftermath of the Night of the Long Knives, he had been commissioned to renovate the Borsig Palace on the corner of Vo\u00dfstra\u00dfe and Wilhelmstra\u00dfe as headquarters of the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA). He completed the preliminary work for the new chancellery by May 1936. In June 1936 he charged a personal honorarium of 30,000 Reichsmark and estimated the chancellery would be completed within three to four years. Detailed plans were completed in July 1937 and the first shell of the new chancellery was complete on January 1, 1938. On January 27, 1938, Speer received plenipotentiary powers from Hitler to finish the new chancellery by January 1, 1939. For propaganda Hitler claimed during the topping-out ceremony on August 2, 1938, that he had ordered Speer to complete the new chancellery that year. Shortages of labor meant the construction workers had to work in ten-to-twelve-hour shifts. The \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) built two concentration camps in 1938 and used the inmates to quarry stone for its construction. A brick factory was built near the Oranienburg concentration camp at Speer's behest; when someone commented on the poor conditions there, Speer stated, \"The Yids got used to making bricks while in Egyptian captivity\". The chancellery was completed in early January 1939. The building itself was hailed by Hitler as the \"crowning glory of the greater German political empire\".\nDuring the Chancellery project, the pogrom of \"Kristallnacht\" took place. Speer made no mention of it in the first draft of \"Inside the Third Reich\". It was only on the urgent advice of his publisher that he added a mention of seeing the ruins of the Central Synagogue in Berlin from his car. \"Kristallnacht\" accelerated Speer's ongoing efforts to dispossess Berlin's Jews from their homes. From 1939 on, Speer's Department used the Nuremberg Laws to evict Jewish tenants of non-Jewish landlords in Berlin, to make way for non-Jewish tenants displaced by redevelopment or bombing. Eventually, 75,000 Jews were displaced by these measures. Speer denied he knew they were being put on Holocaust trains and claimed that those displaced were, \"Completely free and their families were still in their apartments\". He also said: \"\u00a0... en route to my ministry on the city highway, I could see\u00a0... crowds of people on the platform of nearby Nikolassee Railroad Station. I knew that these must be Berlin Jews who were being evacuated. I am sure that an oppressive feeling struck me as I drove past. I presumably had a sense of somber events.\" Matthias Schmidt said Speer had personally inspected concentration camps and described his comments as an \"outright farce\". Martin Kitchen described Speer's often repeated line that he knew nothing of the \"dreadful things\" as hollow\u2014because not only was he fully aware of the fate of the Jews he was actively participating in their persecution.\nAs Germany started World War II in Europe, Speer instituted quick-reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris; before long, these units would be used to clear bomb sites. Speer used forced Jewish labor on these projects, in addition to regular German workers. Construction stopped on the Berlin and N\u00fcremberg plans at the outbreak of war. Though stockpiling of materials and other work continued, this slowed to a halt as more resources were needed for the armament industry. Speer's offices undertook building work for each branch of the military, and for the SS, using slave labor. Speer's building work made him among the wealthiest of the Nazi elite.\nMinister of Armaments.\nAppointment and increasing power.\nOn February 8, 1942, Minister of Armaments Fritz Todt died in a plane crash shortly after taking off from Hitler's eastern headquarters at Rastenburg. Speer arrived there the previous evening and accepted Todt's offer to fly with him to Berlin. Speer cancelled some hours before take-off because the previous night he had been up late in a meeting with Hitler. Hitler appointed Speer in Todt's place. Martin Kitchen, a British historian, says that the choice was not surprising. Speer was loyal to Hitler, and his experience building prisoner of war camps and other structures for the military qualified him for the job. Hitler also appointed Speer as head of the Organisation Todt, a massive, government-controlled construction company. Characteristically Hitler did not give Speer any clear remit; he was left to fight his contemporaries in the regime for power and control. As an example, he wanted to be given power over all armaments issues under Hermann G\u00f6ring's Four Year Plan. G\u00f6ring was reluctant to grant this. However Speer secured Hitler's support, and on March 1, 1942, G\u00f6ring signed a decree naming Speer \"General Plenipotentiary for Armament Tasks\" in the Four Year Plan. Speer proved to be ambitious, unrelenting and ruthless. Speer set out to gain control not just of armaments production in the army, but in the whole armed forces. It did not immediately dawn on his political rivals that his calls for rationalization and reorganization were hiding his desire to sideline them and take control.\nSpeer was f\u00eated at the time, and in the post-war era, for performing an \"armaments miracle\" in which German war production dramatically increased. This \"miracle\" was brought to a halt in the summer of 1943 by, among other factors, the first sustained Allied bombing. Other factors probably contributed to the increase more than Speer himself. Germany's armaments production had already begun to result in increases under his predecessor, Todt. Naval armaments were not under Speer's supervision until October 1943, nor the Luftwaffe's armaments until June of the following year. Yet each showed comparable increases in production despite not being under Speer's control. Another factor that produced the boom in ammunition was the policy of allocating more coal to the steel industry. Production of every type of weapon peaked in June and July 1944, but there was now a severe shortage of fuel. After August 1944, oil from the Romanian fields was no longer available. Oil production became so low that any possibility of offensive action became impossible and weaponry lay idle.\nAs Minister of Armaments, Speer was responsible for supplying weapons to the army. With Hitler's full agreement, he decided to prioritize tank production, and he was given unrivalled power to ensure success. Hitler was closely involved with the design of the tanks, but kept changing his mind about the specifications. This delayed the program, and Speer was unable to remedy the situation. In consequence, despite tank production having the highest priority, relatively little of the armaments budget was spent on it. This led to a significant German Army failure at the Battle of Prokhorovka, a major turning point on the Eastern Front against the Soviet Red Army.\nAs head of Organisation Todt, Speer was directly involved in the construction and alteration of concentration camps. He agreed to expand Auschwitz and some other camps, allocating 13.7 million Reichsmarks for the work to be carried out. This allowed an extra 300 huts to be built at Auschwitz, increasing the total human capacity to 132,000. Included in the building works was material to build gas chambers, crematoria and morgues. The SS called this \"Professor Speer's Special Programme\".\nSpeer realized that with six million workers drafted into the armed forces, there was a labor shortage in the war economy, and not enough workers for his factories. In response, Hitler appointed Fritz Sauckel as a \"manpower dictator\" to obtain new workers. Speer and Sauckel cooperated closely to meet Speer's labor demands. Hitler gave Sauckel a free hand to obtain labor, something that delighted Speer, who had requested 1,000,000 \"voluntary\" laborers to meet the need for armament workers. Sauckel had whole villages in France, Holland and Belgium forcibly rounded up and shipped to Speer's factories. Sauckel obtained new workers often using the most brutal methods. In occupied areas of the Soviet Union, that had been subject to partisan action, civilian men and women were rounded up en masse and sent to work forcibly in Germany. By April 1943, Sauckel had supplied 1,568,801 \"voluntary\" laborers, forced laborers, prisoners of war and concentration camp prisoners to Speer for use in his armaments factories. It was for the maltreatment of these people, that Speer was principally convicted at the Nuremberg Trials.\nConsolidation of arms production.\nFollowing his appointment as Minister of Armaments, Speer was in control of armaments production solely for the Army. He coveted control of the production of armaments for the \"Luftwaffe\" and \"Kriegsmarine\" as well. He set about extending his power and influence with unexpected ambition. His close relationship with Hitler provided him with political protection, and he was able to outwit and outmanoeuver his rivals in the regime. Hitler's cabinet was dismayed at his tactics, but, regardless, he was able to accumulate new responsibilities and more power. By July 1943, he had gained control of armaments production for the \"Luftwaffe\" and \"Kriegsmarine\". In August 1943, he took control of most of the Ministry of Economics, to become, in Admiral D\u00f6nitz's words, \"Europe's economic dictator\". His formal title was changed on September 2, 1943 to \"Reich Minister for Armaments and War Production\". He had become one of the most powerful people in Nazi Germany.\nSpeer and his hand-picked director of submarine construction Otto Merker believed that the shipbuilding industry was being held back by outdated methods, and revolutionary new approaches imposed by outsiders would dramatically improve output. This belief proved incorrect, and Speer and Merker's attempt to build the \"Kriegsmarine\"s new generation of submarines, the Type XXI and Type XXIII, as prefabricated sections at different facilities rather than at single dockyards contributed to the failure of this strategically important program. The designs were rushed into production, and the completed submarines were crippled by flaws which resulted from the way they had been constructed. While dozens of submarines were built, few ever entered service.\nIn December 1943, Speer visited Organisation Todt workers in Lapland, while there he seriously damaged his knee and was incapacitated for several months. He was under the dubious care of Professor Karl Gebhardt at a medical clinic called Hohenlychen where patients \"mysteriously failed to survive\". In mid-January 1944, Speer had a lung embolism and fell seriously ill. Concerned about retaining power, he did not appoint a deputy and continued to direct work of the Armaments Ministry from his bedside. Speer's illness coincided with the Allied \"Big Week\", a series of bombing raids on the German aircraft factories that were a devastating blow to aircraft production. His political rivals used the opportunity to undermine his authority and damage his reputation with Hitler. He lost Hitler's unconditional support and began to lose power.\nIn response to the Allied Big Week, Adolf Hitler authorized the creation of a Fighter Staff committee. Its aim was to ensure the preservation and growth of fighter aircraft production. The task force was established by the March 1, 1944, orders of Speer, with support from Erhard Milch of the Reich Aviation Ministry. Production of German fighter aircraft more than doubled between 1943 and 1944. The growth, however, consisted in large part of models that were becoming obsolescent and proved easy prey for Allied aircraft. On August 1, 1944, Speer merged the Fighter Staff into a newly formed Armament Staff committee.\nThe Fighter Staff committee was instrumental in bringing about the increased exploitation of slave labor in the war economy. The SS provided 64,000 prisoners for 20 separate projects from various concentration camps including Mittelbau-Dora. Prisoners worked for Junkers, Messerschmitt, Henschel and , among others. To increase production, Speer introduced a system of punishments for his workforce. Those who feigned illness, slacked off, sabotaged production or tried to escape were denied food or sent to concentration camps. In 1944 this became endemic; over half a million workers were arrested. By this time, 140,000 people were working in Speer's underground factories. These factories were death-traps; discipline was brutal, with regular executions. There were so many corpses at the Dora underground factory, for example, that the crematorium was overwhelmed. Speer's own staff described the conditions there as \"hell\".\nThe largest technological advance under Speer's command came through the rocket program. It began in 1932 but had not supplied any weaponry. Speer enthusiastically supported the program and in March 1942 made an order for A4 rockets, the predecessor of the world's first ballistic missile, the V-2 rocket. The rockets were researched at a facility in Peenem\u00fcnde along with the V-1 flying bomb. The V-2's first target was Paris on September 8, 1944. The program while advanced proved to be an impediment to the war economy. The large capital investment was not repaid in military effectiveness. The rockets were built at an underground factory at Mittelwerk. Labor to build the A4 rockets came from the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp. Of the 60,000 people who ended up at the camp 20,000 died, due to the appalling conditions.\nBy the summer of 1944 Speer had lost control of Organisation Todt and armaments. He opposed the assassination attempt against Hitler on July 20, 1944. He was not involved in the plot, and played a minor role in the regime's efforts to regain control over Berlin after Hitler survived. After the plot Speer's rivals attacked some of his closest allies and his management system fell out of favor with radicals in the party. He lost yet more authority.\nDefeat of Nazi Germany.\nLosses of territory and a dramatic expansion of the Allied strategic bombing campaign caused the collapse of the German economy from late 1944. Air attacks on the transport network were particularly effective, as they cut the main centres of production off from essential coal supplies. In January 1945, Speer told Goebbels that armaments production could be sustained for at least a year. However, he concluded that the war was lost after Soviet forces captured the important Silesian industrial region later that month. Nevertheless, Speer believed that Germany should continue the war for as long as possible with the goal of winning better conditions from the Allies than the unconditional surrender they insisted upon. During January and February, Speer claimed that his ministry would deliver \"decisive weapons\" and a large increase in armaments production which would \"bring about a dramatic change on the battlefield\". Speer gained control over the railways in February, and asked Himmler to supply concentration camp prisoners to work on their repair.\nBy mid-March, Speer had accepted that Germany's economy would collapse within the next eight weeks. While he sought to frustrate directives to destroy industrial facilities in areas at risk of capture, so that they could be used after the war, he still supported the war's continuation. Speer provided Hitler with a memorandum on March 15, which detailed Germany's dire economic situation and sought approval to cease demolitions of infrastructure. Three days later, he also proposed to Hitler that Germany's remaining military resources be concentrated along the Rhine and Vistula rivers in an attempt to prolong the fighting. This ignored military realities, as the German armed forces were unable to match the Allies' firepower and were facing total defeat. Hitler rejected Speer's proposal to cease demolitions. Instead, he issued the \"Nero Decree\" on March 19, which called for the destruction of all infrastructure as the army retreated. Speer was appalled by this order, and persuaded several key military and political leaders to ignore it. During a meeting with Speer on March 28/29, Hitler rescinded the decree and gave him authority over demolitions. Speer ended them, though the army continued to blow up bridges.\nBy April, little was left of the armaments industry, and Speer had few official duties. Speer visited the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" on April 22 for the last time. He met Hitler and toured the damaged Chancellery before leaving Berlin to return to Hamburg. On April 29, the day before committing suicide, Hitler dictated a final political testament which dropped Speer from the successor government. Speer was to be replaced by his subordinate, Karl-Otto Saur. Speer was disappointed that Hitler had not selected him as his successor. After Hitler's death, Speer offered his services to the so-called Flensburg Government, headed by Hitler's successor, Karl D\u00f6nitz. He took a role in that short-lived regime as Minister of Industry and Production. Speer provided information to the Allies, regarding the effects of the air war, and on a broad range of subjects, beginning on May 10. On May 23, two weeks after the surrender of German forces, British troops arrested the members of the Flensburg Government and brought Nazi Germany to a formal end.\nPost-war.\nNuremberg trial.\nSpeer was taken to several internment centres for Nazi officials and interrogated. In September 1945, he was told that he would be tried for war crimes, and several days later, he was moved to Nuremberg and incarcerated there. Speer was indicted on four counts: participating in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of crime against peace; planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace; war crimes; and crimes against humanity.\nThe chief United States prosecutor, Robert H. Jackson, of the U.S. Supreme Court said, \"Speer joined in planning and executing the program to dragoon prisoners of war and foreign workers into German war industries, which waxed in output while the workers waned in starvation.\" Speer's attorney, Hans Fl\u00e4chsner, presented Speer as an artist thrust into political life who had always remained a non-ideologue.\nSpeer was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, principally for the use of slave labor and forced labor. He was acquitted on the other two counts. He had claimed that he was unaware of Nazi extermination plans, and the Allies had no proof that he was aware, and this probably saved him from hanging. His claim was revealed to be false in a private correspondence written in 1971 and publicly disclosed in 2007. On October 1, 1946, he was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. While three of the eight judges (two Soviet and American Francis Biddle) advocated the death penalty for Speer, the other judges did not, and a compromise sentence was reached after two days of discussions.\nImprisonment.\nOn July 18, 1947, Speer was transferred to Spandau Prison in Berlin to serve his prison term. There he was known as Prisoner Number Five. Speer's parents died while he was incarcerated. His father, who died in 1947, despised the Nazis and was silent upon meeting Hitler. His mother died in 1952. As a Nazi Party member, she had greatly enjoyed dining with Hitler. Wolters and longtime Speer secretary Annemarie Kempf, while not permitted direct communication with Speer in Spandau did what they could to help his family and carry out the requests Speer put in letters to his wife\u2014the only written communication he was officially allowed. Beginning in 1948, Speer had the services of Toni Proost, a sympathetic Dutch orderly to smuggle mail and his writings.\nIn 1949, Wolters opened a bank account for Speer and began fundraising among those architects and industrialists who had benefited from Speer's activities during the war. Initially, the funds were used only to support Speer's family, but increasingly the money was used for other purposes. They paid for Toni Proost to go on holiday, and for bribes to those who might be able to secure Speer's release. Once Speer became aware of the existence of the fund, he sent detailed instructions about what to do with the money. Wolters raised a total of DM158,000 for Speer over the final seventeen years of his sentence.\nThe prisoners were forbidden to write memoirs. Speer was able to have his writings sent to Wolters, however, and they eventually amounted to 20,000 pages. He had completed his memoirs by November 1953, which became the basis of \"Inside the Third Reich\". In \"Spandau Diaries\", Speer aimed to present himself as a tragic hero who had made a Faustian bargain for which he endured a harsh prison sentence.\nMuch of Speer's energy was dedicated to keeping fit, both physically and mentally, during his long confinement. Spandau had a large enclosed yard where inmates were allocated plots of land for gardening. Speer created an elaborate garden complete with lawns, flower beds, shrubbery, and fruit trees. To make his daily walks around the garden more engaging Speer embarked on an imaginary trip around the globe. Carefully measuring distance travelled each day, he mapped distances to the real-world geography. He had walked more than , ending his sentence near Guadalajara, Mexico. Speer also read, studied architectural journals, and brushed up on English and French. In his writings, Speer claimed to have finished five thousand books while in prison, a gross exaggeration. His sentence amounted to 7,300 days, which only allotted one and a half days per book.\nSpeer's supporters maintained calls for his release. Among those who pledged support for his sentence to be commuted were Charles de Gaulle and US diplomat George Wildman Ball. Willy Brandt was an advocate of his release, putting an end to the de-Nazification proceedings against him, which could have caused his property to be confiscated. Speer's efforts for an early release came to naught. The Soviet Union, having demanded a death sentence at trial, was unwilling to entertain a reduced sentence. Speer served a full term and was released at midnight on October 1, 1966.\nRelease and later life.\nSpeer's release from prison was a worldwide media event. Reporters and photographers crowded both the street outside Spandau and the lobby of the Berlin hotel where Speer spent the night. He said little, reserving most comments for a major interview published in \"Der Spiegel\" in November 1966. Although he stated he hoped to resume an architectural career, his sole project, a collaboration for a brewery, was unsuccessful. Instead, he revised his Spandau writings into two autobiographical books, and later published a work about Himmler and the SS. His books included \"Inside the Third Reich\" (in German, \"Erinnerungen\", or \"Reminiscences\") and \"\". Speer was aided in shaping the works by Joachim Fest and Wolf Jobst Siedler from the publishing house Ullstein. He found himself unable to re-establish a relationship with his children, even with his son Albert who had also become an architect. According to Speer's daughter Hilde Schramm, \"One by one my sister and brothers gave up. There was no communication.\" He supported Hermann, his brother, financially after the war. However, his other brother Ernst had died in the Battle of Stalingrad, despite repeated requests from his parents for Speer to repatriate him.\nFollowing his release from Spandau, Speer donated the \"Chronicle\", his personal diary, to the German Federal Archives. It had been edited by Wolters and made no mention of the Jews. David Irving discovered discrepancies between the deceptively edited \"Chronicle\" and independent documents. Speer asked Wolters to destroy the material he had omitted from his donation but Wolters refused and retained an original copy. Wolters' friendship with Speer deteriorated and one year before Speer's death Wolters gave Matthias Schmidt access to the unedited \"Chronicle\". Schmidt authored the first book that was highly critical of Speer.\nSpeer's memoirs were a phenomenal success. The public was fascinated by an inside view of the Third Reich and a major war criminal became a popular figure almost overnight. Importantly, he provided an alibi to older Germans who had been Nazis. If Speer, who had been so close to Hitler, had not known the full extent of the crimes of the Nazi regime and had just been \"following orders\", then they could tell themselves and others they too had done the same. Speer provided a whitewash for an entire generation of older Germans. So great was the need to believe this \"Speer Myth\" that Fest and Siedler were able to strengthen it\u2014even in the face of mounting historical evidence to the contrary.\nDeath.\nSpeer made himself widely available to historians and other enquirers. In October 1973, he made his first trip to Britain, flying to London to be interviewed on the BBC \"Midweek\" programme. In the same year, he appeared on the television programme \"The World at War\". Speer returned to London in 1981 to participate in the BBC \"Newsnight\" programme. He suffered a stroke and died in London on September 1.\nHe had remained married to his wife, but he had formed a relationship with a German woman living in London and was with her at the time of his death. His daughter, Margret Nissen, wrote in her 2005 memoirs that after his release from Spandau he spent all of his time constructing the \"Speer Myth\".\nThe Speer myth.\nThe Good Nazi.\nAfter his release from Spandau, Speer portrayed himself as the \"good Nazi\". He was well-educated, middle class, bourgeois and could contrast himself with the psychopaths and murderers who, in the popular mind, typified \"bad Nazis\". In his memoirs and interviews, he had distorted the truth and made so many major omissions that his lies became known as \"myths\". Speer took his myth-making to a mass media level and his \"cunning apologies\" were reproduced countless times in post-war Germany. Isabell Trommer writes in her biography of Speer that Fest and Siedler were co-authors of Speer's memoirs and co-creators of his myths. In return they were paid handsomely in royalties and other financial inducements. Speer, Siedler and Fest had constructed a masterpiece; the image of the \"good Nazi\" remained in place for decades, despite historical evidence indicating that it was false.\nSpeer had carefully constructed an image of himself as an apolitical technocrat who deeply regretted having failed to discover the monstrous crimes of the Third Reich. This construction was accepted almost at face value by historian Hugh Trevor-Roper when investigating the death of Adolf Hitler for British Intelligence and in writing \"The Last Days of Hitler\". Trevor-Roper frequently refers to Speer as \"a technocrat [who] nourished a technocrat's philosophy\", one who cared only for his building projects or his ministerial duties, and who thought that politics was irrelevant, at least until Hitler's Nero Decree which Speer, according to his own telling, worked assiduously to counter. Trevor-Roper \u2013 who calls Speer an administrative genius whose basic instincts were peaceful and constructive \u2013 does take Speer to task, however, for his failure to recognize the immorality of Hitler and Nazism, calling him \"the real criminal of Nazi Germany\":\nFor ten years he sat at the very centre of political power; his keen intelligence diagnosed the nature and observed the mutations of Nazi government and policy; he saw and despised the personalities around him; he heard their outrageous orders and understood their fantastic ambitions; but he did nothing. Supposing politics to be irrelevant, he turned aside and built roads and bridges and factories, while the logical consequences of government by madmen emerged. Ultimately, when their emergence involved the ruin of all his work, Speer accepted the consequences and acted. Then it was too late; Germany had been destroyed.\nAfter Speer's death, Matthias Schmidt published a book that demonstrated that Speer had ordered the eviction of Jews from their Berlin homes. By 1999, historians had amply demonstrated that he had lied extensively. Even so, public perceptions of Speer did not change substantially until Heinrich Breloer aired a biographical film on TV in 2004. The film began a process of demystification and critical reappraisal. Adam Tooze in his book \"The Wages of Destruction\" said Speer had manoeuvred himself through the ranks of the regime skillfully and ruthlessly and that the idea he was a technocrat blindly carrying out orders was \"absurd\". Trommer said he was not an apolitical technocrat; instead, he was one of the most powerful and unscrupulous leaders in the Nazi regime. Kitchen said he had deceived the Nuremberg Tribunal and post-war Germany. Brechtken said that if his extensive involvement in the Holocaust had been known at the time of his trial he would have been sentenced to death.\nThe image of the good Nazi was supported by numerous Speer myths. In addition to the myth that he was an apolitical technocrat, he claimed he did not have full knowledge of the Holocaust or the persecution of the Jews. Another myth posits that Speer revolutionized the German war machine after his appointment as Minister of Armaments. He was credited with a dramatic increase in the shipment of arms that was widely reported as keeping Germany in the war. Another myth centered around a faked plan to assassinate Hitler with poisonous gas. The idea for this myth came to him after he recalled the panic when car fumes came through an air ventilation system. He fabricated the additional details. Brechtken wrote that his most brazen lie was fabricated during an interview with a French journalist in 1952. The journalist described an invented scenario in which Speer had refused Hitler's orders and Hitler had left with tears in his eyes. Speer liked the scenario so much that he wrote it into his memoirs. The journalist had unwittingly collaborated in one of his myths.\nSpeer also sought to portray himself as an opponent of Hitler's leadership. Despite his opposition to the 20 July plot, he falsely claimed in his memoirs to have been sympathetic to the plotters. He maintained Hitler was cool towards him for the remainder of his life after learning they had included him on a list of potential ministers. This formed a key element of the myths Speer encouraged. Speer also falsely claimed that he had realised the war was lost at an early stage, and thereafter worked to preserve the resources needed for the civilian population's survival. In reality, he had sought to prolong the war until further resistance was impossible, thus contributing to the large number of deaths and the extensive destruction Germany suffered in the conflict's final months.\nDenial of responsibility.\nSpeer maintained at the Nuremberg trials and in his memoirs that he had no direct knowledge of the Holocaust. He admitted only to being uncomfortable around Jews in the published version of the \"Spandau Diaries\". More broadly, Speer accepted responsibility for the Nazi regime's actions. Historian Martin Kitchen states that Speer was actually \"fully aware of what had happened to the Jews\" and was \"intimately involved in the 'Final Solution'\". Brechtken said Speer only admitted to a generalized responsibility for the Holocaust to hide his direct and actual responsibility. Speer was photographed with slave laborers at Mauthausen concentration camp during a visit on March 31, 1943; he also visited Gusen concentration camp. Although survivor Francisco Boix testified at the Nuremberg trials about Speer's visit, Taylor writes that, had the photo been available, he would have been hanged. In 2005, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that documents had surfaced indicating that Speer had approved the allocation of materials for the expansion of Auschwitz concentration camp after two of his assistants inspected the facility on a day when almost a thousand Jews were massacred. Heinrich Breloer, discussing the construction of Auschwitz, said Speer was not just a cog in the work\u2014he was the \"terror itself\".\nSpeer denied being present at the Posen speeches to Nazi leaders at a conference in Posen (Pozna\u0144) on October 6, 1943. Himmler said during his speech, \"The grave decision had to be taken to cause this people to vanish from the earth\", and later, \"The Jews must be exterminated\". Speer is mentioned several times in the speech, and Himmler addresses him directly. In 2007, \"The Guardian\" reported that a letter from Speer dated December 23, 1971, had been found in a collection of his correspondence with H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Jeanty, the widow of a Belgian resistance fighter. In the letter, Speer says, \"There is no doubt\u2014I was present as Himmler announced on October 6, 1943, that all Jews would be killed.\"\nArmaments \"miracle\".\nSpeer was credited with an \"armaments miracle\". During the winter of 1941\u201342, in the light of Germany's disastrous defeat in the Battle of Moscow, the German leadership including Fromm, Thomas and Todt had come to the conclusion that the war could not be won. The rational position to adopt was to seek a political solution that would end the war without defeat. Speer in response used his propaganda expertise to display a new dynamism of the war economy. He produced spectacular statistics, claiming a sixfold increase in munitions production, a fourfold increase in artillery production, and he sent further propaganda to the newsreels of the country. He was able to curtail the discussion that the war should be ended.\nThe armaments \"miracle\" was a myth; Speer had used statistical manipulation to support his claims. The production of armaments did go up; however, this was due to the normal causes of reorganization before Speer came to office, the relentless mobilization of slave labor and a deliberate reduction in the quality of output to favor quantity. By July 1943 Speer's armaments propaganda became irrelevant because a catalogue of dramatic defeats on the battlefield meant the prospect of losing the war could no longer be hidden from the German public. Brechtken writes that Speer knew Germany was going to lose the war and deliberately extended its length, thus causing the deaths of millions of people in the death camps and on the battlefield who would have otherwise lived. Kitchen said \"There can be no doubt that Speer did indeed help to prolong the war longer than many thought possible, as a result of which millions were killed and Germany reduced to a pile of rubble\".\nArchitectural legacy.\nLittle remains of Speer's personal architectural works, other than the plans and photographs. No buildings designed by Speer during the Nazi era are extant in Berlin, other than the \"Schwerbelastungsk\u00f6rper\", a heavy load-bearing body built around 1941. The concrete cylinder, high, was used to measure ground subsidence as part of feasibility studies for a massive triumphal arch and other large structures proposed as part of \"Welthauptstadt Germania\", Hitler's planned post-war renewal project for the city. The cylinder is now a protected landmark and is open to the public. The tribune of the \"Zeppelinfeld\" stadium in Nuremberg, though partly demolished, can also be seen.\nDuring the war, the Speer-designed Reich Chancellery was largely destroyed by air raids and in the Battle of Berlin. The exterior walls survived, but they were eventually dismantled by the Soviets. Unsubstantiated rumors have claimed that the remains were used for other building projects such as the Humboldt University, Mohrenstra\u00dfe metro station and Soviet war memorials in Berlin.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\nCitations\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "956", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=956", "title": "Asteraceae", "text": "The family Asteraceae, alternatively Compositae, consists of over 32,000 known species of flowering plants in over 1,900 genera within the order Asterales. Commonly referred to as the aster, daisy, composite, or sunflower family, Compositae were first described in 1740. The number of species in Asteraceae is rivaled only by the Orchidaceae, and which is the larger family is unclear as the quantity of extant species in each family is unknown. \nMost species of Asteraceae are annual, biennial, or perennial herbaceous plants, but there are also shrubs, vines, and trees. The family has a widespread distribution, from subpolar to tropical regions in a wide variety of habitats. Most occur in hot desert and cold or hot semi-desert climates, and they are found on every continent but Antarctica. The primary common characteristic is the existence of sometimes hundreds of tiny individual florets which are held together by protective involucres in flower heads, or more technically, \"capitula\".\nThe oldest known fossils are pollen grains from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian to Maastrichtian) of Antarctica, dated to \u223c76\u201366 million years (myr). It is estimated that the crown group of Asteraceae evolved at least 85.9 myr (Late Cretaceous, Santonian) with a stem node age of 88\u201389 myr (Late Cretaceous, Coniacian).\nAsteraceae is an economically important family, providing food staples, garden plants, and herbal medicines. Species outside of their native ranges can be considered weedy or invasive.\nDescription.\nMembers of the Asteraceae are mostly herbaceous plants, but some shrubs, vines, and trees (such as \"Lachanodes arborea\") do exist. Asteraceae species are generally easy to distinguish from other plants because of their unique inflorescence and other shared characteristics. However, determining genera and species of some groups such as \"Hieracium\" is notoriously difficult (see \"damned yellow composite\" for example).\nRoots.\nMembers of the family Asteraceae generally produce taproots, but sometimes they possess fibrous root systems. Some species have underground stems in the form of caudices or rhizomes. These can be fleshy or woody depending on the species.\nStems.\nStems are herbaceous, aerial, branched, and cylindrical with glandular hairs, generally erect, but can be prostrate to ascending. The stems can contain secretory canals with resin, or latex which is particularly common among the Cichorioideae.\nLeaves.\nLeaves can be alternate, opposite, or whorled. They may be simple, but are often deeply lobed or otherwise incised, often conduplicate or revolute. The margins also can be entire or toothed. Resin or latex also can be present in the leaves. \nInflorescences.\nNearly all Asteraceae bear their flowers in dense flower heads called \"capitula\". They are surrounded by involucral bracts, and when viewed from a distance, each capitulum may appear to be a single flower. Enlarged outer (peripheral) flowers in the capitulum may resemble petals, and the involucral bracts may look like a calyx.\nFloral heads.\nIn plants of the family Asteraceae, what appears to be a single flower is actually a cluster of much smaller flowers. The overall appearance of the cluster, as a single flower, functions in attracting pollinators in the same way as the structure of an individual flower in some other plant families. The older family name, Compositae, comes from the fact that what appears to be a single flower is actually a \"composite\" of smaller flowers.\nThe \"petals\" or \"sunrays\" in a sunflower head are actually individual strap-shaped flowers called ray flowers, and the \"sun disk\" is made of smaller circular shaped individual flowers called disc flowers. The word \"aster\" means \"star\" in Greek, referring to the appearance of some family members, as a \"star\" surrounded by \"rays\". The cluster of flowers that may appear to be a single flower, is called a \"head\". The entire head may move tracking the sun, like a \"smart\" solar panel, which maximizes reflectivity of the whole unit and can thereby attract more pollinators.\nOn the outside the flower heads are small bracts that look like scales. These are called \"phyllaries\", and together they form the involucre that protects the individual flowers in the head before they open. The individual heads have the smaller individual flowers arranged on a round or dome-like structure called the \"receptacle\". The flowers mature first at the outside, moving toward the center, with the youngest in the middle.\nThe individual flowers in a head have 5 fused petals (rarely 4), but instead of sepals, have threadlike, hairy, or bristly structures called \"pappus\", which surround the fruit and can stick to animal fur or be lifted by wind, aiding in seed dispersal. The whitish fluffy head of a dandelion, commonly blown on by children, is made of the pappus, with tiny seeds attached at the ends, whereby the pappus provides a parachute like structure to help the seed be carried away in the wind.\nA \"ray flower\" is a 3-tipped (3-lobed), strap-shaped, individual flower in the head of some members of the family Asteraceae. Sometimes a ray flower is 2-tipped (2-lobed). The corolla of the ray flower may have 2 tiny teeth opposite the 3-lobed strap, or tongue, indicating evolution by fusion from an originally 5-part corolla. Sometimes, the 3:2 arrangement is reversed, with 2 tips on the tongue, and 0 or 3 tiny teeth opposite the tongue. A \"ligulate flower\" is a 5-tipped, strap-shaped, individual flower in the heads of other members. A \"ligule\" is the strap-shaped tongue of the corolla of either a ray flower or of a ligulate flower. A \"disk flower\" (or \"disc flower\") is a radially symmetric (i.e., with identical shaped petals arranged in circle around the center) individual flower in the head, which is ringed by ray flowers when both are present. Sometimes ray flowers may be slightly off from radial symmetry, or weakly bilaterally symmetric, as in the case of desert pincushions \"Chaenactis fremontii\".\nA \"radiate head\" has disc flowers surrounded by ray flowers. A \"ligulate head\" has all ligulate flowers. When a sunflower family flower head has only disc flowers that are sterile, male, or have both male and female parts, it is a \"discoid head\". \"Disciform heads\" have only disc flowers, but may have two kinds (male flowers and female flowers) in one head, or may have different heads of two kinds (all male, or all female). \"Pistillate heads\" have all female flowers. \"Staminate heads\" have all male flowers. Sometimes, but rarely, the head contains only a single flower, or has a single flowered pistillate (female) head, and a multi-flowered male staminate (male) head.\nFloral structures.\nThe distinguishing characteristic of Asteraceae is their inflorescence, a type of specialised, composite flower head or \"pseudanthium\", technically called a calathium or \"capitulum\", that may look superficially like a single flower. The \"capitulum\" is a contracted raceme composed of numerous individual sessile flowers, called \"florets\", all sharing the same receptacle.\nA set of bracts forms an involucre surrounding the base of the capitulum. These are called \"phyllaries\", or \"involucral bracts\". They may simulate the sepals of the pseudanthium. These are mostly herbaceous but can also be brightly coloured (e.g. \"Helichrysum\") or have a scarious (dry and membranous) texture. The phyllaries can be free or fused, and arranged in one to many rows, overlapping like the tiles of a roof (\"imbricate\") or not (this variation is important in identification of tribes and genera).\nEach floret may be subtended by a bract, called a \"palea\" or \"receptacular bract\". These bracts are often called \"chaff\". The presence or absence of these bracts, their distribution on the receptacle, and their size and shape are all important diagnostic characteristics for genera and tribes.\nThe florets have five petals fused at the base to form a corolla tube and they may be either actinomorphic or zygomorphic. \"Disc florets\" are usually actinomorphic, with five petal lips on the rim of the corolla tube. The petal lips may be either very short, or long, in which case they form deeply lobed petals. The latter is the only kind of floret in the Carduoideae, while the first kind is more widespread. \"Ray florets\" are always highly zygomorphic and are characterised by the presence of a \"ligule\", a strap-shaped structure on the edge of the corolla tube consisting of fused petals. In the Asteroideae and other minor subfamilies these are usually borne only on florets at the circumference of the capitulum and have a 3+2 scheme \u2013 above the fused corolla tube, three very long fused petals form the ligule, with the other two petals being inconspicuously small. The Cichorioideae has only ray florets, with a 5+0 scheme \u2013 all five petals form the ligule. A 4+1 scheme is found in the Barnadesioideae. The tip of the ligule is often divided into teeth, each one representing a petal. Some marginal florets may have no petals at all (filiform floret).\nThe calyx of the florets may be absent, but when present is always modified into a pappus of two or more teeth, scales or bristles and this is often involved in the dispersion of the seeds. As with the bracts, the nature of the pappus is an important diagnostic feature.\nThere are usually five stamens. The filaments are fused to the corolla, while the anthers are generally connate (\"syngenesious\" anthers), thus forming a sort of tube around the style (\"theca\"). They commonly have basal and/or apical appendages. Pollen is released inside the tube and is collected around the growing style, and then, as the style elongates, is pushed out of the tube (\"n\u00fcdelspritze\").\nThe pistil consists of two connate carpels. The style has two lobes. Stigmatic tissue may be located in the interior surface or form two lateral lines. The ovary is inferior and has only one ovule, with basal placentation.\nFruits and seeds.\nIn members of the Asteraceae the fruit is achene-like, and is called a \"cypsela\" (plural \"cypselae\"). Although there are two fused carpels, there is only one locule, and only one seed per fruit is formed. It may sometimes be winged or spiny because the pappus, which is derived from calyx tissue often remains on the fruit (for example in dandelion). In some species, however, the pappus falls off (for example in \"Helianthus\"). Cypsela morphology is often used to help determine plant relationships at the genus and species level. The mature seeds usually have little endosperm or none.\nPollen.\nThe pollen of composites is typically echinolophate, a morphological term meaning \"with elaborate systems of ridges and spines dispersed around and between the apertures.\"\nMetabolites.\nIn Asteraceae, the energy store is generally in the form of inulin rather than starch. They produce iso/chlorogenic acid, sesquiterpene lactones, pentacyclic triterpene alcohols, various alkaloids, acetylenes (cyclic, aromatic, with vinyl end groups), tannins. They have terpenoid essential oils which never contain iridoids.\nAsteraceae produce secondary metabolites, such as flavonoids and terpenoids. Some of these molecules can inhibit protozoan parasites such as \"Plasmodium\", \"Trypanosoma\", \"Leishmania\" and parasitic intestinal worms, and thus have potential in medicine.\nTaxonomy.\nHistory.\nCompositae, the original name for Asteraceae, were first described in 1740 by Dutch botanist Adriaan van Royen. Traditionally, two subfamilies were recognised: Asteroideae (or Tubuliflorae) and Cichorioideae (or Liguliflorae). The latter has been shown to be extensively paraphyletic, and has now been divided into 12 subfamilies, but the former still stands. The study of this family is known as synantherology.\nPhylogeny.\nThe phylogenetic tree presented below is based on Panero &amp; Funk (2002) updated in 2014, and now also includes the monotypic Famatinanthoideae.\nThe diamond (\u2666) denotes a very poorly supported node (&lt;50% bootstrap support), the dot (\u2022) a poorly supported node (&lt;80%).\nThe family includes over 32,000 currently accepted species, in over 1,900 genera (list) in 13 subfamilies. The number of species in the family Asteraceae is rivaled only by Orchidaceae. Which is the larger family is unclear, because of the uncertainty about how many extant species each family includes. The four subfamilies Asteroideae, Cichorioideae, Carduoideae and Mutisioideae contain 99% of the species diversity of the whole family (approximately 70%, 14%, 11% and 3% respectively).\nBecause of the morphological complexity exhibited by this family, agreeing on generic circumscriptions has often been difficult for taxonomists. As a result, several of these genera have required multiple revisions.\nEvolutionary processes.\nThe oldest known fossils of members of Asteraceae are pollen grains from the Late Cretaceous of Antarctica, dated to \u223c76\u201366 myr (Campanian to Maastrichtian) and assigned to the extant genus \"Dasyphyllum\". Barreda, \"et al.\" (2015) estimated that the crown group of Asteraceae evolved at least 85.9 myr (Late Cretaceous, Santonian) with a stem node age of 88\u201389 myr (Late Cretaceous, Coniacian).\nIt is still unknown whether the precise cause of their great success was the development of the highly specialised capitulum, their ability to store energy as fructans (mainly inulin), which is an advantage in relatively dry zones, or some combination of these and possibly other factors. Heterocarpy, or the ability to produce different fruit morphs, has evolved and is common in Asteraceae. It allows seeds to be dispersed over varying distances and each are adapted to different environments, increasing chances of survival.\nEtymology and pronunciation.\nThe name Asteraceae () comes to international scientific vocabulary from New Latin, from \"Aster\", the type genus, + \"-aceae\", a standardized suffix for plant family names in modern taxonomy. The genus name comes from the Classical Latin word , \"star\", which came from Ancient Greek (), \"star\". It refers to the star-like form of the inflorescence. \nThe original name Compositae is still valid under the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants. It refers to the \"composite\" nature of the capitula, which consist of a few or many individual flowers.\nThe vernacular name \"daisy\", widely applied to members of this family, is derived from the Old English name of the daisy (\"Bellis perennis\"): , meaning \"day's eye\". This is because the petals open at dawn and close at dusk.\nDistribution and habitat.\nAsteraceae species have a widespread distribution, from subpolar to tropical regions in a wide variety of habitats. Most occur in hot desert and cold or hot semi-desert climates, and they are found on every continent but Antarctica. They are especially numerous in tropical and subtropical regions (notably Central America, eastern Brazil, the Mediterranean, the Levant, southern Africa, central Asia, and southwestern China). The largest proportion of the species occur in the arid and semi-arid regions of subtropical and lower temperate latitudes. The Asteraceae may represent as much as 10% of indigenous flora in many regions of the world.\nEcology.\nAsteraceae are especially common in open and dry environments. Many members of Asteraceae are pollinated by insects, which explains their value in attracting beneficial insects, but anemophily is also present (e.g. \"Ambrosia\", \"Artemisia\"). There are many apomictic species in the family.\nSeeds are ordinarily dispersed intact with the fruiting body, the cypsela. \"Anemochory\" (wind dispersal) is common, assisted by a hairy pappus. \"Epizoochory\" is another common method, in which the dispersal unit, a single cypsela (e.g. \"Bidens\") or entire capitulum (e.g. \"Arctium\") has hooks, spines or some structure to attach to the fur or plumage (or even clothes, as in the photo) of an animal just to fall off later far from its mother plant. \nSome members of Asteraceae are economically important as weeds. Notable in the United States are \"Senecio jacobaea\" (ragwort), \"Senecio vulgaris\" (groundsel), and \"Taraxacum\" (dandelion). Some are invasive species in particular regions, often having been introduced by human agency. Examples include various tumbleweeds, \"Bidens\", ragweeds, thistles, and dandelion. Dandelion was introduced into North America by European settlers who used the young leaves as a salad green.\nUses.\nAsteraceae is an economically important family, providing products such as cooking oils, leaf vegetables like lettuce, sunflower seeds, artichokes, sweetening agents, coffee substitutes and herbal teas. Several genera are of horticultural importance, including pot marigold (\"Calendula officinalis\"), \"Echinacea\" (coneflowers), various daisies, fleabane, chrysanthemums, dahlias, zinnias, and heleniums. Asteraceae are important in herbal medicine, including \"Grindelia\", yarrow, and many others.\nCommercially important plants in Asteraceae include the food crops \"Lactuca sativa\" (lettuce), \"Cichorium\" (chicory), \"Cynara scolymus\" (globe artichoke), \"Helianthus annuus\" (sunflower), \"Smallanthus sonchifolius\" (yac\u00f3n), \"Carthamus tinctorius\" (safflower) and \"Helianthus tuberosus\" (Jerusalem artichoke).\nPlants are used as herbs and in herbal teas and other beverages. Chamomile, for example, comes from two different species: the annual \"Matricaria chamomilla\" (German chamomile) and the perennial \"Chamaemelum nobile\" (Roman chamomile). \"Calendula\" (known as pot marigold) is grown commercially for herbal teas and potpourri. \"Echinacea\" is used as a medicinal tea. The wormwood genus \"Artemisia\" includes absinthe (\"A. absinthium\") and tarragon (\"A. dracunculus\"). Winter tarragon (\"Tagetes lucida\"), is commonly grown and used as a tarragon substitute in climates where tarragon will not survive.\nMany members of the family are grown as ornamental plants for their flowers, and some are important ornamental crops for the cut flower industry. Some examples are \"Chrysanthemum\", \"Gerbera\", \"Calendula\", \"Dendranthema\", \"Argyranthemum\", \"Dahlia\", \"Tagetes\", \"Zinnia\", and many others.\nMany species of this family possess medicinal properties and are used as traditional antiparasitic medicine.\nMembers of the family are also commonly featured in medical and phytochemical journals because the sesquiterpene lactone compounds contained within them are an important cause of allergic contact dermatitis. Allergy to these compounds is the leading cause of allergic contact dermatitis in florists in the US. Pollen from ragweed \"Ambrosia\" is among the main causes of so-called hay fever in the United States.\nAsteraceae are also used for some industrial purposes. French Marigold (\"Tagetes patula\") is common in commercial poultry feeds and its oil is extracted for uses in cola and the cigarette industry. The genera \"Chrysanthemum\", \"Pulicaria\", \"Tagetes\", and \"Tanacetum\" contain species with useful insecticidal properties. \"Parthenium argentatum\" (guayule) is a source of hypoallergenic latex.\nSeveral members of the family are copious nectar producers and are useful for evaluating pollinator populations during their bloom. \"Centaurea\" (knapweed), \"Helianthus annuus\" (domestic sunflower), and some species of \"Solidago\" (goldenrod) are major \"honey plants\" for beekeepers. \"Solidago\" produces relatively high protein pollen, which helps honey bees over winter."}
{"id": "957", "revid": "1011955256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=957", "title": "Apiaceae", "text": "Apiaceae or Umbelliferae is a family of mostly aromatic flowering plants named after the type genus \"Apium\" and commonly known as the celery, carrot or parsley family, or simply as umbellifers. It is the 16th-largest family of flowering plants, with more than 3,700 species in 434 genera including such well-known and economically important plants such as ajwain, angelica, anise, asafoetida, caraway, carrot, celery, chervil, coriander, cumin, dill, fennel, lovage, cow parsley, parsley, parsnip and sea holly, as well as silphium, a plant whose identity is unclear and which may be extinct.\nThe family Apiaceae includes a significant number of phototoxic species, such as giant hogweed, and a smaller number of highly poisonous species, such as water hemlock, poison hemlock, water dropwort and spotted cowbane.\nDescription.\nMost Apiaceae are annual, biennial or perennial herbs (frequently with the leaves aggregated toward the base), though a minority are woody shrubs or small trees such as \"Bupleurum fruticosum\". Their leaves are of variable size and alternately arranged, or with the upper leaves becoming nearly opposite. The leaves may be petiolate or sessile. There are no stipules but the petioles are frequently sheathing and the leaves may be perfoliate. The leaf blade is usually dissected, ternate, or pinnatifid, but simple and entire in some genera, e.g. \"Bupleurum\". Commonly, their leaves emit a marked smell when crushed, aromatic to foetid, but absent in some species.\nThe defining characteristic of this family is the inflorescence, the flowers nearly always aggregated in terminal umbels, that may be simple or more commonly compound, often umbelliform cymes. The flowers are usually perfect (hermaphroditic) and actinomorphic, but there may be zygomorphic flowers at the edge of the umbel, as in carrot (\"Daucus carota\") and coriander, with petals of unequal size, the ones pointing outward from the umbel larger than the ones pointing inward. Some are andromonoecious, polygamomonoecious, or even dioecious (as in \"Acronema\"), with a distinct calyx and corolla, but the calyx is often highly reduced, to the point of being undetectable in many species, while the corolla can be white, yellow, pink or purple. The flowers are nearly perfectly pentamerous, with five petals, sepals, and stamens.\nThe androecium consists of five stamens, but there is often variation in the functionality of the stamens even within a single inflorescence. Some flowers are functionally staminate (where a pistil may be present but has no ovules capable of being fertilized) while others are functionally pistillate (where stamens are present but their anthers do not produce viable pollen). Pollination of one flower by the pollen of a different flower of the same plant (geitonogamy) is common. The gynoecium consists of two carpels fused into a single, bicarpellate pistil with an inferior ovary. Stylopodia support two styles and secrete nectar, attracting pollinators like flies, mosquitoes, gnats, beetles, moths, and bees. The fruit is a schizocarp consisting of two fused carpels that separate at maturity into two mericarps, each containing a single seed. The fruits of many species are dispersed by wind but others such as those of \"Daucus\" spp., are covered in bristles, which may be hooked in sanicle \"Sanicula europaea\" and thus catch in the fur of animals. The seeds have an oily endosperm and often contain essential oils, containing aromatic compounds that are responsible for the flavour of commercially important umbelliferous seed such as anise, cumin and coriander. The shape and details of the ornamentation of the ripe fruits are important for identification to species level.\nTaxonomy.\nApiaceae was first described by John Lindley in 1836. The name is derived from the type genus \"Apium\", which was originally used by Pliny the Elder circa 50 AD for a celery-like plant. The alternative name for the family, Umbelliferae, derives from the inflorescence being generally in the form of a compound umbel. The family was one of the first to be recognized as a distinct group in Jacques Daleschamps' 1586 \"Historia generalis plantarum\". With Robert Morison's 1672 \"Plantarum umbelliferarum distribution nova\" it became the first group of plants for which a systematic study was published.\nThe family is solidly placed within the Apiales order in the APG III system. It is closely related to Araliaceae and the boundaries between these families remain unclear. Traditionally groups within the family have been delimited largely based on fruit morphology, and the results from this have not been congruent with the more recent molecular phylogenetic analyses. The subfamilial and tribal classification for the family is currently in a state of flux, with many of the groups being found to be grossly paraphyletic or polyphyletic.\nGenera.\nAccording to the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website , 434 genera are in the family Apiaceae.\nEcology.\nThe black swallowtail butterfly, \"Papilio polyxenes\", uses the family Apiaceae for food and host plants for oviposition. The 22-spot ladybird is also commonly found eating mildew on these shrubs.\nUses.\nMany members of this family are cultivated for various purposes. Parsnip (\"Pastinaca sativa\"), carrot (\"Daucus carota\") and Hamburg parsley (\"Petroselinum crispum\") produce tap roots that are large enough to be useful as food. Many species produce essential oils in their leaves or fruits and as a result are flavourful aromatic herbs. Examples are parsley (\"Petroselinum crispum\"), coriander (\"Coriandrum sativum\"), culantro, and dill (\"Anethum graveolens\"). The seeds may be used in cuisine, as with coriander (\"Coriandrum sativum\"), fennel (\"Foeniculum vulgare\"), cumin (\"Cuminum cyminum\"), and caraway (\"Carum carvi\").\nOther notable cultivated Apiaceae include chervil (\"Anthriscus cerefolium\"), angelica (\"Angelica\" spp.), celery (\"Apium graveolens\"), arracacha (\"Arracacia xanthorrhiza\"), sea holly (\"Eryngium\" spp.), asafoetida (\"Ferula asafoetida\"), galbanum (\"Ferula gummosa\"), cicely (\"Myrrhis odorata\"), anise (\"Pimpinella anisum\"), lovage (\"Levisticum officinale\"), and hacquetia (\"Hacquetia epipactis\").\nCultivation.\nGenerally, all members of this family are best cultivated in the cool-season garden; indeed, they may not grow at all if the soils are too warm. Almost every widely cultivated plant of this group is a considered useful as a companion plant. One reason is because the tiny flowers clustered into umbels, are well suited for ladybugs, parasitic wasps, and predatory flies, which actually drink nectar when not reproducing. They then prey upon insect pests on nearby plants. Some of the members of this family considered \"herbs\" produce scents that are believed to ...mask the odours of nearby plants, thus making them harder for insect pests to find.\nOther uses.\nThe poisonous members of the Apiaceae have been used for a variety of purposes globally. The poisonous \"Oenanthe crocata\" has been used to stupefy fish, \"Cicuta douglasii\" has been used as an aid in suicides, and arrow poisons have been made from various other family species.\n\"Daucus carota\" has been used as coloring for butter.\n\"Dorema ammoniacum\", \"Ferula galbaniflua\", and \"Ferula sumbul\" are sources of incense.\nThe woody \"Azorella compacta\" Phil. has been used in South America for fuel.\nToxicity.\nThere are highly poisonous species, such as water hemlock, poison hemlock, water dropwort and spotted cowbane. Many species in the family Apiaceae produce phototoxic substances (called furanocoumarins) that sensitize human skin to sunlight. Contact with plant parts that contain furanocoumarins, followed by exposure to sunlight, may cause phytophotodermatitis, a serious skin inflammation. Of all the plant species that have been reported to induce phytophotodermatitis, approximately half belong to the family Apiaceae.\nPhototoxic species include \"Ammi majus\", the parsnip (\"Pastinaca sativa\") and numerous species of the genus \"Heracleum\", especially the giant hogweed (\"Heracleum mantegazzianum\"). The family Apiaceae also includes a smaller number of poisonous species, including poison hemlock, water hemlock, and fool's parsley.\nSome members of the family Apiaceae, including carrot, celery, fennel, parsley and parsnip, contain polyynes, an unusual class of organic compounds that exhibit cytotoxic effects."}
{"id": "958", "revid": "36439062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=958", "title": "Axon", "text": "An axon (from Greek \u1f04\u03be\u03c9\u03bd \"\u00e1x\u014dn\", axis), or nerve fiber (or nerve fibre: see spelling differences), is a long, slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, in vertebrates, that typically conducts electrical impulses known as action potentials away from the nerve cell body. The function of the axon is to transmit information to different neurons, muscles, and glands. In certain sensory neurons (pseudounipolar neurons), such as those for touch and warmth, the axons are called afferent nerve fibers and the electrical impulse travels along these from the periphery to the cell body, and from the cell body to the spinal cord along another branch of the same axon. Axon dysfunction has caused many inherited and acquired neurological disorders which can affect both the peripheral and central neurons. Nerve fibers are classed into three types \u2013 group A nerve fibers, group B nerve fibers, and group C nerve fibers. Groups A and B are myelinated, and group C are unmyelinated. These groups include both sensory fibers and motor fibers. Another classification groups only the sensory fibers as Type I, Type II, Type III, and Type IV.\nAn axon is one of two types of cytoplasmic protrusions from the cell body of a neuron; the other type is a dendrite. Axons are distinguished from dendrites by several features, including shape (dendrites often taper while axons usually maintain a constant radius), length (dendrites are restricted to a small region around the cell body while axons can be much longer), and function (dendrites receive signals whereas axons transmit them). Some types of neurons have no axon and transmit signals from their dendrites. In some species, axons can emanate from dendrites known as axon-carrying dendrites. No neuron ever has more than one axon; however in invertebrates such as insects or leeches the axon sometimes consists of several regions that function more or less independently of each other.\nAxons are covered by a membrane known as an axolemma; the cytoplasm of an axon is called axoplasm. Most axons branch, in some cases very profusely. The end branches of an axon are called telodendria. The swollen end of a telodendron is known as the axon terminal which joins the dendron or cell body of another neuron forming a synaptic connection. Axons make contact with other cells\u2014usually other neurons but sometimes muscle or gland cells\u2014at junctions called synapses. In some circumstances, the axon of one neuron may form a synapse with the dendrites of the same neuron, resulting in an autapse. At a synapse, the membrane of the axon closely adjoins the membrane of the target cell, and special molecular structures serve to transmit electrical or electrochemical signals across the gap. Some synaptic junctions appear along the length of an axon as it extends\u2014these are called \"en passant\" (\"in passing\") synapses and can be in the hundreds or even the thousands along one axon. Other synapses appear as terminals at the ends of axonal branches.\nA single axon, with all its branches taken together, can innervate multiple parts of the brain and generate thousands of synaptic terminals. A bundle of axons make a nerve tract in the central nervous system, and a fascicle in the peripheral nervous system. In placental mammals the largest white matter tract in the brain is the corpus callosum, formed of some 200 million axons in the human brain.\nAnatomy.\nAxons are the primary transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they form nerves. Some axons can extend up to one meter or more while others extend as little as one millimeter. The longest axons in the human body are those of the sciatic nerve, which run from the base of the spinal cord to the big toe of each foot. The diameter of axons is also variable. Most individual axons are microscopic in diameter (typically about one micrometer (\u00b5m) across). The largest mammalian axons can reach a diameter of up to 20\u00a0\u00b5m. The squid giant axon, which is specialized to conduct signals very rapidly, is close to 1 millimetre in diameter, the size of a small pencil lead. The numbers of axonal telodendria (the branching structures at the end of the axon) can also differ from one nerve fiber to the next. Axons in the central nervous system (CNS) typically show multiple telodendria, with many synaptic end points. In comparison, the cerebellar granule cell axon is characterized by a single T-shaped branch node from which two parallel fibers extend. Elaborate branching allows for the simultaneous transmission of messages to a large number of target neurons within a single region of the brain.\nThere are two types of axons in the nervous system: myelinated and unmyelinated axons. Myelin is a layer of a fatty insulating substance, which is formed by two types of glial cells: Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes. In the peripheral nervous system Schwann cells form the myelin sheath of a myelinated axon. In the central nervous system oligodendrocytes form the insulating myelin. Along myelinated nerve fibers, gaps in the myelin sheath known as nodes of Ranvier occur at evenly spaced intervals. The myelination enables an especially rapid mode of electrical impulse propagation called saltatory conduction.\nThe myelinated axons from the cortical neurons form the bulk of the neural tissue called white matter in the brain. The myelin gives the white appearance to the tissue in contrast to the grey matter of the cerebral cortex which contains the neuronal cell bodies. A similar arrangement is seen in the cerebellum. Bundles of myelinated axons make up the nerve tracts in the CNS. Where these tracts cross the midline of the brain to connect opposite regions they are called \"commissures\". The largest of these is the corpus callosum that connects the two cerebral hemispheres, and this has around 20 million axons.\nThe structure of a neuron is seen to consist of two separate functional regions, or compartments \u2013 the cell body together with the dendrites as one region, and the axonal region as the other.\nAxonal region.\nThe axonal region or compartment, includes the axon hillock, the initial segment, the rest of the axon, and the axon telodendria, and axon terminals. It also includes the myelin sheath. The Nissl bodies that produce the neuronal proteins are absent in the axonal region. Proteins needed for the growth of the axon, and the removal of waste materials, need a framework for transport. This axonal transport is provided for in the axoplasm by arrangements of microtubules and intermediate filaments known as neurofilaments.\nAxon hillock.\nThe axon hillock is the area formed from the cell body of the neuron as it extends to become the axon. It precedes the initial segment. The received action potentials that are summed in the neuron are transmitted to the axon hillock for the generation of an action potential from the initial segment.\nInitial segment.\nThe axonal initial segment (AIS) is a structurally and functionally separate microdomain of the axon. One function of the initial segment is to separate the main part of an axon from the rest of the neuron; another function is to help initiate action potentials. Both of these functions support neuron cell polarity, in which dendrites (and, in some cases the soma) of a neuron receive input signals at the basal region, and at the apical region the neuron's axon provides output signals.\nThe axon initial segment is unmyelinated and contains a specialized complex of proteins. It is between approximately 20 and 60\u00a0\u00b5m in length and functions as the site of action potential initiation. Both the position on the axon and the length of the AIS can change showing a degree of plasticity that can fine-tune the neuronal output. A longer AIS is associated with a greater excitability. Plasticity is also seen in the ability of the AIS to change its distribution and to maintain the activity of neural circuitry at a constant level.\nThe AIS is highly specialized for the fast conduction of nerve impulses. This is achieved by a high concentration of voltage-gated sodium channels in the initial segment where the action potential is initiated. The ion channels are accompanied by a high number of cell adhesion molecules and scaffolding proteins that anchor them to the cytoskeleton. Interactions with ankyrin G are important as it is the major organizer in the AIS.\nAxonal transport.\nThe axoplasm is the equivalent of cytoplasm in the cell. Microtubules form in the axoplasm at the axon hillock. They are arranged along the length of the axon, in overlapping sections, and all point in the same direction \u2013 towards the axon terminals. This is noted by the positive endings of the microtubules. This overlapping arrangement provides the routes for the transport of different materials from the cell body. Studies on the axoplasm has shown the movement of numerous vesicles of all sizes to be seen along cytoskeletal filaments \u2013 the microtubules, and neurofilaments, in both directions between the axon and its terminals and the cell body.\nOutgoing anterograde transport from the cell body along the axon, carries mitochondria and membrane proteins needed for growth to the axon terminal. Ingoing retrograde transport carries cell waste materials from the axon terminal to the cell body. Outgoing and ingoing tracks use different sets of motor proteins. Outgoing transport is provided by kinesin, and ingoing return traffic is provided by dynein. Dynein is minus-end directed. There are many forms of kinesin and dynein motor proteins, and each is thought to carry a different cargo. The studies on transport in the axon led to the naming of kinesin.\nMyelination.\nIn the nervous system, axons may be myelinated, or unmyelinated. This is the provision of an insulating layer, called a myelin sheath. The myelin membrane is unique in its relatively high lipid to protein ratio.\nIn the peripheral nervous system axons are myelinated by glial cells known as Schwann cells. In the central nervous system the myelin sheath is provided by another type of glial cell, the oligodendrocyte. Schwann cells myelinate a single axon. An oligodendrocyte can myelinate up to 50 axons.\nThe composition of myelin is different in the two types. In the CNS the major myelin protein is proteolipid protein, and in the PNS it is myelin basic protein.\nNodes of Ranvier.\nNodes of Ranvier (also known as \"myelin sheath gaps\") are short unmyelinated segments of a myelinated axon, which are found periodically interspersed between segments of the myelin sheath. Therefore, at the point of the node of Ranvier, the axon is reduced in diameter. These nodes are areas where action potentials can be generated. In saltatory conduction, electrical currents produced at each node of Ranvier are conducted with little attenuation to the next node in line, where they remain strong enough to generate another action potential. Thus in a myelinated axon, action potentials effectively \"jump\" from node to node, bypassing the myelinated stretches in between, resulting in a propagation speed much faster than even the fastest unmyelinated axon can sustain.\nAxon terminals.\nAn axon can divide into many branches called telodendria (Greek\u2013end of tree). At the end of each telodendron is an axon terminal (also called a synaptic bouton, or terminal bouton). Axon terminals contain synaptic vesicles that store the neurotransmitter for release at the synapse. This makes multiple synaptic connections with other neurons possible. Sometimes the axon of a neuron may synapse onto dendrites of the same neuron, when it is known as an autapse.\nAction potentials.\nMost axons carry signals in the form of action potentials, which are discrete electrochemical impulses that travel rapidly along an axon, starting at the cell body and terminating at points where the axon makes synaptic contact with target cells. The defining characteristic of an action potential is that it is \"all-or-nothing\"\u00a0\u2014 every action potential that an axon generates has essentially the same size and shape. This all-or-nothing characteristic allows action potentials to be transmitted from one end of a long axon to the other without any reduction in size. There are, however, some types of neurons with short axons that carry graded electrochemical signals, of variable amplitude.\nWhen an action potential reaches a presynaptic terminal, it activates the synaptic transmission process. The first step is rapid opening of calcium ion channels in the membrane of the axon, allowing calcium ions to flow inward across the membrane. The resulting increase in intracellular calcium concentration causes synaptic vesicles (tiny containers enclosed by a lipid membrane) filled with a neurotransmitter chemical to fuse with the axon's membrane and empty their contents into the extracellular space. The neurotransmitter is released from the presynaptic nerve through exocytosis. The neurotransmitter chemical then diffuses across to receptors located on the membrane of the target cell. The neurotransmitter binds to these receptors and activates them. Depending on the type of receptors that are activated, the effect on the target cell can be to excite the target cell, inhibit it, or alter its metabolism in some way. This entire sequence of events often takes place in less than a thousandth of a second. Afterward, inside the presynaptic terminal, a new set of vesicles is moved into position next to the membrane, ready to be released when the next action potential arrives. The action potential is the final electrical step in the integration of synaptic messages at the scale of the neuron.\nExtracellular recordings of action potential propagation in axons has been demonstrated in freely moving animals. While extracellular somatic action potentials have been used to study cellular activity in freely moving animals such as place cells, axonal activity in both white and gray matter can also be recorded. Extracellular recordings of axon action potential propagation is distinct from somatic action potentials in three ways: 1. The signal has a shorter peak-trough duration (~150\u03bcs) than of pyramidal cells (~500\u03bcs) or interneurons (~250\u03bcs). 2. The voltage change is triphasic. 3. Activity recorded on a tetrode is seen on only one of the four recording wires. In recordings from freely moving rats, axonal signals have been isolated in white matter tracts including the alveus and the corpus callosum as well hippocampal gray matter.\nIn fact, the generation of action potentials in vivo is sequential in nature, and these sequential spikes constitute the digital codes in the neurons. Although previous studies indicate an axonal origin of a single spike evoked by short-term pulses, physiological signals in vivo trigger the initiation of sequential spikes at the cell bodies of the neurons.\nIn addition to propagating action potentials to axonal terminals, the axon is able to amplify the action potentials, which makes sure a secure propagation of sequential action potentials toward the axonal terminal. In terms of molecular mechanisms, voltage-gated sodium channels in the axons possess lower threshold and shorter refractory period in response to short-term pulses.\nDevelopment and growth.\nDevelopment.\nThe development of the axon to its target, is one of the six major stages in the overall development of the nervous system. Studies done on cultured hippocampal neurons suggest that neurons initially produce multiple neurites that are equivalent, yet only one of these neurites is destined to become the axon. It is unclear whether axon specification precedes axon elongation or vice versa, although recent evidence points to the latter. If an axon that is not fully developed is cut, the polarity can change and other neurites can potentially become the axon. This alteration of polarity only occurs when the axon is cut at least 10 \u03bcm shorter than the other neurites. After the incision is made, the longest neurite will become the future axon and all the other neurites, including the original axon, will turn into dendrites. Imposing an external force on a neurite, causing it to elongate, will make it become an axon. Nonetheless, axonal development is achieved through a complex interplay between extracellular signaling, intracellular signaling and cytoskeletal dynamics.\nExtracellular signaling.\nThe extracellular signals that propagate through the extracellular matrix surrounding neurons play a prominent role in axonal development. These signaling molecules include proteins, neurotrophic factors, and extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules. \nNetrin (also known as UNC-6) a secreted protein, functions in axon formation. When the UNC-5 netrin receptor is mutated, several neurites are irregularly projected out of neurons and finally a single axon is extended anteriorly. The neurotrophic factors \u2013 nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NTF3) are also involved in axon development and bind to Trk receptors.\nThe ganglioside-converting enzyme plasma membrane ganglioside sialidase (PMGS), which is involved in the activation of TrkA at the tip of neutrites, is required for the elongation of axons. PMGS asymmetrically distributes to the tip of the neurite that is destined to become the future axon.\nIntracellular signaling.\nDuring axonal development, the activity of PI3K is increased at the tip of destined axon. Disrupting the activity of PI3K inhibits axonal development. Activation of PI3K results in the production of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns) which can cause significant elongation of a neurite, converting it into an axon. As such, the overexpression of phosphatases that dephosphorylate PtdIns leads into the failure of polarization.\nCytoskeletal dynamics.\nThe neurite with the lowest actin filament content will become the axon. PGMS concentration and f-actin content are inversely correlated; when PGMS becomes enriched at the tip of a neurite, its f-actin content is substantially decreased. In addition, exposure to actin-depolimerizing drugs and toxin B (which inactivates Rho-signaling) causes the formation of multiple axons. Consequently, the interruption of the actin network in a growth cone will promote its neurite to become the axon.\nGrowth.\nGrowing axons move through their environment via the growth cone, which is at the tip of the axon. The growth cone has a broad sheet-like extension called a lamellipodium which contain protrusions called filopodia. The filopodia are the mechanism by which the entire process adheres to surfaces and explores the surrounding environment. Actin plays a major role in the mobility of this system. Environments with high levels of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) create an ideal environment for axonal growth. This seems to provide a \"sticky\" surface for axons to grow along. Examples of CAM's specific to neural systems include N-CAM, TAG-1\u2014an axonal glycoprotein\u2014\u2014and MAG, all of which are part of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Another set of molecules called extracellular matrix-adhesion molecules also provide a sticky substrate for axons to grow along. Examples of these molecules include laminin, fibronectin, tenascin, and perlecan. Some of these are surface bound to cells and thus act as short range attractants or repellents. Others are difusible ligands and thus can have long range effects.\nCells called guidepost cells assist in the guidance of neuronal axon growth. These cells that help axon guidance, are typically other neurons that are sometimes immature. When the axon has completed its growth at its connection to the target, the diameter of the axon can increase by up to five times, depending on the speed of conduction required.\nIt has also been discovered through research that if the axons of a neuron were damaged, as long as the soma (the cell body of a neuron) is not damaged, the axons would regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells. This is also referred to as neuroregeneration.\nNogo-A is a type of neurite outgrowth inhibitory component that is present in the central nervous system myelin membranes (found in an axon). It has a crucial role in restricting axonal regeneration in adult mammalian central nervous system. In recent studies, if Nogo-A is blocked and neutralized, it is possible to induce long-distance axonal regeneration which leads to enhancement of functional recovery in rats and mouse spinal cord. This has yet to be done on humans. A recent study has also found that macrophages activated through a specific inflammatory pathway activated by the Dectin-1 receptor are capable of promoting axon recovery, also however causing neurotoxicity in the neuron.\nLength regulation.\nAxons vary largely in length from a few micrometers up to meters in some animals. This emphasizes that there must be a cellular length regulation mechanism allowing the neurons both to sense the length of their axons and to control their growth accordingly. It was discovered that motor proteins play an important role in regulating the length of axons. Based on this observation, researchers developed an explicit model for axonal growth describing how motor proteins could affect the axon length on the molecular level. These studies suggest that motor proteins carry signaling molecules from the soma to the growth cone and vice versa whose concentration oscillates in time with a length-dependent frequency.\nClassification.\nThe axons of neurons in the human peripheral nervous system can be classified based on their physical features and signal conduction properties. Axons were known to have different thicknesses (from 0.1 to 20\u00a0\u00b5m) and these differences were thought to relate to the speed at which an action potential could travel along the axon \u2013 its \"conductance velocity\". Erlanger and Gasser proved this hypothesis, and identified several types of nerve fiber, establishing a relationship between the diameter of an axon and its nerve conduction velocity. They published their findings in 1941 giving the first classification of axons.\nAxons are classified in two systems. The first one introduced by Erlanger and Gasser, grouped the fibers into three main groups using the letters A, B, and C. These groups, group A, group B, and group C include both the sensory fibers (afferents) and the motor fibres (efferents). The first group A, was subdivided into alpha, beta, gamma, and delta fibers\u00a0\u2014 A\u03b1, A\u03b2, A\u03b3, and A\u03b4. The motor neurons of the different motor fibers, were the lower motor neurons \u2013 alpha motor neuron, beta motor neuron, and gamma motor neuron having the A\u03b1, A\u03b2, and A\u03b3 nerve fibers respectively.\nLater findings by other researchers identified two groups of Aa fibers that were sensory fibers. These were then introduced into a system that only included sensory fibers (though some of these were mixed nerves and were also motor fibers). This system refers to the sensory groups as Types and uses Roman numerals: Type Ia, Type Ib, Type II, Type III, and Type IV.\nLower motor neurons have two kind of fibers:\nDifferent sensory receptors innervate different types of nerve fibers. Proprioceptors are innervated by type Ia, Ib and II sensory fibers, mechanoreceptors by type II and III sensory fibers and nociceptors and thermoreceptors by type III and IV sensory fibers.\nAutonomic.\nThe autonomic nervous system has two kinds of peripheral fibers:\nClinical significance.\nIn order of degree of severity, injury to a nerve can be described as neurapraxia, axonotmesis, or neurotmesis.\nConcussion is considered a mild form of diffuse axonal injury. Axonal injury can also cause central chromatolysis. The dysfunction of axons in the nervous system is one of the major causes of many inherited neurological disorders that affect both peripheral and central neurons.\nWhen an axon is crushed, an active process of axonal degeneration takes place at the part of the axon furthest from the cell body. This degeneration takes place quickly following the injury, with the part of the axon being sealed off at the membranes and broken down by macrophages. This is known as Wallerian degeneration. Dying back of an axon can also take place in many neurodegenerative diseases, particularly when axonal transport is impaired, this is known as Wallerian-like degeneration. Studies suggest that the degeneration happens as\na result of the axonal protein NMNAT2, being prevented from reaching all of the axon.\nDemyelination of axons causes the multitude of neurological symptoms found in the disease multiple sclerosis.\nDysmyelination is the abnormal formation of the myelin sheath. This is implicated in several leukodystrophies, and also in schizophrenia.\nA severe traumatic brain injury can result in widespread lesions to nerve tracts damaging the axons in a condition known as diffuse axonal injury. This can lead to a persistent vegetative state. It has been shown in studies on the rat that axonal damage from a single mild traumatic brain injury, can leave a susceptibility to further damage, after repeated mild traumatic brain injuries.\nA nerve guidance conduit is an artificial means of guiding axon growth to enable neuroregeneration, and is one of the many treatments used for different kinds of nerve injury.\nHistory.\nGerman anatomist Otto Friedrich Karl Deiters is generally credited with the discovery of the axon by distinguishing it from the dendrites. Swiss R\u00fcdolf Albert von K\u00f6lliker and German Robert Remak were the first to identify and characterize the axon initial segment. K\u00f6lliker named the axon in 1896. Louis-Antoine Ranvier was the first to describe the gaps or nodes found on axons and for this contribution these axonal features are now commonly referred to as the nodes of Ranvier. Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal, a Spanish anatomist, proposed that axons were the output components of neurons, describing their functionality. Joseph Erlanger and Herbert Gasser earlier developed the classification system for peripheral nerve fibers, based on axonal conduction velocity, myelination, fiber size etc. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley also employed the squid giant axon (1939) and by 1952 they had obtained a full quantitative description of the ionic basis of the action potential, leading to the formulation of the Hodgkin\u2013Huxley model. Hodgkin and Huxley were awarded jointly the Nobel Prize for this work in 1963. The formulae detailing axonal conductance were extended to vertebrates in the Frankenhaeuser\u2013Huxley equations. The understanding of the biochemical basis for action potential propagation has advanced further, and includes many details about individual ion channels.\nOther animals.\nThe axons in invertebrates have been extensively studied. The longfin inshore squid, often used as a model organism has the longest known axon. The giant squid has the largest axon known. Its size ranges from a half (typically) to one millimetre in diameter and is used in the control of its jet propulsion system. The fastest recorded conduction speed of 210\u00a0m/s, is found in the ensheathed axons of some pelagic Penaeid shrimps and the usual range is between 90 and 200\u00a0m/s (cf 100\u2013120\u00a0m/s for the fastest myelinated vertebrate axon.)\nIn other cases as seen in rat studies an axon originates from a dendrite; such axons are said to have \"dendritic origin\". Some axons with dendritic origin similarly have a \"proximal\" initial segment that starts directly at the axon origin, while others have a \"distal\" initial segment, discernibly separated from the axon origin. In many species some of the neurons have axons that emanate from the dendrite and not from the cell body, and these are known as axon-carrying dendrites. In many cases, an axon originates at an axon hillock on the soma; such axons are said to have \"somatic origin\". Some axons with somatic origin have a \"proximal\" initial segment adjacent the axon hillock, while others have a \"distal\" initial segment, separated from the soma by an extended axon hillock."}
{"id": "959", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=959", "title": "Agma", "text": ""}
{"id": "960", "revid": "199625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=960", "title": "Aramaic alphabet", "text": "The ancient Aramaic alphabet was adapted by Arameans from the Phoenician alphabet and became a distinct script by the 8th century BC. It was used to write the Aramaic language and had displaced the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet, itself a derivative of the Phoenician alphabet, for the writing of Hebrew. The letters all represent consonants, some of which are also used as \"matres lectionis\" to indicate long vowels.\nThe Aramaic alphabet is historically significant since virtually all modern Middle Eastern writing systems can be traced back to it as well as numerous non-Chinese writing systems of Central and East Asia. That is primarily from the widespread usage of the Aramaic language as both a \"lingua franca\" and the official language of the Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian Empires, and their successor, the Achaemenid Empire. Among the scripts in modern use, the Hebrew alphabet bears the closest relation to the Imperial Aramaic script of the 5th century BC, with an identical letter inventory and, for the most part, nearly identical letter shapes. The Aramaic alphabet was an ancestor to the Nabataean alphabet and the later Arabic alphabet.\nWriting systems (like the Aramaic one) that indicate consonants but do not indicate most vowels other than by means of \"matres lectionis\" or added diacritical signs, have been called abjads by Peter T. Daniels to distinguish them from alphabets, such as the Greek alphabet, which represent vowels more systematically. The term was coined to avoid the notion that a writing system that represents sounds must be either a syllabary or an alphabet, which would imply that a system like Aramaic must be either a syllabary (as argued by Ignace Gelb) or an incomplete or deficient alphabet (as most other writers have said). Rather, it is a different type.\nOrigins.\nThe earliest inscriptions in the Aramaic language use the Phoenician alphabet. Over time, the alphabet developed into the form shown below. Aramaic gradually became the \"lingua franca\" throughout the Middle East, with the script at first complementing and then displacing Assyrian cuneiform, as the predominant writing system.\nAchaemenid Empire (The First Persian Empire).\nAround 500 BC, following the Achaemenid conquest of Mesopotamia under Darius I, Old Aramaic was adopted by the Persians as the \"vehicle for written communication between the different regions of the vast Persian empire with its different peoples and languages. The use of a single official language, which modern scholarship has dubbed as Official Aramaic, Imperial Aramaic or Achaemenid Aramaic, can be assumed to have greatly contributed to the astonishing success of the Achaemenid Persians in holding their far-flung empire together for as long as they did.\"\nImperial Aramaic was highly standardised; its orthography was based more on historical roots than any spoken dialect and was inevitably influenced by Old Persian. The Aramaic glyph forms of the period are often divided into two main styles, the \"lapidary\" form, usually inscribed on hard surfaces like stone monuments, and a cursive form whose lapidary form tended to be more conservative by remaining more visually similar to Phoenician and early Aramaic. Both were in use through the Achaemenid Persian period, but the cursive form steadily gained ground over the lapidary, which had largely disappeared by the 3rd century BC.\nFor centuries after the fall of the Achaemenid Empire in 331 BC, Imperial Aramaic, or something near enough to it to be recognisable, would remain an influence on the various native Iranian languages. The Aramaic script would survive as the essential characteristics of the Iranian Pahlavi writing system.\n30 Aramaic documents from Bactria have been recently discovered, an analysis of which was published in November 2006. The texts, which were rendered on leather, reflect the use of Aramaic in the 4th century BC in the Persian Achaemenid administration of Bactria and Sogdiana.\nThe widespread usage of Achaemenid Aramaic in the Middle East led to the gradual adoption of the Aramaic alphabet for writing Hebrew. Formerly, Hebrew had been written using an alphabet closer in form to that of Phoenician, the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet.\nAramaic-derived scripts.\nSince the evolution of the Aramaic alphabet out of the Phoenician one was a gradual process, the division of the world's alphabets into the ones derived from the Phoenician one directly and the ones derived from Phoenician via Aramaic is somewhat artificial. In general, the alphabets of the Mediterranean region (Anatolia, Greece, Italy) are classified as Phoenician-derived, adapted from around the 8th century BC, and those of the East (the Levant, Persia, Central Asia and India) are considered Aramaic-derived, adapted from around the 6th century BC from the Imperial Aramaic script of the Achaemenid Empire.\nAfter the fall of the Achaemenid Empire, the unity of the Imperial Aramaic script was lost, diversifying into a number of descendant cursives.\nThe Hebrew and Nabataean alphabets, as they stood by the Roman era, were little changed in style from the Imperial Aramaic alphabet. Ibn Khaldun (1332\u20131406) alleges that not only the old Nabataean writing was influenced by the \"Syrian script\" (i.e. Aramaic), but also the old Chaldean script.\nA cursive Hebrew variant developed from the early centuries AD, but it remained restricted to the status of a variant used alongside the noncursive. By contrast, the cursive developed out of the Nabataean alphabet in the same period soon became the standard for writing Arabic, evolving into the Arabic alphabet as it stood by the time of the early spread of Islam.\nThe development of cursive versions of Aramaic also led to the creation of the Syriac, Palmyrene and Mandaic alphabets, which formed the basis of the historical scripts of Central Asia, such as the Sogdian and Mongolian alphabets.\nThe Old Turkic script is generally considered to have its ultimate origins in Aramaic, in particular via the Pahlavi or Sogdian alphabets, as suggested by V. Thomsen, or possibly via Kharosthi (\"cf\"., Issyk inscription).\nBrahmi script was also possibly derived or inspired by Aramaic. Brahmic family of scripts includes Devanagari.\nLanguages using the alphabet.\nToday, Biblical Aramaic, Jewish Neo-Aramaic dialects and the Aramaic language of the Talmud are written in the modern-Hebrew alphabet (distinguished from the Old Hebrew script). In classical Jewish literature, the name given to the modern-Hebrew script was \"Ashurit\" (the ancient Assyrian script), a script now known widely as the Aramaic script. It is believed that during the period of Assyrian dominion that Aramaic script and language received official status. Syriac and Christian Neo-Aramaic dialects are today written in the Syriac alphabet, which script has superseded the more ancient Assyrian script and now bears its name. Mandaic is written in the Mandaic alphabet. The near-identity of the Aramaic and the classical Hebrew alphabets caused Aramaic text to be typeset mostly in the standard Hebrew script in scholarly literature.\nMaaloula.\nIn Maaloula, one of few surviving communities in which a Western Aramaic dialect is still spoken, an Aramaic institute was established in 2007 by Damascus University that teaches courses to keep the language alive. The institute's activities were suspended in 2010 amidst fears that the square Aramaic alphabet used in the program too closely resembled the square script of the Hebrew alphabet and all the signs with the square Aramaic script were taken down. The program stated that they would instead use the more distinct Syriac alphabet, although use of the Aramaic alphabet has continued to some degree. Al Jazeera Arabic also broadcast a program about Western Neo-Aramaic and the villages in which it is spoken with the square script still in use.\nLetters.\nMatres lectionis.\nIn Aramaic writing, Waw and Yodh serve a double function. Originally, they represented only the consonants \"w\" and \"y\", but they were later adopted to indicate the long vowels \"\u016b\" and \"\u012b\" respectively as well (often also \"\u014d\" and \"\u0113\" respectively). In the latter role, they are known as \"\" or \"mothers of reading\".\n\u0100lap, likewise, has some of the characteristics of a \"\" because in initial positions, it indicates a glottal stop (followed by a vowel), but otherwise, it often also stands for the long vowels \"\u0101\" or \"\u0113\". Among Jews, the influence of Hebrew often led to the use of H\u0113 instead, at the end of a word.\nThe practice of using certain letters to hold vowel values spread to Aramaic-derived writing systems, such as in Arabic and Hebrew, which still follow the practice.\nUnicode.\nThe Syriac Aramaic alphabet was added to the Unicode Standard in September 1999, with the release of version 3.0.\nThe Syriac Abbreviation (a type of overline) can be represented with a special control character called the Syriac Abbreviation Mark (U+070F). The Unicode block for Syriac Aramaic is U+0700\u2013U+074F:\nThe Imperial Aramaic alphabet was added to the Unicode Standard in October 2009, with the release of version 5.2.\nThe Unicode block for Imperial Aramaic is U+10840\u2013U+1085F:"}
{"id": "963", "revid": "944645549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=963", "title": "Arguments for the existence of God", "text": ""}
{"id": "966", "revid": "29624353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=966", "title": "American shot", "text": "\"American shot\" or \"cowboy shot\" is a translation of a phrase from French film criticism, \"plan am\u00e9ricain,\" and refers to a medium-long (\"knee\") film shot of a group of characters, who are arranged so that all are visible to the camera. The usual arrangement is for the actors to stand in an irregular line from one side of the screen to the other, with the actors at the end coming forward a little and standing more in profile than the others. The purpose of the composition is to allow complex dialogue scenes to be played out without changes in camera position. In some literature, this is simply referred to as a 3/4 shot.\nOne of the other main reasons why French critics called it \"American shot\" was its frequent use in western genre. This was because a shot that started at knee level would reveal the weapon of a cowboy, usually holstered at his waist. It is actually the closest the camera can get to an actor while keeping both his face and his holstered gun in frame.\nThe French critics thought it was characteristic of American films of the 1930s or 1940s; however, it was mostly characteristic of \"cheaper\" American movies, such as Charlie Chan mysteries where people collected in front of a fireplace or at the foot of the stairs in order to explain what happened a few minutes ago.\nHoward Hawks legitimized this style in his films, allowing characters to act, even when not talking, when most of the audience would not be paying attention. It became his trademark style."}
{"id": "967", "revid": "39076087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=967", "title": "Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis", "text": "Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), or acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis, is a rare autoimmune disease marked by a sudden, widespread attack of inflammation in the brain and spinal cord. As well as causing the brain and spinal cord to become inflamed, ADEM also attacks the nerves of the central nervous system and damages their myelin insulation, which, as a result, destroys the white matter. It is often triggered by a viral infection or (very rarely) specific non-routine vaccinations.\nADEM's symptoms resemble the symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS), so the disease itself is sorted into the classification of the multiple sclerosis borderline diseases. However, ADEM has several features that distinguish it from MS. Unlike MS, ADEM occurs usually in children and is marked with rapid fever, although adolescents and adults can get the disease too. ADEM consists of a single flare-up whereas MS is marked with several flare-ups (or relapses), over a long period of time. Relapses following ADEM are reported in up to a quarter of patients, but the majority of these 'multiphasic' presentations following ADEM likely represent MS. ADEM is also distinguished by a loss of consciousness, coma and death, which is very rare in MS, except in severe cases.\nIt affects about 8 per 1,000,000 people per year. Although it occurs in all ages, most reported cases are in children and adolescents, with the average age around 5 to 8 years old. The disease affects males and females almost equally. ADEM shows seasonal variation with higher incidence in winter and spring months which may coincide with higher viral infections during these months. The mortality rate may be as high as 5%; however, full recovery is seen in 50 to 75% of cases with increase in survival rates up to 70 to 90% with figures including minor residual disability as well. The average time to recover from ADEM flare-ups is one to six months.\nADEM produces multiple inflammatory lesions in the brain and spinal cord, particularly in the white matter. Usually these are found in the subcortical and central white matter and cortical gray-white junction of both cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord, but periventricular white matter and gray matter of the cortex, thalami and basal ganglia may also be involved.\nWhen a person has more than one demyelinating episode of ADEM, the disease is then called recurrent disseminated encephalomyelitis or multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM). Also, a fulminant course in adults has been described.\nSigns and symptoms.\nADEM has an abrupt onset and a monophasic course. Symptoms usually begin 1\u20133 weeks after infection. Major symptoms include fever, headache, nausea and vomiting, confusion, vision impairment, drowsiness, seizures and coma. Although initially the symptoms are usually mild, they worsen rapidly over the course of hours to days, with the average time to maximum severity being about four and a half days. Additional symptoms include hemiparesis, paraparesis, and cranial nerve palsies.\nCauses.\nSince the discovery of the anti-MOG specificity against multiple sclerosis diagnosis it is considered that ADEM is one of the possible clinical causes of anti-MOG associated encephalomyelitis\nAbout how the anti-MOG antibodies appear in the patients serum there are several theories:\nDiagnosis.\nADEM term has been inconsistently used at different times Currently, the commonly accepted international standard for the clinical case definition is the one published by the International Pediatric MS Study Group, revision 2007.\nGiven that the definition is clinical, it is currently unknown if all the cases with ADEM are positive for anti-MOG autoantibody, but in any case, it seems strongly related to ADEM diagnosis.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nMultiple sclerosis.\nWhile ADEM and MS both involve autoimmune demyelination, they differ in many clinical, genetic, imaging, and histopathological aspects. Some authors consider MS and its borderline forms to constitute a spectrum, differing only in chronicity, severity, and clinical course, while others consider them discretely different diseases.\nTypically, ADEM appears in children following an antigenic challenge and remains monophasic. Nevertheless, ADEM does occur in adults, and can also be clinically multiphasic.\nProblems for differential diagnosis increase due to the lack of agreement for a definition of multiple sclerosis. If MS were defined just by the separation in time and space of the demyelinating lesions as McDonald did, it would not be enough to make a difference, as some cases of ADEM satisfy these conditions. Therefore, some authors propose to establish the separation line in the shape of the lesions around the veins, being therefore \"perivenous vs. confluent demyelination\".\nThe pathology of ADEM is very similar to that of MS with some differences. The pathological hallmark of ADEM is perivenular inflammation with limited \"sleeves of demyelination\". Nevertheless, MS-like plaques (confluent demyelination) can appear\nPlaques in the white matter in MS are sharply delineated, while the glial scar in ADEM is smooth. Axons are better preserved in ADEM lesions. Inflammation in ADEM is widely disseminated and ill-defined, and finally, lesions are strictly perivenous, while in MS they are disposed around veins, but not so sharply.\nNevertheless, the co-occurrence of perivenous and confluent demyelination in some individuals suggests pathogenic overlap between acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis and misclassification even with biopsy or even postmortem ADEM in adults can progress to MS\nMultiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis.\nWhen the person has more than one demyelinating episode of ADEM, the disease is then called recurrent disseminated encephalomyelitis or multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM).\nIt has been found that anti-MOG auto-antibodies are related to this kind of ADEM\nAnother variant of ADEM in adults has been described, also related to anti-MOG auto-antibodies, has been named fulminant disseminated encephalomyelitis, and it has been reported to be clinically ADEM, but showing MS-like lesions on autopsy. It has been classified inside the anti-MOG associated inflammatory demyelinating diseases.\nAcute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis.\nAcute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (AHL, or AHLE), acute hemorrhagic encephalomyelitis (AHEM), acute necrotizing hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (ANHLE), Weston-Hurst syndrome, or Hurst's disease, is a hyperacute and frequently fatal form of ADEM. AHL is relatively rare (less than 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature ), it is seen in about 2% of ADEM cases, and is characterized by necrotizing vasculitis of venules and hemorrhage, and edema. Death is common in the first week and overall mortality is about 70%, but increasing evidence points to favorable outcomes after aggressive treatment with corticosteroids, immunoglobulins, cyclophosphamide, and plasma exchange. About 70% of survivors show residual neurological deficits, but some survivors have shown surprisingly little deficit considering the magnitude of the white matter affected.\nThis disease has been occasionally associated with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, malaria, sepsis associated with immune complex deposition, methanol poisoning, and other underlying conditions. Also anecdotal association with MS has been reported\nLaboratory studies that support diagnosis of AHL are: peripheral leukocytosis, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis associated with normal glucose and increased protein. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), lesions of AHL typically show extensive T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) white matter hyperintensities with areas of hemorrhages, significant edema, and mass effect.\nTreatment.\nNo controlled clinical trials have been conducted on ADEM treatment, but aggressive treatment aimed at rapidly reducing inflammation of the CNS is standard. The widely accepted first-line treatment is high doses of intravenous corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone or dexamethasone, followed by 3\u20136 weeks of gradually lower oral doses of prednisolone. Patients treated with methylprednisolone have shown better outcomes than those treated with dexamethasone. Oral tapers of less than three weeks duration show a higher chance of relapsing, and tend to show poorer outcomes. Other anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive therapies have been reported to show beneficial effect, such as plasmapheresis, high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), mitoxantrone and cyclophosphamide. These are considered alternative therapies, used when corticosteroids cannot be used or fail to show an effect.\nThere is some evidence to suggest that patients may respond to a combination of methylprednisolone and immunoglobulins if they fail to respond to either separately\nIn a study of 16 children with ADEM, 10 recovered completely after high-dose methylprednisolone, one severe case that failed to respond to steroids recovered completely after IV Ig; the five most severe cases -with ADAM and severe peripheral neuropathy- were treated with combined high-dose methylprednisolone and immunoglobulin, two remained paraplegic, one had motor and cognitive handicaps, and two recovered. A recent review of IVIg treatment of ADEM (of which the previous study formed the bulk of the cases) found that 70% of children showed complete recovery after treatment with IVIg, or IVIg plus corticosteroids. A study of IVIg treatment in adults with ADEM showed that IVIg seems more effective in treating sensory and motor disturbances, while steroids seem more effective in treating impairments of cognition, consciousness and rigor. This same study found one subject, a 71-year-old man who had not responded to steroids, that responded to an IVIg treatment 58 days after disease onset.\nPrognosis.\nFull recovery is seen in 50 to 70% of cases, ranging to 70 to 90% recovery with some minor residual disability (typically assessed using measures such as mRS or EDSS), average time to recover is one to six months. The mortality rate may be as high as 5%-10%. Poorer outcomes are associated with unresponsiveness to steroid therapy, unusually severe neurological symptoms, or sudden onset. Children tend to have more favorable outcomes than adults, and cases presenting without fevers tend to have poorer outcomes. The latter effect may be due to either protective effects of fever, or that diagnosis and treatment is sought more rapidly when fever is present.\nADEM can progress to MS. It will be considered MS if some lesions appear in different times and brain areas\nMotor deficits.\nResidual motor deficits are estimated to remain in about 8 to 30% of cases, the range in severity from mild clumsiness to ataxia and hemiparesis.\nNeurocognitive.\nPatients with demyelinating illnesses, such as MS, have shown cognitive deficits even when there is minimal physical disability. Research suggests that similar effects are seen after ADEM, but that the deficits are less severe than those seen in MS. A study of six children with ADEM (mean age at presentation 7.7 years) were tested for a range of neurocognitive tests after an average of 3.5 years of recovery. All six children performed in the normal range on most tests, including verbal IQ and performance IQ, but performed at least one standard deviation below age norms in at least one cognitive domain, such as complex attention (one child), short-term memory (one child) and internalizing behaviour/affect (two children). Group means for each cognitive domain were all within one standard deviation of age norms, demonstrating that, as a group, they were normal. These deficits were less severe than those seen in similar aged children with a diagnosis of MS.\nAnother study compared nineteen children with a history of ADEM, of which 10 were five years of age or younger at the time (average age 3.8 years old, tested an average of 3.9 years later) and nine were older (mean age 7.7y at time of ADEM, tested an average of 2.2 years later) to nineteen matched controls. Scores on IQ tests and educational achievement were lower for the young onset ADEM group (average IQ 90) compared to the late onset (average IQ 100) and control groups (average IQ 106), while the late onset ADEM children scored lower on verbal processing speed. Again, all groups means were within one standard deviation of the controls, meaning that while effects were statistically reliable, the children were as a whole, still within the normal range. There were also more behavioural problems in the early onset group, although there is some suggestion that this may be due, at least in part, to the stress of hospitalization at a young age.\nResearch.\nThe relationship between ADEM and anti-MOG associated encephalomyelitis is currently under research. A new entity called MOGDEM has been proposed.\nAbout animal models, the main animal model for MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is also an animal model for ADEM. Being an acute monophasic illness, EAE is far more similar to ADEM than MS."}
{"id": "969", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=969", "title": "Ataxia", "text": "Ataxia is a neurological sign consisting of lack of voluntary coordination of muscle movements that can include gait abnormality, speech changes, and abnormalities in eye movements. Ataxia is a clinical manifestation indicating dysfunction of the parts of the nervous system that coordinate movement, such as the cerebellum. Ataxia can be limited to one side of the body, which is referred to as hemiataxia. Several possible causes exist for these patterns of neurological dysfunction. Dystaxia is a mild degree of ataxia. Friedreich's ataxia has gait abnormality as the most commonly presented symptom. The word is from Greek \u03b1- [a negative prefix] + -\u03c4\u03ac\u03be\u03b9\u03c2 [order] = \"lack of order\".\nTypes.\nCerebellar.\nThe term cerebellar ataxia is used to indicate ataxia due to dysfunction of the cerebellum. The cerebellum is responsible for integrating a significant amount of neural information that is used to coordinate smoothly ongoing movements and to participate in motor planning. Although ataxia is not present with all cerebellar lesions, many conditions affecting the cerebellum do produce ataxia. People with cerebellar ataxia may have trouble regulating the force, range, direction, velocity, and rhythm of muscle contractions. This results in a characteristic type of irregular, uncoordinated movement that can manifest itself in many possible ways, such as asthenia, asynergy, delayed reaction time, and dyschronometria. Individuals with cerebellar ataxia could also display instability of gait, difficulty with eye movements, dysarthria, dysphagia, hypotonia, dysmetria, and dysdiadochokinesia. These deficits can vary depending on which cerebellar structures have been damaged, and whether the lesion is bi- or unilateral.\nPeople with cerebellar ataxia may initially present with poor balance, which could be demonstrated as an inability to stand on one leg or perform tandem gait. As the condition progresses, walking is characterized by a widened base and high stepping, as well as staggering and lurching from side to side. Turning is also problematic and could result in falls. As cerebellar ataxia becomes severe, great assistance and effort are needed to stand and walk. Dysarthria, an impairment with articulation, may also be present and is characterized by \"scanning\" speech that consists of slower rate, irregular rhythm, and variable volume. Also, slurring of speech, tremor of the voice, and ataxic respiration may occur. Cerebellar ataxia could result with incoordination of movement, particularly in the extremities. Overshooting (or hypermetria) occurs with finger-to-nose testing and heel to shin testing; thus, dysmetria is evident. Impairments with alternating movements (dysdiadochokinesia), as well as dysrhythmia, may also be displayed. Tremor of the head and trunk (titubation) may be seen in individuals with cerebellar ataxia.\nDysmetria is thought to be caused by a deficit in the control of interaction torques in multijoint motion. Interaction torques are created at an associated joint when the primary joint is moved. For example, if a movement required reaching to touch a target in front of the body, flexion at the shoulder would create a torque at the elbow, while extension of the elbow would create a torque at the wrist. These torques increase as the speed of movement increases and must be compensated and adjusted for to create coordinated movement. This may, therefore, explain decreased coordination at higher movement velocities and accelerations.\nSensory.\nThe term sensory ataxia is used to indicate ataxia due to loss of proprioception, the loss of sensitivity to the positions of joint and body parts. This is generally caused by dysfunction of the dorsal columns of the spinal cord, because they carry proprioceptive information up to the brain. In some cases, the cause of sensory ataxia may instead be dysfunction of the various parts of the brain that receive positional information, including the cerebellum, thalamus, and parietal lobes.\nSensory ataxia presents itself with an unsteady \"stomping\" gait with heavy heel strikes, as well as a postural instability that is usually worsened when the lack of proprioceptive input cannot be compensated for by visual input, such as in poorly lit environments.\nPhysicians can find evidence of sensory ataxia during physical examination by having patients stand with their feet together and eyes shut. In affected patients, this will cause the instability to worsen markedly, producing wide oscillations and possibly a fall; this is called a positive Romberg's test. Worsening of the finger-pointing test with the eyes closed is another feature of sensory ataxia. Also, when patients are standing with arms and hands extended toward the physician, if the eyes are closed, the patients' fingers tend to \"fall down\" and then be restored to the horizontal extended position by sudden muscular contractions (the \"ataxic hand\").\nVestibular.\nThe term vestibular ataxia is used to indicate ataxia due to dysfunction of the vestibular system, which in acute and unilateral cases is associated with prominent vertigo, nausea, and vomiting. In slow-onset, chronic bilateral cases of vestibular dysfunction, these characteristic manifestations may be absent, and dysequilibrium may be the sole presentation.\nCauses.\nThe three types of ataxia have overlapping causes, so can either coexist or occur in isolation. Cerebellar ataxia can have many causes despite normal neuroimaging.\nFocal lesions.\nAny type of focal lesion of the central nervous system (such as stroke, brain tumor, multiple sclerosis, inflammatory [such as sarcoidosis], and \"chronic lymphocytyc inflammation with pontine perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids syndrome\" [CLIPPERS]) will cause the type of ataxia corresponding to the site of the lesion: cerebellar if in the cerebellum; sensory if in the dorsal spinal cord...to include cord compression by thickened ligamentum flavum or stenosis of the boney spinal canal...(and rarely in the thalamus or parietal lobe); or vestibular if in the vestibular system (including the vestibular areas of the cerebral cortex).\nExogenous substances (metabolic ataxia).\nExogenous substances that cause ataxia mainly do so because they have a depressant effect on central nervous system function. The most common example is ethanol (alcohol), which is capable of causing reversible cerebellar and vestibular ataxia. Other examples include various prescription drugs (e.g. most antiepileptic drugs have cerebellar ataxia as a possible adverse effect), Lithium level over 1.5mEq/L, synthetic cannabinoid HU-211 ingestion and various other medical and recreational drugs (e.g. ketamine, PCP or dextromethorphan, all of which are NMDA receptor antagonists that produce a dissociative state at high doses). A further class of pharmaceuticals which can cause short term ataxia, especially in high doses, are benzodiazepines. Exposure to high levels of methylmercury, through consumption of fish with high mercury concentrations, is also a known cause of ataxia and other neurological disorders.\nRadiation poisoning.\nAtaxia can be induced as a result of severe acute radiation poisoning with an absorbed dose of more than 30 grays.\nVitamin B12 deficiency.\nVitamin B12 deficiency may cause, among several neurological abnormalities, overlapping cerebellar and sensory ataxia.\nHypothyroidism.\nSymptoms of neurological dysfunction may be the presenting feature in some patients with hypothyroidism. These include reversible cerebellar ataxia, dementia, peripheral neuropathy, psychosis and coma. Most of the neurological complications improve completely after thyroid hormone replacement therapy.\nCauses of isolated sensory ataxia.\nPeripheral neuropathies may cause generalised or localised sensory ataxia (e.g. a limb only) depending on the extent of the neuropathic involvement. Spinal disorders of various types may cause sensory ataxia from the lesioned level below, when they involve the dorsal columns.\nNon-hereditary cerebellar degeneration.\nNon-hereditary causes of cerebellar degeneration include chronic alcohol abuse, head injury, paraneoplastic and non-paraneoplastic autoimmune ataxia, high altitude cerebral oedema, coeliac disease, normal pressure hydrocephalus and infectious or post-infectious cerebellitis.\nHereditary ataxias.\nAtaxia may depend on hereditary disorders consisting of degeneration of the cerebellum or of the spine; most cases feature both to some extent, and therefore present with overlapping cerebellar and sensory ataxia, even though one is often more evident than the other. Hereditary disorders causing ataxia include autosomal dominant ones such as spinocerebellar ataxia, episodic ataxia, and dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, as well as autosomal recessive disorders such as Friedreich's ataxia (sensory and cerebellar, with the former predominating) and Niemann Pick disease, ataxia-telangiectasia (sensory and cerebellar, with the latter predominating), and abetalipoproteinaemia. An example of X-linked ataxic condition is the rare fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome or FXTAS.\nArnold\u2013Chiari malformation (congenital ataxia).\nArnold\u2013Chiari malformation is a malformation of the brain. It consists of a downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils and the medulla through the foramen magnum, sometimes causing hydrocephalus as a result of obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid outflow.\nSuccinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.\nSuccinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency is an autosomal-recessive gene disorder where mutations in the ALDH5A1 gene results in the accumulation of gamma-Hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) in the body. GHB accumulates in the nervous system and can cause ataxia as well as other neurological dysfunction.\nWilson's disease.\nWilson's disease is an autosomal-recessive gene disorder whereby an alteration of the ATP7B gene results in an inability to properly excrete copper from the body. Copper accumulates in the nervous system and liver and can cause ataxia as well as other neurological and organ impairments.\nGluten ataxia.\nGluten ataxia is an autoimmune disease triggered by the ingestion of gluten. Early diagnosis and treatment with a gluten-free diet can improve ataxia and prevent its progression. The effectiveness of the treatment depends on the elapsed time from the onset of the ataxia until diagnosis, because the death of neurons in the cerebellum as a result of gluten exposure is irreversible. It accounts for 40% of ataxias of unknown origin and 15% of all ataxias. Less than 10% of people with gluten ataxia present any gastrointestinal symptom, yet about 40% have intestinal damage. In some cases, the immune ataxia remains of unknown origin and lacks biomarkers. This entity is called primary auto-immune ataxia (PACA).\nPotassium pump.\nMalfunction of the sodium-potassium pump may be a factor in some ataxias. The - pump has been shown to control and set the intrinsic activity mode of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. This suggests that the pump might not simply be a homeostatic, \"housekeeping\" molecule for ionic gradients; but could be a computational element in the cerebellum and the brain. Indeed, an ouabain block of - pumps in the cerebellum of a live mouse results in it displaying ataxia and dystonia. Ataxia is observed for lower ouabain concentrations, dystonia is observed at higher ouabain concentrations.\nCerebellar ataxia associated with anti-GAD antibodies.\nAntibodies against the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD: enzyme changing glutamate into GABA) cause cerebellar deficits. The antibodies impair motor learning and cause behavioral deficits.\nGAD antibodies related ataxia is part of the group called immune-mediated cerebellar ataxias. The antibodies induce a synaptopathy. The cerebellum is particularly vulnerable to autoimmune disorders. Cerebellar circuitry has capacities to compensate and restore function thanks to cerebellar reserve, gathering multiple forms of plasticity. LTDpathies gather immune disorders targeting long-term depression (LTD), a form of plasticity.\nTreatment.\nThe treatment of ataxia and its effectiveness depend on the underlying cause. Treatment may limit or reduce the effects of ataxia, but it is unlikely to eliminate them entirely. Recovery tends to be better in individuals with a single focal injury (such as stroke or a benign tumour), compared to those who have a neurological degenerative condition. A review of the management of degenerative ataxia was published in 2009. A small number of rare conditions presenting with prominent cerebellar ataxia are amenable to specific treatment and recognition of these disorders is critical. Diseases include vitamin E deficiency, abetalipoproteinemia, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, Niemann\u2013Pick type C disease, Refsum's disease, glucose transporter type 1 deficiency, episodic ataxia type 2, gluten ataxia, glutamic acid decarboxylase ataxia. Novel therapies target the RNA defects associated with cerebellar disorders, using in particular anti-sense oligonucleotides.\nThe movement disorders associated with ataxia can be managed by pharmacological treatments and through physical therapy and occupational therapy to reduce disability. Some drug treatments that have been used to control ataxia include: 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), idebenone, amantadine, physostigmine, L-carnitine or derivatives, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, vigabatrin, phosphatidylcholine, acetazolamide, 4-aminopyridine, buspirone, and a combination of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E.\nPhysical therapy requires a focus on adapting activity and facilitating motor learning for retraining specific functional motor patterns. A recent systematic review suggested that physical therapy is effective, but there is only moderate evidence to support this conclusion. The most commonly used physical therapy interventions for cerebellar ataxia are vestibular habituation, Frenkel exercises, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF), and balance training; however, therapy is often highly individualized and gait and coordination training are large components of therapy.\nCurrent research suggests that, if a person is able to walk with or without a mobility aid, physical therapy should include an exercise program addressing five components: static balance, dynamic balance, trunk-limb coordination, stairs, and contracture prevention. Once the physical therapist determines that the individual is able to safely perform parts of the program independently, it is important that the individual be prescribed and regularly engage in a supplementary home exercise program that incorporates these components to further improve long term outcomes. These outcomes include balance tasks, gait, and individual activities of daily living. While the improvements are attributed primarily to changes in the brain and not just the hip or ankle joints, it is still unknown whether the improvements are due to adaptations in the cerebellum or compensation by other areas of the brain.\nDecomposition, simplification, or slowing of multijoint movement may also be an effective strategy that therapists may use to improve function in patients with ataxia. Training likely needs to be intense and focused\u2014as indicated by one study performed with stroke patients experiencing limb ataxia who underwent intensive upper limb retraining. Their therapy consisted of constraint-induced movement therapy which resulted in improvements of their arm function. Treatment should likely include strategies to manage difficulties with everyday activities such as walking. Gait aids (such as a cane or walker) can be provided to decrease the risk of falls associated with impairment of balance or poor coordination. Severe ataxia may eventually lead to the need for a wheelchair. To obtain better results, possible coexisting motor deficits need to be addressed in addition to those induced by ataxia. For example, muscle weakness and decreased endurance could lead to increasing fatigue and poorer movement patterns.\nThere are several assessment tools available to therapists and health care professionals working with patients with ataxia. The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) is one of the most widely used and has been proven to have very high reliability and validity. Other tools that assess motor function, balance and coordination are also highly valuable to help the therapist track the progress of their patient, as well as to quantify the patient's functionality. These tests include, but are not limited to:\nOther uses.\nThe term \"ataxia\" is sometimes used in a broader sense to indicate lack of coordination in some physiological process. Examples include optic ataxia (lack of coordination between visual inputs and hand movements, resulting in inability to reach and grab objects) and ataxic respiration (lack of coordination in respiratory movements, usually due to dysfunction of the respiratory centres in the medulla oblongata). Optic ataxia may be caused by lesions to the posterior parietal cortex, which is responsible for combining and expressing positional information and relating it to movement. Outputs of the posterior parietal cortex include the spinal cord, brain stem motor pathways, pre-motor and pre-frontal cortex, basal ganglia and the cerebellum. Some neurons in the posterior parietal cortex are modulated by intention. Optic ataxia is usually part of Balint's syndrome, but can be seen in isolation with injuries to the superior parietal lobule, as it represents a disconnection between visual-association cortex and the frontal premotor and motor cortex."}
{"id": "970", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=970", "title": "AmbientCalculusOnline", "text": ""}
{"id": "972", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=972", "title": "Abdul Alhazred", "text": ""}
{"id": "973", "revid": "39573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=973", "title": "A priori and a posterior knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "974", "revid": "32084967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=974", "title": "Ada Lovelace", "text": "Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace (\"n\u00e9e\" Byron; 10 December 1815\u00a0\u2013 27 November 1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly known for her work on Charles Babbage's proposed mechanical general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. She was the first to recognise that the machine had applications beyond pure calculation, and to have published the first algorithm intended to be carried out by such a machine. As a result, she is often regarded as one of the first computer programmers.\nAugusta Byron was the only child of poet Lord Byron and Lady Byron. All of Byron's other children were born out of wedlock to other women. Byron separated from his wife a month after Ada was born and left England forever four months later. He commemorated the parting in a poem that begins, \"Is thy face like thy mother's my fair child! ADA! sole daughter of my house and heart?\". He died in Greece when Ada was eight years old. Her mother remained bitter and promoted Ada's interest in mathematics and logic in an effort to prevent her from developing her father's perceived insanity. Despite this, Ada remained interested in him, naming her two sons Byron and Gordon. Upon her eventual death, she was buried next to him at her request. Although often ill in her childhood, Ada pursued her studies assiduously. She married William King in 1835. King was made Earl of Lovelace in 1838, Ada thereby becoming Countess of Lovelace.\nHer educational and social exploits brought her into contact with scientists such as Andrew Crosse, Charles Babbage, Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Michael Faraday and the author Charles Dickens, contacts which she used to further her education. Ada described her approach as \"poetical science\" and herself as an \"Analyst (&amp; Metaphysician)\".\nWhen she was a teenager, her mathematical talents led her to a long working relationship and friendship with fellow British mathematician Charles Babbage, who is known as \"the father of computers\". She was in particular interested in Babbage's work on the Analytical Engine. Lovelace first met him in June 1833, through their mutual friend, and her private tutor, Mary Somerville.\nBetween 1842 and 1843, Ada translated an article by Italian military engineer Luigi Menabrea on the calculating engine, supplementing it with an elaborate set of notes, simply called \"Notes\". Lovelace's notes are important in the early history of computers, containing what many consider to be the first computer program\u2014that is, an algorithm designed to be carried out by a machine. Other historians reject this perspective and point out that Babbage's personal notes from the years 1836/1837 contain the first programs for the engine. She also developed a vision of the capability of computers to go beyond mere calculating or number-crunching, while many others, including Babbage himself, focused only on those capabilities. Her mindset of \"poetical science\" led her to ask questions about the Analytical Engine (as shown in her notes) examining how individuals and society relate to technology as a collaborative tool.\nShe died of uterine cancer in 1852 at the age of 36.\nBiography.\nChildhood.\nLord Byron expected his child to be a \"glorious boy\" and was disappointed when Lady Byron gave birth to a girl. The child was named after Byron's half-sister, Augusta Leigh, and was called \"Ada\" by Byron himself. On 16 January 1816, at Lord Byron's command, Lady Byron left for her parents' home at Kirkby Mallory, taking their five-week-old daughter with her. Although English law at the time granted full custody of children to the father in cases of separation, Lord Byron made no attempt to claim his parental rights, but did request that his sister keep him informed of Ada's welfare.\nOn 21 April, Lord Byron signed the deed of separation, although very reluctantly, and left England for good a few days later. Aside from an acrimonious separation, Lady Byron continued throughout her life to make allegations about her husband's immoral behaviour. This set of events made Lovelace infamous in Victorian society. She did not have a relationship with her father. He died in 1824 when she was eight years old. Her mother was the only significant parental figure in her life. Lovelace was not shown the family portrait of her father until her 20th birthday.\nLovelace did not have a close relationship with her mother. She was often left in the care of her maternal grandmother Judith, Hon. Lady Milbanke, who doted on her. However, because of societal attitudes of the time\u2014which favoured the husband in any separation, with the welfare of any child acting as mitigation\u2014Lady Byron had to present herself as a loving mother to the rest of society. This included writing anxious letters to Lady Milbanke about her daughter's welfare, with a cover note saying to retain the letters in case she had to use them to show maternal concern. In one letter to Lady Milbanke, she referred to her daughter as \"it\": \"I talk to it for your satisfaction, not my own, and shall be very glad when you have it under your own.\" Lady Byron had her teenage daughter watched by close friends for any sign of moral deviation. Lovelace dubbed these observers the \"Furies\" and later complained they exaggerated and invented stories about her.\nLovelace was often ill, beginning in early childhood. At the age of eight, she experienced headaches that obscured her vision. In June 1829, she was paralyzed after a bout of measles. She was subjected to continuous bed rest for nearly a year, something which may have extended her period of disability. By 1831, she was able to walk with crutches. Despite the illnesses, she developed her mathematical and technological skills.\nAda Byron had an affair with a tutor in early 1833. She tried to elope with him after she was caught, but the tutor's relatives recognised her and contacted her mother. Lady Byron and her friends covered the incident up to prevent a public scandal. Lovelace never met her younger half-sister, Allegra, the daughter of Lord Byron and Claire Clairmont. Allegra died in 1822 at the age of five. Lovelace did have some contact with Elizabeth Medora Leigh, the daughter of Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh, who purposely avoided Lovelace as much as possible when introduced at court.\nAdult years.\nLovelace became close friends with her tutor Mary Somerville, who introduced her to Charles Babbage in 1833. She had a strong respect and affection for Somerville, and they corresponded for many years. Other acquaintances included the scientists Andrew Crosse, Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Michael Faraday and the author Charles Dickens. She was presented at Court at the age of seventeen \"and became a popular belle of the season\" in part because of her \"brilliant mind.\" By 1834 Ada was a regular at Court and started attending various events. She danced often and was able to charm many people, and was described by most people as being dainty, although John Hobhouse, Byron's friend, described her as \"a large, coarse-skinned young woman but with something of my friend's features, particularly the mouth\". This description followed their meeting on 24 February 1834 in which Ada made it clear to Hobhouse that she did not like him, probably due to her mother's influence, which led her to dislike all of her father's friends. This first impression was not to last, and they later became friends.\nOn 8 July 1835, she married William, 8th Baron King, becoming Lady King. They had three homes: Ockham Park, Surrey; a Scottish estate on Loch Torridon in Ross-shire; and a house in London. They spent their honeymoon at Worthy Manor in Ashley Combe near Porlock Weir, Somerset. The Manor had been built as a hunting lodge in 1799 and was improved by King in preparation for their honeymoon. It later became their summer retreat and was further improved during this time. From 1845, the family's main house was Horsley Towers, built in the Tudorbethan fashion by the architect of the Houses of Parliament, Charles Barry, and later greatly enlarged to Lovelace's own designs.\nThey had three children: Byron (born 12 May 1836); Anne Isabella (called Annabella, born 22 September 1837); and Ralph Gordon (born 2 July 1839). Immediately after the birth of Annabella, Lady King experienced \"a tedious and suffering illness, which took months to cure.\" Ada was a descendant of the extinct Barons Lovelace and in 1838, her husband was made Earl of Lovelace and Viscount Ockham, meaning Ada became the Countess of Lovelace. In 1843\u201344, Ada's mother assigned William Benjamin Carpenter to teach Ada's children and to act as a \"moral\" instructor for Ada. He quickly fell for her and encouraged her to express any frustrated affections, claiming that his marriage meant he would never act in an \"unbecoming\" manner. When it became clear that Carpenter was trying to start an affair, Ada cut it off.\nIn 1841, Lovelace and Medora Leigh (the daughter of Lord Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh) were told by Ada's mother that Ada's father was also Medora's father. On 27 February 1841, Ada wrote to her mother: \"I am not in the least \"astonished\". In fact, you merely \"confirm\" what I have for \"years and years\" felt scarcely a doubt about, but should have considered it most improper in me to hint to you that I in any way suspected.\" She did not blame the incestuous relationship on Byron, but instead blamed Augusta Leigh: \"I fear she is more inherently wicked than he ever was.\" In the 1840s, Ada flirted with scandals: firstly, from a relaxed approach to extra-marital relationships with men, leading to rumours of affairs; and secondly, from her love of gambling. She apparently lost more than \u00a33,000 on the horses during the later 1840s. The gambling led to her forming a syndicate with male friends, and an ambitious attempt in 1851 to create a mathematical model for successful large bets. This went disastrously wrong, leaving her thousands of pounds in debt to the syndicate, forcing her to admit it all to her husband. She had a shadowy relationship with Andrew Crosse's son John from 1844 onwards. John Crosse destroyed most of their correspondence after her death as part of a legal agreement. She bequeathed him the only heirlooms her father had personally left to her. During her final illness, she would panic at the idea of the younger Crosse being kept from visiting her.\nEducation.\nFrom 1832, when she was seventeen, her mathematical abilities began to emerge, and her interest in mathematics dominated the majority of her adult life. Her mother's obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused Byron was one of the reasons that Ada was taught mathematics from an early age. She was privately educated in mathematics and science by William Frend, William King, and Mary Somerville, the noted 19th-century researcher and scientific author. In the 1840s, the mathematician Augustus De Morgan extended her \"much help in her mathematical studies\" including study of advanced calculus topics including the \"numbers of Bernoulli\" (that formed her celebrated algorithm for Babbage's Analytical Engine). In a letter to Lady Byron, De Morgan suggested that Ada's skill in mathematics might lead her to become \"an original mathematical investigator, perhaps of first-rate eminence.\"\nLovelace often questioned basic assumptions through integrating poetry and science. Whilst studying differential calculus, she wrote to De Morgan:\nI may remark that the curious transformations many formulae can undergo, the unsuspected and to a beginner apparently impossible identity of forms exceedingly dissimilar at first sight, is I think one of the chief difficulties in the early part of mathematical studies. I am often reminded of certain sprites and fairies one reads of, who are at one's elbows in \"one\" shape now, and the next minute in a form most dissimilar\nLovelace believed that intuition and imagination were critical to effectively applying mathematical and scientific concepts. She valued metaphysics as much as mathematics, viewing both as tools for exploring \"the unseen worlds around us.\"\nDeath.\nLovelace died at the age of 36 on 27 November 1852, from uterine cancer probably exacerbated by bloodletting by her physicians. The illness lasted several months, in which time Annabella took command over whom Ada saw, and excluded all of her friends and confidants. Under her mother's influence, Ada had a religious transformation and was coaxed into repenting of her previous conduct and making Annabella her executor. She lost contact with her husband after confessing something to him on 30 August which caused him to abandon her bedside. It is not known what she told him. She was buried, at her request, next to her father at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Hucknall, Nottinghamshire. A memorial plaque, written in Latin, to her and her father is in the chapel attached to Horsley Towers.\nWork.\nThroughout her life, Lovelace was strongly interested in scientific developments and fads of the day, including phrenology and mesmerism. After her work with Babbage, Lovelace continued to work on other projects. In 1844 she commented to a friend Woronzow Greig about her desire to create a mathematical model for how the brain gives rise to thoughts and nerves to feelings (\"a calculus of the nervous system\"). She never achieved this, however. In part, her interest in the brain came from a long-running pre-occupation, inherited from her mother, about her \"potential\" madness. As part of her research into this project, she visited the electrical engineer Andrew Crosse in 1844 to learn how to carry out electrical experiments. In the same year, she wrote a review of a paper by Baron Karl von Reichenbach, \"Researches on Magnetism\", but this was not published and does not appear to have progressed past the first draft. In 1851, the year before her cancer struck, she wrote to her mother mentioning \"certain productions\" she was working on regarding the relation of maths and music.\nLovelace first met Charles Babbage in June 1833, through their mutual friend Mary Somerville. Later that month, Babbage invited Lovelace to see the prototype for his difference engine. She became fascinated with the machine and used her relationship with Somerville to visit Babbage as often as she could. Babbage was impressed by Lovelace's intellect and analytic skills. He called her \"The Enchantress of Number.\" In 1843, he wrote to her:\nDuring a nine-month period in 1842\u201343, Lovelace translated the Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea's article on Babbage's newest proposed machine, the Analytical Engine. With the article, she appended a set of notes. Explaining the Analytical Engine's function was a difficult task, as many other scientists did not really grasp the concept and the British establishment had shown little interest in it. Lovelace's notes even had to explain how the Analytical Engine differed from the original Difference Engine. Her work was well received at the time; the scientist Michael Faraday described himself as a supporter of her writing.\nThe notes are around three times longer than the article itself and include (in \"Note G\"), in complete detail, a method for calculating a sequence of Bernoulli numbers using the Analytical Engine, which might have run correctly had it ever been built (only Babbage's Difference Engine has been built, completed in London in 2002). Based on this work, Lovelace is now considered by many to be the first computer programmer and her method has been called the world's first computer program. Others dispute this because some of Charles Babbage's earlier writings could be considered computer programs.\n\"Note G\" also contains Lovelace's dismissal of artificial intelligence. She wrote that \"The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to \"originate\" anything. It can do \"whatever we know how to order it\" to perform. It can follow analysis; but it has no power of anticipating any analytical relations or truths.\" This objection has been the subject of much debate and rebuttal, for example by Alan Turing in his paper \"Computing Machinery and Intelligence\".\nLovelace and Babbage had a minor falling out when the papers were published, when he tried to leave his own statement (criticising the government's treatment of his Engine) as an unsigned preface, which could have been mistakenly interpreted as a joint declaration. When Taylor's \"Scientific Memoirs\" ruled that the statement should be signed, Babbage wrote to Lovelace asking her to withdraw the paper. This was the first that she knew he was leaving it unsigned, and she wrote back refusing to withdraw the paper. The historian Benjamin Woolley theorised that \"His actions suggested he had so enthusiastically sought Ada's involvement, and so happily indulged her\u00a0... because of her 'celebrated name'.\" Their friendship recovered, and they continued to correspond. On 12 August 1851, when she was dying of cancer, Lovelace wrote to him asking him to be her executor, though this letter did not give him the necessary legal authority. Part of the terrace at Worthy Manor was known as \"Philosopher's Walk\", as it was there that Lovelace and Babbage were reputed to have walked while discussing mathematical principles.\nFirst computer program.\nIn 1840, Babbage was invited to give a seminar at the University of Turin about his Analytical Engine. Luigi Menabrea, a young Italian engineer and the future Prime Minister of Italy, transcribed Babbage's lecture into French, and this transcript was subsequently published in the \"Biblioth\u00e8que universelle de Gen\u00e8ve\" in October 1842.\nBabbage's friend Charles Wheatstone commissioned Ada Lovelace to translate Menabrea's paper into English. She then augmented the paper with notes, which were added to the translation. Ada Lovelace spent the better part of a year doing this, assisted with input from Babbage. These notes, which are more extensive than Menabrea's paper, were then published in the September 1843 edition of Taylor's \"Scientific Memoirs\" under the initialism \"AAL\".\nAda Lovelace's notes were labelled alphabetically from A to G. In note G, she describes an algorithm for the Analytical Engine to compute Bernoulli numbers. It is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer, and Ada Lovelace has often been cited as the first computer programmer for this reason. The engine was never completed so her program was never tested.\nIn 1953, more than a century after her death, Ada Lovelace's notes on Babbage's Analytical Engine were republished as an appendix to B.V. Bowden's \"Faster than Thought: A Symposium on Digital Computing Machines\". The engine has now been recognised as an early model for a computer and her notes as a description of a computer and software.\nInsight into potential of computing devices.\nIn her notes, Ada Lovelace emphasised the difference between the Analytical Engine and previous calculating machines, particularly its ability to be programmed to solve problems of any complexity. She realised the potential of the device extended far beyond mere number crunching. In her notes, she wrote:\nThis analysis was an important development from previous ideas about the capabilities of computing devices and anticipated the implications of modern computing one hundred years before they were realised. Walter Isaacson ascribes Ada's insight regarding the application of computing to \"any\" process based on logical symbols to an observation about textiles: \"When she saw some mechanical looms that used punchcards to direct the weaving of beautiful patterns, it reminded her of how Babbage's engine used punched cards to make calculations.\" This insight is seen as significant by writers such as Betty Toole and Benjamin Woolley, as well as the programmer John Graham-Cumming, whose project Plan 28 has the aim of constructing the first complete Analytical Engine.\nAccording to the historian of computing and Babbage specialist Doron Swade: Ada saw something that Babbage in some sense failed to see. In Babbage's world his engines were bound by number...What Lovelace saw...was that number could represent entities other than quantity. So once you had a machine for manipulating numbers, if those numbers represented other things, letters, musical notes, then the machine could manipulate symbols of which number was one instance, according to rules. It is this fundamental transition from a machine which is a number cruncher to a machine for manipulating symbols according to rules that is the fundamental transition from calculation to computation\u2014to general-purpose computation\u2014and looking back from the present high ground of modern computing, if we are looking and sifting history for that transition, then that transition was made explicitly by Ada in that 1843 paper.\nControversy over contribution.\nThough Lovelace is often referred to as the first computer programmer, some biographers, computer scientists and historians of computing claim otherwise.\nAllan G. Bromley, in the 1990 article \"Difference and Analytical Engines\":\nBruce Collier, who later wrote a biography of Babbage, wrote in his 1970 Harvard University PhD thesis that Lovelace \"made a considerable contribution to publicizing the Analytical Engine, but there is no evidence that she advanced the design or theory of it in any way\".\nEugene Eric Kim and Betty Alexandra Toole consider it \"incorrect\" to regard Lovelace as the first computer programmer, as Babbage wrote the initial programs for his Analytical Engine, although the majority were never published. Bromley notes several dozen sample programs prepared by Babbage between 1837 and 1840, all substantially predating Lovelace's notes. Dorothy K. Stein regards Lovelace's notes as \"more a reflection of the mathematical uncertainty of the author, the political purposes of the inventor, and, above all, of the social and cultural context in which it was written, than a blueprint for a scientific development.\"\nDoron Swade, a specialist on history of computing known for his work on Babbage, discussed Lovelace during a lecture on Babbage's analytical engine. He explained that Ada was only a \"promising beginner\" instead of genius in mathematics, that she began studying basic concepts of mathematics five years after Babbage conceived the analytical engine so she could not have made important contributions to it, and that she only published the first computer program instead of actually writing it. But he agrees that Ada was the only person to see the potential of the analytical engine as a machine capable of expressing entities other than quantities.\nIn his book, \"Idea Makers\", Stephen Wolfram defends Lovelace's contributions. While acknowledging that Babbage wrote several unpublished algorithms for the Analytical Engine prior to Lovelace's notes, Wolfram argues that \"there's nothing as sophisticated\u2014or as clean\u2014as Ada's computation of the Bernoulli numbers. Babbage certainly helped and commented on Ada's work, but she was definitely the driver of it.\" Wolfram then suggests that Lovelace's main achievement was to distill from Babbage's correspondence \"a clear exposition of the abstract operation of the machine\u2014something which Babbage never did.\"\nIn popular culture.\n1810s.\nLord Byron wrote the poem \"Fare Thee Well\" to his wife Lady Byron in 1816, following their separation after the birth of Ada Lovelace. In the poem he writes:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAnd when thou would'st solace gather\u2014\nWilt thou teach her to say \"Father!\"\nWhen her little hands shall press thee\u2014\nThink of him whose prayer shall bless thee\u2014\nShould her lineaments resemble\nThen thy heart will softly tremble\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n1970s.\nLovelace is portrayed in Romulus Linney's 1977 play \"Childe Byron\".\n1990s.\nIn the 1990 steampunk novel \"The Difference Engine\" by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, Lovelace delivers a lecture on the \"punched cards\" programme which proves two theorems, a discovery that, in reality, was not made until 1931 by Kurt G\u00f6del.\nIn the 1997 film \"Conceiving Ada,\" a computer scientist obsessed with Countess Ada Lovelace finds a way of communicating with her in the past by means of \"undying information waves\".\nIn Tom Stoppard's 1993 play \"Arcadia\", the precocious teenage genius Thomasina Coverly\u2014a character \"apparently based\" on Ada Lovelace (the play also involves Lord Byron)\u2014comes to understand chaos theory, and theorises the second law of thermodynamics, before either is officially recognised.\n2000s.\nLovelace features in John Crowley's 2005 novel, \"Lord Byron's Novel: The Evening Land\", as an unseen character whose personality is forcefully depicted in her annotations and anti-heroic efforts to archive her father's lost novel.\n2010s.\nThe 2015 play \"Ada and the Memory Engine\" by Lauren Gunderson portrays Lovelace and Charles Babbage in unrequited love, and it imagines a post-death meeting between Lovelace and her father.\nLovelace and Babbage are the main characters in Sydney Padua's webcomic and graphic novel \"The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage\". The comic features extensive footnotes on the history of Ada Lovelace, and many lines of dialogue are drawn from actual correspondence.\nLovelace and Mary Shelley as teenagers are the central characters in Jordan Stratford's steampunk series, \"The Wollstonecraft Detective Agency\".\nLovelace, identified as Ada Augusta Byron, is portrayed by Lily Lesser in the second season of \"The Frankenstein Chronicles\". She is employed as an \"analyst\" to provide the workings of a life-sized humanoid automaton. The brass workings of the machine are reminiscent of Babbage's analytical engine. Her employment is described as keeping her occupied until she returns to her studies in advanced mathematics.\nLovelace and Babbage appear as characters in the second season of the ITV series \"Victoria\" (2017). Emerald Fennell portrays Lovelace in the episode, \"The Green-Eyed Monster.\"\nIn 2019, Lovelace is a featured character in the play STEM FEMMES by Philadelphia theater company Applied Mechanics.\n2020s.\nLovelace features as a character in \"Spyfall, Part 2\", the second episode of \"Doctor Who\", series 12, which first aired on BBC One on 5\u00a0January 2020. The character was portrayed by actress Sylvie Briggs, alongside characterisations of Charles Babbage and Noor Inayat Khan.\nCommemoration.\nThe computer language Ada, created on behalf of the United States Department of Defense, was named after Lovelace. The reference manual for the language was approved on 10 December 1980 and the Department of Defense Military Standard for the language, \"MIL-STD-1815\", was given the number of the year of her birth.\nIn 1981, the Association for Women in Computing inaugurated its Ada Lovelace Award. Since 1998, the British Computer Society (BCS) has awarded the Lovelace Medal, and in 2008 initiated an annual competition for women students. BCSWomen sponsors the Lovelace Colloquium, an annual conference for women undergraduates. Ada College is a further-education college in Tottenham Hale, London, focused on digital skills.\nAda Lovelace Day is an annual event celebrated on the second Tuesday of October, which began in 2009. Its goal is to \"...\u00a0raise the profile of women in science, technology, engineering, and maths,\" and to \"create new role models for girls and women\" in these fields. Events have included Wikipedia edit-a-thons with the aim of improving the representation of women on Wikipedia in terms of articles and editors to reduce unintended gender bias on Wikipedia. The Ada Initiative was a non-profit organisation dedicated to increasing the involvement of women in the free culture and open source movements.\nThe Engineering in Computer Science and Telecommunications College building in Zaragoza University is called the Ada Byron Building. The computer centre in the village of Porlock, near where Lovelace lived, is named after her. Ada Lovelace House is a council-owned building in Kirkby-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, near where Lovelace spent her infancy.\nIn 2013 Ada Developers Academy was founded and named after her. The mission of Ada Developers Academy is to diversify tech by providing women and gender diverse people the skills, experience, and community support to become professional software developers to change the face of tech.\nOn 17 September 2013, an episode of \"Great Lives\" about Ada Lovelace aired.\nAs of November 2015, all new British passports have included an illustration of Lovelace and Babbage on pages 46 and 47.\nIn 2017, a Google Doodle honoured her on International Women's Day.\nOn 2 February 2018, Satellogic, a high-resolution Earth observation imaging and analytics company, launched a \u00d1uSat type micro-satellite named in honour of Ada Lovelace.\nIn March 2018, \"The New York Times\" published a belated obituary for Ada Lovelace.\nOn 27 July 2018, Senator Ron Wyden submitted, in the United States Senate, the designation of 9 October 2018 as National Ada Lovelace Day: \"To honor the life and contributions of Ada Lovelace as a leading woman in science and mathematics\". The resolution (S.Res.592) was considered, and agreed to without amendment and with a preamble by unanimous consent.\nIn November 2020 it was announced that Trinity College Dublin whose library had previously held forty busts, all of them of men, was commissioning four new busts of women one of whom was to be Lovelace.\nBicentenary.\nThe bicentenary of Ada Lovelace's birth was celebrated with a number of events, including:\nSpecial exhibitions were displayed by the Science Museum in London, England and the Weston Library (part of the Bodleian Library) in Oxford, England.\nPublication history.\nSix copies of the 1843 first edition of \"Sketch of the Analytical Engine\" with Ada Lovelace's \"Notes\" have been located. Three are held at Harvard University, one at the University of Oklahoma, and one at the United States Air Force Academy. On 20 July 2018, the sixth copy was sold at auction to an anonymous buyer for \u00a395,000. A digital facsimile of one of the copies in the Harvard University Library is available online.\nIn December 2016, a letter written by Ada Lovelace was forfeited by Martin Shkreli to the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance for unpaid taxes owed by Shkreli."}
{"id": "975", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=975", "title": "AmbientCalculiOnline", "text": ""}
{"id": "980", "revid": "40545606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=980", "title": "August Derleth", "text": "August William Derleth (February 24, 1909 \u2013 July 4, 1971) was an American writer and anthologist. Though best remembered as the first book publisher of the writings of H. P. Lovecraft, and for his own contributions to the Cthulhu Mythos and the cosmic horror genre, as well as his founding of the publisher Arkham House (which did much to bring supernatural fiction into print in hardcover in the US that had only been readily available in the UK), Derleth was a leading American regional writer of his day, as well as prolific in several other genres, including historical fiction, poetry, detective fiction, science fiction, and biography.\nA 1938 Guggenheim Fellow, Derleth considered his most serious work to be the ambitious \"Sac Prairie Saga\", a series of fiction, historical fiction, poetry, and non-fiction naturalist works designed to memorialize life in the Wisconsin he knew. Derleth can also be considered a pioneering naturalist and conservationist in his writing.\nLife.\nThe son of William Julius Derleth and Rose Louise Volk, Derleth grew up in Sauk City, Wisconsin. He was educated in local parochial and public high school. Derleth wrote his first fiction at age 13. He was interested most in reading, and he made three trips to the library a week. He would save his money to buy books (his personal library exceeded 12,000 later on in life). Some of his biggest influences were Ralph Waldo Emerson's essays, Walt Whitman, H. L. Mencken's \"The American Mercury\", Samuel Johnson's \"The History of Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia\", Alexandre Dumas, Edgar Allan Poe, Walter Scott, and Henry David Thoreau's Walden.\nForty rejected stories and three years later, according to anthologist Jim Stephens, he sold his first story, \"Bat's Belfry\", to \"Weird Tales\" magazine. Derleth wrote throughout his four years at the University of Wisconsin, where he received a B.A. in 1930. During this time he also served briefly as associate editor of Minneapolis-based Fawcett Publications \"Mystic Magazine\".\nReturning to Sauk City in the summer of 1931, Derleth worked in a local canning factory and collaborated with childhood friend Mark Schorer (later Chairman of the University of California, Berkeley English Department). They rented a cabin, writing Gothic and other horror stories and selling them\nto \"Weird Tales\" magazine. Derleth won a place on the O'Brien Roll of Honor for \"Five Alone\", published in \"Place of Hawks\", but was first found in \"Pagany\" magazine.\nAs a result of his early work on the \"Sac Prairie Saga\", Derleth was awarded the prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship; his sponsors were Helen C. White, Nobel Prize-winning novelist Sinclair Lewis and poet Edgar Lee Masters of \"Spoon River Anthology\" fame.\nIn the mid-1930s, Derleth organized a Ranger's Club for young people, served as clerk and president of the local school board, served as a parole officer, organized a local men's club and a parent-teacher association. He also lectured in American regional literature at the University of Wisconsin and was a contributing editor of \"Outdoors Magazine\".\nWith longtime friend Donald Wandrei, Derleth in 1939 founded Arkham House. Its initial objective was to publish the works of H. P. Lovecraft, with whom Derleth had corresponded since his teenage years. At the same time, he began teaching a course in American Regional Literature at the University of Wisconsin.\nIn 1941, he became literary editor of \"The Capital Times\" newspaper in Madison, a post he held until his resignation in 1960. His hobbies included fencing, swimming, chess, philately and comic-strips (Derleth reportedly used the funding from his Guggenheim Fellowship to bind his comic book collection, most recently valued in the millions of dollars, rather than to travel abroad as the award intended.). Derleth's true avocation, however, was hiking the terrain of his native Wisconsin lands, and observing and recording nature with an expert eye.\nDerleth once wrote of his writing methods, \"I write very swiftly, from 750,000 to a million words yearly, very little of it pulp material.\"\nIn 1948, he was elected president of the Associated Fantasy Publishers at the 6th World Science Fiction Convention in Toronto.\nHe was married April 6, 1953, to Sandra Evelyn Winters. They divorced six years later. Derleth retained custody of the couple's two children, April Rose and Walden William. April earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1977. She became majority stockholder, President, and CEO of Arkham House in 1994. She remained in that capacity until her death. She was known in the community as a naturalist and humanitarian. April died on March 21, 2011.\nIn 1960, Derleth began editing and publishing a magazine called \"Hawk and Whippoorwill\", dedicated to poems of man and nature.\nDerleth died of a heart attack on July 4, 1971, and is buried in St. Aloysius Cemetery in Sauk City. The U.S. 12 bridge over the Wisconsin River is named in his honor. Derleth was Roman Catholic.\nCareer.\nDerleth wrote more than 150 short stories and more than 100 books during his lifetime.\nThe \"Sac Prairie Saga\".\nDerleth wrote an expansive series of novels, short stories, journals, poems, and other works about Sac Prairie (whose prototype is Sauk City). Derleth intended this series to comprise up to 50 novels telling the projected life-story of the region from the 19th century onwards, with analogies to Balzac's \"Human Comedy\" and Proust's \"Remembrance of Things Past\".\nThis, and other early work by Derleth, made him a well-known figure among the regional literary figures of his time: early Pulitzer Prize winners Hamlin Garland and Zona Gale, as well as Sinclair Lewis, the last both an admirer and critic of Derleth.\nAs Edward Wagenknecht wrote in \"Cavalcade of the American Novel\", \"What Mr. Derleth has that is lacking...in modern novelists generally, is a country. He belongs. He writes of a land and a people that are bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. In his fictional world, there is a unity much deeper and more fundamental than anything that can be conferred by an ideology. It is clear, too, that he did not get the best, and most fictionally useful, part of his background material from research in the library; like Scott, in his Border novels, he gives, rather, the impression of having drunk it in with his mother's milk.\"\nJim Stephens, editor of \"An August Derleth Reader\", (1992), argues: \"what Derleth accomplished...was to gather a Wisconsin mythos which gave respect to the ancient fundament of our contemporary life.\"\nThe author inaugurated the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" with four novellas comprising \"Place of Hawks\", published by Loring &amp; Mussey in 1935. At publication, \"The Detroit News\" wrote: \"Certainly with this book Mr. Derleth may be added to the American writers of distinction.\"\nDerleth's first novel, \"Still is the Summer Night\", was published two years later by the famous Charles Scribners' editor Maxwell Perkins, and was the second in his Sac Prairie Saga.\n\"Village Year\", the first in a series of journals \u2013 meditations on nature, Midwestern village American life, and more \u2013 was published in 1941 to praise from \"The New York Times Book Review\": \"A book of instant sensitive responsiveness...recreates its scene with acuteness and beauty, and makes an unusual contribution to the Americana of the present day.\" The \"New York Herald Tribune\" observed that \"Derleth...deepens the value of his village setting by presenting in full the enduring natural background; with the people projected against this, the writing comes to have the quality of an old Flemish picture, humanity lively and amusing and loveable in the foreground and nature magnificent beyond.\" James Grey, writing in the \"St. Louis Dispatch\" concluded, \"Derleth has achieved a kind of prose equivalent of the \"Spoon River Anthology\".\"\nIn the same year, \"Evening in Spring\" was published by Charles Scribners &amp; Sons. This work Derleth considered among his finest. What \"The Milwaukee Journal\" called \"this beautiful little love story\", is an autobiographical novel of first love beset by small-town religious bigotry. The work received critical praise: \"The New Yorker\" considered it a story told \"with tenderness and charm\", while the \"Chicago Tribune\" concluded: \"It's as though he turned back the pages of an old diary and told, with rekindled emotion, of the pangs of pain and the sharp, clear sweetness of a boy's first love.\" Helen Constance White, wrote in \"The Capital Times\" that it was \"...the best articulated, the most fully disciplined of his stories.\"\nThese were followed in 1943 with \"Shadow of Night\", a Scribners' novel of which \"The Chicago Sun\" wrote: \"Structurally it has the perfection of a carved jewel...A psychological novel of the first order, and an adventure tale that is unique and inspiriting.\"\nIn November 1945, however, Derleth's work was attacked by his one-time admirer and mentor, Sinclair Lewis. Writing in \"Esquire\", Lewis observed, \"It is a proof of Mr. Derleth's merit that he makes one want to make the journey and see his particular Avalon: The Wisconsin River shining among its islands, and the castles of Baron Pierneau and Hercules Dousman. He is a champion and a justification of regionalism. Yet he is also a burly, bounding, bustling, self-confident, opinionated, and highly-sweatered young man with faults so grievous that a melancholy perusal of them may be of more value to apprentices than a study of his serious virtues. If he could ever be persuaded that he isn't half as good as he thinks he is, if he would learn the art of sitting still and using a blue pencil, he might become twice as good as he thinks he is \u2013 which would about rank him with Homer.\" Derleth good-humoredly reprinted the criticism along with a photograph of himself sans sweater, on the back cover of his 1948 country journal: \"Village Daybook\".\nA lighter side to the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" is a series of quasi-autobiographical short stories known as the \"Gus Elker Stories\", amusing tales of country life that Peter Ruber, Derleth's last editor, said were \"...models of construction and...fused with some of the most memorable characters in American literature.\" Most were written between 1934 and the late 1940s, though the last, \"Tail of the Dog\", was published in 1959 and won the \"Scholastic Magazine\" short story award for the year. The series was collected and republished in \"Country Matters\" in 1996.\n\"Walden West\", published in 1961, is considered by many Derleth's finest work. This prose meditation is built out of the same fundamental material as the series of Sac Prairie journals, but is organized around three themes: \"the persistence of memory...the sounds and odors of the country...and Thoreau's observation that the 'mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.'\" A blend of nature writing, philosophic musings, and careful observation of the people and place of \"Sac Prairie.\" Of this work, George Vukelich, author of \"North Country Notebook\", writes: \"Derleth's \"Walden West\" is...the equal of Sherwood Anderson's \"Winesburg,Ohio\", Thornton Wilder's \"Our Town\", and Edgar Lee Masters' \"Spoon River Anthology\".\" This was followed eight years later by \"Return to Walden West\", a work of similar quality, but with a more noticeable environmentalist edge to the writing, notes critic Norbert Blei.\nA close literary relative of the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" was Derleth's \"Wisconsin Saga\", which comprises several historical novels.\nDetective and mystery fiction.\nDetective fiction represented another substantial body of Derleth's work. Most notable among this work was a series of 70 stories in affectionate pastiche of Sherlock Holmes, whose creator, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, he admired greatly. These included one published novel as well (\"Mr. Fairlie's Final Journey\"). The series features a (Sherlock Holmes-styled) British detective named Solar Pons, of 7B Praed Street in London. The series was greatly admired by such notable writers and critics of mystery and detective fiction as Ellery Queen (Frederic Dannay), Anthony Boucher, Vincent Starrett and Howard Haycraft.\nIn his 1944 volume \"The Misadventures of Sherlock Holmes\", Ellery Queen wrote of Derleth's \"The Norcross Riddle\", an early Pons story: \"How many budding authors, not even old enough to vote, could have captured the spirit and atmosphere with as much fidelity?\" Queen adds, \"...and his choice of the euphonic Solar Pons is an appealing addition to the fascinating lore of Sherlockian nomenclature.\" Vincent Starrett, in his foreword to the 1964 edition of \"The Casebook of Solar Pons\", wrote that the series is \"...as sparkling a galaxy of Sherlockian pastiches as we have had since the canonical entertainments came to an end.\"\nDespite close similarities to Doyle's creation, Pons lived in the post-World War I era, in the decades of the 1920s and 1930s. Though Derleth never wrote a Pons novel to equal \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\", editor Peter Ruber wrote: \"...Derleth produced more than a few Solar Pons stories almost as good as Sir Arthur's, and many that had better plot construction.\"\nAlthough these stories were a form of diversion for Derleth, Ruber, who edited \"The Original Text Solar Pons Omnibus Edition\" (2000), argued: \"Because the stories were generally of such high quality, they ought to be assessed on their own merits as a unique contribution in the annals of mystery fiction, rather than suffering comparison as one of the endless imitators of Sherlock Holmes.\"\nSome of the stories were self-published, through a new imprint called \"Mycroft &amp; Moran\", an appellation of humorous significance to Holmesian scholars. For approximately a decade, an active supporting group was the Praed Street Irregulars, patterned after the Baker Street Irregulars.\nIn 1946, Conan Doyle's two sons made some attempts to force Derleth to cease publishing the Solar Pons series, but the efforts were unsuccessful and eventually withdrawn.\nDerleth's mystery and detective fiction also included a series of works set in Sac Prairie and featuring Judge Peck as the central character.\nYouth and children's fiction.\nDerleth wrote many and varied children's works, including biographies meant to introduce younger readers to explorer Jacques Marquette, as well as Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Arguably most important among his works for younger readers, however, is the Steve and Sim Mystery Series, also known as the Mill Creek Irregulars series. The ten-volume series, published between 1958 and 1970, is set in Sac Prairie of the 1920s and can thus be considered in its own right a part of the \"Sac Prairie Saga\", as well as an extension of Derleth's body of mystery fiction. Robert Hood, writing in the \"New York Times\" said: \"Steve and Sim, the major characters, are twentieth-century cousins of Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer; Derleth's minor characters, little gems of comic drawing.\" The first novel in the series, \"The Moon Tenders\", does, in fact, involve a rafting adventure down the Wisconsin River, which led regional writer Jesse Stuart to suggest the novel was one that \"older people might read to recapture the spirit and dream of youth.\" The connection to the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" was noted by the \"Chicago Tribune\": \"Once again a small midwest community in 1920s is depicted with perception, skill, and dry humor.\"\nArkham House and the \"Cthulhu Mythos\".\nDerleth was a correspondent and friend of H. P. Lovecraft \u2013 when Lovecraft wrote about \"le Comte d'Erlette\" in his fiction, it was in homage to Derleth. Derleth invented the term \"Cthulhu Mythos\" to describe the fictional universe depicted in the series of stories shared by Lovecraft and other writers in his circle.\nWhen Lovecraft died in 1937, Derleth and Donald Wandrei assembled a collection of Lovecraft's stories and tried to get them published. Existing publishers showed little interest, so Derleth and Wandrei founded Arkham House in 1939 for that purpose. The name of the company derived from Lovecraft's fictional town of Arkham, Massachusetts, which features in many of his stories. In 1939 Arkham House published \"The Outsider and Others\", a huge collection that contained most of Lovecraft's known short stories. Derleth and Wandrei soon expanded Arkham House and began a regular publishing schedule after its second book, \"Someone in the Dark\", a collection of some of Derleth's own horror stories, was published in 1941.\nFollowing Lovecraft's death, Derleth wrote a number of stories based on fragments and notes left by Lovecraft. These were published in \"Weird Tales\" and later in book form, under the byline \"H. P. Lovecraft and August Derleth\", with Derleth calling himself a \"posthumous collaborator.\" This practice has raised objections in some quarters that Derleth simply used Lovecraft's name to market what was essentially his own fiction; S. T. Joshi refers to the \"posthumous collaborations\" as marking the beginning of \"perhaps the most disreputable phase of Derleth's activities\".\nDirk W. Mosig, S. T. Joshi, and Richard L. Tierney were dissatisfied with Derleth's invention of the term \"Cthulhu Mythos\" (Lovecraft himself used \"Yog-Sothothery\") and his presentation of Lovecraft's fiction as having an overall pattern reflecting Derleth's own Christian world view, which they contrast with Lovecraft's depiction of an amoral universe. However, Robert M. Price points out that while Derleth's tales are distinct from Lovecraft's in their use of hope and his depiction of a struggle between good and evil, nevertheless the basis of Derlerth's systemization are found in Lovecraft. He also suggests that the differences can be overstated:\nDerleth \"was\" more optimistic than Lovecraft in his conception of the Mythos, but we are dealing with a difference more of degree than kind. There are indeed tales wherein Derleth's protagonists get off scot-free (like \"The Shadow in the Attic\", \"Witches' Hollow\", or \"The Shuttered Room\"), but often the hero is doomed (e.g., \"The House in the Valley\", \"The Peabody Heritage\", \"Something in Wood\"), as in Lovecraft. And it must be remembered that an occasional Lovecraftian hero does manage to overcome the odds, e.g., in \"The Horror in the Museum\", \"The Shunned House\", and 'The Case of Charles Dexter Ward'. \nDerleth also treated Lovecraft's Great Old Ones as representatives of elemental forces, creating new fictional entities to flesh out this framework.\nSuch debates aside, Derleth's founding of Arkham House and his successful effort to rescue Lovecraft from literary oblivion are widely acknowledged by practitioners in the horror field as seminal events in the field. For instance, Ramsey Campbell has acknowledged Derleth's encouragement and guidance during the early part of his own writing career, and Kirby McCauley has cited Derleth and Arkham House as an inspiration for his own anthology \"Dark Forces\". Arkham House and Derleth published \"Dark Carnival\", the first book by Ray Bradbury, as well. Brian Lumley cites the importance of Derleth to his own Lovecraftian work, and contends in a 2009 introduction to Derleth's work that he was \"...one of the first, finest, and most discerning editors and publishers of macabre fiction.\"\nImportant as was Derleth's work to rescue H.P. Lovecraft from literary obscurity at the time of Lovecraft's death, Derleth also built a body of horror and spectral fiction of his own; still frequently anthologized. The best of this work, recently reprinted in four volumes of short stories \u2013 most of which were originally published in \"Weird Tales\", illustrates Derleth's original abilities in the genre. While Derleth considered his work in this genre less important than his most serious literary efforts, the compilers of these four anthologies, including Ramsey Campbell, note that the stories still resonate after more than 50 years.\nIn 2009, The Library of America selected Derleth's story \"The Panelled Room\" for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American Fantastic Tales.\nOther works.\nDerleth also wrote many historical novels, as part of both the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" and the \"Wisconsin Saga\". He also wrote history; arguably most notable among these was \"The Wisconsin: River of a Thousand Isles\", published in 1942. The work was one in a series entitled \"The Rivers of America\", conceived by writer Constance Lindsay Skinner in the Great Depression as a series that would connect Americans to their heritage through the history of the great rivers of the nation. Skinner wanted the series to be written by artists, not academicians. Derleth, while not a trained historian, was, according to former Wisconsin state historian William F. Thompson, \"...a very competent regional historian who based his historical writing upon research in the primary documents and who regularly sought the help of professionals... .\" In the foreword to the 1985 reissue of the work by The University of Wisconsin Press, Thompson concluded: \"No other writer, of whatever background or training, knew and understood his particular 'corner of the earth' better than August Derleth.\"\nAdditionally, Derleth wrote a number of volumes of poetry. Three of his collections \u2013 \"Rind of Earth\" (1942), \"Selected Poems\" (1944), and \"The Edge of Night\" (1945) \u2013 were published by the Decker Press, which also printed the work of other Midwestern poets such as Edgar Lee Masters. \nDerleth was also the author of several biographies of other writers, including Zona Gale, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.\nHe also wrote introductions to several collections of classic early 20th century comics, such as \"Buster Brown\", \"Little Nemo in Slumberland\", and \"Katzenjammer Kids\", as well as a book of children's poetry entitled \"A Boy's Way\", and the foreword to \"Tales from an Indian Lodge\" by \"Phebe Jewell Nichols.\" Derleth also wrote under the noms de plume Stephen Grendon, Kenyon Holmes and Tally Mason.\nDerleth's papers were donated to the Wisconsin Historical Society in Madison."}
{"id": "981", "revid": "11378440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=981", "title": "Alps", "text": "The Alps are the highest and most extensive mountain range system that lies entirely in Europe, stretching approximately across eight Alpine countries (from west to east): France, Switzerland, Monaco, Italy, Liechtenstein, Austria, Germany, and Slovenia. The Alpine arch generally extends from Nice on the western Mediterranean to Trieste on the Adriatic and Vienna at the beginning of the Pannonian basin. The mountains were formed over tens of millions of years as the African and Eurasian tectonic plates collided. Extreme shortening caused by the event resulted in marine sedimentary rocks rising by thrusting and folding into high mountain peaks such as Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn. Mont Blanc spans the French\u2013Italian border, and at is the highest mountain in the Alps. The Alpine region area contains 128 peaks higher than .\nThe altitude and size of the range affects the climate in Europe; in the mountains precipitation levels vary greatly and climatic conditions consist of distinct zones. Wildlife such as ibex live in the higher peaks to elevations of , and plants such as Edelweiss grow in rocky areas in lower elevations as well as in higher elevations. Evidence of human habitation in the Alps goes back to the Palaeolithic era. A mummified man, determined to be 5,000 years old, was discovered on a glacier at the Austrian\u2013Italian border in 1991.\nBy the 6th century BC, the Celtic La T\u00e8ne culture was well established. Hannibal famously crossed the Alps with a herd of elephants, and the Romans had settlements in the region. In 1800, Napoleon crossed one of the mountain passes with an army of 40,000. The 18th and 19th centuries saw an influx of naturalists, writers, and artists, in particular, the Romantics, followed by the golden age of alpinism as mountaineers began to ascend the peaks.\nThe Alpine region has a strong cultural identity. The traditional culture of farming, cheesemaking, and woodworking still exists in Alpine villages, although the tourist industry began to grow early in the 20th century and expanded greatly after World War II to become the dominant industry by the end of the century. The Winter Olympic Games have been hosted in the Swiss, French, Italian, Austrian and German Alps. At present, the region is home to 14\u00a0million people and has 120\u00a0million annual visitors.\nEtymology and toponymy.\nThe English word \"Alps\" comes from the Latin \"Alpes\".\nThe Latin word \"Alpes\" could possibly come from the adjective \"albus\" (\"white\"), which could possibly come from the Greek goddess Alphito, whose name is related to \"alphita\", the \"white flour\"; \"alphos\", a dull white leprosy; and finally the Proto-Indo-European word alphos. Similarly, the river god Alpheus also derives from the Greek \"alphos\" and means whitish.\nIn his commentary on the \"Aeneid\" of Vergil, the late fourth-century grammarian Maurus Servius Honoratus says that all high mountains are called \"Alpes\" by Celts. The term may be common to Italo-Celtic, because the Celtic languages have terms for high mountains derived from \"alp\".\nThis may be consistent with the theory that in Greek \"Alpes\" is a name of non-Indo-European origin (which is common for prominent mountains and mountain ranges in the Mediterranean region). According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the Latin \"Alpes\" might possibly derive from a pre-Indo-European word *\"alb\" \"hill\"; \"Albania\" is a related derivation. Albania, a name not native to the region known as the country of Albania, has been used as a name for a number of mountainous areas across Europe. In Roman times, \"Albania\" was a name for the eastern Caucasus, while in the English languages \"Albania\" (or \"Albany\") was occasionally used as a name for Scotland, although it is more likely derived from the Latin word \"albus\", the color white.\nIn modern languages the term \"alp\", \"alm\", \"albe\" or \"alpe\" refers to a grazing pastures in the alpine regions below the glaciers, not the peaks. An \"alp\" refers to a high mountain pasture where cows are taken to be grazed during the summer months and where hay barns can be found, and the term \"the Alps\", referring to the mountains, is a misnomer. The term for the mountain peaks varies by nation and language: words such as \"Horn\", \"Kogel\", \"Kopf\", \"Gipfel\", \"Spitze\", \"Stock\", and \"Berg\" are used in German speaking regions; \"Mont\", \"Pic\", \"T\u00eate\", \"Pointe\", \"Dent\", \"Roche\", and \"Aiguille\" in French speaking regions; and \"Monte\", \"Picco\", \"Corno\", \"Punta\", \"Pizzo\", or \"Cima\" in Italian speaking regions.\nGeography.\nThe Alps are a crescent shaped geographic feature of central Europe that ranges in an arc (curved line) from east to west and is in width. The mean height of the mountain peaks is . The range stretches from the Mediterranean Sea north above the Po basin, extending through France from Grenoble, and stretching eastward through mid and southern Switzerland. The range continues onward toward Vienna, Austria, and east to the Adriatic Sea and Slovenia. To the south it dips into northern Italy and to the north extends to the southern border of Bavaria in Germany. In areas like Chiasso, Switzerland, and Allg\u00e4u, Bavaria, the demarcation between the mountain range and the flatlands are clear; in other places such as Geneva, the demarcation is less clear. The countries with the greatest alpine territory are Austria (28.7% of the total area), Italy (27.2%), France (21.4%) and Switzerland (13.2%).\nThe highest portion of the range is divided by the glacial trough of the Rh\u00f4ne valley, from Mont Blanc to the Matterhorn and Monte Rosa on the southern side, and the Bernese Alps on the northern. The peaks in the easterly portion of the range, in Austria and Slovenia, are smaller than those in the central and western portions. \nThe variances in nomenclature in the region spanned by the Alps makes classification of the mountains and subregions difficult, but a general classification is that of the Eastern Alps and Western Alps with the divide between the two occurring in eastern Switzerland according to geologist Stefan Schmid, near the Spl\u00fcgen Pass.\nThe highest peaks of the Western Alps and Eastern Alps, respectively, are Mont Blanc, at and Piz Bernina at . The second-highest major peaks are Monte Rosa at and Ortler at , respectively\nSeries of lower mountain ranges run parallel to the main chain of the Alps, including the French Prealps in France and the Jura Mountains in Switzerland and France. The secondary chain of the Alps follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald, passing over many of the highest and most well-known peaks in the Alps. From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs westwards, before turning to the northwest and then, near the Colle della Maddalena, to the north. Upon reaching the Swiss border, the line of the main chain heads approximately east-northeast, a heading it follows until its end near Vienna.\nThe northeast end of the Alpine arc directly on the Danube, which flows into the Black Sea, is the Leopoldsberg near Vienna. In contrast, the southeastern part of the Alps ends on the Adriatic Sea in the area around Trieste towards Duino and Barcola.\nPasses.\nThe Alps have been crossed for war and commerce, and by pilgrims, students and tourists. Crossing routes by road, train or foot are known as \"passes\", and usually consist of depressions in the mountains in which a valley leads from the plains and hilly pre-mountainous zones. In the medieval period hospices were established by religious orders at the summits of many of the main passes. The most important passes are the Col de l'Iseran (the highest), the Col Agnel, the Brenner Pass, the Mont-Cenis, the Great St. Bernard Pass, the Col de Tende, the Gotthard Pass, the Semmering Pass, the Simplon Pass, and the Stelvio Pass.\nCrossing the Italian-Austrian border, the Brenner Pass separates the \u00d6tztal Alps and Zillertal Alps and has been in use as a trading route since the 14th century. The lowest of the Alpine passes at , the Semmering crosses from Lower Austria to Styria; since the 12th century when a hospice was built there, it has seen continuous use. A railroad with a tunnel long was built along the route of the pass in the mid-19th century. With a summit of , the Great St. Bernard Pass is one of the highest in the Alps, crossing the Italian-Swiss border east of the Pennine Alps along the flanks of Mont Blanc. The pass was used by Napoleon Bonaparte to cross 40,000 troops in 1800.\nThe Mont Cenis pass has been a major commercial and military road between Western Europe and Italy. The pass was crossed by many troops on their way to the Italian peninsula. From Constantine I, Pepin the Short and Charlemagne to Henry IV, Napol\u00e9on and more recently the German Gebirgsj\u00e4gers during World War II.\nNow the pass has been supplanted by the Fr\u00e9jus Highway Tunnel (opened 1980) and Rail Tunnel (opened 1871).\nThe Saint Gotthard Pass crosses from Central Switzerland to Ticino; in 1882 the Saint Gotthard Railway Tunnel was opened connecting Lucerne in Switzerland, with Milan in Italy. 98 years later followed Gotthard Road Tunnel ( long) connecting the A2 motorway in G\u00f6schenen on the German-Swiss side with Airolo on the Italian-Swiss side, exactly like the railway tunnel. On June 1, 2016 the world's longest railway tunnel, the Gotthard Base Tunnel was opened, which connects Erstfeld in canton of Uri with Bodio in canton of Ticino by two single tubes of . It is the first tunnel that traverses the Alps on a flat route. From December 11, 2016 it is part of the regular railway timetable and be used hourly as standard way to ride between Basel/Lucerne/Zurich and Bellinzona/Lugano/Milano.\nThe highest pass in the alps is the col de l'Iseran in Savoy (France) at , followed by the Stelvio Pass in northern Italy at ; the road was built in the 1820s.\nHighest mountains.\nThe Union Internationale des Associations d'Alpinisme (UIAA) has defined a list of 82 \"official\" Alpine summits that reach at least . The list includes not only mountains, but also subpeaks with little prominence that are considered important mountaineering objectives. Below are listed the 29 \"four-thousanders\" with at least of prominence.\nWhile Mont Blanc was first climbed in 1786 and the Jungfrau in 1811, most of the Alpine four-thousanders were climbed during the second half of the 19th century, notably Piz Bernina (1850), the Dom (1858), the Grand Combin (1859), the Weisshorn (1861) and the Barre des \u00c9crins (1864); the ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865 marked the end of the golden age of alpinism. Karl Blodig (1859\u20131956) was among the first to successfully climb all the major 4,000\u00a0m peaks. He completed his series of ascents in 1911. Many of the big Alpine three-thousanders were climbed in the early 19th century, notably the Grossglockner (1800) and the Ortler (1804), although some of them were climbed only much later, such at Mont Pelvoux (1848), Monte Viso (1861) and La Meije (1877).\nThe first British Mont Blanc ascent was in 1788; the first female ascent in 1819. By the mid-1850s Swiss mountaineers had ascended most of the peaks and were eagerly sought as mountain guides. Edward Whymper reached the top of the Matterhorn in 1865 (after seven attempts), and in 1938 the last of the six great north faces of the Alps was climbed with the first ascent of the Eiger \"Nordwand\" (north face of the Eiger).\nGeology and orogeny.\nImportant geological concepts were established as naturalists began studying the rock formations of the Alps in the 18th century. In the mid-19th century the now defunct theory of geosynclines was used to explain the presence of \"folded\" mountain chains but by the mid-20th century the theory of plate tectonics became widely accepted.\nThe formation of the Alps (the Alpine orogeny) was an episodic process that began about 300\u00a0million years ago. In the Paleozoic Era the Pangaean supercontinent consisted of a single tectonic plate; it broke into separate plates during the Mesozoic Era and the Tethys sea developed between Laurasia and Gondwana during the Jurassic Period. The Tethys was later squeezed between colliding plates causing the formation of mountain ranges called the Alpide belt, from Gibraltar through the Himalayas to Indonesia\u2014a process that began at the end of the Mesozoic and continues into the present. The formation of the Alps was a segment of this orogenic process, caused by the collision between the African and the Eurasian plates that began in the late Cretaceous Period.\nUnder extreme compressive stresses and pressure, marine sedimentary rocks were uplifted, creating characteristic recumbent folds, or \"nappes\", and thrust faults. As the rising peaks underwent erosion, a layer of marine flysch sediments was deposited in the foreland basin, and the sediments became involved in younger nappes (folds) as the orogeny progressed. Coarse sediments from the continual uplift and erosion were later deposited in foreland areas as molasse. The molasse regions in Switzerland and Bavaria were well-developed and saw further upthrusting of flysch.\nThe Alpine orogeny occurred in ongoing cycles through to the Paleogene causing differences in nappe structures, with a late-stage orogeny causing the development of the Jura Mountains. A series of tectonic events in the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods caused different paleogeographic regions. The Alps are subdivided by different lithology (rock composition) and nappe structure according to the orogenic events that affected them. The geological subdivision differentiates the Western, Eastern Alps and Southern Alps: the Helveticum in the north, the Penninicum and Austroalpine system in the centre and, south of the Periadriatic Seam, the Southern Alpine system.\nAccording to geologist Stefan Schmid, because the Western Alps underwent a metamorphic event in the Cenozoic Era while the Austroalpine peaks underwent an event in the Cretaceous Period, the two areas show distinct differences in nappe formations. Flysch deposits in the Southern Alps of Lombardy probably occurred in the Cretaceous or later.\nPeaks in France, Italy and Switzerland lie in the \"Houilli\u00e8re zone\", which consists of basement with sediments from the Mesozoic Era. High \"massifs\" with external sedimentary cover are more common in the Western Alps and were affected by Neogene Period thin-skinned thrusting whereas the Eastern Alps have comparatively few high peaked massifs. Similarly the peaks in eastern Switzerland extending to western Austria (Helvetic nappes) consist of thin-skinned sedimentary folding that detached from former basement rock.\nIn simple terms the structure of the Alps consists of layers of rock of European, African and oceanic (Tethyan) origin. The bottom nappe structure is of continental European origin, above which are stacked marine sediment nappes, topped off by nappes derived from the African plate. The Matterhorn is an example of the ongoing orogeny and shows evidence of great folding. The tip of the mountain consists of gneisses from the African plate; the base of the peak, below the glaciated area, consists of European basement rock. The sequence of Tethyan marine sediments and their oceanic basement is sandwiched between rock derived from the African and European plates.\nThe core regions of the Alpine orogenic belt have been folded and fractured in such a manner that erosion created the characteristic steep vertical peaks of the Swiss Alps that rise seemingly straight out of the foreland areas. Peaks such as Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and high peaks in the Pennine Alps, the Brian\u00e7onnais, and Hohe Tauern consist of layers of rock from the various orogenies including exposures of basement rock.\nDue to the ever-present geologic instability, earthquakes continue in the Alps to this day. Typically, the largest earthquakes in the alps have been between magnitude 6 and 7 on the Richter scale.\nMinerals.\nThe Alps are a source of minerals that have been mined for thousands of years. In the 8th to 6th centuries BC during the Hallstatt culture, Celtic tribes mined copper; later the Romans mined gold for coins in the Bad Gastein area. Erzberg in Styria furnishes high-quality iron ore for the steel industry. Crystals, such as cinnabar, amethyst, and quartz, are found throughout much of the Alpine region. The cinnabar deposits in Slovenia are a notable source of cinnabar pigments.\nAlpine crystals have been studied and collected for hundreds of years, and began to be classified in the 18th century. Leonhard Euler studied the shapes of crystals, and by the 19th century crystal hunting was common in Alpine regions. David Friedrich Wiser amassed a collection of 8000 crystals that he studied and documented. In the 20th century Robert Parker wrote a well-known work about the rock crystals of the Swiss Alps; at the same period a commission was established to control and standardize the naming of Alpine minerals.\nGlaciers.\nIn the Miocene Epoch the mountains underwent severe erosion because of glaciation, which was noted in the mid-19th century by naturalist Louis Agassiz who presented a paper proclaiming the Alps were covered in ice at various intervals\u2014a theory he formed when studying rocks near his Neuch\u00e2tel home which he believed originated to the west in the Bernese Oberland. Because of his work he came to be known as the \"father of the ice-age concept\" although other naturalists before him put forth similar ideas.\nAgassiz studied glacier movement in the 1840s at the Unteraar Glacier where he found the glacier moved per year, more rapidly in the middle than at the edges. His work was continued by other scientists and now a permanent laboratory exists inside a glacier under the Jungfraujoch, devoted exclusively to the study of Alpine glaciers.\nGlaciers pick up rocks and sediment with them as they flow. This causes erosion and the formation of valleys over time. The Inn valley is an example of a valley carved by glaciers during the ice ages with a typical terraced structure caused by erosion. Eroded rocks from the most recent ice age lie at the bottom of the valley while the top of the valley consists of erosion from earlier ice ages. Glacial valleys have characteristically steep walls (reliefs); valleys with lower reliefs and talus slopes are remnants of glacial troughs or previously infilled valleys. Moraines, piles of rock picked up during the movement of the glacier, accumulate at edges, centre and the terminus of glaciers.\nAlpine glaciers can be straight rivers of ice, long sweeping rivers, spread in a fan-like shape (Piedmont glaciers), and curtains of ice that hang from vertical slopes of the mountain peaks. The stress of the movement causes the ice to break and crack loudly, perhaps explaining why the mountains were believed to be home to dragons in the medieval period. The cracking creates unpredictable and dangerous crevasses, often invisible under new snowfall, which cause the greatest danger to mountaineers.\nGlaciers end in ice caves (the Rh\u00f4ne Glacier), by trailing into a lake or river, or by shedding snowmelt on a meadow. Sometimes a piece of glacier will detach or break resulting in flooding, property damage and loss of life.\nHigh levels of precipitation cause the glaciers to descend to permafrost levels in some areas whereas in other, more arid regions, glaciers remain above about the level. The of the Alps covered by glaciers in 1876 had shrunk to by 1973, resulting in decreased river run-off levels. Forty percent of the glaciation in Austria has disappeared since 1850, and 30% of that in Switzerland.\nRivers and lakes.\nThe Alps provide lowland Europe with drinking water, irrigation, and hydroelectric power. Although the area is only about 11% of the surface area of Europe, the Alps provide up to 90% of water to lowland Europe, particularly to arid areas and during the summer months. Cities such as Milan depend on 80% of water from Alpine runoff. Water from the rivers is used in over 500 hydroelectricity power plants, generating as much as 2900 GWh of electricity.\nMajor European rivers flow from the Alps, such as the Rhine, the Rh\u00f4ne, the Inn, and the Po, all of which have headwaters in the Alps and flow into neighbouring countries, finally emptying into the North Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Adriatic Sea and the Black Sea. Other rivers such as the Danube have major tributaries flowing into them that originate in the Alps. The Rh\u00f4ne is second to the Nile as a freshwater source to the Mediterranean Sea; the river begins as glacial meltwater, flows into Lake Geneva, and from there to France where one of its uses is to cool nuclear power plants. The Rhine originates in a area in Switzerland and represents almost 60% of water exported from the country. Tributary valleys, some of which are complicated, channel water to the main valleys which can experience flooding during the snow melt season when rapid runoff causes debris torrents and swollen rivers.\nThe rivers form lakes, such as Lake Geneva, a crescent shaped lake crossing the Swiss border with Lausanne on the Swiss side and the town of Evian-les-Bains on the French side. In Germany, the medieval St. Bartholomew's chapel was built on the south side of the K\u00f6nigssee, accessible only by boat or by climbing over the abutting peaks.\nAdditionally, the Alps have led to the creation of large lakes in Italy. For instance, the Sarca, the primary inflow of Lake Garda, originates in the Italian Alps. The Italian Lakes are a popular tourist destination since the Roman Era for their mild climate.\nScientists have been studying the impact of climate change and water use. For example, each year more water is diverted from rivers for snowmaking in the ski resorts, the effect of which is yet unknown. Furthermore, the decrease of glaciated areas combined with a succession of winters with lower-than-expected precipitation may have a future impact on the rivers in the Alps as well as an effect on the water availability to the lowlands.\nClimate.\nThe Alps are a classic example of what happens when a temperate area at lower altitude gives way to higher-elevation terrain. Elevations around the world that have cold climates similar to those of the polar regions have been called Alpine. A rise from sea level into the upper regions of the atmosphere causes the temperature to decrease (see adiabatic lapse rate). The effect of mountain chains on prevailing winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone, where it expands in volume at the cost of a proportionate loss of temperature, often accompanied by precipitation in the form of snow or rain. The height of the Alps is sufficient to divide the weather patterns in Europe into a wet north and a dry south because moisture is sucked from the air as it flows over the high peaks.\nThe severe weather in the Alps has been studied since the 18th century; particularly the weather patterns such as the seasonal foehn wind. Numerous weather stations were placed in the mountains early in the early 20th century, providing continuous data for climatologists. Some of the valleys are quite arid such as the Aosta valley in Italy, the Maurienne in France, the Valais in Switzerland, and northern Tyrol.\nThe areas that are not arid and receive high precipitation experience periodic flooding from rapid snowmelt and runoff. The mean precipitation in the Alps ranges from a low of per year to per year, with the higher levels occurring at high altitudes. At altitudes between , snowfall begins in November and accumulates through to April or May when the melt begins. Snow lines vary from , above which the snow is permanent and the temperatures hover around the freezing point even during July and August. High-water levels in streams and rivers peak in June and July when the snow is still melting at the higher altitudes.\nThe Alps are split into five climatic zones, each with different vegetation. The climate, plant life and animal life vary among the different sections or zones of the mountains. The lowest zone is the colline zone, which exists between , depending on the location. The montane zone extends from , followed by the sub-Alpine zone from . The Alpine zone, extending from tree line to snow line, is followed by the glacial zone, which covers the glaciated areas of the mountain. Climatic conditions show variances within the same zones; for example, weather conditions at the head of a mountain valley, extending directly from the peaks, are colder and more severe than those at the mouth of a valley which tend to be less severe and receive less snowfall.\nVarious models of climate change have been projected into the 22nd century for the Alps, with an expectation that a trend toward increased temperatures will have an effect on snowfall, snowpack, glaciation, and river runoff. Significant changes, of both natural and anthropogenic origins, have already been diagnosed from observations.\nEcology.\nFlora.\nThirteen thousand species of plants have been identified in the Alpine regions. Alpine plants are grouped by habitat and soil type which can be limestone or non-calcareous. The habitats range from meadows, bogs, woodland (deciduous and coniferous) areas to soil-less scree and moraines, and rock faces and ridges. A natural vegetation limit with altitude is given by the presence of the chief deciduous trees\u2014oak, beech, ash and sycamore maple. These do not reach exactly to the same elevation, nor are they often found growing together; but their upper limit corresponds accurately enough to the change from a temperate to a colder climate that is further proved by a change in the presence of wild herbaceous vegetation. This limit usually lies about above the sea on the north side of the Alps, but on the southern slopes it often rises to , sometimes even to .\nAbove the forestry, there is often a band of short pine trees (\"Pinus mugo\"), which is in turn superseded by \"Alpenrosen\", dwarf shrubs, typically \"Rhododendron ferrugineum\" (on acid soils) or \"Rhododendron hirsutum\" (on alkaline soils). Although the Alpenrose prefers acidic soil, the plants are found throughout the region. Above the tree line is the area defined as \"alpine\" where in the alpine meadow plants are found that have adapted well to harsh conditions of cold temperatures, aridity, and high altitudes. The alpine area fluctuates greatly because of regional fluctuations in tree lines.\nAlpine plants such as the Alpine gentian grow in abundance in areas such as the meadows above the Lauterbrunnental. Gentians are named after the Illyrian king Gentius, and 40 species of the early-spring blooming flower grow in the Alps, in a range of . Writing about the gentians in Switzerland D. H. Lawrence described them as \"darkening the day-time, torch-like with the smoking blueness of Pluto's gloom.\" Gentians tend to \"appear\" repeatedly as the spring blooming takes place at progressively later dates, moving from the lower altitude to the higher altitude meadows where the snow melts much later than in the valleys. On the highest rocky ledges the spring flowers bloom in the summer.\nAt these higher altitudes, the plants tend to form isolated cushions. In the Alps, several species of flowering plants have been recorded above , including \"Ranunculus glacialis\", \"Androsace alpina\" and \"Saxifraga biflora\". \"Eritrichium nanum\", commonly known as the King of the Alps, is the most elusive of the alpine flowers, growing on rocky ridges at . Perhaps the best known of the alpine plants is Edelweiss which grows in rocky areas and can be found at altitudes as low as and as high as . The plants that grow at the highest altitudes have adapted to conditions by specialization such as growing in rock screes that give protection from winds.\nThe extreme and stressful climatic conditions give way to the growth of plant species with secondary metabolites important for medicinal purposes. Origanum vulgare, Prunella vulgaris, Solanum nigrum and Urtica dioica are some of the more useful medicinal species found in the Alps.\nHuman interference has nearly exterminated the trees in many areas, and, except for the beech forests of the Austrian Alps, forests of deciduous trees are rarely found after the extreme deforestation between the 17th and 19th centuries. The vegetation has changed since the second half of the 20th century, as the high alpine meadows cease to be harvested for hay or used for grazing which eventually might result in a regrowth of forest. In some areas the modern practice of building ski runs by mechanical means has destroyed the underlying tundra from which the plant life cannot recover during the non-skiing months, whereas areas that still practice a natural \"piste\" type of ski slope building preserve the fragile underlayers.\nFauna.\nThe Alps are a habitat for 30,000 species of wildlife, ranging from the tiniest snow fleas to brown bears, many of which have made adaptations to the harsh cold conditions and high altitudes to the point that some only survive in specific micro-climates either directly above or below the snow line.\nThe largest mammal to live in the highest altitudes are the alpine ibex, which have been sighted as high as . The ibex live in caves and descend to eat the succulent alpine grasses. Classified as antelopes, chamois are smaller than ibex and found throughout the Alps, living above the tree line and are common in the entire alpine range. Areas of the eastern Alps are still home to brown bears. In Switzerland the canton of Bern was named for the bears but the last bear is recorded as having been killed in 1792 above Kleine Scheidegg by three hunters from Grindelwald.\nMany rodents such as voles live underground. Marmots live almost exclusively above the tree line as high as . They hibernate in large groups to provide warmth, and can be found in all areas of the Alps, in large colonies they build beneath the alpine pastures. Golden eagles and bearded vultures are the largest birds to be found in the Alps; they nest high on rocky ledges and can be found at altitudes of . The most common bird is the alpine chough which can be found scavenging at climber's huts or at the Jungfraujoch, a high altitude tourist destination.\nReptiles such as adders and vipers live up to the snow line; because they cannot bear the cold temperatures they hibernate underground and soak up the warmth on rocky ledges. The high-altitude Alpine salamanders have adapted to living above the snow line by giving birth to fully developed young rather than laying eggs. Brown trout can be found in the streams up to the snow line. Molluscs such as the wood snail live up the snow line. Popularly gathered as food, the snails are now protected.\nA number of species of moths live in the Alps, some of which are believed to have evolved in the same habitat up to 120\u00a0million years ago, long before the Alps were created. Blue butterflies can commonly be seen drinking from the snow melt; some species of blues fly as high as . The butterflies tend to be large, such as those from the swallowtail Parnassius family, with a habitat that ranges to . Twelve species of beetles have habitats up to the snow line; the most beautiful and formerly collected for its colours but now protected is \"Rosalia alpina\". Spiders, such as the large wolf spider, live above the snow line and can be seen as high as . Scorpions can be found in the Italian Alps.\nSome of the species of moths and insects show evidence of having been indigenous to the area from as long ago as the Alpine orogeny. In Emosson in Valais, Switzerland, dinosaur tracks were found in the 1970s, dating probably from the Triassic Period.\nHistory.\nPrehistory to Christianity.\nAbout 10,000 years ago, when the ice melted after the W\u00fcrm glaciation, late Palaeolithic communities were established along the lake shores and in cave systems. Evidence of human habitation has been found in caves near Vercors, close to Grenoble; in Austria the Mondsee culture shows evidence of houses built on piles to keep them dry. Standing stones have been found in Alpine areas of France and Italy. The Rock Drawings in Valcamonica are more than 5000 years old; more than 200,000 drawings and etchings have been identified at the site.\nIn 1991 a mummy of a neolithic body, known as \u00d6tzi the Iceman, was discovered by hikers on the Similaun glacier. His clothing and gear indicate that he lived in an alpine farming community, while the location and manner of his death \u2013 an arrowhead was discovered in his shoulder \u2013 suggests he was travelling from one place to another. Analysis of the mitochondrial DNA of \u00d6tzi, has shown that he belongs to the K1 subclade which cannot be categorized into any of the three modern branches of that subclade. The new subclade has provisionally been named \"K1\u00f6\" for \"\u00d6tzi\".\nCeltic tribes settled in Switzerland between 1500 and 1000 BC. The Raetians lived in the eastern regions, while the west was occupied by the Helvetii and the Allobrogi settled in the Rh\u00f4ne valley and in Savoy. The Ligurians and Adriatic Veneti lived in north-west Italy and Triveneto respectively. Among the many substances Celtic tribes mined was salt in areas such as Salzburg in Austria where evidence of the Hallstatt culture was found by a mine manager in the 19th century. By the 6th century BC the La T\u00e8ne culture was well established in the region, and became known for high quality decorated weapons and jewellery. The Celts were the most widespread of the mountain tribes\u2014they had warriors that were strong, tall and fair skinned, and skilled with iron weapons, which gave them an advantage in warfare.\nDuring the Second Punic War in 218 BC, the Carthaginian general Hannibal probably crossed the Alps with an army numbering 38,000 infantry, 8,000 cavalry, and 37 war elephants. This was one of the most celebrated achievements of any military force in ancient warfare, although no evidence exists of the actual crossing or the place of crossing. The Romans, however, had built roads along the mountain passes, which continued to be used through the medieval period to cross the mountains and Roman road markers can still be found on the mountain passes.\nThe Roman expansion brought the defeat of the Allobrogi in 121 BC and during the Gallic Wars in 58 BC Julius Caesar overcame the Helvetii. The Rhaetians continued to resist but were eventually conquered when the Romans turned northward to the Danube valley in Austria and defeated the Brigantes. The Romans built settlements in the Alps; towns such as Aosta (named for Augustus) in Italy, Martigny and Lausanne in Switzerland, and Partenkirchen in Bavaria show remains of Roman baths, villas, arenas and temples. Much of the Alpine region was gradually settled by Germanic tribes, (Lombards, Alemanni, Bavarii, and Franks) from the 6th to the 13th centuries mixing with the local Celtic tribes.\nChristianity, feudalism, and Napoleonic wars.\nChristianity was established in the region by the Romans, and saw the establishment of monasteries and churches in the high regions. The Frankish expansion of the Carolingian Empire and the Bavarian expansion in the eastern Alps introduced feudalism and the building of castles to support the growing number of dukedoms and kingdoms. Castello del Buonconsiglio in Trento, Italy, still has intricate frescoes, excellent examples of Gothic art, in a tower room. In Switzerland, Ch\u00e2teau de Chillon is preserved as an example of medieval architecture.\nMuch of the medieval period was a time of power struggles between competing dynasties such as the House of Savoy, the Visconti in northern Italy and the House of Habsburg in Austria and Slovenia. In 1291 to protect themselves from incursions by the Habsburgs, four cantons in the middle of Switzerland drew up a charter that is considered to be a declaration of independence from neighbouring kingdoms. After a series of battles fought in the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries, more cantons joined the confederacy and by the 16th century Switzerland was well-established as a separate state.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars in the late 18th century and early 19th century, Napoleon annexed territory formerly controlled by the Habsburgs and Savoys. In 1798 he established the Helvetic Republic in Switzerland; two years later he led an army across the St. Bernard pass and conquered almost all of the Alpine regions.\nAfter the fall of Napol\u00e9on, many alpine countries developed heavy protections to prevent any new invasion. Thus, Savoy built a series of fortifications in the Maurienne valley in order to protect the major alpine passes, such as the col du Mont-Cenis that was even crossed by Charlemagne and his father to defeat the Lombards. The later indeed became very popular after the construction of a paved road ordered by Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte.\nThe Barri\u00e8re de l'Esseillon is a series of forts with heavy batteries, built on a cliff with a perfect view on the valley, a gorge on one side and steep mountains on the other side.\nIn the 19th century, the monasteries built in the high Alps during the medieval period to shelter travellers and as places of pilgrimage, became tourist destinations. The Benedictines had built monasteries in Lucerne, Switzerland, and Oberammergau; the Cistercians in the Tyrol and at Lake Constance; and the Augustinians had abbeys in the Savoy and one in the centre of Interlaken, Switzerland. The Great St Bernard Hospice, built in the 9th or 10th centuries, at the summit of the Great Saint Bernard Pass was shelter for travellers and place for pilgrims since its inception; by the 19th century it became a tourist attraction with notable visitors such as author Charles Dickens and mountaineer Edward Whymper.\nExploration.\nRadiocarbon-dated charcoal placed around 50,000 years ago was found in the \"Drachloch\" (Dragon's Hole) cave above the village of Vattis in the canton of St. Gallen, proving that the high peaks were visited by prehistoric people. Seven bear skulls from the cave may have been buried by the same prehistoric people. The peaks, however, were mostly ignored except for a few notable examples, and long left to the exclusive attention of the people of the adjoining valleys. The mountain peaks were seen as terrifying, the abode of dragons and demons, to the point that people blindfolded themselves to cross the Alpine passes. The glaciers remained a mystery and many still believed the highest areas to be inhabited by dragons.\nCharles VII of France ordered his chamberlain to climb Mont Aiguille in 1356. The knight reached the summit of Rocciamelone where he left a bronze triptych of three crosses, a feat which he conducted with the use of ladders to traverse the ice. In 1492 Antoine de Ville climbed Mont Aiguille, without reaching the summit, an experience he described as \"horrifying and terrifying.\" Leonardo da Vinci was fascinated by variations of light in the higher altitudes, and climbed a mountain\u2014scholars are uncertain which one; some believe it may have been Monte Rosa. From his description of a \"blue like that of a gentian\" sky it is thought that he reached a significantly high altitude. In the 18th century four Chamonix men almost made the summit of Mont Blanc but were overcome by altitude sickness and snowblindness.\nConrad Gessner was the first naturalist to ascend the mountains in the 16th century, to study them, writing that in the mountains he found the \"theatre of the Lord\". By the 19th century more naturalists began to arrive to explore, study and conquer the high peaks. Two men who first explored the regions of ice and snow were Horace-B\u00e9n\u00e9dict de Saussure (1740\u20131799) in the Pennine Alps, and the Benedictine monk of Disentis Placidus a Spescha (1752\u20131833). Born in Geneva, Saussure was enamoured with the mountains from an early age; he left a law career to become a naturalist and spent many years trekking through the Bernese Oberland, the Savoy, the Piedmont and Valais, studying the glaciers and the geology, as he became an early proponent of the theory of rock upheaval. Saussure, in 1787, was a member of the third ascent of Mont Blanc\u2014today the summits of all the peaks have been climbed.\nThe Romantics and Alpinists.\nAlbrecht von Haller's poem \"Die Alpen\" (1732) described the mountains as an area of mythical purity. Jean-Jacques Rousseau was another writer who presented the Alps as a place of allure and beauty, in his novel \"Julie, or the New Heloise\" (1761), Later the first wave of Romantics such as Goethe and Turner came to admire the scenery; Wordsworth visited the area in 1790, writing of his experiences in \"The Prelude\" (1799). Schiller later wrote the play \"William Tell\" (1804), which tells the story the legendary Swiss marksman William Tell as part of the greater Swiss struggle for independence from the Habsburg Empire in the early 14th century. At the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Alpine countries began to see an influx of poets, artists, and musicians, as visitors came to experience the sublime effects of monumental nature.\nIn 1816 Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley and his wife Mary Shelley visited Geneva and all three were inspired by the scenery in their writings. During these visits Shelley wrote the poem \"Mont Blanc\", Byron wrote \"The Prisoner of Chillon\" and the dramatic poem \"Manfred\", and Mary Shelley, who found the scenery overwhelming, conceived the idea for the novel \"Frankenstein\" in her villa on the shores of Lake Geneva in the midst of a thunderstorm. When Coleridge travelled to Chamonix, he declaimed, in defiance of Shelley, who had signed himself \"Atheos\" in the guestbook of the Hotel de Londres near Montenvers, \"Who would be, who could be an atheist in this valley of wonders\".\nBy the mid-19th century scientists began to arrive en masse to study the geology and ecology of the region.\nFrom the beginning of the 19th century, the tourism and mountaineering development of the Alps began. In the early years of the \"golden age of alpinism\" initially scientific activities were mixed with sport, for example by the physicist John Tyndall, with the first ascent of the Matterhorn by Edward Whymper being the highlight. In the later years, the \"silver age of alpinism\", the focus was on mountain sports and climbing. The first president of the Alpine Club, John Ball, is considered the discoverer of the Dolomites, which for decades were the focus of climbers like Paul Grohmann, Michael Innerkofler and Angelo Dibona.\nThe Nazis.\nAustrian-born Adolf Hitler had a lifelong romantic fascination with the Alps and by the 1930s established a home at Berghof, in the Obersalzberg region outside of Berchtesgaden. His first visit to the area was in 1923 and he maintained a strong tie there until the end of his life. At the end of World War II the US Army occupied Obersalzberg, to prevent Hitler from retreating with the Wehrmacht into the mountains.\nBy 1940 many of the Alpine countries were under the control of the Axis powers. Austria underwent a political coup that made it part of the Third Reich; France had been invaded and Italy was a fascist regime. Switzerland and Liechtenstein were the only countries to avoid Axis takeover. The Swiss Confederation mobilized its troops\u2014the country follows the doctrine of \"armed neutrality\" with all males required to have military training\u2014a number that General Eisenhower estimated to be about 850,000. The Swiss commanders wired the infrastructure leading into the country with explosives, and threatened to destroy bridges, railway tunnels and roads across passes in the event of a Nazi invasion; and if there was an invasion the Swiss army would then have retreated to the heart of the mountain peaks, where conditions were harsher, and a military invasion would involve difficult and protracted battles.\nGerman Ski troops were trained for the war, and battles were waged in mountainous areas such as the battle at Riva Ridge in Italy, where the American 10th Mountain Division encountered heavy resistance in February 1945. At the end of the war, a substantial amount of Nazi plunder was found stored in Austria, where Hitler had hoped to retreat as the war drew to a close. The salt mines surrounding the Altaussee area, where American troops found of gold coins stored in a single mine, were used to store looted art, jewels, and currency; vast quantities of looted art were found and returned to the owners.\nLargest cities.\nThe largest city within the Alps is the city of Grenoble in France. Other larger and important cities within the Alps with over 100,000 inhabitants are in Tyrol with Bolzano (Italy), Trento (Italy) and Innsbruck (Austria). Larger cities outside the Alps are Milan, Verona, Turin (Italy), Munich (Germany), Graz, Vienna, Salzburg (Austria), Ljubljana, Maribor, Kranj (Slovenia), Zurich, Geneva (Switzerland) and Lyon (France).\nCities with over 100,000 inhabitants in the Alps are:\nAlpine people and culture.\nThe population of the region is 14\u00a0million spread across eight countries. On the rim of the mountains, on the plateaus and the plains the economy consists of manufacturing and service jobs whereas in the higher altitudes and in the mountains farming is still essential to the economy. Farming and forestry continue to be mainstays of Alpine culture, industries that provide for export to the cities and maintain the mountain ecology.\nMuch of the Alpine culture is unchanged since the medieval period when skills that guaranteed survival in the mountain valleys and in the highest villages became mainstays, leading to strong traditions of carpentry, woodcarving, baking and pastry-making, and cheesemaking.\nFarming had been a traditional occupation for centuries, although it became less dominant in the 20th century with the advent of tourism. Grazing and pasture land are limited because of the steep and rocky topography of the Alps. In mid-June cows are moved to the highest pastures close to the snowline, where they are watched by herdsmen who stay in the high altitudes often living in stone huts or wooden barns during the summers. Villagers celebrate the day the cows are herded up to the pastures and again when they return in mid-September. The Almabtrieb, Alpabzug, Alpabfahrt, D\u00e9salpes (\"coming down from the alps\") is celebrated by decorating the cows with garlands and enormous cowbells while the farmers dress in traditional costumes.\nCheesemaking is an ancient tradition in most Alpine countries. A wheel of cheese from the Emmental in Switzerland can weigh up to , and the Beaufort in Savoy can weigh up to . Owners of the cows traditionally receive from the cheesemakers a portion in relation to the proportion of the cows' milk from the summer months in the high alps. Haymaking is an important farming activity in mountain villages which has become somewhat mechanized in recent years, although the slopes are so steep that usually scythes are necessary to cut the grass. Hay is normally brought in twice a year, often also on festival days. Alpine festivals vary from country to country and often include the display of local costumes such as dirndl and trachten, the playing of Alpenhorns, wrestling matches, some pagan traditions such as Walpurgis Night and, in many areas, Carnival is celebrated before Lent.\nIn the high villages people live in homes built according to medieval designs that withstand cold winters. The kitchen is separated from the living area (called the \"stube\", the area of the home heated by a stove), and second-floor bedrooms benefit from rising heat. The typical Swiss chalet originated in the Bernese Oberland. Chalets often face south or downhill, and are built of solid wood, with a steeply gabled roof to allow accumulated snow to slide off easily. Stairs leading to upper levels are sometimes built on the outside, and balconies are sometimes enclosed.\nFood is passed from the kitchen to the stube, where the dining room table is placed. Some meals are communal, such as fondue, where a pot is set in the middle of the table for each person to dip into. Other meals are still served in a traditional manner on carved wooden plates. Furniture has been traditionally elaborately carved and in many Alpine countries carpentry skills are passed from generation to generation.\nRoofs are traditionally constructed from Alpine rocks such as pieces of schist, gneiss or slate. Such chalets are typically found in the higher parts of the valleys, as in the Maurienne valley in Savoy, where the amount of snow during the cold months is important. The inclination of the roof cannot exceed 40%, allowing the snow to stay on top, thereby functioning as insulation from the cold. In the lower areas where the forests are widespread, wooden tiles are traditionally used. Commonly made of Norway spruce, they are called \"tavaillon\".\nThe Alpine regions are multicultural and linguistically diverse. Dialects are common, and vary from valley to valley and region to region. In the Slavic Alps alone 19 dialects have been identified. Some of the French dialects spoken in the French, Swiss and Italian alps of Aosta Valley derive from Arpitan, while the southern part of the western range is related to Old Proven\u00e7al; the German dialects derive from Germanic tribal languages. Romansh, spoken by two percent of the population in southeast Switzerland, is an ancient Rhaeto-Romanic language derived from Latin, remnants of ancient Celtic languages and perhaps Etruscan.\nTourism.\nThe Alps are one of the more popular tourist destinations in the world with many resorts such Oberstdorf, in Bavaria, Saalbach in Austria, Davos in Switzerland, Chamonix in France, and Cortina d'Ampezzo in Italy recording more than a million annual visitors. With over 120\u00a0million visitors a year, tourism is integral to the Alpine economy with much it coming from winter sports, although summer visitors are also an important component.\nThe tourism industry began in the early 19th century when foreigners visited the Alps, travelled to the bases of the mountains to enjoy the scenery, and stayed at the spa-resorts. Large hotels were built during the Belle \u00c9poque; cog-railways, built early in the 20th century, brought tourists to ever higher elevations, with the Jungfraubahn terminating at the Jungfraujoch, well above the eternal snow-line, after going through a tunnel in Eiger. During this period winter sports were slowly introduced: in 1882 the first figure skating championship was held in St. Moritz, and downhill skiing became a popular sport with English visitors early in the 20th century, as the first ski-lift was installed in 1908 above Grindelwald.\nIn the first half of the 20th century the Olympic Winter Games were held three times in Alpine venues: the 1924 Winter Olympics in Chamonix, France; the 1928 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz, Switzerland; and the 1936 Winter Olympics in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. During World War II the winter games were cancelled but after that time the Winter Games have been held in St. Moritz (1948), Cortina d'Ampezzo (1956), Innsbruck, Austria (1964 and 1976), Grenoble, France, (1968), Albertville, France, (1992), and Torino (2006). In 1930 the \"Lauberhorn Rennen\" (Lauberhorn Race), was run for the first time on the Lauberhorn above Wengen; the equally demanding Hahnenkamm was first run in the same year in Kitzb\u00fchl, Austria. Both races continue to be held each January on successive weekends. The Lauberhorn is the more strenuous downhill race at and poses danger to racers who reach within seconds of leaving the start gate.\nDuring the post-World War I period ski-lifts were built in Swiss and Austrian towns to accommodate winter visitors, but summer tourism continued to be important; by the mid-20th century the popularity of downhill skiing increased greatly as it became more accessible and in the 1970s several new villages were built in France devoted almost exclusively to skiing, such as Les Menuires. Until this point Austria and Switzerland had been the traditional and more popular destinations for winter sports, but by the end of the 20th century and into the early 21st century, France, Italy and the Tyrol began to see increases in winter visitors. From 1980 to the present, ski-lifts have been modernized and snow-making machines installed at many resorts, leading to concerns regarding the loss of traditional Alpine culture and questions regarding sustainable development as the winter ski industry continues to develop quickly and the number of summer tourists decline.\nTransportation.\nThe region is serviced by of roads used by six million vehicles per year. Train travel is well established in the Alps, with, for instance of track for every in a country such as Switzerland. Most of Europe's highest railways are located there. In 2007 the new L\u00f6tschberg Base Tunnel was opened, which circumvents the 100 years older L\u00f6tschberg Tunnel. With the opening of the Gotthard Base Tunnel on June 1, 2016 it bypasses the Gotthard Tunnel built in the 19th century and realizes the first flat route through the Alps.\nSome high mountain villages are car free either because of inaccessibility or by choice. Wengen, and Zermatt (in Switzerland) are accessible only by cable car or cog-rail trains. Avoriaz (in France), is car free, with other Alpine villages considering becoming car free zones or limiting the number of cars for reasons of sustainability of the fragile Alpine terrain.\nThe lower regions and larger towns of the Alps are well-served by motorways and main roads, but higher mountain passes and byroads, which are amongst the highest in Europe, can be treacherous even in summer due to steep slopes. Many passes are closed in winter. A number of airports around the Alps (and some within), as well as long-distance rail links from all neighbouring countries, afford large numbers of travellers easy access."}
{"id": "982", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=982", "title": "A priori and a posteriori knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "983", "revid": "1012139172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=983", "title": "Albert Camus", "text": "Albert Camus ( , , ; 7 November 1913 \u2013 4 January 1960) was a French-Algerian philosopher, author, and journalist. He won the Nobel Prize in Literature at the age of 44 in 1957, the second-youngest recipient in history. His works include \"The Stranger\", \"The Plague\", \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", \"The Fall\", and \"The Rebel\".\nCamus was born in Algeria (at the time, a French colony) to French \"Pieds Noirs\" parents. His citizenship was French. He spent his childhood in a poor neighborhood and later studied philosophy at the University of Algiers. He was in Paris when the Germans invaded France during World War II in 1940. Camus tried to flee but finally joined the French Resistance where he served as editor-in-chief at \"Combat\", an outlawed newspaper. After the war, he was a celebrity figure and gave many lectures around the world. He married twice but had many extramarital affairs. Camus was politically active; he was part of the left that opposed the Soviet Union because of its totalitarianism. Camus was a moralist and leaned towards anarcho-syndicalism. He was part of many organisations seeking European integration. During the Algerian War (1954\u20131962), he kept a neutral stance, advocating for a multicultural and pluralistic Algeria, a position that caused controversy and was rejected by most parties.\nPhilosophically, Camus's views contributed to the rise of the philosophy known as absurdism, a movement reacting against the rise of nihilism. He is also considered to be an existentialist, even though he firmly rejected the term throughout his lifetime.\nLife.\nEarly years and education.\nAlbert Camus was born on 7 November 1913 in a working-class neighbourhood in Mondovi (present-day Dr\u00e9an), in French Algeria. His mother, Catherine H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Camus (n\u00e9e Sint\u00e8s), was French with Spanish-Balearic ancestry. His father, Lucien Camus, a poor French agricultural worker, died in the Battle of the Marne in 1914 during World War I. Camus never knew him. Camus, his mother and other relatives lived without many basic material possessions during his childhood in the Belcourt section of Algiers. He was a second-generation French in Algeria, a French territory from 1830 until 1962. His paternal grandfather, along with many others of his generation, had moved to Algeria for a better life during the first decades of the 19th century. Hence, he was called \u2014a slang term for French who were born in Algeria\u2014and his identity and his poor background had a substantial effect on his later life. Nevertheless, Camus was a French citizen, in contrast to the Arab or Berber inhabitants of Algeria who were kept under an inferior legal status. During his childhood, Camus developed a love for football and swimming.\nUnder the influence of his teacher Louis Germain, Camus gained a scholarship in 1924 to continue his studies at a prestigious lyceum (secondary school) near Algiers. In 1930, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis. Because it is a transmitted disease, he moved out of his home and stayed with his uncle Gustave Acault, a butcher, who influenced the young Camus. It was at that time that Camus turned to philosophy, with the mentoring of his philosophy teacher Jean Grenier. He was impressed by ancient Greek philosophers and Friedrich Nietzsche. During that time, he was only able to study part-time. To earn money, he took odd jobs: as a private tutor, car parts clerk, and assistant at the Meteorological Institute.\nIn 1933, Camus enrolled at the University of Algiers and completed his \"licence de philosophie\" (BA) in 1936; after presenting his thesis on Plotinus. Camus developed an interest in early Christian philosophers, but Nietzsche and Arthur Schopenhauer had paved the way towards pessimism and atheism. Camus also studied novelist-philosophers such as Stendhal, Herman Melville, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Franz Kafka. In 1933, he also met Simone Hi\u00e9, then a partner of a friend of Camus, who would become his first wife.\nCamus played goalkeeper for the Racing Universitaire d'Alger junior team from 1928 to 1930. The sense of team spirit, fraternity, and common purpose appealed to Camus enormously. In match reports, he was often praised for playing with passion and courage. Any football ambitions disappeared when he contracted tuberculosis at the age of 17. Camus drew parallels among football, human existence, morality, and personal identity. For him, the simplistic morality of football contradicted the complicated morality imposed by authorities such as the state and Church.\nFormative years.\nIn 1934, aged 20, Camus was in a relationship with Simone Hi\u00e9. Simone suffered from an addiction to morphine, a drug she used to ease her menstrual pains. His uncle Gustave did not approve of the relationship, but Camus married Hi\u00e9 to help her fight her addiction. He subsequently discovered she was in a relationship with her doctor at the same time and the couple later divorced. Camus was a womaniser throughout his life.\nCamus joined the French Communist Party (PCF) in early 1935. He saw it as a way to \"fight inequalities between Europeans and 'natives' in Algeria,\" even though he was not a Marxist. He explained: \"We might see communism as a springboard and asceticism that prepares the ground for more spiritual activities.\" Camus left the PCF a year later. In 1936, the independence-minded Algerian Communist Party (PCA) was founded, and Camus joined it after his mentor Grenier advised him to do so. Camus's main role within the PCA was to organise the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Travail\" (\"Workers' Theatre\"). Camus was also close to the Parti du Peuple Alg\u00e9rien (Algerian People's Party (PPA)), which was a moderate anti-colonialist/nationalist party. As tensions in the interwar period escalated, the Stalinist PCA and PPA broke ties. Camus was expelled from the PCA for refusing to toe the party line. This series of events sharpened his belief in human dignity. Camus's mistrust of bureaucracies that aimed for efficiency instead of justice grew. He continued his involvement with theatre and renamed his group Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Equipe (\"Theatre of the Team\"). Some of his scripts were the basis for his later novels.\nIn 1938, Camus began working for the leftist newspaper \"Alger r\u00e9publicain\" (founded by Pascal Pia) as he had strong anti-fascist feelings, and the rise of fascist regimes in Europe was worrying him. By then, Camus had developed strong feelings against authoritative colonialism as he witnessed the harsh treatment of the Arabs and Berbers by French authorities. \"Alger r\u00e9publicain\" was banned in 1940 and Camus flew to Paris to take a new job at \"Paris-Soir\" as editor-in-chief. In Paris, he almost completed his \"first cycle\" of works dealing with the absurd and the meaningless\u2014the novel \"L'\u00c9tranger\" (\"The Outsider\" (UK), or \"The Stranger\" (US)), the philosophical essay \"Le Mythe de Sisyphe\" (\"The Myth of Sisyphus\") and the play \"Caligula\". Each cycle consisted of a novel, an essay and a theatrical play.\nWorld War II, Resistance and \"Combat\".\nSoon after Camus moved to Paris, the outbreak of World War II began to affect France. Camus volunteered to join the army but was not accepted because he had suffered from tuberculosis. As the Germans were marching towards Paris, Camus fled. He was laid off from \"Paris-Soir\" and ended up in Lyon, where he married pianist and mathematician Francine Faure on 3 December 1940. Camus and Faure moved back to Algeria (Oran) where he taught in primary schools. Because of his tuberculosis, he moved to the French Alps on medical advice. There he began writing his second cycle of works, this time dealing with revolt\u2014a novel \"La Peste\" (\"The Plague\") and a play \"Le Malentendu\" (\"The Misunderstanding\"). By 1943 he was known because of his earlier work. He returned to Paris where he met and became friends with Jean-Paul Sartre. He also became part of a circle of intellectuals including Simone de Beauvoir, Andr\u00e9 Breton, and others. Among them was the actress Mar\u00eda Casares, who would later have an affair with Camus.\nCamus took an active role in the underground resistance movement against the Germans during the French Occupation. Upon his arrival in Paris, he started working as a journalist and editor of the banned newspaper \"Combat\". He continued writing for the paper after the liberation of France. Camus used a pseudonym for his \"Combat\" articles and used false ID cards to avoid being captured. During that period he composed four \"Lettres \u00e0 un Ami Allemand\" (\"Letters to a German Friend\"), explaining why resistance was necessary.\nPost-World War II.\nAfter the War, Camus lived in Paris with Faure, who gave birth to twins, Catherine and Jean in 1945. Camus was now a celebrated writer known for his role in the Resistance. He gave lectures at various universities in the United States and Latin America during two separate trips. He also visited Algeria once more, only to leave disappointed by the continued oppressive colonial policies, which he had warned about many times. During this period he completed the second cycle of his work, with the essay \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (\"The Rebel\"). Camus attacked totalitarian communism while advocating libertarian socialism and anarcho-syndicalism. Upsetting many of his colleagues and contemporaries in France with his rejection of communism, the book brought about the final split with Sartre. His relations with the Marxist Left deteriorated further during the Algerian War.\nCamus was a strong supporter of European integration in various marginal organisations working towards that end. In 1944, he founded the \"Comit\u00e9 fran\u00e7ais pour la f\u00e9deration europ\u00e9enne\"\u2014(CFFE (French Committee for the European Federation))\u2014declaring that Europe \"can only evolve along the path of economic progress, democracy, and peace if the nation states become a federation.\" In 1947\u201348, he founded the Groupes de liaison internationale (GLI) a trade union movement in the context of revolutionary syndicalism (\"syndicalisme r\u00e9volutionnaire\"). His main aim was to express the positive side of surrealism and existentialism, rejecting the negativity and the nihilism of Andr\u00e9 Breton. Camus also raised his voice against the Soviet intervention in Hungary and the totalitarian tendencies of Franco's regime in Spain.\nCamus had numerous affairs, particularly an irregular and eventually public affair with the Spanish-born actress Mar\u00eda Casares, with whom he had an extensive correspondence. Faure did not take this affair lightly. She had a mental breakdown and needed hospitalisation in the early 1950s. Camus, who felt guilty, withdrew from public life and was slightly depressed for some time.\nIn 1957, Camus received the news that he was to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. This came as a shock to him. He was anticipating Andr\u00e9 Malraux would win the prestigious award. At age 44, he was the second-youngest recipient of the prize, after Rudyard Kipling, who was 42. After this he began working on his autobiography \"Le Premier Homme\" (\"The First Man\") in an attempt to examine \"moral learning\". He also turned to the theatre once more. Financed by the money he received with his Nobel Prize, he adapted and directed for the stage Dostoyevsky's novel \"Demons\". The play opened in January 1959 at the Antoine Theatre in Paris and was a critical success.\nDuring these years, he published posthumously the works of the philosopher Simone Weil, in the series \"Espoir\" (\"Hope\") which he had founded for \u00c9ditions Gallimard. Weil had great influence on his philosophy, since he saw her writings as an \"antidote\" to nihilism. Camus described her as \"the only great spirit of our times\".\nDeath.\nCamus died on 4 January 1960 at the age of 46, in a car accident near Sens, in Le Grand Fossard in the small town of Villeblevin. He had spent the New Year's holiday of 1960 at his house in Lourmarin, Vaucluse with his family, and his publisher Michel Gallimard of \u00c9ditions Gallimard, along with Gallimard's wife, Janine, and daughter. Camus's wife and children went back to Paris by train on 2 January, but Camus decided to return in Gallimard's luxurious Facel Vega HK500. The car crashed into a plane tree on a long straight stretch of the Route nationale 5 (now the RN 6). Camus, who was in the passenger seat and not wearing a safety belt, died instantly. Gallimard died a few days later, although his wife and daughter were unharmed. There has been speculation that Camus was assassinated by the KGB because of his criticism of Soviet abuses.\n144 pages of a handwritten manuscript entitled \"Le premier Homme\" (\"The First Man\") were found in the wreckage. Camus had predicted that this unfinished novel based on his childhood in Algeria would be his finest work. Camus was buried in the Lourmarin Cemetery, Vaucluse, France, where he had lived. His friend Sartre read a eulogy, paying tribute to Camus's heroic \"stubborn humanism\". William Faulkner wrote his obituary, saying, \"When the door shut for him he had already written on this side of it that which every artist who also carries through life with him that one same foreknowledge and hatred of death, is hoping to do: I was here.\"\nLiterary career.\nCamus's first publication was a play called \"R\u00e9volte dans les Asturies\" (\"Revolt in the Asturias\") written with three friends in May 1936. The subject was the 1934 revolt by Spanish miners that was brutally suppressed by the Spanish government resulting in 1,500 to 2,000 deaths. In May 1937 he wrote his first book, \"L'Envers et l'Endroit\" (\"Betwixt and Between\", also translated as \"The Wrong Side and the Right Side\"). Both were published by Edmond Charlot's small publishing house.\nCamus separated his work into three cycles. Each cycle consisted of a novel, an essay, and a play. The first was the cycle of the absurd consisting of \"L'\u00c9tranger\", \"Le Mythe de Sysiphe\", and \"Caligula\". The second was the cycle of the revolt which included \"La Peste\" (\"The Plague\"), \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (\"The Rebel\"), and \"Les Justes\" (\"The Just Assassins\"). The third, the cycle of the love, consisted of \"Nemesis\". Each cycle was an examination of a theme with the use of a pagan myth and including biblical motifs.\nThe books in the first cycle were published between 1942 and 1944, but the theme was conceived earlier, at least as far back as 1936. With this cycle, Camus aims to pose a question on the human condition, discuss the world as an absurd place, and warn humanity of the consequences of totalitarianism.\nCamus began his work on the second cycle while he was in Algeria, in the last months of 1942, just as the Germans were reaching North Africa. In the second cycle, Camus used Prometheus, who is depicted as a revolutionary humanist, to highlight the nuances between revolution and rebellion. He analyses various aspects of rebellion, its metaphysics, its connection to politics, and examines it under the lens of modernity, of historicity and the absence of a God.\nAfter receiving the Nobel Prize, Camus gathered, clarified, and published his pacifist leaning views at \"Actuelles III: Chronique alg\u00e9rienne 1939\u20131958\" (\"Algerian Chronicles\"). He then decided to distance himself from the Algerian War as he found the mental burden too heavy. He turned to theatre and the third cycle which was about love and the goddess Nemesis.\nTwo of Camus's works were published posthumously. The first entitled \"La mort heureuse\" (\"A Happy Death\") (1970), features a character named Patrice Mersault, comparable to \"The Stranger\"s Meursault. There is scholarly debate about the relationship between the two books. The second was an unfinished novel, \"Le Premier homme\" (\"The First Man\") (1995), which Camus was writing before he died. It was an autobiographical work about his childhood in Algeria and its publication in 1994 sparked a widespread reconsideration of Camus's allegedly unrepentant colonialism.\nPolitical stance.\nCamus was a moralist; he claimed morality should guide politics. While he did not deny that morals change over time, he rejected the classical Marxist doctrine that history defines morality.\nCamus was also strongly critical of authoritarian communism, especially in the case of the Soviet regime, which he considered totalitarian. Camus rebuked Soviet apologists and their \"decision to call total servitude freedom\". As a proponent of libertarian socialism, he claimed the USSR was not socialist, and the United States was not liberal. His fierce critique of the USSR caused him to clash with others on the political left, most notably with his friend Jean-Paul Sartre.\nActive in the French Resistance to the German occupation of France during World War II, Camus wrote for and edited the famous Resistance journal \"Combat\". Of the French collaboration with the German occupiers, he wrote: \"Now the only moral value is courage, which is useful here for judging the puppets and chatterboxes who pretend to speak in the name of the people.\" After France's liberation, Camus remarked, \"This country does not need a Talleyrand, but a Saint-Just.\" The reality of the bloody postwar tribunals soon changed his mind: Camus publicly reversed himself and became a lifelong opponent of capital punishment.\nCamus leaned towards anarchism, a tendency that intensified in the 1950s, when he came to believe that the Soviet model was morally bankrupt. Camus was firmly against any kind of exploitation, authority and property, bosses, the State and centralization. Philosophy professor David Sherman considers Camus an anarcho-syndicalist. Graeme Nicholson considers Camus an existentialist anarchist.\nThe anarchist Andr\u00e9 Prudhommeaux first introduced him at a meeting of the Cercle des \u00c9tudiants Anarchistes (\"Anarchist Student Circle\") in 1948 as a sympathiser familiar with anarchist thought. Camus wrote for anarchist publications such as \"Le Libertaire\", \"La R\u00e9volution prol\u00e9tarienne\", and \"Solidaridad Obrera\" (\"Workers' Solidarity\"), the organ of the anarcho-syndicalist Confederaci\u00f3n Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) (\"National Confederation of Labor\").\nCamus kept a neutral stance during the Algerian Revolution (1954\u201362). While he was against the violence of the National Liberation Front (FLN) he acknowledged the injustice and brutalities imposed by colonialist France. He was supportive of Pierre Mend\u00e8s' Unified Socialist Party (PSU) and its approach to the crisis;\u00b7 Mendes advocated reconciliation. Camus also supported a like-minded Algerian militant, Aziz Kessous. Camus traveled to Algeria to negotiate a truce between the two belligerents but was met with distrust by all parties. His confrontation with an Algerian nationalist during his acceptance speech for the Nobel Prize caused a sensation. When confronted with the dilemma of choosing between his mother and justice, his response was: \u201cPeople are now planting bombs in the tramways of Algiers. My mother might be on one of those tramways. If that is justice, then I prefer my mother.\u201d According to David Sherman, Camus tried to highlight the false dichotomy of the two choices as the use of terrorism and indiscriminate violence could not bring justice under any circumstances. However, his response has been widely misreported as: \"I have always condemned terrorism, and I must condemn a terrorism that works blindly in the streets of Algiers and one day might strike at my mother and family. I believe in justice, but I will defend my mother before justice.\u201d Camus' critics have labelled the misquoted response as reactionary and a result of a colonialist attitude.\nHe was sharply critical of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In the 1950s, Camus devoted his efforts to human rights. In 1952, he resigned from his work for UNESCO when the UN accepted Spain, under the leadership of the caudillo General Francisco Franco, as a member. Camus maintained his pacifism and resisted capital punishment anywhere in the world. He wrote an essay against capital punishment in collaboration with Arthur Koestler, the writer, intellectual, and founder of the League Against Capital Punishment entitled \"R\u00e9flexions sur la peine capitale\", published by Calmann-Levy in 1957.\nRole in Algeria.\nBorn in Algeria to French parents, Camus was familiar with the institutional racism of France against Arabs and Berbers, but he was not part of a rich elite. He lived in very poor conditions as a child but was a citizen of France and as such was entitled to citizens' rights; the Arab and Berbers majority of the country were not.\nCamus was a vocal advocate of the \"new Mediterranean Culture\". This was a term he used to describe his vision of embracing the multi-ethnicity of the Algerian people, in opposition to \"Latiny\", a popular pro-fascist and antisemitic ideology among other \"Pieds-Noirs\"\u2014or French or Europeans born in Algeria. For Camus, this vision encapsulated the Hellenic humanism which survived among ordinary people around the Mediterranean Sea. His 1938 address on \"The New Mediterranean Culture\" represents Camus's most systematic statement of his views at this time. Camus also supported the Blum\u2013Viollette proposal to grant Algerians full French citizenship in a manifesto with arguments defending this assimilative proposal on radical egalitarian grounds. In 1939, Camus wrote a stinging series of articles for the \"Alger r\u00e9publicain\" on the atrocious living conditions of the inhabitants of the Kabylie highlands. He advocated for economic, educational and political reforms as a matter of emergency.\nIn 1945, following the S\u00e9tif and Guelma massacre after Arab revolts against French mistreatment, Camus was one of only a few mainland journalists to visit the colony. He wrote a series of articles reporting on conditions, and advocating for French reforms and concessions to the demands of the Algerian people.\nWhen the Algerian War began in 1954, Camus was confronted with a moral dilemma. He identified with the \"Pieds-Noirs\" such as his own parents and defended the French government's actions against the revolt. He argued the Algerian uprising was an integral part of the \"new Arab imperialism\" led by Egypt, and an \"anti-Western\" offensive orchestrated by Russia to \"encircle Europe\" and \"isolate the United States\". Although favoring greater Algerian autonomy or even federation, though not full-scale independence, he believed the \"Pieds-Noirs\" and Arabs could co-exist. During the war, he advocated a civil truce that would spare the civilians. It was rejected by both sides who regarded it as foolish. Behind the scenes, he began working for imprisoned Algerians who faced the death penalty. His position drew much criticism from the left who considered colonialism unacceptable. In their eyes, Camus was no longer the defender of the oppressed.\nCamus once confided that the troubles in Algeria \"affected him as others feel pain in their lungs.\"\nPhilosophy.\nExistentialism.\nEven though Camus is mostly connected to Absurdism, he is routinely categorized as an Existentialist, a term he rejected on several occasions.\nCamus himself said his philosophical origins lay in ancient Greek philosophy, Nietzsche, and 17th-century moralists whereas existentialism arises from 19th- and early 20th-century philosophy such as Kierkegaard, Karl Jaspers, and Heidegger. He also said his work, \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", was a criticism of various aspects of existentialism. Camus was rejecting existentialism as a philosophy, but his critique was mostly focused on Sartrean existentialism, and to a lesser extent on religious existentialism. He thought that the importance of history held by Marx and Sartre was incompatible with his belief in human freedom. David Sherman and others also suggest the rivalry between Sartre and Camus also played a part in his rejection of existentialism. David Simpson argues further that his humanism and belief in human nature set him apart from the existentialist doctrine that existence precedes essence.\nOn the other hand, Camus focused most of his philosophy around existential questions. The absurdity of life, the inevitable ending (death) is highlighted in his acts. His belief was that the absurd\u2014life being void of meaning, or man's inability to know that meaning if it were to exist\u2014was something that man should embrace. His anti-Christianity, his commitment to individual moral freedom and responsibility are only a few of the similarities with other existential writers. More importantly, Camus addressed one of the fundamental questions of existentialism: the problem of suicide. He wrote: \"There is only one really serious philosophical question, and that is suicide.\" Camus viewed the question of suicide as arising naturally as a solution to the absurdity of life.\nAbsurdism.\nMany existentialist writers have addressed the Absurd, each with their own interpretation of what it is and what makes it important. Kierkegaard explains that the absurdity of religious truths prevents us from reaching God rationally. Sartre recognizes the absurdity of individual experience. Camus's thoughts on the Absurd begin with his first cycle of books and the literary essay \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", (\"Le Mythe de Sisyphe\"), his major work on the subject. In 1942 he published the story of a man living an absurd life in \"L'\u00c9tranger\". He also wrote a play about the Roman emperor Caligula, pursuing an absurd logic, which was not performed until 1945. His early thoughts appeared in his first collection of essays, \"L'Envers et l'endroit\" (\"Betwixt and Between\") in 1937. Absurd themes were expressed with more sophistication in his second collection of essays, \"Noces\" (\"Nuptials\"), in 1938 and \"Betwixt and Between\". In these essays, Camus reflects on the experience of the Absurd. Aspects of the notion of the Absurd can be found in \"The Plague\".\nCamus follows Sartre's definition of the Absurd: \"That which is meaningless. Thus man's existence is absurd because his contingency finds no external justification\". The Absurd is created because man, who is placed in an unintelligent universe, realises that human values are not founded on a solid external component; or as Camus himself explains, the Absurd is the result of the \"confrontation between human need and the unreasonable silence of the world.\" Even though absurdity is inescapable, Camus does not drift towards nihilism. But the realization of absurdity leads to the question: Why should someone continue to live? Suicide is an option that Camus firmly dismisses as the renunciation of human values and freedom. Rather, he proposes we accept that absurdity is a part of our lives and live with it.\nThe turning point in Camus's attitude to the Absurd occurs in a collection of four letters to an anonymous German friend, written between July 1943 and July 1944. The first was published in the \"Revue Libre\" in 1943, the second in the \"Cahiers de Lib\u00e9ration\" in 1944, and the third in the newspaper \"Libert\u00e9s\", in 1945. The four letters were published as \"Lettres \u00e0 un ami allemand\" (\"Letters to a German Friend\") in 1945, and were included in the collection \"Resistance, Rebellion, and Death\".\nCamus regretted the continued reference to himself as a \"philosopher of the absurd\". He showed less interest in the Absurd shortly after publishing \"Le Mythe de Sisyphe\". To distinguish his ideas, scholars sometimes refer to the Paradox of the Absurd, when referring to \"Camus's Absurd\".\nRevolt.\nCamus is known for articulating the case for revolting against any kind of oppression, injustice, or whatever disrespects the human condition. He is cautious enough, however, to set the limits on the rebellion. \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (\"The Rebel\") explains in detail his thoughts on the issue. There, he builds upon the absurd (described in \"The Myth of Sisyphus\") but goes further. In the introduction, where he examines the metaphysics of rebellion, he concludes with the phrase \"I revolt, therefore we exist\" implying the recognition of a common human condition. Camus also delineates the difference between revolution and rebellion and notices that history has shown that the rebel's revolution might easily end up as an oppressive regime; he therefore places importance on the morals accompanying the revolution. Camus poses a crucial question: Is it possible for humans to act in an ethical and meaningful manner, in a silent universe? According to him the answer is yes, as the experience and awareness of the Absurd creates the moral values and also sets the limits of our actions. Camus separates the modern form of rebellion into two modes. First, there is the metaphysical rebellion, which is \"the movement by which man protests against his condition and against the whole of creation.\" The other mode, historical rebellion, is the attempt to materialize the abstract spirit of metaphysical rebellion and change the world. In this attempt, the rebel must balance between the evil of the world and the intrinsic evil which every revolt carries, and not cause any unjustifiable suffering.\nLegacy.\nCamus's novels and philosophical essays are still influential. After his death, interest in Camus followed the rise (and diminution) of the New Left. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, interest in his alternative road to communism resurfaced. He is remembered for his skeptical humanism and his support for political tolerance, dialogue, and civil rights.\nAlthough Camus has been linked to anti-Soviet communism, reaching as far as anarcho-syndicalism, some neo-liberals have tried to associate him with their policies; for instance, the French President Nicolas Sarkozy suggested that his remains be moved to the Panth\u00e9on, an idea that angered many on the Left.\nWorks.\nThe works of Albert Camus include:"}
{"id": "984", "revid": "7643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=984", "title": "Agatha Christie", "text": "Dame Agatha Mary Clarissa Christie, Lady Mallowan, (n\u00e9e Miller; 15\u00a0September 1890\u00a0\u2013 12\u00a0January 1976) was an English writer known for her sixty-six detective novels and fourteen short story collections, particularly those revolving around fictional detectives Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple. She also wrote the world's longest-running play, \"The Mousetrap\", which was performed in the West End from 1952 to 2020, as well as six novels under the pseudonym Mary Westmacott. In 1971, she was made a Dame (DBE) for her contributions to literature. \"Guinness World Records\" lists Christie as the best-selling fiction writer of all time, her novels having sold more than two billion copies.\nChristie was born into a wealthy upper-middle-class family in Torquay, Devon, and was largely home-schooled. She was initially an unsuccessful writer with six consecutive rejections, but this changed in 1920 when \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", featuring detective Hercule Poirot, was published. Her first husband was Archibald Christie; they married in 1914 and had one child before divorcing in 1928. During both World Wars, she served in hospital dispensaries, acquiring a thorough knowledge of the poisons which featured in many of her novels, short stories, and plays. Following her marriage to archaeologist Max Mallowan in 1930, she spent several months each year on digs in the Middle East and used her first-hand knowledge of his profession in her fiction.\nAccording to Index Translationum, she remains the most-translated individual author. Her novel \"And Then There Were None\" is one of the highest-selling books of all time, with approximately 100 million copies sold. Christie's stage play \"The Mousetrap\" holds the world record for the longest initial run. It opened at the Ambassadors Theatre in the West End of London on 25\u00a0November 1952, and by September 2018 there had been more than 27,500 performances. The play was closed down in March 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic.\nIn 1955, Christie was the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's Grand Master Award. Later that year, \"Witness for the Prosecution\" received an Edgar Award for best play. In 2013, she was voted the best crime writer and \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\" the best crime novel ever by 600 professional novelists of the Crime Writers' Association. In September 2015, \"And Then There Were None\" was named the \"World's Favourite Christie\" in a vote sponsored by the author's estate. Most of Christie's books and short stories have been adapted for television, radio, video games, and graphic novels. More than thirty feature films are based on her work.\nLife and career.\nChildhood and adolescence: 1890\u20131907.\nAgatha Mary Clarissa Miller was born on 15\u00a0September 1890 into a wealthy upper-middle-class family in Torquay, Devon. She was the youngest of three children born to Frederick Alvah Miller, \"a gentleman of substance\", and his wife Clarissa Margaret (\"Clara\") Miller n\u00e9e Boehmer.\nChristie's mother Clara was born in Dublin in 1854 to British Army officer Frederick Boehmer and his wife Mary Ann Boehmer n\u00e9e West. Boehmer died in Jersey in 1863, leaving his widow to raise Clara and her brothers on a meagre income. Two weeks after Boehmer's death, Mary's sister Margaret West married widowed dry goods merchant Nathaniel Frary Miller, a US citizen. To assist Mary financially, they agreed to foster nine-year-old Clara; the family settled in Timperley, Cheshire. Margaret and Nathaniel had no children together, but Nathaniel had a seventeen-year-old son, Fred Miller, from his previous marriage. Fred was born in New York City and travelled extensively after leaving his Swiss boarding school. He and Clara were married in London in 1878. Their first child, Margaret Frary (\"Madge\"), was born in Torquay in 1879. The second, Louis Montant (\"Monty\"), was born in Morristown, New Jersey, in 1880, while the family was on an extended visit to the United States.\nWhen Fred's father died in 1869, he left Clara \u00a32,000 (approximately ); in 1881 they used this to buy the leasehold of a villa in Torquay named Ashfield. It was here that their third and last child, Agatha, was born in 1890. She described her childhood as \"very happy\". The Millers lived mainly in Devon but often visited her step-grandmother/great-aunt Margaret Miller in Ealing and maternal grandmother Mary Boehmer in Bayswater. A year was spent abroad with her family, in the French Pyrenees, Paris, Dinard, and Guernsey. Because her siblings were so much older, and there were few children in their neighbourhood, Christie spent much of her time playing alone with her pets and imaginary companions. She eventually made friends with other girls in Torquay, noting that \"one of the highlights of my existence\" was her appearance with them in a youth production of Gilbert and Sullivan's \"The Yeomen of the Guard\", in which she played the hero, Colonel Fairfax.\nAccording to Christie, Clara believed she should not learn to read until she was eight; thanks to her curiosity, she was reading by age four. Her sister had been sent to a boarding school, but their mother insisted that Christie receive a home education. As a result, her parents and sister supervised her studies in reading, writing, and basic arithmetic, a subject she particularly enjoyed. They also taught her music, and she learned to play the piano and the mandolin.\nChristie was a voracious reader from an early age. Among her earliest memories were reading children's books by Mrs Molesworth and Edith Nesbit. When a little older, she moved on to the surreal verse of Edward Lear and Lewis Carroll. As an adolescent, she enjoyed works by Anthony Hope, Walter Scott, Charles Dickens, and Alexandre Dumas. In April 1901, aged 10, she wrote her first poem, \"The Cowslip\".\nBy 1901, her father's health had deteriorated, because of what he believed were heart problems. Fred died in November 1901 from pneumonia and chronic kidney disease. Christie later said that her father's death when she was eleven marked the end of her childhood.\nThe family's financial situation had by this time worsened. Madge married the year after their father's death and moved to Cheadle, Cheshire; Monty was overseas, serving in a British regiment. Christie now lived alone at Ashfield with her mother. In 1902, she began attending Miss Guyer's Girls' School in Torquay but found it difficult to adjust to the disciplined atmosphere. In 1905, her mother sent her to Paris, where she was educated in a series of (boarding schools), focusing on voice training and piano playing. Deciding she lacked the temperament and talent, she gave up her goal of performing professionally as a concert pianist or an opera singer.\nEarly literary attempts, marriage, literary success: 1907\u20131926.\nAfter completing her education, Christie returned to England to find her mother ailing. They decided to spend the northern winter of 1907\u20131908 in the warm climate of Egypt, which was then a regular tourist destination for wealthy Britons. They stayed for three months at the Gezirah Palace Hotel in Cairo. Christie attended many dances and other social functions; she particularly enjoyed watching amateur polo matches. While they visited some ancient Egyptian monuments such as the Great Pyramid of Giza, she did not exhibit the great interest in archaeology and Egyptology that developed in her later years. Returning to Britain, she continued her social activities, writing and performing in amateur theatricals. She also helped put on a play called \"The Blue Beard of Unhappiness\" with female friends.\nAt eighteen, Christie wrote her first short story, \"The House of Beauty\", while recovering in bed from an illness. It consisted of about 6,000 words on \"madness and dreams\", a subject of fascination for her. Her biographer, Janet Morgan, has commented that, despite \"infelicities of style\", the story was \"compelling\". (The story became an early version of her story \"The House of Dreams\".) Other stories followed, most of them illustrating her interest in spiritualism and the paranormal. These included \"The Call of Wings\" and \"The Little Lonely God\". Magazines rejected all her early submissions, made under pseudonyms (including Mac Miller, Nathaniel Miller, and Sydney West); some submissions were later revised and published under her real name, often with new titles.\nAround the same time, Christie began work on her first novel, \"Snow Upon the Desert\". Writing under the pseudonym Monosyllaba, she set the book in Cairo and drew upon her recent experiences there. She was disappointed when the six publishers she contacted declined the work. Clara suggested that her daughter ask for advice from the successful novelist Eden Phillpotts, a family friend and neighbour, who responded to her enquiry, encouraged her writing, and sent her an introduction to his own literary agent, Hughes Massie, who also rejected \"Snow Upon the Desert\" but suggested a second novel.\nMeanwhile, Christie's social activities expanded, with country house parties, riding, hunting, dances, and roller skating. She had short-lived relationships with four men and an engagement to another. In October 1912, she was introduced to Archibald \"Archie\" Christie at a dance given by Lord and Lady Clifford at Ugbrooke, about from Torquay. The son of a barrister in the Indian Civil Service, Archie was an army officer who was seconded to the Royal Flying Corps in April 1913. The couple quickly fell in love. Three months after their first meeting, Archie proposed marriage, and Agatha accepted.\nWith the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, Archie was sent to France to fight. They married on Christmas Eve 1914 at Emmanuel Church, Clifton, Bristol, close to the home of his mother and stepfather, while Archie was on home leave. Rising through the ranks, he was posted back to Britain in September 1918 as a colonel in the Air Ministry. Christie involved herself in the war effort as a member of the Voluntary Aid Detachment of the Red Cross. From October 1914 to May 1915, then from June 1916 to September 1918, she worked 3,400 hours in the Town Hall Red Cross Hospital, Torquay, first as a nurse (unpaid) then as a dispenser at \u00a316 (approximately ) a year from 1917 after qualifying as an apothecaries' assistant. Her war service ended in September 1918 when Archie was reassigned to London, and they rented a flat in St. John's Wood.\nChristie had long been a fan of detective novels, having enjoyed Wilkie Collins's \"The Woman in White\" and \"The Moonstone\", and Arthur Conan Doyle's early Sherlock Holmes stories. She wrote her first detective novel, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", in 1916. It featured Hercule Poirot, a former Belgian police officer with \"magnificent moustaches\" and a head \"exactly the shape of an egg\", who had taken refuge in Britain after Germany invaded Belgium. Christie's inspiration for the character came from Belgian refugees living in Torquay, and the Belgian soldiers she helped to treat as a volunteer nurse during the First World War. Her original manuscript was rejected by Hodder &amp; Stoughton and Methuen. After keeping the submission for several months, John Lane at The Bodley Head offered to accept it, provided that Christie change how the solution was revealed. She did so, and signed a contract committing her next five books to The Bodley Head, which she later felt was exploitative. It was published in 1920.\nChristie settled into married life, giving birth to her only child, Rosalind Margaret Clarissa (later Hicks), in August 1919 at Ashfield. Archie left the Air Force at the end of the war and began working in the City financial sector at a relatively low salary. They still employed a maid. Her second novel, \"The Secret Adversary\" (1922), featured a new detective couple Tommy and Tuppence, again published by The Bodley Head. It earned her \u00a350 (approximately ). A third novel, \"Murder on the Links\", again featured Poirot, as did the short stories commissioned by Bruce Ingram, editor of \"The Sketch\" magazine, from 1923. She now had no difficulty selling her work.\nIn 1922, the Christies joined an around-the-world promotional tour for the British Empire Exhibition, led by Major Ernest Belcher. Leaving their daughter with Agatha's mother and sister, in ten months they travelled to South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and Canada. They learned to surf prone in South Africa; then, in Waikiki, they were among the first Britons to surf standing up.\nWhen they returned to England, Archie resumed work in the city, and Christie continued to work hard at her writing. After living in a series of apartments in London, they bought a house in Sunningdale, Berkshire, which they renamed Styles after the mansion in Christie's first detective novel.\nChristie's mother, Clarissa Miller, died in April 1926. They had been exceptionally close, and the loss sent Christie into a deep depression. In August 1926, reports appeared in the press that Christie had gone to a village near Biarritz to recuperate from a \"breakdown\" caused by \"overwork\".\nDisappearance: 1926.\nIn August 1926, Archie asked Agatha for a divorce. He had fallen in love with Nancy Neele, a friend of Major Belcher. On 3December 1926, the pair quarrelled after Archie announced his plan to spend the weekend with friends, unaccompanied by his wife. Late that evening, Christie disappeared from their home. The following morning, her car, a Morris Cowley, was discovered at Newlands Corner, parked above a chalk quarry with an expired driving licence and clothes inside.\nThe disappearance quickly became a news story, as the press sought to satisfy their readers' \"hunger for sensation, disaster, and scandal\". Home secretary William Joynson-Hicks pressured police, and a newspaper offered a \u00a3100 reward (approximately ). More than a thousand police officers, 15,000 volunteers, and several aeroplanes searched the rural landscape. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle gave a spirit medium one of Christie's gloves to find her. Christie's disappearance was featured on the front page of \"The New York Times\". Despite the extensive manhunt, she was not found for another ten days. On 14\u00a0December 1926, she was located at the Swan Hydropathic Hotel in Harrogate, Yorkshire, registered as \"Mrs Tressa Neele\" (the surname of her husband's lover) from \" S.A.\" (South Africa). The next day, Christie left for her sister's residence at Abney Hall, Cheadle, where she was sequestered \"in guarded hall, gates locked, telephone cut off, and callers turned away\".\nChristie's autobiography makes no reference to the disappearance. Two doctors diagnosed her as suffering from \"an unquestionable genuine loss of memory\", yet opinion remains divided over the reason for her disappearance. Some, including her biographer Morgan, believe she disappeared during a fugue state. The author Jared Cade concluded that Christie planned the event to embarrass her husband but did not anticipate the resulting public melodrama. Christie biographer Laura Thompson provides an alternative view that Christie disappeared during a nervous breakdown, conscious of her actions but not in emotional control of herself. Public reaction at the time was largely negative, supposing a publicity stunt or an attempt to frame her husband for murder.\nSecond marriage and later life: 1927\u20131976.\nIn January 1927, Christie, looking \"very pale\", sailed with her daughter and secretary to Las Palmas, Canary Islands, to \"complete her convalescence\", returning three months later. Christie petitioned for divorce and was granted a decree nisi against her husband in April 1928, which was made absolute in October 1928. Archie married Nancy Neele a week later. Christie retained custody of their daughter, Rosalind, and kept the Christie surname for her writing.\nReflecting on the period in her autobiography, Christie wrote, \"So, after illness, came sorrow, despair and heartbreak. There is no need to dwell on it.\"\nIn 1928 Christie left England and took the (Simplon) Orient Express to Istanbul and then to Baghdad. In Iraq, she became friends with archaeologist Leonard Woolley and his wife, who invited her to return to their dig in February 1930. On that second trip, she met an archaeologist, thirteen years her junior, Max Mallowan. In a 1977 interview, Mallowan recounted his first meeting with Christie, when he took her and a group of tourists on a tour of his expedition site in Iraq. Christie and Mallowan married in Edinburgh in September 1930. Their marriage lasted until Christie's death in 1976. She accompanied Mallowan on his archaeological expeditions, and her travels with him contributed background to several of her novels set in the Middle East. Other novels (such as \"Peril at End House\") were set in and around Torquay, where she was raised. Christie drew on her experience of international train travel when writing her 1934 novel \"Murder on the Orient Express\". The Pera Palace Hotel in Istanbul, the southern terminus of the railway, claims the book was written there and maintains Christie's room as a memorial to the author.\nChristie and Mallowan lived in Chelsea, first in Cresswell Place and later in Sheffield Terrace. Both properties are now marked by blue plaques. In 1934, they bought Winterbrook House in Winterbrook, a hamlet near Wallingford. This was their main residence for the rest of their lives and the place where Christie did much of her writing. This house also bears a blue plaque. Christie led a quiet life despite being known in Wallingford; from 1951 to 1976 she served as president of the local amateur dramatic society.\nThe couple acquired the Greenway Estate in Devon as a summer residence in 1938; it was given to the National Trust in 2000. Christie frequently stayed at Abney Hall, Cheshire, which was owned by her brother-in-law, James Watts, and based at least two stories there: a short story \"The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding\" in the story collection of the same name and the novel \"After the Funeral\". One Christie compendium notes that \"Abney became Agatha's greatest inspiration for country-house life, with all its servants and grandeur being woven into her plots. The descriptions of the fictional Chimneys, Stonygates, and other houses in her stories are mostly Abney Hall in various forms.\"\nDuring World War II, Christie worked in the pharmacy at University College Hospital (UCH), London, where she updated her knowledge of poisons. Her later novel \"The Pale Horse\" was based on a suggestion from Harold Davis, the chief pharmacist at UCH. In 1977, a thallium poisoning case was solved by British medical personnel who had read Christie's book and recognised the symptoms she described.\nThe British intelligence agency MI5 investigated Christie after a character called Major Bletchley appeared in her 1941 thriller \"N or M?\", which was about a hunt for a pair of deadly fifth columnists in wartime England. MI5 was concerned that Christie had a spy in Britain's top-secret codebreaking centre, Bletchley Park. The agency's fears were allayed when Christie told her friend, the codebreaker Dilly Knox, \"I was stuck there on my way by train from Oxford to London and took revenge by giving the name to one of my least lovable characters.\"\nChristie was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1950. In honour of her many literary works, Christie was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1956 New Year Honours. She was co-president of the Detection Club from 1958 to her death in 1976. In 1961, she was awarded an honorary Doctor of Literature degree by the University of Exeter. In the 1971 New Year Honours, she was promoted to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE), three years after her husband had been knighted for his archaeological work. After her husband's knighthood, Christie could also be styled Lady Mallowan.\nFrom 1971 to 1974, Christie's health began to fail, but she continued to write. Her last novel was \"Postern of Fate\" in 1973. Using textual analysis, Canadian researchers suggested in 2009 that Christie may have begun to suffer from Alzheimer's disease or other dementia.\nPersonal qualities.\nIn 1946, Christie said of herself: \"My chief dislikes are crowds, loud noises, gramophones and cinemas. I dislike the taste of alcohol and do not like smoking. I \"do\" like sun, sea, flowers, travelling, strange foods, sports, concerts, theatres, pianos, and doing embroidery.\"\nChristie's works of fiction contain some objectionable character stereotypes, but in real life, many of her biases were positive. After four years of war-torn London, Christie hoped to return some day to Syria, which she described as a \"gentle fertile country and its simple people, who know how to laugh and how to enjoy life; who are idle and gay, and who have dignity, good manners, and a great sense of humour, and to whom death is not terrible\".\nChristie was a lifelong, \"quietly devout\" member of the Church of England, attended church regularly, and kept her mother's copy of \"The Imitation of Christ\" by her bedside. After her divorce, she stopped taking the sacrament of communion.\nThe Agatha Christie Trust For Children was established in 1969, and shortly after Christie's death a charitable memorial fund was set up to \"help two causes that she favoured: old people and young children\".\nChristie's obituary in \"The Times\" notes that \"she never cared much for the cinema, or for wireless and television.\" Further,\nDame Agatha's private pleasures were gardeningshe won local prizes for horticultureand buying furniture for her various houses. She was a shy person: she disliked public appearances: but she was friendly and sharp-witted to meet. By inclination as well as breeding she belonged to the English upper middle-class. She wrote about, and for, people like herself. That was an essential part of her charm.\nDeath and estate.\nDeath and burial.\nChristie died peacefully on 12\u00a0January 1976 at age 85 from natural causes at her home at Winterbrook House. When her death was announced, two West End theatresthe St. Martin's, where \"The Mousetrap\" was playing, and the Savoy, which was home to a revival of \"Murder at the Vicarage\"dimmed their outside lights in her honour. She was buried in the nearby churchyard of St Mary's, Cholsey, in a plot she had chosen with her husband ten years before. The simple funeral service was attended by about 20 newspaper and TV reporters, some having travelled from as far away as South America. Thirty wreaths adorned Christie's grave, including one from the cast of her long-running play \"The Mousetrap\" and one sent \"on behalf of the multitude of grateful readers\" by the Ulverscroft Large Print Book Publishers.\nMallowan, who remarried in 1977, died in 1978 and was buried next to Christie.\nEstate and subsequent ownership of works.\nChristie was unhappy about becoming \"an employed wage slave\", and for tax reasons set up a private company in 1955, Agatha Christie Limited, to hold the rights to her works. In about 1959 she transferred her 278-acre home, Greenway Estate, to her daughter, Rosalind Hicks. In 1968, when Christie was almost 80, she sold a 51% stake in Agatha Christie Limited (and the works it owned) to Booker Books (better known as Booker Author's Division), which by 1977 had increased its stake to 64%. Agatha Christie Limited still owns the worldwide rights for more than eighty of Christie's novels and short stories, nineteen plays, and nearly forty TV films.\nIn the late 1950s, Christie had reputedly been earning around \u00a3100,000 (approximately ) per year. Christie sold an estimated 300 million books during her lifetime. At the time of her death in 1976, \"she was the best-selling novelist in history.\"\nOne estimate of her total earnings from more than a half-century of writing is $20\u00a0million (approximately $\u00a0million in ). As a result of her tax planning, her will left only \u00a3106,683 (approximately ) net, which went mostly to her husband and daughter along with some smaller bequests. Her remaining 36% share of Agatha Christie Limited was inherited by Hicks, who passionately preserved her mother's works, image, and legacy until her own death 28 years later. The family's share of the company allowed them to appoint 50% of the board and the chairman, and retain a veto over new treatments, updated versions, and republications of her works.\nIn 2004, Hicks' obituary in \"The Telegraph\" noted that she had been \"determined to remain true to her mother's vision and to protect the integrity of her creations\" and disapproved of \"merchandising\" activities. Upon her death on 28\u00a0October 2004, the Greenway Estate passed to her son Mathew Prichard. After his stepfather's death in 2005, Prichard donated Greenway and its contents to the National Trust.\nChristie's family and family trusts, including great-grandson James Prichard, continue to own the 36% stake in Agatha Christie Limited, and remain associated with the company. In 2020, James Prichard was the company's chairman. Mathew Prichard also holds the copyright to some of his grandmother's later literary works including \"The Mousetrap\". Christie's work continues to be developed in a range of adaptations.\nIn 1998, Booker sold its shares in Agatha Christie Limited (at the time earning \u00a32,100,000, approximately annual revenue) for \u00a310,000,000 (approximately ) to Chorion, whose portfolio of authors' works included the literary estates of Enid Blyton and Dennis Wheatley. In February 2012, after a management buyout, Chorion began to sell off its literary assets. This included the sale of Chorion's 64% stake in Agatha Christie Limited to Acorn Media UK. In 2014, RLJ Entertainment Inc. (RLJE) acquired Acorn Media UK, renamed it Acorn Media Enterprises, and incorporated it as the RLJE UK development arm.\nIn late February 2014, media reports stated that the BBC had acquired exclusive TV rights to Christie's works in the UK (previously associated with ITV) and made plans with Acorn's co-operation to air new productions for the 125th anniversary of Christie's birth in 2015. As part of that deal, the BBC broadcast \"Partners in Crime\" and \"And Then There Were None\", both in 2015. Subsequent productions have included \"The Witness for the Prosecution\" but plans to televise \"Ordeal by Innocence\" at Christmas 2017 were delayed because of controversy surrounding one of the cast members. The three-part adaptation aired in April 2018. A three-part adaptation of \"The A.B.C. Murders\" starring John Malkovich and Rupert Grint began filming in June 2018 and was first broadcast in December 2018. A two-part adaptation of \"The Pale Horse\" was broadcast on BBC1 in February 2020. \"Death Comes as the End\" will be the next BBC adaptation.\nWorks, reception, and legacy.\nWorks of fiction.\nHercule Poirot and Miss Marple.\nChristie's first published book, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", was released in 1920 and introduced the detective Hercule Poirot, who appeared in thirty-three of her novels and more than fifty short stories. The Poirot stories are being continued by Sophie Hannah with books including \"The Monogram Murders\", \"Closed Casket\", and \"The Mystery of Three Quarters\".\nOver the years, Christie grew tired of Poirot, much as Conan Doyle did with Sherlock Holmes. By the end of the 1930s, Christie wrote in her diary that she was finding Poirot \"insufferable\", and by the 1960s she felt he was \"an egocentric creep\". Thompson believes Christie's occasional antipathy to her creation is overstated, and points out that \"in later life she sought to protect him against misrepresentation as powerfully as if he were her own flesh and blood.\" Unlike Conan Doyle, she resisted the temptation to kill her detective off while he was still popular. She married off Poirot's \"Watson\", Captain Arthur Hastings, in an attempt to trim her cast commitments.\nMiss Jane Marple was introduced in a series of short stories that began publication in December 1927 and were subsequently collected under the title \"The Thirteen Problems\". Marple was a genteel, elderly spinster who solved crimes using analogies to English village life. Christie said, \"Miss Marple was not in any way a picture of my grandmother; she was far more fussy and spinsterish than my grandmother ever was,\" but her autobiography establishes a firm connection between the fictional character and Christie's step-grandmother Margaret Miller (\"Auntie-Grannie\") and her \"Ealing cronies\". Both Marple and Miller \"always expected the worst of everyone and everything, and were, with almost frightening accuracy, usually proved right\". Marple appeared in twelve novels and twenty stories.\nDuring the Second World War, Christie wrote two novels, \"Curtain\" and \"Sleeping Murder\", featuring Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple, respectively. Both books were sealed in a bank vault, and she made over the copyrights by deed of gift to her daughter and her husband to provide each with a kind of insurance policy. Christie suffered a heart attack and a serious fall in 1974, after which she was unable to write. Her daughter authorised the publication of \"Curtain\" in 1975, and \"Sleeping Murder\" was published posthumously in 1976. These publications followed the success of the 1974 film version of \"Murder on the Orient Express\".\nShortly before the publication of \"Curtain\", Poirot became the first fictional character to have an obituary in \"The New York Times\", which was printed on page one on 6August 1975.\nChristie never wrote a novel or short story featuring both Poirot and Miss Marple. In a recording discovered and released in 2008, Christie revealed the reason for this: \"Hercule Poirot, a complete egoist, would not like being taught his business or having suggestions made to him by an elderly spinster lady. Hercule Poirota professional sleuthwould not be at home at all in Miss Marple's world.\"\nIn 2013, the Christie family supported the release of a new Poirot story, \"The Monogram Murders\", written by British author Sophie Hannah. Hannah later published two more Poirot mysteries, \"Closed Casket\" in 2016 and \"The Mystery of Three Quarters\" in 2018.\nFormula and plot devices.\nChristie has been called the \"Duchess of Death\", the \"Mistress of Mystery\", and the \"Queen of Crime\". Early in her career, a reporter noted that \"her plots are possible, logical, and always new.\" According to Hannah, \"At the start of each novel, she shows us an apparently impossible situation and we go mad wondering 'How can this be happening?' Then, slowly, she reveals how the impossible is not only possible but the only thing that could have happened.\"\nShe developed her storytelling techniques during what has been called the \"Golden Age\" of detective fiction. Author Dilys Winn called Christie \"the doyenne of Coziness\", a sub-genre which \"featured a small village setting, a hero with faintly aristocratic family connections, a plethora of red herrings and a tendency to commit homicide with sterling silver letter openers and poisons imported from Paraguay\". At the end, in a Christie hallmark, the detective usually gathers the surviving suspects into one room, explains the course of their deductive reasoning, and reveals the guilty party; there are exceptions where it is left to the guilty party to explain all (such as \"And Then There Were None\" and \"Endless Night\").\nChristie did not limit herself to quaint English villagesthe action might take place on a small island (\"And Then There Were None\"), an aeroplane (\"Death in the Clouds\"), a train (\"Murder on the Orient Express\"), a steamship (\"Death on the Nile\"), a smart London flat (\"Cards on the Table\"), a resort in the West Indies (\"A Caribbean Mystery\"), or an archaeological dig (\"Murder in Mesopotamia\")but the circle of potential suspects is usually closed and intimate: family members, friends, servants, business associates, fellow travellers. Stereotyped characters abound (the , the stolid policeman, the devoted servant, the dull colonel), but these may be subverted to stymie the reader; impersonations and secret alliances are always possible. There is always a motivemost often, money: \"There are very few killers in Christie who enjoy murder for its own sake.\"\nProfessor of Pharmacology Michael C. Gerald noted that \"in over half her novels, one or more victims are poisoned, albeit not always to the full satisfaction of the perpetrator.\" Guns, knives, garrottes, tripwires, blunt instruments, and even a hatchet were also used, but \"Christie never resorted to elaborate mechanical or scientific means to explain her ingenuity,\" according to John Curran, author and literary adviser to the Christie estate. Many of her clues are mundane objects: a calendar, a coffee cup, wax flowers, a beer bottle, a fireplace used during a heat wave.\nAccording to crime writer P. D. James, Christie was prone to making the unlikeliest character the guilty party. Alert readers could sometimes identify the culprit by identifying the least likely suspect. Christie mocked this insight in her Foreword to \"Cards on the Table\": \"Spot the person least likely to have committed the crime and in nine times out of ten your task is finished. Since I do not want my faithful readers to fling away this book in disgust, I prefer to warn them beforehand \"that this is not that kind of book\".\"\nOn \"Desert Island Discs\" in 2007, Brian Aldiss said Christie had told him she wrote her books up to the last chapter, then decided who the most unlikely suspect was, after which she would go back and make the necessary changes to \"frame\" that person. Based upon a study of her working notebooks, Curran describes how Christie would first create a cast of characters, choose a setting, and then produce a list of scenes in which specific clues would be revealed; the order of scenes would be revised as she developed her plot. Of necessity, the murderer had to be known to the author before the sequence could be finalised and she began to type or dictate the first draft of her novel. Much of the work, particularly dialogue, was done in her head before she put it on paper.\nIn 2013, the 600 members of the Crime Writers' Association chose \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\" as \"the best whodunit... ever written\". Author Julian Symons observed, \"In an obvious sense, the book fits within the conventions... The setting is a village deep within the English countryside, Roger Ackroyd dies in his study; there is a butler who behaves suspiciously... Every successful detective story in this period involved a deceit practised upon the reader, and here the trick is the highly original one of making the murderer the local doctor, who tells the story and acts as Poirot's Watson.\" Critic Sutherland Scott stated, \"If Agatha Christie had made no other contribution to the literature of detective fiction she would still deserve our grateful thanks\" for writing this novel.\nIn September 2015, to mark her 125th birthday, \"And Then There Were None\" was named the \"World's Favourite Christie\" in a vote sponsored by the author's estate. The novel is emblematic of both her use of formula and her willingness to discard it. \"\"And Then There Were None\" carries the 'closed society' type of murder mystery to extreme lengths,\" according to author Charles Osborne. It begins with the classic set-up of potential victim(s) and killer(s) isolated from the outside world, but then violates conventions. There is no detective involved in the action, no interviews of suspects, no careful search for clues, and no suspects gathered together in the last chapter to be confronted with the solution. As Christie herself said, \"Ten people had to die without it becoming ridiculous or the murderer being obvious.\" Critics agreed she had succeeded: \"The arrogant Mrs. Christie this time set herself a fearsome test of her own ingenuity... the reviews, not surprisingly, were without exception wildly adulatory.\"\nCharacter stereotypes and perceived racism.\nChristie included stereotyped descriptions of characters in her work, especially before 1945 (when such attitudes were more commonly expressed publicly), particularly in regard to Italians, Jews, and non-Europeans. For example, she described \"men of Hebraic extraction, sallow men with hooked noses, wearing rather flamboyant jewellery\" in the short story \"The Soul of the Croupier\" from the collection \"The Mysterious Mr Quin\". In 1947, the Anti-Defamation League in the US sent an official letter of complaint to Christie's American publishers, Dodd, Mead and Company, regarding perceived antisemitism in her works. Christie's British literary agent later wrote to her US representative, authorising American publishers to \"omit the word 'Jew' when it refers to an unpleasant character in future books.\"\nIn \"The Hollow\", published in 1946, one of the characters is \"a Whitechapel Jewess with dyed hair and a voice like a corncrake\u00a0... a small woman with a thick nose, henna red and a disagreeable voice\". To contrast with the more stereotyped descriptions, Christie portrayed some \"foreign\" characters as victims, or potential victims, at the hands of English malefactors, such as, respectively, Olga Seminoff (\"Hallowe'en Party\") and Katrina Reiger (in the short story \"How Does Your Garden Grow?\"). Jewish characters are often seen as un-English (such as Oliver Manders in \"Three Act Tragedy\"), but they are rarely the culprits.\nOther detectives.\nIn addition to Poirot and Marple, Christie also created amateur detectives Thomas Beresford and his wife, Prudence \"Tuppence\" n\u00e9e Cowley, who appear in four novels and one collection of short stories published between 1922 and 1974. Unlike her other sleuths, the Beresfords were only in their early twenties when introduced in \"The Secret Adversary\", and were allowed to age alongside their creator. She treated their stories with a lighter touch, giving them a \"dash and verve\" which was not universally admired by critics. Their last adventure, \"Postern of Fate\", was Christie's last novel.\nHarley Quin was \"easily the most unorthodox\" of Christie's fictional detectives. Inspired by Christie's affection for the figures from the Harlequinade, the semi-supernatural Quin always works with an elderly, conventional man called Satterthwaite. The pair appear in fourteen short stories, twelve of which were collected in 1930 as \"The Mysterious Mr. Quin\". Mallowan described these tales as \"detection in a fanciful vein, touching on the fairy story, a natural product of Agatha's peculiar imagination\". Satterthwaite also appears in a novel, \"Three Act Tragedy\", and a short story, \"Dead Man's Mirror\", both of which feature Poirot.\nAnother of her lesser-known characters is Parker Pyne, a retired civil servant who assists unhappy people in an unconventional manner. The twelve short stories which introduced him, \"Parker Pyne Investigates\" (1934), are best remembered for \"The Case of the Discontented Soldier\", which features Ariadne Oliver, \"an amusing and satirical self-portrait of Agatha Christie\". Over the ensuing decades, Oliver reappeared in seven novels. In most of them she assists Poirot.\nPlays.\nIn 1928, Michael Morton adapted \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\" for the stage under the title \"Alibi\". The play enjoyed a respectable run, but Christie disliked the changes made to her work and, in future, preferred to write for the theatre herself. The first of her own stage works was \"Black Coffee\", which received good reviews when it opened in the West End in late 1930. She followed this up with adaptations of her detective novels: \"And Then There Were None\" in 1943, \"Appointment with Death\" in 1945, and \"The Hollow\" in 1951.\nIn the 1950s, \"the theatre\u00a0... engaged much of Agatha's attention.\" She next adapted her short radio play into \"The Mousetrap\", which premiered in the West End in 1952, produced by Peter Saunders. Her expectations for the play were not high; she believed it would run no more than eight months. It has long since made theatrical history, staging its 27,500th performance in September 2018. The play closed down in March 2020, when all UK theatres shut due to the coronavirus pandemic.\nIn 1953, she followed this with \"Witness for the Prosecution\", whose Broadway production won the New York Drama Critics' Circle award for best foreign play of 1954 and earned Christie an Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America. \"Spider's Web\", an original work written for actress Margaret Lockwood at her request, premiered in 1954 and was also a hit. She is also the first female playwright to have three plays running simultaneously in London's West End. Along with The Mousetrap the plays included were Witness for the Prosecution and Spider's Web Christie said, \"Plays are much easier to \"write\" than books, because you can \"see\" them in your mind's eye, you are not hampered by all that description which clogs you so terribly in a book and stops you from getting on with what's happening.\" In a letter to her daughter, Christie said being a playwright was \"a lot of fun!\".\nAs Mary Westmacott.\nChristie published six mainstream novels under the name Mary Westmacott, a pseudonym which gave her the freedom to explore \"her most private and precious imaginative garden\". These books typically received better reviews than her detective and thriller fiction. Of the first, \"Giant's Bread\" published in 1930, a reviewer for \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"...her book is far above the average of current fiction, in fact, comes well under the classification of a 'good book'. And it is only a satisfying novel that can claim that appellation.\" After her authorship of the first four Westmacott novels was revealed by a journalist in 1949, she wrote two more, the last in 1956.\nThe other Westmacott titles are: \"Unfinished Portrait\" (1934), \"Absent in the Spring\" (1944), \"The Rose and the Yew Tree\" (1948), \"A Daughter's a Daughter\" (1952), and \"The Burden\" (1956).\nNon-fiction works.\nChristie published few non-fiction works. \"Come, Tell Me How You Live\", about working on an archaeological dig, was drawn from her life with Mallowan. \"The Grand Tour: Around the World with the Queen of Mystery\" is a collection of correspondence from her 1922 Grand Tour of the British empire, including South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. \"\" was published posthumously in 1977 and adjudged the Best Critical / Biographical Work at the 1978 Edgar Awards.\nTitles.\nMany of Christie's works from 1940 onward have titles drawn from literature, with the original context of the title typically printed as an epigraph.\nThe inspirations for some of Christie's titles include:\nChristie biographer Gillian Gill said, \"Christie's writing has the sparseness, the directness, the narrative pace, and the universal appeal of the fairy story, and it is perhaps as modern fairy stories for grown-up children that Christie's novels succeed.\" Reflecting a juxtaposition of innocence and horror, numerous Christie titles were drawn from well-known children's nursery rhymes: \"And Then There Were None\" (from \"Ten Little Niggers\"), \"One, Two, Buckle My Shoe\" (from \"One, Two, Buckle My Shoe\"), \"Five Little Pigs\" (from \"This Little Piggy\"), \"Crooked House\" (from \"There Was a Crooked Man\"), \"A Pocket Full of Rye\" (from \"Sing a Song of Sixpence\"), \"Hickory Dickory Dock\" (from \"Hickory Dickory Dock\"), and \"Three Blind Mice\" (from \"Three Blind Mice\").\nCritical reception and legacy.\nChristie is regularly referred to as the \"Queen of Crime\" or \"Queen of Mystery\", and is considered a master of suspense, plotting, and characterisation. In 1955, she became the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's Grand Master Award. She was named \"Best Writer of the Century\" and the \"Hercule Poirot\" series of books was named \"Best Series of the Century\" at the 2000 Bouchercon World Mystery Convention. In 2013, she was voted \"best crime writer\" in a survey of 600 members of the Crime Writers' Association of professional novelists. The writer Raymond Chandler criticised the artificiality of her books, as did Symons. The literary critic Edmund Wilson described her prose as banal and her characterisations as superficial.\nIn 2011 Christie was named the second most financially successful crime writer of all time in the United Kingdom, after Ian Fleming, by digital crime drama TV channel Alibi with total earnings around \u00a3100\u00a0million. In 2012, Christie was among the people selected by the artist Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous work, the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" album cover, \"to celebrate the British cultural figures he most admires\".\nIn 2015, in honour of the 125th anniversary of her birth, twenty-five contemporary mystery writers and one publisher gave their views on Christie's works. Many of the authors had read Christie's novels first, before other mystery writers, in English or in their native language, influencing their own writing, and nearly all still viewed her as the \"Queen of Crime\" and creator of the plot twists used by mystery authors. Nearly all had one or more favourites among Christie's mysteries and found her books still good to read nearly 100 years after her first novel was published. Just one of the twenty-five authors held with Wilson's views.\nIn 2016, one hundred years after Christie wrote her first detective story, the Royal Mail released six stamps in her honour, featuring \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", \"Murder on the Orient Express\", \"And Then There Were None\", \"The Body in the Library\", and \"A Murder is Announced\". \"The Guardian\" reported that, \"Each design incorporates microtext, UV ink and thermochromic ink. These concealed clues can be revealed using either a magnifying glass, UV light or body heat and provide pointers to the mysteries' solutions.\"\nHer characters and her face appeared on the stamps of many countries like Dominica and the Somali Republic. In 2020, Christie was commemorated on a \u00a32 coin by the Royal Mint for the first time to mark the centenary of her first novel \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\".\nBook sales.\nIn her prime Christie was rarely out of the bestseller list.\nShe was the first crime writer to have 100,000 copies of ten of her titles published by Penguin on the same day in 1948. , \"Guinness World Records\" listed Christie as the best-selling fiction writer of all time. , her novels had sold more than two billion copies in forty-four languages. Half the sales are of English-language editions, and half are translations. According to Index Translationum, , she was the most-translated individual author. Christie is one of the most-borrowed authors in UK libraries. She is also UK's best-selling spoken-book author. In 2002, 117,696 Christie audiobooks were sold, in comparison to 97,755 for J. K. Rowling, 78,770 for Roald Dahl and 75,841 for J. R. R. Tolkien. In 2015 the Christie estate claimed \"And Then There Were None\" was \"the best-selling crime novel of all time\", with approximately 100 million sales, also making it one of the highest-selling books of all time. More than two million copies of her books were sold in English in 2020.\nAdaptations.\nChristie's works have been adapted for cinema and television. The first was the 1928 British film \"The Passing of Mr. Quin\". Poirot's first film appearance was in 1931 in \"Alibi\", which starred Austin Trevor as Christie's sleuth. Margaret Rutherford played Marple in a series of films released in the 1960s. Christie liked her acting, but considered the first film \"pretty poor\" and thought no better of the rest.\nShe felt differently about the 1974 film \"Murder on the Orient Express\", directed by Sidney Lumet, which featured major stars and high production values; her attendance at the London premiere was one of her last public outings. In 2016, a new film version was released, directed by Kenneth Branagh, who also starred, wearing \"the most extravagant mustache moviegoers have ever seen\".\nThe television adaptation \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" (1989\u20132013), with David Suchet in the title role, ran for seventy episodes over thirteen series. It received nine BAFTA award nominations and won four BAFTA awards in 1990\u20131992. The television series \"Miss Marple\" (1984\u20131992), with Joan Hickson as \"the BBC's peerless Miss Marple\", adapted all twelve Marple novels. The French television series (2009\u20132012, 2013\u20132020), adapted thirty-six of Christie's stories.\nChristie's books have also been adapted for BBC Radio, a video game series, and graphic novels.\nInterests and influences.\nPharmacology.\nDuring the First World War, Christie took a break from nursing to train for the Apothecaries Hall Examination. While she subsequently found dispensing in the hospital pharmacy monotonous, and thus less enjoyable than nursing, her new knowledge provided her with a background in potentially toxic drugs. Early in the Second World War, she brought her skills up to date at Torquay Hospital.\nAs Michael C. Gerald puts it, her \"activities as a hospital dispenser during both World Wars not only supported the war effort but also provided her with an appreciation of drugs as therapeutic agents and poisons... These hospital experiences were also likely responsible for the prominent role physicians, nurses, and pharmacists play in her stories.\" There were to be many medical practitioners, pharmacists, and scientists, na\u00efve or suspicious, in Christie's cast of characters; featuring in \"Murder in Mesopotamia\", \"Cards on the Table\", \"The Pale Horse\", and \"Mrs. McGinty's Dead\", among many others.\nGillian Gill notes that the murder method in Christie's first detective novel, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", \"comes right out of Agatha Christie's work in the hospital dispensary\". In an interview with journalist Marcelle Bernstein, Christie stated, \"I don't like messy deaths... I'm more interested in peaceful people who die in their own beds and no one knows why.\" With her expert knowledge, Christie had no need of poisons unknown to science, which were forbidden under Ronald Knox's \"Ten Rules for Detective Fiction\". Arsenic, aconite, strychnine, digitalis, thallium, and other substances were used to dispatch victims in the ensuing decades.\nArchaeology.\nIn her youth, Christie showed little interest in antiquities. After her marriage to Mallowan in 1930, she accompanied him on annual expeditions, spending three to four months at a time in Syria and Iraq at excavation sites at Ur, Nineveh, Tell Arpachiyah, Chagar Bazar, Tell Brak, and Nimrud. The Mallowans also took side trips whilst travelling to and from expedition sites, visiting Italy, Greece, Egypt, Iran, and the Soviet Union, among other places. Their experiences travelling and living abroad are reflected in novels such as \"Murder on the Orient Express\", \"Death on the Nile\", and \"Appointment with Death\".\nFor the 1931 digging season at Nineveh, Christie bought a writing table to continue her own work; in the early 1950s, she paid to add a small writing room to the team's house at Nimrud. She also devoted time and effort each season in \"making herself useful by photographing, cleaning, and recording finds; and restoring ceramics, which she especially enjoyed\". She also provided funds for the expeditions.\nMany of the settings for Christie's books were inspired by her archaeological fieldwork in the Middle East; this is reflected in the detail with which she describes themfor instance, the temple of Abu Simbel as depicted in \"Death on the Nile\"while the settings for \"They Came to Baghdad\" were places she and Mallowan had recently stayed. Similarly, she drew upon her knowledge of daily life on a dig throughout \"Murder in Mesopotamia\". Archaeologists and experts in Middle Eastern cultures and artefacts featured in her works include Dr Eric Leidner in \"Murder in Mesopotamia\" and Signor Richetti in \"Death on the Nile\".\nAfter the Second World War, Christie chronicled her time in Syria in \"Come, Tell Me How You Live\", which she described as \"small beera very little book, full of everyday doings and happenings\". From 8November 2001 to March 2002, The British Museum presented a \"colourful and episodic exhibition\" called \"Agatha Christie and Archaeology: Mystery in Mesopotamia\" which illustrated how her activities as a writer and as the wife of an archaeologist intertwined.\nPortrayals.\nBBC television released \"\" in 2004, in which she is portrayed by Olivia Williams, Anna Massey, and Bonnie Wright (at different stages in her life). ITV's \"Perspectives\": \"The Mystery of Agatha Christie\" (2013) is hosted by David Suchet.\nSome of Christie's fictional portrayals have explored and offered accounts of her disappearance in 1926. The film \"Agatha\" (1979), with Vanessa Redgrave, has Christie sneaking away to plan revenge against her husband; Christie's heirs sued unsuccessfully to prevent the film's distribution. The \"Doctor Who\" episode \"The Unicorn and the Wasp\" (17\u00a0May 2008), with Fenella Woolgar, portrays Christie in her early writing career and explains her disappearance as the result of having suffered a temporary breakdown owing to a brief psychic link being formed between her and an alien wasp called the Vespiform. The film \"Agatha and the Truth of Murder\" (2018) sends her under cover to solve the murder of Florence Nightingale's goddaughter, Florence Nightingale Shore. A fictionalised account of Christie's disappearance is also the central theme of a Korean musical, \"Agatha\".\nOther portrayals, such as the Hungarian film, \"Kojak Budapesten\" (1980) create their own scenarios involving Christie's criminal skill. In the TV play, \"Murder by the Book\" (1986), Christie (Dame Peggy Ashcroft) murders one of her fictional-turned-real characters, Poirot. Christie features as a character in Gaylord Larsen's \"Dorothy and Agatha\" and \"The London Blitz Murders\" by Max Allan Collins. The American television program \"Unsolved Mysteries\" devoted a segment to her famous disapprarance, with Agatha portrayed by actress Tessa Pritchard. A young Agatha is depicted in the Spanish historical television series \"Gran Hotel\" (2011) in which she finds inspiration to write her new novel while aiding local detectives. In the alternative history television film \"Agatha and the Curse of Ishtar\" (2018), Christie becomes involved in a murder case at an archaeological dig in Iraq. In 2019, Honeysuckle Weeks portrayed Christie in an episode, \"No Friends Like Old Friends\", in a Canadian drama, \"Frankie Drake Mysteries.\"\nNotes.\nj. \"And Then There Were None came first in a global vote to find the world's favourite Agatha Christie books for her 125th birthday.\""}
{"id": "986", "revid": "1012602267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=986", "title": "The Plague", "text": "The Plague (French: La Peste) is a novel by Albert Camus, published in 1947, that tells the story from the point of view of a narrator of a plague sweeping the French Algerian city of Oran. The narrator remains unknown until the start of the last chapter, chapter 5 of part 5. The novel presents a snapshot of life in Oran as seen through the author's distinctive absurdist point of view.\nCamus used as source material the cholera epidemic that killed a large proportion of Oran's population in 1849, but situated the novel in the 1940s. Oran and its surroundings were struck by disease several times before Camus published his novel. According to an academic study, Oran was decimated by the bubonic plague in 1556 and 1678, but all later outbreaks (in 1921: 185 cases; 1931: 76 cases; and 1944: 95 cases) were very far from the scale of the epidemic described in the novel.\n\"The Plague\" is considered an existentialist classic despite Camus' objection to the label. The novel stresses the powerlessness of the individual characters to affect their destinies. The narrative tone is similar to Kafka's, especially in \"The Trial\", whose individual sentences potentially have multiple meanings; the material often pointedly resonating as stark allegory of phenomenal consciousness and the human condition.\nPlot summary.\nThe book begins with an epigraph quoting Daniel Defoe, author of \"A Journal of the Plague Year\".\nPart one.\nIn the town of Oran, thousands of rats, initially unnoticed by the populace, begin to die in the streets. Hysteria develops soon afterward, causing the local newspapers to report the incident. Authorities responding to public pressure order the collection and cremation of the rats, unaware that the collection itself was the catalyst for the spread of the bubonic plague.\nThe main character, Dr. Bernard Rieux, lives comfortably in an apartment building when strangely the building's concierge, M. Michel, a confidante, dies from a fever. Dr. Rieux consults his colleague, Dr. Castel, about the illness until they come to the conclusion that a plague is sweeping the town. They both approach fellow doctors and town authorities about their theory but are eventually dismissed on the basis of one death. However, as more deaths quickly ensue, it becomes apparent that there is an epidemic. Meanwhile, Rieux's wife has been sent to a sanatorium in another city, to be treated for an unrelated chronic illness.\nAuthorities, including the Prefect, are slow to accept that the situation is serious and quibble over the appropriate action to take. Official notices enacting control measures are posted, but the language used is optimistic and downplays the seriousness of the situation. A \"special ward\" is opened at the hospital, but its 80 beds are filled within three days. As the death toll begins to rise, more desperate measures are taken. Homes are quarantined; corpses and burials are strictly supervised. A supply of plague serum finally arrives, but there is enough to treat only existing cases, and the country's emergency reserves are depleted. When the daily number of deaths jumps to 30, the town is sealed, and an outbreak of plague is officially declared.\nPart two.\nThe town is sealed off. The town gates are shut, rail travel is prohibited, and all mail service is suspended. The use of telephone lines is restricted only to \"urgent\" calls, leaving short telegrams as the only means of communicating with friends or family outside the town. The separation affects daily activity and depresses the spirit of the townspeople, who begin to feel isolated and introverted, and the plague begins to affect various characters.\nOne character, Raymond Rambert, devises a plan to escape the city to join his wife in Paris after city officials refused his request to leave. He befriends some underground criminals so that they may smuggle him out of the city. Another character, Father Paneloux, uses the plague as an opportunity to advance his stature in the town by suggesting that the plague was an act of God punishing the citizens' sinful nature. His diatribe falls on the ears of many citizens of the town, who turned to religion in droves but would not have done so under normal circumstances. Cottard, a criminal remorseful enough to attempt suicide but fearful of being arrested, becomes wealthy as a major smuggler. Meanwhile, Jean Tarrou, a vacationer; Joseph Grand, a civil engineer; and Dr. Rieux, exhaustively treat patients in their homes and in the hospital.\nRambert informs Tarrou of his escape plan, but when Tarrou tells him that there are others in the city, including Dr. Rieux, who have loved ones outside the city whom they are not allowed to see, Rambert becomes sympathetic and offers to help Rieux fight the epidemic until he leaves town.\nPart three.\nIn mid-August, the situation continues to worsen. People try to escape the town, but some are shot by armed sentries. Violence and looting break out on a small scale, and the authorities respond by declaring martial law and imposing a curfew. Funerals are conducted with more speed, no ceremony and little concern for the feelings of the families of the deceased. The inhabitants passively endure their increasing feelings of exile and separation. Despondent, they waste away emotionally as well as physically.\nPart four.\nIn September and October, the town remains at the mercy of the plague. Rieux hears from the sanatorium that his wife's condition is worsening. He also hardens his heart regarding the plague victims so that he can continue to do his work. Cottard, on the other hand, seems to flourish during the plague because it gives him a sense of being connected to others, since everybody faces the same danger. Cottard and Tarrou attend a performance of Gluck's opera \"Orpheus and Eurydice\", but the actor portraying Orpheus collapses with plague symptoms during the performance.\nAfter extended negotiations with guards, Rambert finally has a chance to escape, but he decides to stay, saying that he would feel ashamed of himself if he left.\nTowards the end of October, Castel's new antiplague serum is tried for the first time, but it cannot save the life of Othon's young son, who suffers greatly, as Paneloux, Rieux, and Tarrou tend to his bedside in horror.\nPaneloux, who has joined the group of volunteers fighting the plague, gives a second sermon. He addresses the problem of an innocent child's suffering and says it is a test of a Christian's faith since it requires him either to deny everything or believe everything. He urges the congregation not to give up the struggle but to do everything possible to fight the plague.\nA few days after the sermon, Paneloux is taken ill. His symptoms do not conform to those of the plague, but the disease still proves fatal.\nTarrou and Rambert visit one of the isolation camps, where they meet Othon. When Othon's period of quarantine ends, he chooses to stay in the camp as a volunteer because this will make him feel less separated from his dead son. Tarrou tells Rieux the story of his life and, to take their mind off the epidemic, the two men go swimming together in the sea. Grand catches the plague and instructs Rieux to burn all his papers. However, Grand makes an unexpected recovery, and deaths from the plague start to decline.\nPart five.\nBy late January the plague is in full retreat, and the townspeople begin to celebrate the imminent opening of the town gates. Othon, however, does not escape death from the disease. Cottard is distressed by the ending of the epidemic from which he has profited by shady dealings. Two government employees approach him, and he flees. Despite the epidemic's ending, Tarrou contracts the plague and dies after a heroic struggle. Rieux is later informed via telegram that his wife has also died.\nIn February, the town gates open and people are reunited with their loved ones from other cities. Rambert is reunited with his wife. Cottard goes mad and shoots at people from his home, and is soon arrested after a brief skirmish with the police. Grand begins working on his novel again. The narrator of the chronicle says that he is Dr. Rieux and states that he tried to present an objective view of the events. He reflects on the epidemic and declares he wrote the chronicle \"to simply say what we learn in the midst of plagues : there are more things to admire in men than to despise\".\nCritical analysis.\nGermaine Br\u00e9e has characterised the struggle of the characters against the plague as \"undramatic and stubborn\", and in contrast to the ideology of \"glorification of power\" in the novels of Andr\u00e9 Malraux, whereas Camus' characters \"are obscurely engaged in saving, not destroying, and this in the name of no ideology\". Lulu Haroutunian has discussed Camus' own medical history, including a bout with tuberculosis, and how it informs the novel. Marina Warner notes its larger philosophical themes of \"engagement\", \"paltriness and generosity\", \"small heroism and large cowardice\", and \"all kinds of profoundly humanist problems, such as love and goodness, happiness and mutual connection\".\nThomas L Hanna and John Loose have separately discussed themes related to Christianity in the novel, with particular respect to Father Paneloux and Dr Rieux. Louis R Rossi briefly discusses the role of Tarrou in the novel, and the sense of philosophical guilt behind his character. Elwyn Sterling has analysed the role of Cottard and his final actions at the end of the novel.\nIn the popular press.\nThe novel has been read as an allegorical treatment of the French resistance to Nazi occupation during World War II.\nThe novel became a bestseller during the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 to the point that its British publisher Penguin Classics reported struggling to keep up with demand. The prescience of the fictional cordon sanitaire of Oran with real-life COVID-19 lockdowns worldwide brought revived popular attention. Sales in Italy tripled and it became a top-ten bestseller during its nationwide lockdown. Penguin Classics' editorial director said \"it couldn\u2019t be more relevant to the current moment\" and Camus' daughter Catherine said that the message of the novel had newfound relevance in that \"we are not responsible for coronavirus but we can be responsible in the way we respond to it\".\nPublication history.\nAs early as April 1941, Camus had been working on the novel, as evidenced in his diaries in which he wrote down a few ideas on \"the redeeming plague\". On 13 March 1942, he informed Andr\u00e9 Malraux that he was writing \"a novel on the plague\", adding \"Said like that it might sound strange, [\u2026] but this subject seems so natural to me.\""}
{"id": "988", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=988", "title": "Applied ethics", "text": "Applied ethics refers to the practical application of moral considerations. It is ethics with respect to real-world actions and their moral considerations in the areas of private and public life, the professions, health, technology, law, and leadership. For example, the bioethics community is concerned with identifying the correct approach to moral issues in the life sciences, such as euthanasia, the allocation of scarce health resources, or the use of human embryos in research. Environmental ethics is concerned with ecological issues such as the responsibility of government and corporations to clean up pollution. Business ethics includes questions regarding the duties or duty of 'whistleblowers' to the general public or their loyalty to their employers.\nApplied ethics has expanded the study of ethics beyond the realms of academic philosophical discourse. The field of applied ethics, as it appears today, emerged from debate surrounding rapid medical and technological advances in the early 1970s and is now established as a subdiscipline of moral philosophy. However, applied ethics is, by its very nature, a multi-professional subject because it requires specialist understanding of the potential ethical issues in fields like medicine, business or information technology. Nowadays, ethical codes of conduct exist in almost every profession.\nAn applied ethics approach to the examination of moral dilemmas can take many different forms but one of the most influential and most widely utilised approaches in bioethics and health care ethics is the four-principle approach developed by Tom Beauchamp and James Childress. The four-principle approach, commonly termed principlism, entails consideration and application of four prima facie ethical principles: autonomy, non-maleficence, beneficence, and justice.\nUnderpinning theory.\nApplied ethics is distinguished from normative ethics, which concerns standards for right and wrong behavior, and from meta-ethics, which concerns the nature of ethical properties, statements, attitudes, and judgments.\nWhilst these three areas of ethics appear to be distinct they are also interrelated. The use of an applied ethics approach often draws upon certain normative ethical theories like the following:\nSometimes, these normative ethical theories clash which poses challenges when trying to resolve real-world ethical dilemmas. One approach which attempts to overcome the seemingly impossible divide between deontology and utilitarianism (of which the divide is caused by the opposite takings of an absolute and relativist moral view) is case-based reasoning, also known as casuistry. Casuistry does not begin with theory, rather it starts with the immediate facts of a real and concrete case. While casuistry makes use of ethical theory, it does not view ethical theory as the most important feature of moral reasoning. Casuists, like Albert Jonsen and Stephen Toulmin (\"The Abuse of Casuistry\" 1988), challenge the traditional paradigm of applied ethics. Instead of starting from theory and applying theory to a particular case, casuists start with the particular case itself and then ask what morally significant features (including both theory and practical considerations) ought to be considered for that particular case. In their observations of medical ethics committees, Jonsen and Toulmin note that a consensus on particularly problematic moral cases often emerges when participants focus on the facts of the case, rather than on ideology or theory. Thus, a Rabbi, a Catholic priest, and an agnostic might agree that, in this particular case, the best approach is to withhold extraordinary medical care, while disagreeing on the reasons that support their individual positions. By focusing on cases and not on theory, those engaged in moral debate increase the possibility of agreement."}
{"id": "991", "revid": "1011118342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=991", "title": "Absolute value", "text": "In mathematics, the absolute value or modulus of a real number\u00a0, denoted , is the non-negative value of\u00a0 without regard to its sign. Namely, if is positive, and if is negative (in which case is positive), and . For example, the absolute value of 3 is 3, and the absolute value of \u22123 is also 3. The absolute value of a number may be thought of as its distance from zero.\nGeneralisations of the absolute value for real numbers occur in a wide variety of mathematical settings. For example, an absolute value is also defined for the complex numbers, the quaternions, ordered rings, fields and vector spaces. The absolute value is closely related to the notions of magnitude, distance, and norm in various mathematical and physical contexts.\nTerminology and notation.\nIn 1806, Jean-Robert Argand introduced the term \"module\", meaning \"unit of measure\" in French, specifically for the \"complex\" absolute value, and it was borrowed into English in 1866 as the Latin equivalent \"modulus\". The term \"absolute value\" has been used in this sense from at least 1806 in French and 1857 in English. The notation , with a vertical bar on each side, was introduced by Karl Weierstrass in 1841. Other names for \"absolute value\" include \"numerical value\" and \"magnitude\". In programming languages and computational software packages, the absolute value of \"x\" is generally represented by codice_1, or a similar expression.\nThe vertical bar notation also appears in a number of other mathematical contexts: for example, when applied to a set, it denotes its cardinality; when applied to a matrix, it denotes its determinant. Vertical bars denote the absolute value only for algebraic objects for which the notion of an absolute value is defined, notably an element of a normed division algebra, for example a real number, a complex number, or a quaternion. A closely related but distinct notation is the use of vertical bars for either the euclidean norm or sup norm of a vector in formula_1, although double vertical bars with subscripts (formula_2 and formula_3, respectively) are a more common and less ambiguous notation.\nDefinition and properties.\nReal numbers.\nFor any real number\u00a0, the absolute value or modulus of\u00a0 is denoted by (a vertical bar on each side of the quantity) and is defined as\nThe absolute value of\u00a0 is thus always either positive or zero, but never negative: when itself is negative (), then its absolute value is necessarily positive ().\nFrom an analytic geometry point of view, the absolute value of a real number is that number's distance from zero along the real number line, and more generally the absolute value of the difference of two real numbers is the distance between them. The notion of an abstract distance function in mathematics can be seen to be a generalisation of the absolute value of the difference (see \"Distance\" below).\nSince the square root symbol represents the unique \"positive\" square root (when applied to a positive number), it follows that\nis equivalent to the definition above, and may be used as an alternative definition of the absolute value of real numbers.\nThe absolute value has the following four fundamental properties (\"a\", \"b\" are real numbers), that are used for generalization of this notion to other domains:\nNon-negativity, positive definiteness, and multiplicativity are readily apparent from the definition. To see that subadditivity holds, first note that one of the two alternatives of taking as either or guarantees that formula_6 Now, since formula_7 and formula_8, it follows that, whichever is the value of , one has formula_9 for all real formula_10. Consequently, formula_11, as desired. (For a generalization of this argument to complex numbers, see \"Proof of the triangle inequality for complex numbers\" below.)\nSome additional useful properties are given below. These are either immediate consequences of the definition or implied by the four fundamental properties above.\nTwo other useful properties concerning inequalities are:\nThese relations may be used to solve inequalities involving absolute values. For example:\nThe absolute value, as \"distance from zero\", is used to define the absolute difference between arbitrary real numbers, the standard metric on the real numbers.\nComplex numbers.\nSince the complex numbers are not ordered, the definition given at the top for the real absolute value cannot be directly applied to complex numbers. However, the geometric interpretation of the absolute value of a real number as its distance from 0 can be generalised. The absolute value of a complex number is defined by the Euclidean distance of its corresponding point in the complex plane from the origin. This can be computed using the Pythagorean theorem: for any complex number\nwhere and are real numbers, the absolute value or modulus of\u00a0 is denoted and is defined by\nwhere Re(\"z\") = \"x\" and Im(\"z\") = \"y\" denote the real and imaginary parts of \"z\", respectively. When the imaginary part is zero, this coincides with the definition of the absolute value of the real number\u00a0.\nWhen a complex number\u00a0 is expressed in its polar form as\nwith formula_18 (and is the argument (or phase) of \"z\"), its absolute value is\nSince the product of any complex number\u00a0 and its complex conjugate\u00a0formula_20 with the same absolute value, is always the non-negative real number formula_21, the absolute value of a complex number is the square root of formula_22 which is therefore called the absolute square or \"squared modulus\" of :\nThis generalizes the alternative definition for reals: formula_24\nThe complex absolute value shares the four fundamental properties given above for the real absolute value.\nIn the language of group theory, the multiplicative property may be rephrased as follows: the absolute value is a group homomorphism from the multiplicative group of the complex numbers onto the group under multiplication of positive real numbers.\nImportantly, the property of subadditivity (\"triangle inequality\") extends to any finite collection of \u00a0complex \nThis inequality also applies to infinite families, provided that the infinite series formula_26 is absolutely convergent. If Lebesgue integration is viewed as the continuous analog of summation, then this inequality is analogously obeyed by complex-valued, measurable functions formula_27 when integrated over a measurable subset formula_28:\nProof of the complex triangle inequality.\nThe triangle inequality, as given by formula_31, can be demonstrated by applying three easily verified properties of the complex numbers: Namely, for every complex number formula_32,\nAlso, for a family of complex numbers formula_37, formula_38. In particular,\nProof of formula_31: Choose formula_42 such that formula_34 and formula_44 (summed over formula_45). The following computation then affords the desired inequality: \nIt is clear from this proof that equality holds in formula_31 exactly if all the formula_48 are non-negative real numbers, which in turn occurs exactly if all nonzero formula_49 have the same argument, i.e., formula_50 for a complex constant formula_51 and real constants formula_52 for formula_53.\nSince formula_54 measurable implies that formula_55 is also measurable, the proof of the inequality formula_56 proceeds via the same technique, by replacing formula_57 with formula_58 and formula_49 with formula_60.\nAbsolute value function.\nThe real absolute value function is continuous everywhere. It is differentiable everywhere except for . It is monotonically decreasing on the interval and monotonically increasing on the interval . Since a real number and its opposite have the same absolute value, it is an even function, and is hence not invertible. The real absolute value function is a piecewise linear, convex function.\nBoth the real and complex functions are idempotent.\nRelationship to the sign function.\nThe absolute value function of a real number returns its value irrespective of its sign, whereas the sign (or signum) function returns a number's sign irrespective of its value. The following equations show the relationship between these two functions:\nor\nand for ,\nDerivative.\nThe real absolute value function has a derivative for every , but is not differentiable at . Its derivative for is given by the step function:\nThe real absolute value function is an example of a continuous function that achieves a global minimum where the derivative does not exist.\nThe subdifferential of\u00a0 at\u00a0 is the interval\u00a0.\nThe complex absolute value function is continuous everywhere but complex differentiable \"nowhere\" because it violates the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations.\nThe second derivative of\u00a0 with respect to\u00a0 is zero everywhere except zero, where it does not exist. As a generalised function, the second derivative may be taken as two times the Dirac delta function.\nAntiderivative.\nThe antiderivative (indefinite integral) of the real absolute value function is\nwhere is an arbitrary constant of integration. This is not a complex antiderivative because complex antiderivatives can only exist for complex-differentiable (holomorphic) functions, which the complex absolute value function is not.\nDistance.\nThe absolute value is closely related to the idea of distance. As noted above, the absolute value of a real or complex number is the distance from that number to the origin, along the real number line, for real numbers, or in the complex plane, for complex numbers, and more generally, the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers is the distance between them.\nThe standard Euclidean distance between two points\nand\nin Euclidean -space is defined as:\nThis can be seen as a generalisation, since for formula_69 and formula_70 real, i.e. in a 1-space, according to the alternative definition of the absolute value,\nand for formula_72 and formula_73 complex numbers, i.e. in a 2-space,\nThe above shows that the \"absolute value\"-distance, for real and complex numbers, agrees with the standard Euclidean distance, which they inherit as a result of considering them as one and two-dimensional Euclidean spaces, respectively.\nThe properties of the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers: non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry and the triangle inequality given above, can be seen to motivate the more general notion of a distance function as follows:\nA real valued function on a set is called a metric (or a \"distance function\") on\u00a0, if it satisfies the following four axioms:\nGeneralizations.\nOrdered rings.\nThe definition of absolute value given for real numbers above can be extended to any ordered ring. That is, if\u00a0 is an element of an ordered ring\u00a0\"R\", then the absolute value of\u00a0, denoted by , is defined to be:\nwhere is the additive inverse of\u00a0, 0 is the additive identity, and &lt; and \u2265 have the usual meaning with respect to the ordering in the ring.\nFields.\nThe four fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers can be used to generalise the notion of absolute value to an arbitrary field, as follows.\nA real-valued function\u00a0 on a field\u00a0 is called an \"absolute value\" (also a \"modulus\", \"magnitude\", \"value\", or \"valuation\") if it satisfies the following four axioms:\nWhere 0 denotes the additive identity of\u00a0. It follows from positive-definiteness and multiplicativity that , where 1 denotes the multiplicative identity of\u00a0. The real and complex absolute values defined above are examples of absolute values for an arbitrary field.\nIf is an absolute value on\u00a0, then the function\u00a0 on , defined by , is a metric and the following are equivalent:\nAn absolute value which satisfies any (hence all) of the above conditions is said to be non-Archimedean, otherwise it is said to be Archimedean.\nVector spaces.\nAgain the fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers can be used, with a slight modification, to generalise the notion to an arbitrary vector space.\nA real-valued function on a vector space\u00a0 over a field\u00a0, represented as , is called an absolute value, but more usually a norm, if it satisfies the following axioms:\nFor all\u00a0 in\u00a0, and , in\u00a0,\nThe norm of a vector is also called its \"length\" or \"magnitude\".\nIn the case of Euclidean space formula_1, the function defined by\nis a norm called the Euclidean norm. When the real numbers formula_85 are considered as the one-dimensional vector space formula_86, the absolute value is a norm, and is the -norm (see Lp space) for any\u00a0. In fact the absolute value is the \"only\" norm on formula_86, in the sense that, for every norm on formula_86, . \nThe complex absolute value is a special case of the norm in an inner product space, which is identical to the Euclidean norm when the complex plane is identified as the Euclidean plane\u00a0formula_89.\nComposition algebras.\nEvery composition algebra \"A\" has an involution \"x\" \u2192 \"x\"* called its conjugation. The product in \"A\" of an element \"x\" and its conjugate \"x\"* is written \"N\"(\"x\") = \"x x\"* and called the norm of x.\nThe real numbers formula_85, complex numbers formula_91, and quaternions formula_85 are all composition algebras with norms given by definite quadratic forms. The absolute value in these division algebras is given by the square root of the composition algebra norm.\nIn general the norm of a composition algebra may be a quadratic form that is not definite and has null vectors. However, as in the case of division algebras, when an element \"x\" has a non-zero norm, then \"x\" has a multiplicative inverse given by \"x\"*/\"N\"(\"x\")."}
{"id": "993", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=993", "title": "Analog signal", "text": "An analog signal is any continuous signal for which the time-varying feature of the signal is a representation of some other time-varying quantity, i.e., \"analogous\" to another time-varying signal. For example, in an analog audio signal, the instantaneous voltage of the signal varies continuously with the pressure of the sound waves. \nIt differs from a digital signal, in which the continuous quantity is a representation of a sequence of discrete values which can only take on one of a finite number of values. \nThe term \"analog signal\" usually refers to electrical signals; however, mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic, and other systems may also convey or be considered analog signals.\nRepresentation.\nAn analog signal uses some property of the medium to convey the signal's information. For example, an aneroid barometer uses rotary position as the signal to convey pressure information. In an electrical signal, the voltage, current, or frequency of the signal may be varied to represent the information.\nAny information may be conveyed by an analog signal; such a signal may be a measured response to changes in a physical variable, such as sound, light, temperature, position, or pressure. The physical variable is converted to an analog signal by a transducer. For example, sound striking the diaphragm of a microphone induces corresponding fluctuations in the current produced by a coil in an electromagnetic microphone or the voltage produced by a condenser microphone. The voltage or the current is said to be an \"analog\" of the sound.\nNoise.\nAn analog signal is subject to electronic noise and distortion introduced by communication channels, recording and signal processing operations, which can progressively degrade the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). As the signal is transmitted, copied, or processed, the unavoidable noise introduced in the signal path will accumulate as a generation loss, progressively and irreversibly degrading the SNR, until in extreme cases, the signal can be overwhelmed. Noise can show up as hiss and intermodulation distortion in audio signals, or snow in video signals. Generation loss is irreversible as there is no reliable method to distinguish the noise from the signal.\nIn contrast, although converting an analog signal to digital form introduces a low-level quantization noise into the signal due to finite resolution of digital systems, once in digital form, the signal can be transmitted, stored, or processed without introducing significant additional noise or distortion.\nNoise accumulation in analog systems can be minimized by electromagnetic shielding, balanced lines, low-noise amplifiers and high-quality electrical components.\nIn analog systems, it is difficult to detect when such degradation occurs. However, in digital systems, degradation can not only be detected but corrected as well."}
{"id": "994", "revid": "40600116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=994", "title": "Arecales", "text": "Arecales is an order of flowering plants. The order has been widely recognised only for the past few decades; until then, the accepted name for the order including these plants was Principes.\nTaxonomy.\nThe Cronquist system of 1981 assigned the order to the subclass Arecidae in the class Liliopsida (= monocotyledons).\nThe Thorne system (1992) and the Dahlgren system assigned the order to the superorder Areciflorae, also called Arecanae in the subclass Liliidae (= monocotyledons), with the single family Arecaceae.\nThe APG II system of 2003 recognised the order and placed it in the clade commelinids in the monocots and uses this circumscription:\nThis was unchanged from the APG system of 1998, although it used the spelling \"commelinoids\" instead of commelinids.\nThe APG IV system of 2016 places Dasypogonaceae in this order, after studies shown Dasypogonaceae as sister to Arecaceae. However, this decision has been called into question."}
{"id": "1000", "revid": "7643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1000", "title": "Hercule Poirot", "text": "Hercule Poirot (, ) is a fictional Belgian detective created by British writer Agatha Christie. Poirot is one of Christie's most famous and long-running characters, appearing in 33 novels, 2 plays (\"Black Coffee\" and \"Alibi\"), and more than 50 short stories published between 1920 and 1975.\nPoirot has been portrayed on radio, in film and on television by various actors, including Austin Trevor, John Moffatt, Albert Finney, Peter Ustinov, Ian Holm, Tony Randall, Alfred Molina, Orson Welles, David Suchet, Kenneth Branagh, and John Malkovich.\nOverview.\nInfluences.\nPoirot's name was derived from two other fictional detectives of the time: Marie Belloc Lowndes' Hercule Popeau and Frank Howel Evans' Monsieur Poiret, a retired Belgian police officer living in London.\nA more obvious influence on the early Poirot stories is that of Arthur Conan Doyle. In \"An Autobiography\", Christie states, \"I was still writing in the Sherlock Holmes tradition \u2013 eccentric detective, stooge assistant, with a Lestrade-type Scotland Yard detective, Inspector Japp\". For his part, Conan Doyle acknowledged basing his detective stories on the model of Edgar Allan Poe's C. Auguste Dupin and his anonymous narrator, and basing his character Sherlock Holmes on Joseph Bell, who in his use of \"ratiocination\" prefigured Poirot's reliance on his \"little grey cells\".\nPoirot also bears a striking resemblance to A. E. W. Mason's fictional detective Inspector Hanaud of the French S\u00fbret\u00e9, who first appeared in the 1910 novel \"At the Villa Rose\" and predates the first Poirot novel by 10 years.\nChristie's Poirot was clearly the result of her early development of the detective in her first book, written in 1916 and published in 1920. Belgium's occupation by Germany during World War I provided a plausible explanation of why such a skilled detective would be available to solve mysteries at an English country house. At the time of Christie's writing, it was considered patriotic to express sympathy towards the Belgians, since the invasion of their country had constituted Britain's \"casus belli\" for entering World War I, and British wartime propaganda emphasised the \"Rape of Belgium\".\nPopularity.\nPoirot first appeared in \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\" (published in 1920) and exited in \"Curtain\" (published in 1975). Following the latter, Poirot was the only fictional character to receive an obituary on the front page of \"The New York Times\".\nBy 1930, Agatha Christie found Poirot \"insufferable\", and by 1960 she felt that he was a \"detestable, bombastic, tiresome, ego-centric little creep\". Yet the public loved him and Christie refused to kill him off, claiming that it was her duty to produce what the public liked.\nAppearance and proclivities.\nCaptain Arthur Hastings's first description of Poirot:\nAgatha Christie's initial description of Poirot in \"The Murder on the Orient Express\":\nIn the later books, his limp is not mentioned, suggesting it may have been a temporary wartime injury. (In \"\", Poirot admits he was wounded when he first came to England.) Poirot has green eyes that are repeatedly described as shining \"like a cat's\" when he is struck by a clever idea, and dark hair, which he dyes later in life. In \"Curtain\", he admits to Hastings that he wears a wig and a false moustache. However, in many of his screen incarnations, he is bald or balding.\nFrequent mention is made of his patent leather shoes, damage to which is frequently a source of misery for him, but comical for the reader. Poirot's appearance, regarded as fastidious during his early career, later falls hopelessly out of fashion. He employs pince-nez reading glasses.\nAmong Poirot's most significant personal attributes is the sensitivity of his stomach:\nHe suffers from sea sickness, and, in \"Death in the Clouds\", he states that his air sickness prevents him from being more alert at the time of the murder. Later in his life, we are told:\nPoirot is extremely punctual and carries a pocket watch almost to the end of his career. He is also particular about his personal finances, preferring to keep a bank balance of 444\u00a0 pounds, 4 shillings, and 4 pence. Actor David Suchet, who portrayed Poirot on television, said \"there's no question he's obsessive-compulsive\". Film portrayer Kenneth Branagh said that he \"enjoyed finding the sort of obsessive-compulsive\" in Poirot.\nAs mentioned in \"Curtain\" and \"The Clocks\", he is fond of classical music, particularly Mozart and Bach.\nMethods.\nIn \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", Poirot operates as a fairly conventional, clue-based and logical detective; reflected in his vocabulary by two common phrases: his use of \"the little grey cells\" and \"order and method\". Hastings is irritated by the fact that Poirot sometimes conceals important details of his plans, as in \"The Big Four\". In this novel, Hastings is kept in the dark throughout the climax. This aspect of Poirot is less evident in the later novels, partly because there is rarely a narrator to mislead.\nIn \"Murder on the Links,\" still largely dependent on clues himself, Poirot mocks a rival \"bloodhound\" detective who focuses on the traditional trail of clues established in detective fiction (e.g., Sherlock Holmes depending on footprints, fingerprints, and cigar ash). From this point on, Poirot establishes his psychological bona fides. Rather than painstakingly examining crime scenes, he enquires into the nature of the victim or the psychology of the murderer. He predicates his actions in the later novels on his underlying assumption that particular crimes are committed by particular types of people.\nPoirot focuses on getting people to talk. In the early novels, he casts himself in the role of \"Papa Poirot\", a benign confessor, especially to young women. In later works, Christie made a point of having Poirot supply false or misleading information about himself or his background to assist him in obtaining information. In \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", Poirot speaks of a non-existent mentally disabled nephew to uncover information about homes for the mentally unfit. In \"Dumb Witness\", Poirot invents an elderly invalid mother as a pretence to investigate local nurses. In \"The Big Four\", Poirot pretends to have (and poses as) an identical twin brother named Achille: however, this brother was mentioned again in \"The Labours of Hercules\".\n\"If I remember rightly \u2013 though my memory isn't what it was \u2013 you also had a brother called Achille, did you not?\u201d Poirot's mind raced back over the details of Achille Poirot's career. Had all that really happened? \"Only for a short space of time,\" he replied.\nPoirot is also willing to appear more foreign or vain in an effort to make people underestimate him. He admits as much:\nIt is true that I can speak the exact, the idiomatic English. But, my friend, to speak the broken English is an enormous asset. It leads people to despise you. They say \u2013 a foreigner \u2013 he can't even speak English properly. ... Also I boast! An Englishman he says often, \"A fellow who thinks as much of himself as that cannot be worth much.\" ... And so, you see, I put people off their guard.\nHe also has a tendency to refer to himself in the third person.\nIn later novels, Christie often uses the word \"mountebank\" when characters describe Poirot, showing that he has successfully passed himself off as a charlatan or fraud.\nPoirot's investigating techniques assist him solving cases; \"For in the long run, either through a lie, or through truth, people were bound to give themselves away...\" At the end, Poirot usually reveals his description of the sequence of events and his deductions to a room of suspects, often leading to the culprit's apprehension.\nLife.\nOrigins.\nChristie was purposely vague about Poirot's origins, as he is thought to be an elderly man even in the early novels. In \"An Autobiography,\" she admitted that she already imagined him to be an old man in 1920. At the time, however, she had no idea she would write works featuring him for decades to come.\nA brief passage in \"The Big Four\" provides original information about Poirot's birth or at least childhood in or near the town of Spa, Belgium: \"But we did not go into Spa itself. We left the main road and wound into the leafy fastnesses of the hills, till we reached a little hamlet and an isolated white villa high on the hillside.\" Christie strongly implies that this \"quiet retreat in the Ardennes\" near Spa is the location of the Poirot family home.\nAn alternative tradition holds that Poirot was born in the village of Ellezelles (province of Hainaut, Belgium). A few memorials dedicated to Hercule Poirot can be seen in the centre of this village. There appears to be no reference to this in Christie's writings, but the town of Ellezelles cherishes a copy of Poirot's birth certificate in a local memorial 'attesting' Poirot's birth, naming his father and mother as Jules-Louis Poirot and Godelieve Poirot.\nChristie wrote that Poirot is a Catholic by birth, but not much is described about his later religious convictions, except sporadic references to his \"going to church\". Christie provides little information regarding Poirot's childhood, only mentioning in \"Three Act Tragedy\" that he comes from a large family with little wealth, and has at least one younger sister. Apart from French and English, Poirot is also fluent in German.\nPoliceman.\nGustave ... was not a policeman. I have dealt with policemen all my life and I \"know\". He could pass as a detective to an outsider but not to a man who was a policeman himself.\nHercule Poirot was active in the Brussels police force by 1893. Very little mention is made about this part of his life, but in \"The Nemean Lion\" (1939) Poirot refers to a Belgian case of his in which \"a wealthy soap manufacturer ... poisoned his wife in order to be free to marry his secretary\". As Poirot was often misleading about his past to gain information, the truthfulness of that statement is unknown; it does, however, scare off a would-be wife-killer.\nIn the short story \"The Chocolate Box\" (1923), Poirot reveals to Captain Arthur Hastings an account of what he considers to be his only failure. Poirot admits that he has failed to solve a crime \"innumerable\" times:\nI have been called in too late. Very often another, working towards the same goal, has arrived there first. Twice I have been struck down with illness just as I was on the point of success.\nNevertheless, he regards the 1893 case in \"The Chocolate Box\", as his only actual failure of detection. Again, Poirot is not reliable as a narrator of his personal history and there is no evidence that Christie sketched it out in any depth. During his police career, Poirot shot a man who was firing from a roof into the public below. In \"Lord Edgware Dies\", Poirot reveals that he learned to read writing upside down during his police career. Around that time he met Xavier Bouc, director of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits. Poirot also became a uniformed director, working on trains.\nInspector Japp offers some insight into Poirot's career with the Belgian police when introducing him to a colleague:\nYou've heard me speak of Mr Poirot? It was in 1904 he and I worked together \u2013 the Abercrombie forgery case \u2013 you remember he was run down in Brussels. Ah, those were the days Moosier. Then, do you remember \"Baron\" Altara? There was a pretty rogue for you! He eluded the clutches of half the police in Europe. But we nailed him in Antwerp \u2013 thanks to Mr. Poirot here.\nIn \"The Double Clue,\" Poirot mentions that he was Chief of Police of Brussels, until \"the Great War\" (World War I) forced him to leave for England. (In \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\" Poirot had retired at age 55 in 1905)\nPrivate detective.\nI had called in at my friend Poirot's rooms to find him sadly overworked. So much had he become the rage that every rich woman who had mislaid a bracelet or lost a pet kitten rushed to secure the services of the great Hercule Poirot. \nDuring World War I, Poirot left Belgium for England as a refugee, although he returned a few times. On 16 July 1916 he again met his lifelong friend, Captain Arthur Hastings, and solved the first of his cases to be published, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\". It is clear that Hastings and Poirot are already friends when they meet in Chapter 2 of the novel, as Hastings tells Cynthia that he has not seen him for \"some years\". Particulars such as the date of 1916 for the case and that Hastings had met Poirot in Belgium, are given in \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\", Chapter 1. After that case, Poirot apparently came to the attention of the British secret service and undertook cases for the British government, including foiling the attempted abduction of the Prime Minister. Readers were told that the British authorities had learned of Poirot's keen investigative ability from certain members of Belgium's royal family.\nAfter the war, Poirot became a private detective and began undertaking civilian cases. He moved into what became both his home and work address, Flat 203 at 56B Whitehaven Mansions. Hastings first visits the flat when he returns to England in June 1935 from Argentina in \"The A.B.C. Murders\", Chapter 1. The TV programmes place this in Florin Court, Charterhouse Square, in the wrong part of London. According to Hastings, it was chosen by Poirot \"entirely on account of its strict geometrical appearance and proportion\" and described as the \"newest type of service flat\". (The Florin Court building was actually built in 1936, decades after Poirot fictionally moved in.) His first case in this period was \"The Affair at the Victory Ball\", which allowed Poirot to enter high society and begin his career as a private detective.\nBetween the world wars, Poirot travelled all over Europe, Africa, Asia, and half of South America investigating crimes and solving murders. Most of his cases occurred during this time and he was at the height of his powers at this point in his life. In \"The Murder on the Links\", the Belgian pits his grey cells against a French murderer. In the Middle East, he solved the cases \"Death on the Nile\" and \"Murder in Mesopotamia\" with ease and even survived \"An Appointment with Death\". As he passed through Eastern Europe on his return trip, he solved \"The Murder on the Orient Express\". However, he did not travel to North America, the West Indies, the Caribbean or Oceania, probably to avoid seasickness.\nIt is this villainous sea that troubles me! The \"mal de mer\" \u2013 it is horrible suffering!\nIt was during this time he met the Countess Vera Rossakoff, a glamorous jewel thief. The history of the Countess is, like Poirot's, steeped in mystery. She claims to have been a member of the Russian aristocracy before the Russian Revolution and suffered greatly as a result, but how much of that story is true is an open question. Even Poirot acknowledges that Rossakoff offered wildly varying accounts of her early life. Poirot later became smitten with the woman and allowed her to escape justice.\nIt is the misfortune of small, precise men always to hanker after large and flamboyant women. Poirot had never been able to rid himself of the fatal fascination that the Countess held for him.\nAlthough letting the Countess escape was morally questionable, it was not uncommon. In \"The Nemean Lion\", Poirot sided with the criminal, Miss Amy Carnaby, allowing her to evade prosecution by blackmailing his client Sir Joseph Hoggins, who, Poirot discovered, had plans to commit murder. Poirot even sent Miss Carnaby two hundred pounds as a final payoff prior to the conclusion of her dog kidnapping campaign. In \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", Poirot allowed the murderer to escape justice through suicide and then withheld the truth to spare the feelings of the murderer's relatives. In \"The Augean Stables\", he helped the government to cover up vast corruption. In \"Murder on the Orient Express\", Poirot allowed the murderers to go free after discovering that twelve different people participated in the murder, each one stabbing the victim in a darkened carriage after drugging him into unconsciousness so that there was no way for anyone to definitively determine which of them actually delivered the killing blow. The victim had committed a disgusting crime which led to the deaths of at least five people. There was no question of his guilt, but he had been acquitted in America in a miscarriage of justice. Considering it poetic justice that twelve jurors had acquitted him and twelve people had stabbed him, Poirot produced an alternative sequence of events to explain the death involving an unknown additional passenger on the train, with the medical examiner agreeing to doctor his own report to support this theory.\nAfter his cases in the Middle East, Poirot returned to Britain. Apart from some of the so-called \"Labours of Hercules\" (see next section) he very rarely went abroad during his later career. He moved into Styles Court towards the end of his life.\nWhile Poirot was usually paid handsomely by clients, he was also known to take on cases that piqued his curiosity, although they did not pay well.\nPoirot shows a love of steam trains, which Christie contrasts with Hastings' love of autos: this is shown in \"The Plymouth Express\", \"The Mystery of the Blue Train\", \"Murder on the Orient Express\", and \"The ABC Murders\" (in the TV series, steam trains are seen in nearly all of the episodes).\nRetirement.\nThat\u2019s the way of it. Just a case or two, just one case more \u2013 the Prima Donna\u2019s farewell performance won\u2019t be in it with yours, Poirot.\nConfusion surrounds Poirot's retirement. Most of the cases covered by Poirot's private detective agency take place before his retirement to grow marrows, at which time he solves \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\". It has been said that the twelve cases related in \"The Labours of Hercules\" (1947) must refer to a different retirement, but the fact that Poirot specifically says that he intends to grow marrows indicates that these stories also take place before \"Roger Ackroyd\", and presumably Poirot closed his agency once he had completed them. There is specific mention in \"The Capture of Cerberus\" of the twenty-year gap between Poirot's previous meeting with Countess Rossakoff and this one. If the \"Labours\" precede the events in \"Roger Ackroyd\", then the Ackroyd case must have taken place around twenty years \"later\" than it was published, and so must any of the cases that refer to it. One alternative would be that having failed to grow marrows once, Poirot is determined to have another go, but this is specifically denied by Poirot himself. Also, in \"The Erymanthian Boar\", a character is said to have been turned out of Austria by the Nazis, implying that the events of \"The Labours of Hercules\" took place after 1937. Another alternative would be to suggest that the Preface to the \"Labours\" takes place at one date but that the labours are completed over a matter of twenty years. None of the explanations is especially attractive.\nIn terms of a rudimentary chronology, Poirot speaks of retiring to grow marrows in Chapter 18 of \"The Big Four\" (1927) which places that novel out of published order before \"Roger Ackroyd\". He declines to solve a case for the Home Secretary because he is retired in Chapter One of \"Peril at End House\" (1932). He has certainly retired at the time of \"Three Act Tragedy\" (1935) but he does not enjoy his retirement and repeatedly takes cases thereafter when his curiosity is engaged. He continues to employ his secretary, Miss Lemon, at the time of the cases retold in \"Hickory Dickory Dock\" and \"Dead Man's Folly\", which take place in the mid-1950s. It is, therefore, better to assume that Christie provided no authoritative chronology for Poirot's retirement but assumed that he could either be an active detective, a consulting detective, or a retired detective as the needs of the immediate case required.\nOne consistent element about Poirot's retirement is that his fame declines during it so that in the later novels he is often disappointed when characters (especially younger characters) recognise neither him nor his name:\n\"I should, perhaps, Madame, tell you a little more about myself. I am \"Hercule Poirot\".\"\nThe revelation left Mrs Summerhayes unmoved.\n\"What a lovely name,\" she said kindly. \"Greek, isn't it?\"\nPost\u2013World War II.\nPoirot is less active during the cases that take place at the end of his career. Beginning with \"Three Act Tragedy\" (1934), Christie had perfected during the inter-war years a subgenre of Poirot novel in which the detective himself spent much of the first third of the novel on the periphery of events. In novels such as \"Taken at the Flood\", \"After the Funeral\", and \"Hickory Dickory Dock\", he is even less in evidence, frequently passing the duties of main interviewing detective to a subsidiary character. In \"Cat Among the Pigeons\", Poirot's entrance is so late as to be almost an afterthought. Whether this was a reflection of his age or of Christie's distaste for him, is impossible to assess. \"Crooked House\" (1949) and \"Ordeal by Innocence\" (1957), which could easily have been Poirot novels, represent a logical endpoint of the general diminution of his presence in such works.\nTowards the end of his career, it becomes clear that Poirot's retirement is no longer a convenient fiction. He assumes a genuinely inactive lifestyle during which he concerns himself with studying famous unsolved cases of the past and reading detective novels. He even writes a book about mystery fiction in which he deals sternly with Edgar Allan Poe and Wilkie Collins. In the absence of a more appropriate puzzle, he solves such inconsequential domestic riddles as the presence of three pieces of orange peel in his umbrella stand. \nPoirot (and, it is reasonable to suppose, his creator) becomes increasingly bemused by the vulgarism of the up-and-coming generation's young people. In \"Hickory Dickory Dock\", he investigates the strange goings-on in a student hostel, while in \"Third Girl\" (1966) he is forced into contact with the smart set of Chelsea youths. In the growing drug and pop culture of the sixties, he proves himself once again but has become heavily reliant on other investigators (especially the private investigator, Mr. Goby) who provide him with the clues that he can no longer gather for himself.\nNotably, during this time his physical characteristics also change dramatically, and by the time Arthur Hastings meets Poirot again in \"Curtain\", he looks very different from his previous appearances, having become thin with age and with obviously dyed hair.\nDeath.\nOn the ITV television series, Poirot died in October 1949 from complications of a heart condition at the end of \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\". This took place at Styles Court, the scene of his first English case in 1916. In Christie's novels, he lived into the late 1960s, perhaps even until 1975 when \"Curtain\" was published. In both the novel and the television adaptation, he had moved his amyl nitrite pills out of his own reach, possibly because of guilt. He thereby became the murderer in \"Curtain\", although it was for the benefit of others. Poirot himself noted that he wanted to kill his victim shortly before his own death so that he could avoid succumbing to the arrogance of the murderer, concerned that he might come to view himself as entitled to kill those whom he deemed necessary to eliminate.\nThe \"murderer\" that he was hunting had never actually killed anyone, but he had manipulated others to kill for him, subtly and psychologically manipulating the moments where others desire to commit murder so that they carry out the crime when they might otherwise dismiss their thoughts as nothing more than a momentary passion. Poirot thus was forced to kill the man himself, as otherwise he would have continued his actions and never been officially convicted, as he did not legally do anything wrong. It is revealed at the end of \"Curtain\" that he fakes his need for a wheelchair to fool people into believing that he is suffering from arthritis, to give the impression that he is more infirm than he is. His last recorded words are \"Cher ami!\", spoken to Hastings as the Captain left his room. (The TV adaptation adds that as Poirot is dying alone, he whispers out his final prayer to God in these words: \"Forgive me... forgive...\") Poirot was buried at Styles, and his funeral was arranged by his best friend Hastings and Hastings' daughter Judith. Hastings reasoned, \"Here was the spot where he had lived when he first came to this country. He was to lie here at the last.\"\nPoirot's actual death and funeral occurred in \"Curtain\", years after his retirement from the active investigation, but it was not the first time that Hastings attended the funeral of his best friend. In \"The Big Four\" (1927), Poirot feigned his death and subsequent funeral to launch a surprise attack on the Big Four.\nRecurring characters.\nCaptain Arthur Hastings.\nHastings, a former British Army officer, first meets Poirot during Poirot's years as a police officer in Belgium and almost immediately after they both arrive in England. He becomes Poirot's lifelong friend and appears in many cases. Poirot regards Hastings as a poor private detective, not particularly intelligent, yet helpful in his way of being fooled by the criminal or seeing things the way the average man would see them and for his tendency to unknowingly \"stumble\" onto the truth. Hastings marries and has four children \u2013 two sons and two daughters. As a loyal, albeit somewhat na\u00efve companion, Hastings is to Poirot what Watson is to Sherlock Holmes.\nHastings is capable of great bravery and courage, facing death unflinchingly when confronted by \"The Big Four\" and displaying unwavering loyalty towards Poirot. However, when forced to choose between Poirot and his wife in that novel, he initially chooses to betray Poirot to protect his wife. Later, though, he tells Poirot to draw back and escape the trap.\nThe two are an airtight team until Hastings meets and marries Dulcie Duveen, a beautiful music hall performer half his age, after investigating the \"Murder on the Links\". They later emigrated to Argentina, leaving Poirot behind as a \"very unhappy old man\". However, Poirot and Hastings reunite during the novels \"The Big Four\", \"Peril at End House\", \"The ABC Murders\", \"Lord Edgware Dies\", and \"Dumb Witness,\" when Hastings arrives in England for business, with Poirot noting in \"ABC Murders\" that he enjoys having Hastings over because he feels that he always has his most interesting cases with Hastings. The two collaborate for the final time in \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\" when the seemingly-crippled Poirot asks Hastings to assist him in his final case. When the killer they are tracking nearly manipulates Hastings into committing murder, Poirot describes this in his final farewell letter to Hastings as the catalyst that prompted him to eliminate the man himself, as Poirot \"knew\" that his friend was not a murderer and refused to let a man capable of manipulating Hastings in such a manner go on.\nMrs Ariadne Oliver.\nDetective novelist Ariadne Oliver is Agatha Christie's humorous self-caricature. Like Christie, she is not overly fond of the detective whom she is most famous for creating\u2013in Ariadne's case, Finnish sleuth Sven Hjerson. We never learn anything about her husband, but we do know that she hates alcohol and public appearances and has a great fondness for apples until she is put off them by the events of \"Hallowe'en Party\". She also has a habit of constantly changing her hairstyle, and in every appearance by her much is made of her clothes and hats. Her maid Maria prevents the public adoration from becoming too much of a burden on her employer but does nothing to prevent her from becoming too much of a burden on others.\nShe has authored more than 56 novels and greatly dislikes people modifying her characters. She is the only one in Poirot's universe to have noted that \"It\u2019s not natural for five or six people to be on the spot when B is murdered and all have a motive for killing B.\" She first met Poirot in the story \"Cards on the Table\" and has bothered him ever since.\nMiss Felicity Lemon.\nPoirot's secretary, Miss Felicity Lemon, has few human weaknesses. The only mistakes she makes within the series are a typing error during the events of \"Hickory Dickory Dock\" and the mis-mailing of an electricity bill, although she was worried about strange events surrounding her sister Florence Hubbard at the time. Florence lived in Singapore until her husband died. Later, she returned to England and began working as a housekeeper at a student residence where several murders were committed. \nPoirot described miss Lemon as being \"Unbelievably ugly and incredibly efficient. Anything that she mentioned as worth consideration usually was worth consideration.\" She is an expert on nearly everything and plans to create the perfect filing system. She also worked for the government statistician-turned-philanthropist Parker Pyne. Whether this was during one of Poirot's numerous retirements or before she entered his employment is unknown. In \"The Agatha Christie Hour\", she was portrayed by Angela Easterling, while in \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" she was portrayed by Pauline Moran. On a number of occasions, she joins Poirot in his inquiries or seeks out answers alone at his request.\nChief Inspector James Harold Japp.\nJapp is a Scotland Yard Inspector and appears in many of the stories trying to solve cases that Poirot is working on. Japp is outgoing, loud, and sometimes inconsiderate by nature, and his relationship with the refined Belgian is one of the stranger aspects of Poirot's world. He first met Poirot in Belgium in 1904, during the Abercrombie Forgery. Later that year they joined forces again to hunt down a criminal known as Baron Altara. They also meet in England where Poirot often helps Japp and lets him take credit in return for special favours. These favours usually entail Poirot being supplied with other interesting cases. In \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\", Japp was portrayed by Philip Jackson. In the film, \"Thirteen at Dinner\" (1985), adapted from \"Lord Edgware Dies\", the role of Japp was taken by the actor David Suchet, who would later star as Poirot in the ITV adaptations.\nMajor novels.\nThe Poirot books take readers through the whole of his life in England, from the first book (\"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\"), where he is a refugee staying at Styles, to the last Poirot book (\"Curtain\"), where he visits Styles before his death. In between, Poirot solves cases outside England as well, including his most famous case, \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1934).\nHercule Poirot became famous in 1926 with the publication of \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", whose surprising solution proved controversial. The novel is still among the most famous of all detective novels: Edmund Wilson alludes to it in the title of his well-known attack on detective fiction, \"Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?\" Aside from \"Roger Ackroyd\", the most critically acclaimed Poirot novels appeared from 1932 to 1942, including \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1934); \"The ABC Murders\" (1935)\"; Cards on the Table\" (1936); and \"Death on the Nile\" (1937), a tale of multiple homicide upon a Nile steamer. \"Death on the Nile\" was judged by detective novelist John Dickson Carr to be among the ten greatest mystery novels of all time.\nThe 1942 novel \"Five Little Pigs\" (a.k.a. \"Murder in Retrospect\"), in which Poirot investigates a murder committed sixteen years before by analysing various accounts of the tragedy, has been called \"the best Christie of all\" by critic and mystery novelist Robert Barnard.\nIn 2014, the Poirot canon was added to by Sophie Hannah, the first author to be commissioned by the Christie estate to write an original story. The novel was called \"The Monogram Murders\", and was set in the late 1920s, placing it chronologically between \"The Mystery of the Blue Train\" and \"Peril at End House\". A second Hannah-penned Poirot came out in 2016, called \"Closed Casket\", and a third, \"The Mystery of Three Quarters\", in 2018.\nPortrayals.\nStage.\nThe first actor to portray Hercule Poirot was Charles Laughton. He appeared on the West End in 1928 in the play \"Alibi\" which had been adapted by Michael Morton from the novel \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\". \nIn 1932 the play was performed as \"The Fatal Alibi\" on Broadway.\nAnother Poirot play, \"Black Coffee\" opened in London at the Embassy Theatre on 8 December 1930 and starred Francis L. Sullivan as Poirot. Another production of \"Black Coffee\" ran in Dublin, Ireland from 23-28 June 1931, starring Robert Powell.\nAmerican playwright Ken Ludwig adapted \"Murder on the Orient Express\" into a play, which premiered at the McCarter Theatre in Princeton, New Jersey on March 14, 2017. It starred Allan Corduner in the role of Hercule Poirot.\nFilm.\nAustin Trevor.\nAustin Trevor debuted the role of Poirot on screen in the 1931 British film \"Alibi\". The film was based on the stage play. Trevor reprised the role of Poirot twice, in \"Black Coffee\" and \"Lord Edgware Dies\". Trevor said once that he was probably cast as Poirot simply because he could do a French accent. Notably, Trevor's Poirot did not have a moustache. Leslie S. Hiscott directed the first two films, and Henry Edwards took over for the third.\nTony Randall.\nTony Randall portrayed Poirot in \"The Alphabet Murders\", a 1965 film also known as \"The ABC Murders\". This was more a satire of Poirot than a straightforward adaptation and was greatly changed from the original. Much of the story, set in modern times, was played for comedy, with Poirot investigating the murders while evading the attempts by Hastings (Robert Morley) and the police to get him out of England and back to Belgium.\nAlbert Finney.\nAlbert Finney played Poirot in 1974 in the cinematic version of \"Murder on the Orient Express\". As of today, Finney is the only actor to receive an Academy Award nomination for playing Poirot, though he did not win.\nPeter Ustinov.\nPeter Ustinov played Poirot six times, starting with \"Death on the Nile\" (1978). He reprised the role in \"Evil Under the Sun\" (1982) and \"Appointment with Death\" (1988).\nChristie's daughter Rosalind Hicks observed Ustinov during a rehearsal and said, \"That's not Poirot! He isn't at all like that!\" Ustinov overheard and remarked \"He is \"now!\"\"\nHe appeared again as Poirot in three made-for-television movies: \"Thirteen at Dinner\" (1985), \"Dead Man's Folly\" (1986), and \"Murder in Three Acts\" (1986). Earlier adaptations were set during the time in which the novels were written, but these TV movies were set in the contemporary era. The first of these was based on \"Lord Edgware Dies\" and was made by Warner Bros. It also starred Faye Dunaway, with David Suchet as Inspector Japp, just before Suchet began to play Poirot. David Suchet considers his performance as Japp to be \"possibly the worst performance of [his] career\".\nKenneth Branagh.\nIn 2017, Kenneth Branagh directed &amp; starred in another film adaptation. Branagh has been confirmed to return for the sequel, \"Death on the Nile.\" \nTelevision.\nDavid Suchet.\nDavid Suchet starred as Poirot in the ITV series \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" from 1989 until June 2013, when he announced that he was bidding farewell to the role. \"No one could've guessed then that the series would span a quarter-century or that the classically trained Suchet would complete the entire catalogue of whodunits featuring the eccentric Belgian investigator, including 33 novels and dozens of short stories.\" His final appearance was in an adaptation of \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\", aired on 13 November 2013. \nThe writers of the \"Binge!\" article of \"Entertainment Weekly\" Issue #1343\u201344 (26 December 2014 \u2013 3 January 2015) picked Suchet as \"Best Poirot\" in the \"Hercule Poirot &amp; Miss Marple\" timeline.\nThe episodes were shot in various locations in the UK, and foreign scenes were shot in Twickenham studios.\nAnime.\nIn 2004, NHK (Japanese public TV network) produced a 39 episode anime series titled \"Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple\", as well as a manga series under the same title released in 2005. The series, adapting several of the best-known Poirot and Marple stories, ran from 4 July 2004 through 15 May 2005, and in repeated reruns on NHK and other networks in Japan. Poirot was voiced by K\u014dtar\u014d Satomi and Miss Marple was voiced by Kaoru Yachigusa.\nRadio.\nFrom 1985 to 2007, BBC Radio 4 produced a series of twenty-seven adaptations of Poirot novels and short stories, adapted by Michael Bakewell and directed by Enyd Williams. Twenty five starred John Moffatt as Poirot; Maurice Denham and Peter Sallis played Poirot on BBC Radio 4 in the first two adaptations, \"The Mystery of the Blue Train\" and in \"Hercule Poirot's Christmas\" respectively.\nIn 1939, Orson Welles and the Mercury Players dramatised \"Roger Ackroyd\" on CBS's \"Campbell Playhouse\".\nOn 6 October 1942, the Mutual radio series \"Murder Clinic\" broadcast \"The Tragedy at Marsden Manor\" starring Maurice Tarplin as Poirot.\nA 1945 radio series of at least 13 original half-hour episodes (none of which apparently adapt any Christie stories) transferred Poirot from London to New York and starred character actor Harold Huber, perhaps better known for his appearances as a police officer in various Charlie Chan films. On 22 February 1945, \"speaking from London, Agatha Christie introduced the initial broadcast of the Poirot series via shortwave\".\nAn adaptation of \"Murder in the Mews\" was broadcast on the BBC Light Programme in March 1955 starring Richard Williams as Poirot; this program was thought lost, but was discovered in the BBC archives in 2015.\nOther audio.\nIn 2017, Audible released an original audio adaptation of \"Murder on the Orient Express\" starring Tom Conti as Poirot. The cast included Jane Asher as Mrs. Hubbard, Jay Benedict as Monsieur Bouc, Ruta Gedmintas as Countess Andrenyi, Sophie Okonedo as Mary Debenham, Eddie Marsan as Ratchett, Walles Hamonde as Hector MacQueen, Paterson Joseph as Colonel Arbuthnot, Rula Lenska as Princess Dragimiroff and Art Malik as the Narrator. According to the Publisher's Summary on Audible.com, \"sound effects [were] recorded on the Orient Express itself.\"\nParodies and references.\nIn \"Revenge of the Pink Panther\", Poirot makes a cameo appearance in a mental asylum, portrayed by Andrew Sachs and claiming to be \"the greatest detective in all of France, the greatest in all the world\".\nIn Neil Simon's \"Murder by Death\", American actor James Coco plays \"Milo Perrier\", a parody of Poirot.\nDudley Jones played Poirot in the film \"The Strange Case of the End of Civilization as We Know It\" (1977).\nIn the film \"Spice World\", Hugh Laurie plays Poirot. \nIn \"\", Poirot appears as a young boy on the train transporting Holmes and Watson. Holmes helps the boy in opening a puzzle-box, with Watson giving the boy advice about using his \"little grey cells\", giving the impression that Poirot first heard about grey cells and their uses from Dr. Watson.\nThe Belgian brewery Brasserie Ellezelloise makes a stout called \"Hercule\" with a moustachioed caricature of Hercule Poirot on the label.\nIn season 2, episode 4 of TVFPlay's Indian web series \"Permanent Roommates\", one of the characters refers to Hercule Poirot as her inspiration while she attempts to solve the mystery of the cheating spouse. Throughout the episode, she is mocked as Hercule Poirot and Agatha Christie by the suspects. TVFPlay also telecasted a spoof of Indian TV suspense drama \"CID\" as \"Qissa Missing Dimaag Ka: C.I.D Qtiyapa\". In the first episode, when Ujjwal is shown to browse for the best detectives of the world, David Suchet appears as Poirot in his search."}
{"id": "1002", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1002", "title": "Miss Marple", "text": "Miss Marple is a fictional character in Agatha Christie's crime novels and short stories. Jane Marple lives in the village of St. Mary Mead and acts as an amateur consulting detective. Often characterized as an elderly spinster, she is one of Christie's best-known characters and has been portrayed numerous times on screen. Her first appearance was in a short story published in \"The Royal Magazine\" in December 1927, \"The Tuesday Night Club\", which later became the first chapter of \"The Thirteen Problems\" (1932). Her first appearance in a full-length novel was in \"The Murder at the Vicarage\" in 1930, and her last appearance was in \"Sleeping Murder\" in 1976.\nOrigins.\nThe character of Miss Marple is based on friends of Christie's step grandmother/aunt (Margaret Miller, n\u00e9e West). Christie attributed the inspiration for the character to a number of sources, stating that Miss Marple was \"the sort of old lady who would have been rather like some of my step grandmother's Ealing cronies \u2013 old ladies whom I have met in so many villages where I have gone to stay as a girl\". Christie also used material from her fictional creation, spinster Caroline Sheppard, who appeared in \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\". When Michael Morton adapted the novel for the stage, he replaced the character of Caroline with a young girl. This change saddened Christie and she determined to give old maids a voice: Miss Marple was born.\nChristie may have taken the name from Marple railway station, through which she passed, or from Marple Hall, near her sister Margaret Watts' home at Abney Hall.\nCharacter.\nThe character of Jane Marple in the first Miss Marple book, \"The Murder at the Vicarage\", is markedly different from how she appears in later books. This early version of Miss Marple is a gleeful gossip and not an especially nice woman. The citizens of St. Mary Mead like her but are often tired by her nosy nature and how she seems to expect the worst of everyone. In later books, she becomes a kinder and more modern person.\nMiss Marple solves difficult crimes because of her shrewd intelligence, and St. Mary Mead, over her lifetime, has given her seemingly infinite examples of the negative side of human nature. Crimes always remind her of a parallel incident, although acquaintances may be bored by analogies that often lead her to a deeper realization about the true nature of a crime. She also has a remarkable ability to latch onto a casual comment and connect it to the case at hand. In several stories, she is able to rely on her acquaintance with Sir Henry Clithering, a retired commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, for official information when required.\nMiss Marple never married and has no close living relatives. Her nephew, the \"well-known author\" Raymond West, appears in some stories, including \"The Thirteen Problems\", \"Sleeping Murder\" and \"Ingots of Gold\" (which also feature his wife, Joyce Lempri\u00e8re). Raymond overestimates himself and underestimates his aunt's mental acuity. Miss Marple employs young women (including Clara, Emily, Alice, Esther, Gwenda, and Amy) from a nearby orphanage, whom she trains for service as general housemaids after the retirement of her long-time maid-housekeeper, faithful Florence. She was briefly looked after by her irritating companion, Miss Knight. In her later years, companion Cherry Baker, first introduced in \"The Mirror Crack'd From Side to Side\", lives in.\nMiss Marple has never worked for her living and is of independent means, although she benefits in her old age from the financial support of Raymond West, her nephew (\"A Caribbean Mystery\", 1964). She is not from the aristocracy or landed gentry, but is quite at home among them and would probably have been happy to describe herself as \"genteel\"; a \"gentlewoman\". Miss Marple may thus be considered a female version of that staple of British detective fiction, the gentleman detective. She demonstrates a remarkably thorough education, including some art courses that involved the study of human anatomy using human cadavers. In \"They Do It with Mirrors\" (1952), it is revealed that Miss Marple grew up in a cathedral close, and that she studied at an Italian finishing school with Americans Ruth Van Rydock and Caroline \"Carrie\" Louise Serrocold.\nWhile Miss Marple is described as \"an old lady\" in many of the stories, her age is mentioned in \"At Bertram's Hotel\", where it is said she visited the hotel when she was fourteen and almost sixty years have passed since then. Excluding \"Sleeping Murder\", forty-one years passed between the first and last-written novels, and many characters grow and age. An example would be the Vicar's nephew: in \"The Murder at the Vicarage\", the Reverend Clement's nephew Dennis is a teenager; in \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\", it is mentioned that the nephew is now grown and successful and has a career. The effects of ageing are seen on Miss Marple, such as needing a holiday after illness in \"A Caribbean Mystery\" but she is if anything more agile in \"Nemesis\", set only sixteen months later.\nMiss Marple's background is described in some detail, albeit in glimpses across the novels and short stories in which she appears. She has a very large family, including a sister, the mother of Raymond and Mabel Denham, a young woman who was accused of poisoning her husband Geoffrey (\"The Thumb Mark of St. Peter\").\nBibliography.\nMiss Marple short story collections.\nMiss Marple also appears in \"Greenshaw's Folly\", a short story included as part of the Poirot collection \"The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding\" (1960). Four stories in the \"Three Blind Mice\" collection (1950) feature Miss Marple: \"Strange Jest\", \"Tape-Measure Murder\", \"The Case of the Caretaker\", and \"The Case of the Perfect Maid\".\nThe Autograph edition of \"Miss Marple's Final Cases\" includes the eight in the original plus \"Greenshaw's Folly\".\nStage.\nA stage adaptation of \"Murder at the Vicarage\", by Moie Charles and Barbara Toy, was first seen at Northampton on 17 October 1949; it was directed by Reginald Tate, starred the 35-year-old Barbara Mullen as Miss Marple, and after touring, reached the Playhouse Theatre in London's West End on 14 December. Having run till late March 1950, it then went on tour again.\nIn July 1974, Mullen (by then 60) returned to the role in another national tour of the same play, culminating 12 months later when the show opened at London's Savoy Theatre on 28 July 1975. At the end of March 1976 the Miss Marple role was taken over by Avril Angers, after which the production transferred to the Fortune Theatre on 5 July. The role then passed to Muriel Pavlow in June 1977 and to Gabrielle Hamilton late the following year; the production finally closed in October 1979.\nOn 21 September 1977, while \"Murder at the Vicarage\" was still running at the Fortune, a stage adaptation by Leslie Darbon of \"A Murder Is Announced\" opened at the Vaudeville Theatre, with Dulcie Gray as Miss Marple. The show ran to the end of September 1978 and then went on tour.\nFilms.\nMargaret Rutherford.\nJane Marple had to wait thirty-two years after her first appearance in 1930 for her first big-screen appearance, the first in a sequence of films starring Margaret Rutherford. These were successful light comedies, but were disappointing to Christie herself. Nevertheless, Agatha Christie dedicated the novel \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\" to Rutherford.\nRutherford presented the character as a bold and eccentric old lady, different from the prim and birdlike character Christie created in her novels. As penned by Christie, Miss Marple has never worked for a living, but the character as portrayed by Margaret Rutherford briefly works as a cook-housekeeper, a stage actress, a sailor and criminal reformer, and is offered the chance to run a riding establishment-cum-hotel. Her education and genteel background are hinted at when she mentions her awards at marksmanship, fencing, and equestrianism (although these hints are played for comedic value).\nRutherford played in four movies directed by George Pollock:&lt;br&gt;\n\"Murder, She Said\" (1961) was the first of four British MGM productions starring Rutherford. This film was based on the 1957 novel \"4:50 from Paddington\" (U.S. title, \"What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw!\"), and the changes made in the plot were typical of the series. In the film, Mrs. McGillicuddy is cut from the plot. Miss Marple herself sees an apparent murder committed on a train running alongside hers. Likewise, it is Miss Marple herself who poses as a maid to find out the facts of the case, not a young friend of hers who has made a business of it. Actress Joan Hickson, who played Marple in the 1984-1992 television adaptations, has a role as a housekeeper in this movie.\n\"Murder at the Gallop\" (1963), based on the 1953 Hercule Poirot novel \"After the Funeral\" (in this film, she is identified as Miss JTV Marple, though there was no indication as to what the extra initials might stand for).\n\"Murder Most Foul\" (1964), based on the 1952 Poirot novel \"Mrs McGinty's Dead\".\n\"Murder Ahoy!\" (1964). The last film is not based on any Christie work but displays a few plot elements from \"They Do It With Mirrors\" (viz., the ship is used as a reform school for wayward boys and one of the teachers uses them as a crime force), and there is a kind of salute to \"The Mousetrap\".\nThe music to all four films was composed and conducted by Ron Goodwin. The same theme is used on all four films with slight variations in each. The main theme has a distinct 1960s feel to it and is known to be a highly complex piece of music due to the quick playing of the violin. The score was written within a couple of weeks by Goodwin who was approached by Pollock after Pollock had heard about him from Stanley Black. Black had worked with Pollock on \"Stranger in Town\" in 1957 and had previously used Goodwin as his orchestrator.\nRutherford, who was 68 years old when the first film was shot in February 1961, insisted that she wear her own clothes during the filming of the movie, as well as having her real-life husband, Stringer Davis, appear alongside her as the character 'Mr Stringer'. The Rutherford films are frequently repeated on television in Germany, and in that country Miss Marple is generally identified with Rutherford's quirky portrayal.\nRutherford also appeared briefly as Miss Marple in the parodic Hercule Poirot adventure \"The Alphabet Murders\" (1965).\nAngela Lansbury.\nIn 1980, Angela Lansbury played Miss Marple in \"The Mirror Crack'd\" (EMI, directed by Guy Hamilton), based on Christie's 1962 novel. The film featured an all-star cast that included Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson, Geraldine Chaplin, Tony Curtis, and Kim Novak. Edward Fox appeared as Inspector Craddock, who did Miss Marple's legwork. Lansbury's Marple was a crisp, intelligent woman who moved stiffly and spoke in clipped tones. Unlike most incarnations of Miss Marple, this one smoked cigarettes. Lansbury would find later fame in a similar role as Jessica Fletcher.\nIta Ever.\nIn 1983, Estonian stage and film actress Ita Ever starred in the Russian language Mosfilm adaptation of Agatha Christie's novel \"A Pocket Full of Rye\" (using the Russian edition's translated title, \"The Secret of the Blackbirds\") as the character of Miss Marple. Ever has also portrayed the character of Miss Marple in the Eesti Televisioon (ETV) series \"Miss Marple Stories\" in 1990, and onstage at the Tallinn City Theatre in a production of \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\" in 2005.\nTelevision.\nAmerican TV was the setting for the first screen portrayal of Miss Marple with Gracie Fields, the British actress and singer, playing her in a 1956 episode of \"Goodyear TV Playhouse\" based on \"A Murder Is Announced\", the 1950 Christie novel.\nIn 1970, the character of Miss Marple was portrayed by Inge Langen in a West German television adaptation of \"The Murder at the Vicarage \" (\"Mord im Pfarrhaus\").\nIn 2015, CBS planned a \"much younger\" version of the character, a granddaughter who takes over a California bookstore.\nIn 2018, Miss Marple was portrayed by Yunjin Kim in the South Korean television series \"Ms. Ma, Nemesis\".\nHelen Hayes.\nAmerican stage and screen actress Helen Hayes portrayed Miss Marple in two American television films near the end of her decades-long acting career, both for CBS: \"A Caribbean Mystery\" (1983) and \"Murder with Mirrors\" (1985). Sue Grafton contributed to the screenplay of the former. Hayes's Marple was benign and chirpy. She had earlier appeared in a television film adaptation of the non-Marple Christie story \"Murder Is Easy\", playing an elderly lady somewhat similar to Miss Marple.\nJoan Hickson.\nFrom 1984 to 1992, the BBC adapted all of the original Miss Marple novels as a series titled \"Miss Marple\". Joan Hickson played the lead role. In the 1940s she had appeared on stage in an Agatha Christie play, \"Appointment with Death\", which was seen by Christie who wrote in a note to her, \"I hope one day you will play my dear Miss Marple\". She portrayed a maid in the 1937 film, \"Love from a Stranger\", which starred Ann Harding and Basil Rathbone, another Agatha Christie play adaptation. As well as portraying Miss Marple on television, Hickson also narrated a number of Miss Marple stories on audio books. In the \"Binge!\" article of \"Entertainment Weekly\" Issue #1343\u20131344 (26 December 2014 \u2013 3 January 2015), the writers picked Hickson as \"Best Marple\" in the \"Hercule Poirot &amp; Miss Marple\" timeline.\nListing of the TV series featuring Joan Hickson:\nGeraldine McEwan (2004\u20132008)/Julia McKenzie (2009\u20132013).\nBeginning in 2004, ITV broadcast a series of adaptations of Agatha Christie's books under the title \"Agatha Christie's Marple\", usually referred to as \"Marple.\" Geraldine McEwan starred in the first three series. Julia McKenzie took over the role in the fourth season.\nThe adaptations change the plots and characters of the original books (e.g. incorporating lesbian affairs, changing the identities of some killers, renaming or removing significant characters, and even using stories from other books in which Miss Marple did not originally feature). In the Geraldine McEwan series it is revealed that when she was young (portrayed by Julie Cox in a flashback), Miss Marple had an affair with a married soldier, Captain Ainsworth, who was killed in action in World War I, in December 1915. It is also said (in \"A Murder Is Announced\") that she served as an ambulance driver during World War I.\nListing of the TV series featuring Geraldine McEwan and Julia McKenzie:\nAnime.\nFrom 2004 to 2005, Japanese TV network NHK produced a 39 episode anime series titled \"Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple\", which features both Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot. Miss Marple's voice is provided by Kaoru Yachigusa. Episodes adapted both short stories and novels.\nThe anime series dramatised the following Miss Marple stories:\nRadio.\nJune Whitfield starred as Miss Marple in Michael Bakewell's adaptations of all twelve novels, broadcast on BBC Radio 4 between 1993 and 2001.\nThree short stories with Whitfield (\"Tape-Measure Murder\", \"The Case of the Perfect Maid\" and \"Sanctuary\") were later broadcast under the collective title \"Miss Marple's Final Cases\" weekly 16 \u2013 30 September 2015.\nOther appearances.\nMarple was highlighted in volume 20 of the \"Case Closed\" manga's edition of \"Gosho Aoyama's Mystery Library\", a section of the graphic novels (usually the last page) where the author introduces a different detective (or occasionally, a villain) from mystery literature, television, or other media.\nIn the 1976 Neil Simon spoof \"Murder by Death\", Miss Marple is parodied as \"Miss Marbles\" by Elsa Lanchester."}
{"id": "1004", "revid": "1012306764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1004", "title": "April", "text": "April is the fourth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar, the fifth in the early Julian, the first of four months to have a length of 30 days, and the second of five months to have a length of less than 31 days.\nApril is commonly associated with the season of autumn in parts of the Southern Hemisphere, and spring in parts of the Northern Hemisphere, where it is the seasonal equivalent to October in the Southern Hemisphere and vice versa.\nApril begins on the same day of the week as July, and also January in leap years. It ends on the same day of the week as December in every year. In common years, it begins on the same day of the week as January and October of the previous year and ends on the same day of the week as July of the previous year. In leap years, it begins on the same day of the week as May of the previous year and ends on the same day of the week as January, February, and October of the previous year. In years preceding common years, April begins on and ends on the same day of the week as September and begins on the same day of the week as December of the following year. In years preceding leap years, it begins and ends on the same day of the week as June and ends on the same day of the week as March of the following year.\nHistory.\nThe Romans gave this month the Latin name \"Aprilis\" but the derivation of this name is uncertain. The traditional etymology is from the verb \"aperire\", \"to open\", in allusion to its being the season when trees and flowers begin to \"open\", which is supported by comparison with the modern Greek use of \u03ac\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9\u03be\u03b7 (\"\u00e1nixi\") (opening) for spring. Since some of the Roman months were named in honor of divinities, and as April was sacred to the goddess Venus, her Veneralia being held on the first day, it has been suggested that Aprilis was originally her month Aphrilis, from her equivalent Greek goddess name Aphrodite (\"Aphros\"), or from the Etruscan name \"Apru\". Jacob Grimm suggests the name of a hypothetical god or hero, \"Aper\" or \"Aprus\".\nApril was the second month of the earliest Roman calendar, before \"Ianuarius\" and \"Februarius\" were added by King Numa Pompilius about 700\u00a0BC. It became the fourth month of the calendar year (the year when twelve months are displayed in order) during the time of the decemvirs about 450\u00a0BC, when it also was given 29\u00a0days. The 30th day was added during the reform of the calendar undertaken by Julius Caesar in the mid-40s\u00a0BC, which produced the Julian calendar.\nThe Anglo-Saxons called April \"\u0113astre-mona\u00fe\". The Venerable Bede says in \"The Reckoning of Time\" that this month \"\u0113astre\" is the root of the word Easter. He further states that the month was named after a goddess \"Eostre\" whose feast was in that month. It is also attested by Einhard in his work, Vita Karoli Magni.\nSt George's day is the twenty-third of the month; and St Mark's Eve, with its superstition that the ghosts of those who are doomed to die within the year will be seen to pass into the church, falls on the twenty-fourth.\nIn China the symbolic ploughing of the earth by the emperor and princes of the blood took place in their third month, which frequently corresponds to April. In Finnish April is \"huhtikuu\", meaning \"slash-and-burn moon\", when gymnosperms for beat and burn clearing of farmland were felled.\nIn Slovene, the most established traditional name is \"mali traven\", meaning the month when plants start growing. It was first written in 1466 in the \u0160kofja Loka manuscript.\nThe month Aprilis had 30\u00a0days; Numa Pompilius made it 29\u00a0days long; finally Julius Caesar\u2019s calendar reform made it again 30\u00a0days long, which was not changed in the calendar revision of Augustus Caesar in 8\u00a0BC. Additionally in the Spanish colony, Las Islas Filipinas (now known as the Philippines), the month Aprilis had a significant meaning to the life of the natives as it was associated to the influence of the Chinese during the Spanish colonial period. The importance of this aspect to the lives of the natives was formerly associated to an event called \"Abril na Ikaw\" as it is closely linked to the famous trader, April Yu.\nIn Ancient Rome, the festival of Cerealia was held for seven days from mid-to-late April, but exact dates are uncertain. Feriae Latinae was also held in April, with the date varying. Other ancient Roman observances include Veneralia (April 1), Megalesia (April 10\u201316), Fordicidia (April 15), Parilia (April 21), Vinalia Urbana, Robigalia, and Serapia were celebrated on (April 25). Floralia was held April 27 during the Republican era, or April 28 on the Julian calendar, and lasted until May 3. However, these dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nThe Lyrids meteor shower appears on April 16 \u2013 April 26 each year, with the peak generally occurring on April 22. Eta Aquariids meteor shower also appears in April. It is visible from about April 21 to about May 20 each year with peak activity on or around May 6. The Pi Puppids appear on April 23, but only in years around the parent comet's perihelion date. The Virginids also shower at various dates in April.\nThe \"Days of April\" (\"journ\u00e9es d'avril\") is a name appropriated in French history to a series of insurrections at Lyons, Paris and elsewhere, against the government of Louis Philippe in 1834, which led to violent repressive measures, and to a famous trial known as the \"proc\u00e8s d'avril\".\nApril symbols.\nApril's birthstone is the diamond.\nApril observances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance.\"\nMonth-long observances.\nIn Catholic and Orthodox tradition, April is the Month of the Resurrection of the Lord. April and March are the months in which is celebrated the moveable feast of Easter Sunday.\nNon-Gregorian observances: 2021.\n\"(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)\""}
{"id": "1005", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1005", "title": "August", "text": "August is the eighth month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars, and the fifth of seven months to have a length of 31 days. It was originally named \"Sextilis\" in Latin because it was the sixth month in the original ten-month Roman calendar under Romulus in 753 BC, with March being the first month of the year. About 700\u00a0BC, it became the eighth month when January and February were added to the year before March by King Numa Pompilius, who also gave it 29 days. Julius Caesar added two days when he created the Julian calendar in 46 BC (708 AUC), giving it its modern length of 31 days. In 8 BC, it was renamed in honor of Augustus. According to a Senatus consultum quoted by Macrobius, he chose this month because it was the time of several of his great triumphs, including the conquest of Egypt.\nNo other month starts on the same day of the week as August in common years, but in leap years, August starts on the same day of the week as February. August ends on the same day of the week as November every year. In years preceding common years, it starts and ends on the same day of the week as May of the following year. In years preceding leap years, it begins and ends on the same day of the week as October of the following year and ends on the same day of the week as February of the following year. In common years preceded by any year, August begins on the same day of the week as March and November and ends on the same day of the week as March and June. In leap years, it begins on the same day of the week as June of the previous year and ends on the same day of the week as September of the previous year. In common years preceded by common years, August begins on the same day of the week as February of the previous year.\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, August is the seasonal equivalent of February in the Northern Hemisphere. In the Northern Hemisphere, August falls in the season of summer. In the Southern Hemisphere, the month falls during the season of winter. In many European countries, August is the holiday month for most workers. Numerous religious holidays occurred during August in ancient Rome.\nCertain meteor showers take place in August. The Kappa Cygnids take place in August, with the dates varying each year. The Alpha Capricornids meteor shower takes place as early as July 10 and ends at around August 10, and the Southern Delta Aquariids take place from mid-July to mid-August, with the peak usually around July 28\u201329. The Perseids, a major meteor shower, typically takes place between July 17 and August 24, with the days of the peak varying yearly. The star cluster of Messier 30 is best observed around August.\nAmong the aborigines of the Canary Islands, especially among the Guanches of Tenerife, the month of August received in the name of Be\u00f1esmer or Be\u00f1esmen, which was also the harvest festival held this month.\nObservances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nFurther reading.\n[[Category:August| ]]\n[[Category:Months|*08]]"}
{"id": "1006", "revid": "1273126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1006", "title": "Aaron", "text": "Aaron ( or ; \"\u2019Ah\u0103r\u014dn\") was a prophet, high priest, and the elder brother of Moses in the Abrahamic religions. Knowledge of Aaron, along with his brother Moses, comes exclusively from religious texts, such as the Bible and Quran.\nThe Hebrew Bible relates that, unlike Moses, who grew up in the Egyptian royal court, Aaron and his elder sister Miriam remained with their kinsmen in the eastern border-land of Egypt (Goshen). When Moses first confronted the Egyptian king about the Israelites, Aaron served as his brother's spokesman (\"prophet\") to the Pharaoh. Part of the Law (Torah) that Moses received from God at Sinai granted Aaron the priesthood for himself and his male descendants, and he became the first High Priest of the Israelites.\nAaron died before the Israelites crossed the North Jordan river and he was buried on Mount Hor (Numbers 33:39; Deuteronomy 10:6 says he died and was buried at Moserah). Aaron is also mentioned in the New Testament of the Bible.\nBiblical narrative.\nAccording to the Book of Exodus, Aaron first functioned as Moses' assistant. Because Moses complained that he could not speak well, God appointed Aaron as Moses' \"prophet\" (Exodus 4:10-17; 7:1). At the command of Moses, he let his rod turn into a snake. Then he stretched out his rod in order to bring on the first three plagues. After that, Moses tended to act and speak for himself.\nDuring the journey in the wilderness, Aaron was not always prominent or active. At the battle with Amalek, he was chosen with Hur to support the hand of Moses that held the \"rod of God\". When the revelation was given to Moses at biblical Mount Sinai, he headed the elders of Israel who accompanied Moses on the way to the summit. While Joshua went with Moses to the top, however, Aaron and Hur remained below to look after the people. From here on in Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, Joshua appears in the role of Moses' assistant while Aaron functions instead as the first high priest.\nHigh Priest.\nThe books of Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers maintain that Aaron received from God a monopoly over the priesthood for himself and his male descendants (Exodus 28:1). The family of Aaron had the exclusive right and responsibility to make offerings on the altar to Yahweh. The rest of his tribe, the Levites, were given subordinate responsibilities within the sanctuary (Numbers 3). Moses anointed and consecrated Aaron and his sons to the priesthood, and arrayed them in the robes of office (Leviticus 8; cf. Exodus 28\u201329). He also related to them God's detailed instructions for performing their duties while the rest of the Israelites listened (Leviticus 1\u20137, 11\u201327). Aaron and his successors as high priest were given control over the Urim and Thummim by which the will of God could be determined (Exodus 28:30). God commissioned the Aaronide priests to distinguish the holy from the common and the clean from the unclean, and to teach the divine laws (the Torah) to the Israelites (Leviticus 10:10-11). The priests were also commissioned to bless the people (Numbers 6:22-27). When Aaron completed the altar offerings for the first time and, with Moses, \"blessed the people: and the glory of the appeared unto all the people: And there came a fire out from before the , and consumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat [which] when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces\" (Leviticus 9:23-24). In this way, the institution of the Aaronide priesthood was established.\nIn later books of the Hebrew Bible, Aaron and his kin are not mentioned very often except in literature dating to the Babylonian captivity and later. The books of Judges, Samuel and Kings mention priests and Levites, but do not mention the Aaronides in particular. The Book of Ezekiel, which devotes much attention to priestly matters, calls the priestly upper class the Zadokites after one of King David's priests. It does reflect a two-tier priesthood with the Levites in subordinate position. A two-tier hierarchy of Aaronides and Levites appears in Ezra, Nehemiah and Chronicles. As a result, many historians think that Aaronide families did not control the priesthood in pre-exilic Israel. What is clear is that high priests claiming Aaronide descent dominated the Second Temple period. Most scholars think the Torah reached its final form early in this period, which may account for Aaron's prominence in Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers. \nConflicts.\nAaron plays a leading role in several stories of conflicts during Israel's wilderness wanderings. During the prolonged absence of Moses on Mount Sinai, the people provoked Aaron to make a golden calf. (Exodus 32:1-6). This incident nearly caused God to destroy the Israelites (Exodus 32:10). Moses successfully intervened, but then led the loyal Levites in executing many of the culprits; a plague afflicted those who were left (Exodus 32:25-35). Aaron, however, escaped punishment for his role in the affair, because of the intercession of Moses according to Deuteronomy 9:20. Later retellings of this story almost always excuse Aaron for his role. For example, in rabbinic sources and in the Quran, Aaron was not the idol-maker and upon Moses' return begged his pardon because he felt mortally threatened by the Israelites (Quran 7:142-152).\nOn the day of Aaron's consecration, his oldest sons, Nadab and Abihu, were burned up by divine fire because they offered \"strange\" incense (Leviticus 10:1-3). Most interpreters think this story reflects a conflict between priestly families some time in Israel's past. Others argue that the story simply shows what can happen if the priests do not follow God's instructions given through Moses.\nThe Torah generally depicts the siblings, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, as the leaders of Israel after the Exodus, a view also reflected in the biblical Book of Micah. Numbers 12, however, reports that on one occasion, Aaron and Miriam complained about Moses' exclusive claim to be the 's prophet. Their presumption was rebuffed by God who affirmed Moses' uniqueness as the one with whom the spoke face to face. Miriam was punished with a skin disease (\"tzaraath\") that turned her skin white. Aaron pleaded with Moses to intercede for her, and Miriam, after seven days' quarantine, was healed. Aaron once again escaped any retribution.\nAccording to Numbers 16\u201317, a Levite named Korah led many in challenging Aaron's exclusive claim to the priesthood. When the rebels were punished by being swallowed up by the earth (Numbers 16:25-35), Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was commissioned to take charge of the censers of the dead priests. And when a plague broke out among the people who had sympathized with the rebels, Aaron, at the command of Moses, took his censer and stood between the living and the dead till the plague abated (Numbers 17:1-15, 16:36-50).\nTo emphasize the validity of the Levites' claim to the offerings and tithes of the Israelites, Moses collected a rod from the leaders of each tribe in Israel and laid the twelve rods overnight in the tent of meeting. The next morning, Aaron's rod was found to have budded and blossomed and produced ripe almonds (Numbers 17:8). The following chapter then details the distinction between Aaron's family and the rest of the Levites: while all the Levites (and only Levites) were devoted to the care of the sanctuary, charge of its interior and the altar was committed to the Aaronites alone (Numbers 18:1-7).\nDeath.\nAaron, like Moses, was not permitted to enter Canaan with the Israelites because the two brothers showed impatience at Meribah (Kadesh) in the last year of the desert pilgrimage (Numbers 20:12-13), when Moses brought water out of a rock to quench the people's thirst. Although they had been commanded to speak to the rock, Moses struck it with the staff twice, which was construed as displaying a lack of deference to the (Numbers 20:7-11).\nThere are two accounts of the death of Aaron in the Torah. Numbers says that soon after the incident at Meribah, Aaron with his son Eleazar and Moses ascended Mount Hor. There Moses stripped Aaron of his priestly garments and transferred them to Eleazar. Aaron died on the summit of the mountain, and the people mourned for him thirty days (Numbers 20:22-29; compare 33:38-39). The other account is found in Deuteronomy 10:6, where Aaron died at Moserah and was buried. There is a significant amount of travel between these two points, as the itinerary in Numbers 33:31\u201337 records seven stages between Moseroth (Mosera) and Mount Hor. Aaron died on the 1st of Av and was 123 at the time of his death.\nDescendants.\nAaron married Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon (Exodus 6:23) of the tribe of Judah. The sons of Aaron were Eleazar, Ithamar, and Nadab and Abihu. A descendant of Aaron is an Aaronite, or Kohen, meaning Priest. Any non-Aaronic Levite\u2014i.e., descended from Levi but not from Aaron\u2014assisted the Levitical priests of the family of Aaron in the care of the tabernacle; later of the temple.\nThe Gospel of Luke records that both Zechariah and Elizabeth and therefore their son John the Baptist were descendants of Aaron.\nIn religious traditions.\nJewish rabbinic literature.\nThe older prophets and prophetical writers beheld in their priests the representatives of a religious form inferior to the prophetic truth; men without the spirit of God and lacking the will-power requisite to resist the multitude in its idolatrous proclivities. Thus Aaron, the first priest, ranks below Moses: he is his mouthpiece, and the executor of the will of God revealed through Moses, although it is pointed out that it is said fifteen times in the Torah that \"the Lord spoke to Moses \"and\" Aaron.\"\nUnder the influence of the priesthood that shaped the destinies of the nation under Persian rule, a different ideal of the priest was formed, according to , and the prevailing tendency was to place Aaron on a footing equal with Moses. \"At times Aaron, and at other times Moses, is mentioned first in Scripture\u2014this is to show that they were of equal rank,\" says the Mekhilta of Rabbi Ishmael, which strongly implies this when introducing in its record of renowned men the glowing description of Aaron's ministration.\nIn fulfillment of the promise of peaceful life, symbolized by the pouring of oil upon his head, Aaron's death, as described in the aggadah, was of a wonderful tranquility. Accompanied by Moses, his brother, and by Eleazar, his son, Aaron went to the summit of Mount Hor, where the rock suddenly opened before him and a beautiful cave lit by a lamp presented itself to his view. Moses said, \"Take off your priestly raiment and place it upon your son Eleazar! and then follow me.\" Aaron did as commanded; and they entered the cave, where was prepared a bed around which angels stood. \"Go lie down upon thy bed, my brother,\" Moses continued; and Aaron obeyed without a murmur. Then his soul departed as if by a kiss from God. The cave closed behind Moses as he left; and he went down the hill with Eleazar, with garments rent, and crying: \"Alas, Aaron, my brother! thou, the pillar of supplication of Israel!\" When the Israelites cried in bewilderment, \"Where is Aaron?\" angels were seen carrying Aaron's bier through the air. A voice was then heard saying: \"The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found on his lips: he walked with me in righteousness, and brought many back from sin\" (Malachi 2:6). He died on the first of Av. The pillar of cloud which proceeded in front of Israel's camp disappeared at Aaron's death. The seeming contradiction between Numbers 20:22 et seq. and Deuteronomy 10:6 is solved by the rabbis in the following manner: Aaron's death on Mount Hor was marked by the defeat of the people in a war with the king of Arad, in consequence of which the Israelites fled, marching seven stations backward to Mosera, where they performed the rites of mourning for Aaron; wherefore it is said: \"There [at Mosera] died Aaron.\"\nThe rabbis particularly praise the brotherly sentiment between Aaron and Moses. When Moses was appointed ruler and Aaron high priest, neither betrayed any jealousy; instead they rejoiced in each other's greatness. When Moses at first declined to go to Pharaoh, saying: \"O my Lord, send, I pray, by the hand of him whom you will send\" (Exodus 4:13), he was unwilling to deprive Aaron of the high position the latter had held for so many years; but the Lord reassured him, saying: \"Behold, when he sees you, he will be glad in his heart\" (). Indeed, Aaron was to find his reward, says Shimon bar Yochai; for that heart which had leaped with joy over his younger brother's rise to glory greater than his was decorated with the Urim and Thummim, which were to \"be upon Aaron's heart when he goeth in before the Lord\". Moses and Aaron met in gladness of heart, kissing each other as true brothers, and of them it is written: \"Behold how good and how pleasant [it is] for brethren to dwell together in unity!\" (Psalm 133:1). Of them it is said: \"Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed [each other]\"; for Moses stood for righteousness (Deuteronomy 33:21) and Aaron for peace (). Again, mercy was personified in Aaron, according to Deuteronomy 33:8, and truth in Moses, according to Numbers 12:7.\nWhen Moses poured the oil of anointment upon the head of Aaron, Aaron modestly shrank back and said: \"Who knows whether I have not cast some blemish upon this sacred oil so as to forfeit this high office.\" Then the Shekhinah spoke the words: \"Behold the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard of Aaron, that even went down to the skirts of his garment, is as pure as the dew of Hermon\" ().\nAccording to Tanhuma, Aaron's activity as a prophet began earlier than that of Moses. Hillel held Aaron up as an example, saying: \"Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace; love your fellow creatures and draw them nigh unto the Law!\" This is further illustrated by the tradition that Aaron was an ideal priest of the people, far more beloved for his kindly ways than was Moses. While Moses was stern and uncompromising, brooking no wrong, Aaron went about as peacemaker, reconciling man and wife when he saw them estranged, or a man with his neighbor when they quarreled, and winning evil-doers back into the right way by his friendly intercourse. As a result, Aaron's death was more intensely mourned than Moses': when Aaron died the whole house of Israel wept, including the women, (Numbers 20:29) while Moses was bewailed by \"the sons of Israel\" only (Deuteronomy 34:8). Even in the making of the Golden Calf the rabbis find extenuating circumstances for Aaron. His fortitude and silent submission to the will of God on the loss of his two sons are referred to as an excellent example to men how to glorify God in the midst of great affliction. Especially significant are the words represented as being spoken by God after the princes of the Twelve Tribes had brought their dedication offerings into the newly reared Tabernacle: \"Say to thy brother Aaron: Greater than the gifts of the princes is thy gift; for thou art called upon to kindle the light, and, while the sacrifices shall last only as long as the Temple lasts, thy light shall last forever.\"\nChristianity.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox and Maronite churches, Aaron is venerated as a saint whose feast day is shared with his brother Moses and celebrated on September 4. (Those churches that follow the traditional Julian Calendar celebrate this day on September 17 of the modern Gregorian Calendar). Aaron is also commemorated with other Old Testament saints on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, the Sunday before Christmas.\nAaron is commemorated as one of the Holy Forefathers in the Calendar of Saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on July 30. He is commemorated on July 1 in the modern Latin calendar and in the Syriac Calendar.\nLatter Day Saints.\nIn The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Aaronic order is the lesser order of priesthood, comprising the grades (from lowest to highest) of deacon, teacher, and priest. The chief office of the Aaronic priesthood is the presiding bishopric; the head of the priesthood is the bishop. Each ward includes a quorum of one or more of each office of the Aaronic priesthood.\nIn the Community of Christ, the Aaronic order of priesthood is regarded as an appendage to the Melchisedec order, and consists of the priesthood offices of deacon, teacher, and priest. While differing in responsibilities, these offices, along with those of the Melchisidec order, are regarded as equal before God.\nIslam.\nAaron (Arabic: \u0647\u0627\u0631\u0648\u0646, \"H\u0101r\u016bn\" or \"Haron\") is also mentioned in the Quran as a prophet of God. The Quran praises Aaron repeatedly, calling him a \"believing servant\" as well as one who was \"guided\" and one of the \"victors\". Aaron is important in Islam for his role in the events of the Exodus, in which, according to the Quran and Islamic belief, he preached with his elder brother, Moses, to the Pharaoh of the Exodus. \nAaron's significance in Islam, however, is not limited to his role as the helper of Moses. Islamic tradition also accords Aaron the role of a patriarch, as tradition records that the priestly descent came through Aaron's lineage, which included the entire House of Amran.\nAaron in the Quran.\nThe Quran contains numerous references to Aaron (Arabic: \u0647\u0627\u0631\u0648\u0646 \"H\u0101r\u016bn\"), both by name and without name. It says that he was a descendant of Abraham (Quran 4: 163) and makes it clear that both he and Moses were sent together to warn the Pharaoh about God's punishment (Quran 10: 75). It further adds that Moses had earlier prayed to God to strengthen his own ministry with Aaron () and that Aaron helped Moses as he too was a prophet (), and very eloquent in matters of speech and discourse (Quran 28: 34). The Quran adds that both Moses and Aaron were entrusted to establish places of dwelling for the Israelites in Egypt, and to convert those houses into places of worship for God (Quran 10: 87).\nThe incident of the Golden Calf as it is narrated in the Quran paints Aaron in a positive light. The Quran says that Aaron was entrusted the leadership of Israel while Moses was up on (, Mount Sinai) for a period of forty days (Quran 7: 142). It adds that Aaron tried his best to stop the worship of the Golden Calf, which was built not by Aaron but by a wicked man by the name of 'As-Samiri' (Quran 19: 50). When Moses returned from Mount Sinai, he rebuked Aaron for allowing the worship of the idol, to which Aaron pleaded with Moses to not blame him when he had no role in its construction (Quran 7: 150). The Quran then adds that Moses here lamented the sins of Israel, and said that he only had power over himself and Aaron (Quran 5: 25).\nAaron is later commemorated in the Quran as one who had a \"clear authority\" (Quran 23: 45) and one who was \"guided to the Right Path\" (Quran 37: 118). It further adds that Aaron's memory was left for people who came after him (Quran 37: 119) and he is blessed by God along with his brother (Quran 37: 120). The Quran also says that people called \u2018Isa's mother Maryam (, Mary) a \"sister of Harun\" (Quran 19: 28). Muslim scholars debated as to who exactly this \"Harun\" was in terms of his historical persona, with some saying that it was a reference to Aaron of the Exodus, and the term \"sister\" designating only a metaphorical or spiritual link between the two figures, all the more evident when Mary was a descendant of the priestly lineage of Aaron, while others held it to be another righteous man living at the time of Christ by the name of \"Aaron\". Most scholars have agreed to the former perspective, and have linked Mary spiritually with the actual sister of Aaron, her namesake Miryam (, ), whom she resembled in many ways. The Quran also narrates that, centuries later, when the \"Tabut\" (, Ark of the Covenant) returned to Israel, it contained \"relics from the family of Moses and relics from the family of Aaron\" (Quran 2: 248).\nAaron in Muhammad's time.\nMuhammad, in many of his sayings, speaks of Aaron. In the event of the Mi'raj, his miraculous ascension through the Heavens, Muhammad is said to have encountered Aaron in the fifth heaven. According to old scholars, including Ibn Hisham, Muhammad, in particular, mentioned the beauty of Aaron when he encountered him in Heaven. Martin Lings, in his biographical \"Muhammad\", speaks of Muhammad's wonderment at seeing fellow prophets in their heavenly glory:\nAaron was also mentioned by Muhammad in likeness to \u2018Ali. Muhammad had left \u2018Ali to look after his family, but the hypocrites of the time begun to spread the rumor that the prophet found \u2018Ali a burden and was relieved to be rid of his presence. \u2018Ali, grieved at hearing this wicked taunt, told Muhammad what the local people were saying. In reply, the Prophet said: \"They lie, I bade thee remain for the sake of what I had left behind me. So return and represent me in my family and in thine. Art thou not content, O \u2018Ali, that thou should be unto me as Aaron was unto Moses, save that after me there is no prophet.\"\nTomb of Aaron.\nAccording to Islamic tradition, the tomb of Aaron is located on \"Jabal Harun\" (, Mountain of Aaron), near Petra in Jordan. At above sea-level, it is the highest peak in the area; and it is a place of great sanctity to the local people for here. A 14th-century Mamluk mosque stands here with its white dome visible from most areas in and around Petra.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, although his father is described as both an apostle and a prophet, Aaron is merely described as a prophet. The Kitab-I-Iqan describes Imran as being his father.\nArt history.\nAaron appears paired with Moses frequently in Jewish and Christian art, especially in the illustrations of manuscript and printed Bibles. He can usually be distinguished by his priestly vestments, especially his turban or miter and jeweled breastplate. He frequently holds a censor or, sometimes, his flowering rod. (See at Wikimedia Commons.) Aaron also appears in scenes depicting the wilderness Tabernacle and its altar, as already in the third-century frescos in the synagogue at Dura-Europos in Syria. An eleventh-century portable silver altar from Fulda, Germany depicts Aaron with his censor, and is located in the Mus\u00e9e National de l\u2019Age M\u00e9di\u00e9vale in Paris. This is also how he appears in the frontispieces of early printed Passover Haggadot and occasionally in church sculptures. Aaron has rarely been the subject of portraits, such as those by Anton Kern [1710\u20131747] and by Pier Francesco Mola [c. 1650]. Christian artists sometimes portray Aaron as a prophet (Exod. 7:1) holding a scroll, as in a twelfth-century sculpture from the Cathedral of Noyon in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York and often in Eastern Orthodox icons. Illustrations of the Golden Calf story usually include him as well\u2014most notably in Nicolas Poussin's \"The Adoration of the Golden Calf\" (ca. 1633\u201334, National Gallery London). Finally, some artists interested in validating later priesthoods have painted the ordination of Aaron and his sons (Leviticus 8). Harry Anderson's realistic portrayal is often reproduced in the literature of the Latter Day Saints."}
{"id": "1008", "revid": "8271180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1008", "title": "April 6", "text": ""}
{"id": "1009", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1009", "title": "April 12", "text": ""}
{"id": "1010", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1010", "title": "April 15", "text": ""}
{"id": "1011", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1011", "title": "April 30", "text": "It is the last day of April."}
{"id": "1012", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1012", "title": "August 22", "text": ""}
{"id": "1013", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1013", "title": "August 27", "text": ""}
{"id": "1014", "revid": "6320553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1014", "title": "Alcohol", "text": "In chemistry, alcohol is an organic compound that carries at least one hydroxyl functional group (\u2212OH) bound to a saturated carbon atom. The term alcohol originally referred to the primary alcohol ethanol (ethyl alcohol), which is used as a drug and is the main alcohol present in alcoholic drinks. An important class of alcohols, of which methanol and ethanol are the simplest members, includes all compounds for which the general formula is CHOH. Simple monoalcohols that are the subject of this article include primary (RCHOH), secondary (RCHOH) and tertiary (RCOH) alcohols.\nThe suffix \"-ol\" appears in the IUPAC chemical name of all substances where the hydroxyl group is the functional group with the highest priority. When a higher priority group is present in the compound, the prefix \"hydroxy-\" is used in its IUPAC name. The suffix \"-ol\" in non-IUPAC names (such as paracetamol or cholesterol) also typically indicates that the substance is an alcohol. However, many substances that contain hydroxyl functional groups (particularly sugars, such as glucose and sucrose) have names which include neither the suffix \"-ol\", nor the prefix \"hydroxy-\". \nHistory.\nThe inflammable nature of the exhalations of wine was already known to ancient natural philosophers such as Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE), Theophrastus (c. 371\u2013287 BCE), and Pliny the Elder (23/24\u201379 CE). However, this did not immediately lead to the isolation of alcohol, even despite the development of more advanced distillation techniques in second- and third-century Roman Egypt. An important recognition, first found in one of the writings attributed to J\u0101bir ibn \u1e24ayy\u0101n (ninth century CE), was that by adding salt to boiling wine, which increases the wine's relative volatility, the flammability of the resulting vapors may be enhanced. The distillation of wine is attested in Arabic works attributed to al-Kind\u012b (c. 801\u2013873 CE) and to al-F\u0101r\u0101b\u012b (c. 872\u2013950), and in the 28th book of al-Zahr\u0101w\u012b's (Latin: Abulcasis, 936\u20131013) \"Kit\u0101b al-Ta\u1e63r\u012bf\" (later translated into Latin as \"Liber servatoris\"). In the twelfth century, recipes for the production of \"aqua ardens\" (\"burning water\", i.e., alcohol) by distilling wine with salt started to appear in a number of Latin works, and by the end of the thirteenth century it had become a widely known substance among Western European chemists. Its medicinal properties were studied by Arnald of Villanova (1240\u20131311 CE) and John of Rupescissa (c. 1310\u20131366), the latter of whom regarded it as a life-preserving substance able to prevent all diseases (the \"aqua vitae\" or \"water of life\", also called by John the \"quintessence\" of wine).\nNomenclature.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"alcohol\" is from the Arabic \"kohl\" (), a powder used as an eyeliner. Al- is the Arabic definite article, equivalent to \"the\" in English. \"Alcohol\" was originally used for the very fine powder produced by the sublimation of the natural mineral stibnite to form antimony trisulfide . It was considered to be the essence or \"spirit\" of this mineral. It was used as an antiseptic, eyeliner, and cosmetic. The meaning of alcohol was extended to distilled substances in general, and then narrowed to ethanol, when \"spirits\" was a synonym for hard liquor.\nBartholomew Traheron, in his 1543 translation of John of Vigo, introduces the word as a term used by \"barbarous\" authors for \"fine powder.\" Vigo wrote: \"the barbarous auctours use alcohol, or (as I fynde it sometymes wryten) alcofoll, for moost fine poudre.\"\nThe 1657 \"Lexicon Chymicum\", by William Johnson glosses the word as \"antimonium sive stibium.\" By extension, the word came to refer to any fluid obtained by distillation, including \"alcohol of wine,\" the distilled essence of wine. Libavius in \"Alchymia\" (1594) refers to \"vini alcohol vel vinum alcalisatum\". Johnson (1657) glosses \"alcohol vini\" as \"quando omnis superfluitas vini a vino separatur, ita ut accensum ardeat donec totum consumatur, nihilque f\u00e6cum aut phlegmatis in fundo remaneat.\" The word's meaning became restricted to \"spirit of wine\" (the chemical known today as ethanol) in the 18th century and was extended to the class of substances so-called as \"alcohols\" in modern chemistry after 1850.\nThe term \"ethanol\" was invented in 1892, blending \"ethane\" with the \"-ol\" ending of \"alcohol\", which was generalized as a libfix.\nSystematic names.\nIUPAC nomenclature is used in scientific publications and where precise identification of the substance is important, especially in cases where the relative complexity of the molecule does not make such a systematic name unwieldy. In naming simple alcohols, the name of the alkane chain loses the terminal \"e\" and adds the suffix \"-ol\", \"e.g.\", as in \"ethanol\" from the alkane chain name \"ethane\". When necessary, the position of the hydroxyl group is indicated by a number between the alkane name and the \"-ol\": propan-1-ol for , propan-2-ol for . If a higher priority group is present (such as an aldehyde, ketone, or carboxylic acid), then the prefix \"hydroxy-\"is used, e.g., as in 1-hydroxy-2-propanone ().\nIn cases where the OH functional group is bonded to an sp2 carbon on an aromatic ring the molecule is known as a phenol, and is named using the IUPAC rules for naming phenols.\nCommon names.\nIn other less formal contexts, an alcohol is often called with the name of the corresponding alkyl group followed by the word \"alcohol\", e.g., methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol. Propyl alcohol may be \"n\"-propyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol, depending on whether the hydroxyl group is bonded to the end or middle carbon on the straight propane chain. As described under systematic naming, if another group on the molecule takes priority, the alcohol moiety is often indicated using the \"hydroxy-\" prefix.\nAlcohols are then classified into primary, secondary (\"sec-\", \"s-\"), and tertiary (\"tert-\", \"t-\"), based upon the number of carbon atoms connected to the carbon atom that bears the hydroxyl functional group. (The respective numeric shorthands 1\u00b0, 2\u00b0, and 3\u00b0 are also sometimes used in informal settings.) The primary alcohols have general formulas RCHOH. The simplest primary alcohol is methanol (CHOH), for which R=H, and the next is ethanol, for which R=CH, the methyl group. Secondary alcohols are those of the form RR'CHOH, the simplest of which is 2-propanol (R=R'=CH). For the tertiary alcohols the general form is RR'R\"COH. The simplest example is tert-butanol (2-methylpropan-2-ol), for which each of R, R', and R\" is CH. In these shorthands, R, R', and R\" represent substituents, alkyl or other attached, generally organic groups.\nIn archaic nomenclature, alcohols can be named as derivatives of methanol using \"-carbinol\" as the ending. For instance, (CH)COH can be named trimethylcarbinol.\nApplications.\nAlcohols have a long history of myriad uses. For simple mono-alcohols, which is the focus on this article, the following are most important industrial alcohols:\nMethanol is the most common industrial alcohol, with about 12 million tons/y produced in 1980. The combined capacity of the other alcohols is about the same, distributed roughly equally.\nToxicity.\nWith respect to acute toxicity, simple alcohols have low acute toxicities. Doses of several milliliters are tolerated. For pentanols, hexanols, octanols and longer alcohols, LD50 range from 2\u20135 g/kg (rats, oral). Methanol and ethanol are less acutely toxic. All alcohols are mild skin irritants.\nThe metabolism of methanol (and ethylene glycol) is affected by the presence of ethanol, which has a higher affinity for liver alcohol dehydrogenase. In this way methanol will be excreted intact in urine.\nPhysical properties.\nIn general, the hydroxyl group makes alcohols polar. Those groups can form hydrogen bonds to one another and to most other compounds. Owing to the presence of the polar OH alcohols are more water-soluble than simple hydrocarbons. Methanol, ethanol, and propanol are miscible in water. Butanol, with a four-carbon chain, is moderately soluble.\nBecause of hydrogen bonding, alcohols tend to have higher boiling points than comparable hydrocarbons and ethers. The boiling point of the alcohol ethanol is 78.29\u00a0\u00b0C, compared to 69\u00a0\u00b0C for the hydrocarbon hexane, and 34.6\u00a0\u00b0C for diethyl ether.\nOccurrence in nature.\nSimple alcohols are found widely in nature. Ethanol is the most prominent because it is the product of fermentation, a major energy-producing pathway. The other simple alcohols are formed in only trace amounts. More complex alcohols however are pervasive, as manifested in sugars, some amino acids, and fatty acids.\nProduction.\nZiegler and oxo processes.\nIn the Ziegler process, linear alcohols are produced from ethylene and triethylaluminium followed by oxidation and hydrolysis. An idealized synthesis of 1-octanol is shown:\nThe process generates a range of alcohols that are separated by distillation.\nMany higher alcohols are produced by hydroformylation of alkenes followed by hydrogenation. When applied to a terminal alkene, as is common, one typically obtains a linear alcohol:\nSuch processes give fatty alcohols, which are useful for detergents.\nHydration reactions.\nSome low molecular weight alcohols of industrial importance are produced by the addition of water to alkenes. Ethanol, isopropanol, 2-butanol, and tert-butanol are produced by this general method. Two implementations are employed, the direct and indirect methods. The direct method avoids the formation of stable intermediates, typically using acid catalysts. In the indirect method, the alkene is converted to the sulfate ester, which is subsequently hydrolyzed. The direct hydration using ethylene (ethylene hydration) or other alkenes from cracking of fractions of distilled crude oil.\nHydration is also used industrially to produce the diol ethylene glycol from ethylene oxide.\nBiological routes.\nEthanol is obtained by fermentation using glucose produced from sugar from the hydrolysis of starch, in the presence of yeast and temperature of less than 37\u00a0\u00b0C to produce ethanol. For instance, such a process might proceed by the conversion of sucrose by the enzyme invertase into glucose and fructose, then the conversion of glucose by the enzyme complex zymase into ethanol and carbon dioxide.\nSeveral species of the benign bacteria in the intestine use fermentation as a form of anaerobic metabolism. This metabolic reaction produces ethanol as a waste product. Thus, human bodies contain some quantity of alcohol endogenously produced by these bacteria. In rare cases, this can be sufficient to cause \"auto-brewery syndrome\" in which intoxicating quantities of alcohol are produced.\nLike ethanol, butanol can be produced by fermentation processes. Saccharomyces yeast are known to produce these higher alcohols at temperatures above . The bacterium \"Clostridium acetobutylicum\" can feed on cellulose to produce butanol on an industrial scale.\nSubstitution.\nPrimary alkyl halides react with aqueous NaOH or KOH mainly to primary alcohols in nucleophilic aliphatic substitution. (Secondary and especially tertiary alkyl halides will give the elimination (alkene) product instead). Grignard reagents react with carbonyl groups to secondary and tertiary alcohols. Related reactions are the Barbier reaction and the Nozaki-Hiyama reaction.\nReduction.\nAldehydes or ketones are reduced with sodium borohydride or lithium aluminium hydride (after an acidic workup). Another reduction by aluminiumisopropylates is the Meerwein-Ponndorf-Verley reduction. Noyori asymmetric hydrogenation is the asymmetric reduction of \u03b2-keto-esters.\nHydrolysis.\nAlkenes engage in an acid catalysed hydration reaction using concentrated sulfuric acid as a catalyst that gives usually secondary or tertiary alcohols. The hydroboration-oxidation and oxymercuration-reduction of alkenes are more reliable in organic synthesis. Alkenes react with NBS and water in halohydrin formation reaction. Amines can be converted to diazonium salts, which are then hydrolyzed.\nThe formation of a secondary alcohol via reduction and hydration is shown:\nReactions.\nDeprotonation.\nWith a pK of around 16\u201319, they are, in general, slightly weaker acids than water. With strong bases such as sodium hydride or sodium they form salts called alkoxides, with the general formula RO\u2212 M+.\nThe acidity of alcohols is strongly affected by solvation. In the gas phase, alcohols are more acidic than in water.\nNucleophilic substitution.\nThe OH group is not a good leaving group in nucleophilic substitution reactions, so neutral alcohols do not react in such reactions. However, if the oxygen is first protonated to give R\u2212OH+, the leaving group (water) is much more stable, and the nucleophilic substitution can take place. For instance, tertiary alcohols react with hydrochloric acid to produce tertiary alkyl halides, where the hydroxyl group is replaced by a chlorine atom by unimolecular nucleophilic substitution. If primary or secondary alcohols are to be reacted with hydrochloric acid, an activator such as zinc chloride is needed. In alternative fashion, the conversion may be performed directly using thionyl chloride.[1]\nAlcohols may, likewise, be converted to alkyl bromides using hydrobromic acid or phosphorus tribromide, for example:\nIn the Barton-McCombie deoxygenation an alcohol is deoxygenated to an alkane with tributyltin hydride or a trimethylborane-water complex in a radical substitution reaction.\nDehydration.\nMeanwhile, the oxygen atom has lone pairs of nonbonded electrons that render it weakly basic in the presence of strong acids such as sulfuric acid. For example, with methanol:\nUpon treatment with strong acids, alcohols undergo the E1 elimination reaction to produce alkenes. The reaction, in general, obeys Zaitsev's Rule, which states that the most stable (usually the most substituted) alkene is formed. Tertiary alcohols eliminate easily at just above room temperature, but primary alcohols require a higher temperature.\nThis is a diagram of acid catalysed dehydration of ethanol to produce ethylene:\nA more controlled elimination reaction requires the formation of the xanthate ester.\nProtonolysis.\nTertiary alcohols react with strong acids to generate carbocations. The reaction is related to their dehydration, e.g. isobutylene from tert-butyl alcohol. A special kind of dehydration reaction involves triphenylmethanol and especially its amine-substituted derivatives. When treated with acid, these alcohols lose water to give stable carbocations, which are commercial dyes.\nEsterification.\nAlcohol and carboxylic acids react in the so-called Fischer esterification. The reaction usually requires a catalyst, such as concentrated sulfuric acid:\nOther types of ester are prepared in a similar manner for example, tosyl (tosylate) esters are made by reaction of the alcohol with p-toluenesulfonyl chloride in pyridine.\nOxidation.\nPrimary alcohols (R-CHOH) can be oxidized either to aldehydes (R-CHO) or to carboxylic acids (R-COH). The oxidation of secondary alcohols (R1R2CH-OH) normally terminates at the ketone (R1R2C=O) stage. Tertiary alcohols (R1R2R3C-OH) are resistant to oxidation.\nThe direct oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids normally proceeds via the corresponding aldehyde, which is transformed via an \"aldehyde hydrate\" (R-CH(OH)) by reaction with water before it can be further oxidized to the carboxylic acid.\nReagents useful for the transformation of primary alcohols to aldehydes are normally also suitable for the oxidation of secondary alcohols to ketones. These include Collins reagent and Dess-Martin periodinane. The direct oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids can be carried out using potassium permanganate or the Jones reagent."}
{"id": "1016", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1016", "title": "Achill Island", "text": "Achill Island (; ) in County Mayo is the largest of the Irish isles, and is situated off the west coast of Ireland. It has a population of 2,594. Its area is . Achill is attached to the mainland by Michael Davitt Bridge, between the villages of Gob an Choire (Achill Sound) and Poll Raithn\u00ed (Polranny). A bridge was first completed here in 1887. Other centres of population include the villages of Keel, Dooagh, Dumha \u00c9ige (Dooega), D\u00fan Ibhir (Dooniver), and Dugort. The parish's main Gaelic football pitch and secondary school are on the mainland at Poll Raithn\u00ed. Early human settlements are believed to have been established on Achill around 3000 BC.\nThe island is 87% peat bog. The parish of Achill consists of Achill Island, Achillbeg, Inishbiggle and the Corraun Peninsula. \nRoughly half of the island, including the villages of Achill Sound and Bunacurry are in the Gaeltacht (traditional Irish-speaking region) of Ireland, although the vast majority of the island's population speaks English as their daily language. \nHistory.\nIt is believed that at the end of the Neolithic Period (around 4000 BC), Achill had a population of 500\u20131,000 people. The island would have been mostly forest until the Neolithic people began crop cultivation. Settlement increased during the Iron Age, and the dispersal of small promontory forts around the coast indicate the warlike nature of the times. Megalithic tombs and forts can be seen at Slievemore, along the Atlantic Drive and on Achillbeg.\nOverlords.\nAchill Island lies in the Barony of Burrishoole, in the territory of ancient Umhall (Umhall Uactarach and Umhall Ioctarach), that originally encompassed an area extending from the County Galway/Mayo border to Achill Head.\nThe hereditary chieftains of Umhall were the O'Malleys, recorded in the area in 814 AD when they successfully repelled an onslaught by the Vikings in Clew Bay. The Anglo-Norman invasion of Connacht in 1235 AD saw the territory of Umhall taken over by the Butlers and later by the de Burgos. The Butler Lordship of Burrishoole continued into the late 14th century when Thomas le Botiller was recorded as being in possession of Akkyll and Owyll.\nImmigration.\nIn the 17th and 18th centuries, there was much migration to Achill from other parts of Ireland, particularly Ulster, due to the political and religious turmoil of the time. For a while there were two different dialects of Irish being spoken on Achill. This led to many townlands being recorded as having two names during the 1824 Ordnance Survey, and some maps today give different names for the same place. Achill Irish still has many traces of Ulster Irish.\nSpecific historical sites and events.\nGrace O'Malley's Castle.\nCarrickkildavnet Castle is a 15th-century tower house associated with the O'Malley Clan, who were once a ruling family of Achill. Grace O' Malley, or Granuaile, the most famous of the O'Malleys, was born on Clare Island around 1530. Her father was the chieftain of the barony of Murrisk. The O'Malleys were a powerful seafaring family, who traded widely. Grace became a fearless leader and gained fame as a sea captain and pirate. She is reputed to have met with Queen Elizabeth I in 1593. She died around 1603 and is buried in the O'Malley family tomb on Clare Island.\nAchill Mission.\nOne of Achill's most famous historical sites is that of the Achill Mission or 'the Colony' at Dugort. In 1831 the Church of Ireland Reverend Edward Nangle founded a proselytising mission at Dugort. The Mission included schools, cottages, an orphanage, an infirmary and a guesthouse. The Colony gave rise to mixed assessments, particularly during the Great Famine when charges of 'souperism' were leveled against Edward Nangle. For almost forty years Edward Nangle edited a newspaper called the Achill Missionary Herald and Western Witness which was printed in Achill. Nangle expanded his mission into Mweelin in west Achill where a school, church, rectory, cottages and a training school were built. Edward's wife Eliza suffered poor health in Achill and died in 1852; she is buried with six of the Nangle children on the slopes of Slievemore in North Achill. The Achill Mission began to decline slowly after Nangle was moved from Achill and was finally closed in the 1880s. When Edward Nangle died in 1883 there were opposing views on his legacy.\nRailway.\nIn 1894, the Westport \u2013 Newport railway line was extended to Achill Sound. The railway station is now a hostel. The train provided a great service to Achill, but it also is said to have fulfilled an ancient prophecy. Brian Rua O' Cearbhain had prophesied that 'carts on iron wheels' would carry bodies into Achill on their first and last journey. In 1894, the first train on the Achill railway carried the bodies of victims of the Clew Bay Drowning. This tragedy occurred when a boat overturned in Clew Bay, drowning thirty-two young people. They had been going to meet the steamer which would take them to Scotland for potato picking.\nThe Kirkintilloch Fire in 1937 almost fulfilled the second part of the prophecy when the bodies of ten victims were carried by rail to Achill. While it was not literally the last train, the railway would close just two weeks later. These people had died in a fire in a bothy in Kirkintilloch. This term referred to the temporary accommodation provided for those who went to Scotland to pick potatoes, a migratory pattern that had been established in the early nineteenth century.\nKildamhnait.\nKildamhnait on the south-east coast of Achill is named after St. Damhnait, or Dymphna, who founded a church there in the 7th century. There is also a holy well just outside the graveyard. The present church was built in the 1700s and the graveyard contains memorials to the victims of two of Achill's greatest tragedies, the Kirchintilloch Fire (1937) and the Clew Bay Drowning (1894).\nThe Monastery.\nIn 1852, Dr. John McHale, Archbishop of Tuam purchased land in Bunnacurry which became the location of a Franciscan Monastery which, for many years provided an education for local children. The building of the monastery was marked by a conflict between the followers of the Achill Mission colony and those building the monastery. The dispute is known in the island folklore as the \"Battle of the Stones\". A notable monk who lived at the monastery for almost thirty years was Brother Paul Carney. He wrote a biography of James Lynchehaun who rose to fame following his conviction for the 1894 attack on the Valley House in North Achill. Brother Paul also wrote accounts of his lengthy church fundraising trips across the US at the start of the twentieth century. The ruins of this monastery are still to be seen in Bunnacurry today.\nThe Valley House.\nThe historic Valley House is located in The Valley, near Dugort in the north-east of Achill Island. The present building sits on the site of a hunting lodge built by the Earl of Cavan in the 19th century. Its notoriety arises from an incident in 1894 in which the then owner, an English landlady named Agnes McDonnell, was savagely beaten and the house set alight, allegedly by a local man, James Lynchehaun. Lynchehaun had been employed by McDonnell as her land agent, but the two fell out and he was sacked and told to quit his accommodation on her estate. A lengthy legal battle ensued, with Lynchehaun refusing to leave. At the time, in the 1890s, the issue of land ownership in Ireland was politically charged, and after the events at the Valley House in 1895 Lynchehaun was to claim that his actions were motivated by politics. He escaped custody and fled to the United States, where he successfully defeated legal attempts by the British authorities to have him extradited to face charges arising from the attack and the burning of the Valley House. Agnes McDonnell suffered terrible injuries from the attack but survived and lived for another 23 years, dying in 1923. Lynchehaun is said to have returned to Achill on two occasions, once in disguise as an American tourist, and eventually died in Girvan, Scotland, in 1937. The Valley House is now a Hostel and Bar.\nThe Deserted Village.\nClose by Dugort, at the base of Slievemore mountain lies the Deserted Village. There are approximately 80 ruined houses in the village.\nThe houses were built of unmortared stone, which means that no cement or mortar was used to hold the stones together. Each house consisted of just one room and this room was used as a kitchen, living room, bedroom and even a stable.\nIf one looks at the fields around the Deserted Village and right up the mountain, one can see the tracks in the fields of 'lazy beds', which is the way crops like potatoes were grown. In Achill, as in many areas of Ireland, a system called 'Rundale' was used for farming. This meant that the land around a village was rented from a landlord. This land was then shared by all the villagers to graze their cattle and sheep. Each family would then have two or three small pieces of land scattered about the village, which they used to grow crops.\nFor many years people lived in the village and then in 1845 Famine struck in Achill as it did in the rest of Ireland. Most of the families moved to the nearby village of Dooagh, which is beside the sea, while some others emigrated. Living beside the sea meant that fish and shellfish could be used for food. The village was completely abandoned which is where the name 'Deserted Village' came from.\nNo-one has lived in these houses since the time of the Famine, however, the families that moved to Dooagh and their descendants, continued to use the village as a 'booley village'. This means that during the summer season, the younger members of the family, teenage boys and girls, would take the cattle to graze on the hillside and they would stay in the houses of the Deserted Village. This custom continued until the 1940s. Boolying was also carried out in other areas of Achill, including Annagh on Croaghaun mountain and in Curraun.\nAt Ailt, Kildownet,the remains of a similar deserted village can be found. This village was deserted in 1855 when the tenants were evicted by the local landlord so the land could be used for cattle grazing; the tenants were forced to rent holdings in Currane, Dooega and Slievemore. Others emigrated to America.\nArchaeology.\nAchill Archaeological Field School is based at the Achill Archaeology Centre in Dooagh, which has served as a catalyst for a wide array of archaeological investigations on the island. It was founded in 1991 and is a training school for students of archaeology and anthropology. Since 1991, several thousand students from 21 countries have come to Achill to study and participate in ongoing excavations. The school is involved in a study of the prehistoric and historic landscape at Slievemore, incorporating a research excavation at a number of sites within the deserted village of Slievemore. Slievemore is rich in archaeological monuments that span a 5,000-year period from the Neolithic to the Post Medieval. Recent archaeological research suggests the village was occupied year-round at least as early as the 19th century, though it is known to have served as a seasonally occupied 'booley village' by the first half of the 20th century. A booley village (a number of which exist in a ruined state on the island) is a village occupied only during part of the year, such as a resort community, a lake community, or (as the case on Achill) a place to live while tending flocks or herds of ruminants during winter or summer pasturing. Specifically, some of the people of Dooagh and Pollagh would migrate in the summer to Slievemore and then go back to Dooagh in the autumn. The summer 2009 field school excavated Round House 2 on Slievemore Mountain under the direction of archaeologist Stuart Rathbone. Only the outside north wall, entrance way and inside of the Round House were completely excavated.\nFrom 2004 to 2006, the Achill Island Maritime Archaeology Project directed by Chuck Meide was sponsored by the College of William and Mary, the Institute of Maritime History, the Achill Folklife Centre (now the Achill Archaeology Centre), and the Lighthouse Archaeological Maritime Program (LAMP). This project focused on the documentation of archaeological resources related to Achill's rich maritime heritage. Maritime archaeologists recorded a 19th-century fishing station, an ice house, boat house ruins, a number of anchors which had been salvaged from the sea, 19th-century and more recent currach pens, a number of traditional vernacular watercraft including a possibly 100-year-old Achill yawl, and the remains of four historic shipwrecks.\nOther places of interest.\nThe cliffs of Croaghaun on the western end of the island are the third highest sea cliffs in Europe but are inaccessible by road. Near the westernmost point of Achill, Achill Head, is Keem Bay. Keel Beach is quite popular with tourists and some locals as a surfing location. South of Keem beach is Moytoge Head, which with its rounded appearance drops dramatically down to the ocean. An old British observation post, built during World War I to prevent the Germans from landing arms for the Irish Republican Army, is still standing on Moytoge. During the Second World War this post was rebuilt by the Irish Defence Forces as a Look Out Post for the Coast Watching Service wing of the Defence Forces. It operated from 1939 to 1945.\nThe mountain of Slievemore, (672\u00a0m) rises dramatically in the north of the island and the Atlantic Drive (along the south/west of the island) has some dramatic views. On the slopes of Slievemore, there is an abandoned village (the \"Deserted Village\") The Deserted Village is traditionally thought to be a remnant village from An Gorta M\u00f3r (The Great Hunger of 1845\u20131849).\nJust west of the deserted village is an old Martello tower, again built by the British to warn of any possible French invasion during the Napoleonic Wars. The area also boasts an approximately 5000-year-old Neolithic tomb.\nAchillbeg (\"\", \"Little Achill\") is a small island just off Achill's southern tip. Its inhabitants were resettled on Achill in the 1960s. A plaque to Johnny Kilbane is situated on Achillbeg and was erected to celebrate 100 years since his first championship win.\nThe villages of Dooniver and Askill have picturesque scenery and the cycle route is popular with tourists.\nCaisle\u00e1n Ghr\u00e1inne, also known as Kildownet Castle, is a small tower house built in the early 1400s. It is located in Cloughmore, on the south of Achill Island. It is noted for its associations with Grace O'Malley, along with the larger Rockfleet Castle in Newport.\nEconomy.\nWhile a number of attempts at setting up small industrial units on the island have been made, the economy of the island is largely dependent on tourism. Subventions from Achill people working abroad, in particular in the United Kingdom, the United States and Africa allowed many families to remain living in Achill throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. Since the advent of Ireland's \"Celtic Tiger\" economy fewer Achill people were forced to look for work abroad. Agriculture plays a small role and the fact that the island is mostly bog means that its potential for agriculture is limited largely to sheep farming. In the past, fishing was a significant activity but this aspect of the economy is small now. At one stage, the island was known for its shark fishing, basking shark in particular was fished for its valuable shark liver oil. There was a big spurt of growth in tourism in the 1960s and 1970s before which life was tough and difficult on the island. Despite healthy visitor numbers each year, the common perception is that tourism in Achill has been slowly declining since its heyday. Currently, the largest employers on Achill are two hotels. In late 2009 Ireland's only turbot farm opened in the Bunnacurry Business Park.\nReligion.\nMost people on Achill are either Roman Catholic or Anglican (Church of Ireland).\nOverview of the churches\nEducation.\nHedge schools existed in most villages of Achill in various periods of history. A university was started by the missions to Achill in Mweelin. In the modern age, there used to be two secondary schools in Achill, Mc Hale College and Scoil Damhnait. However, in August 2011, the two schools amalgamated to form Col\u00e1iste Pobail Acla. For primary education, there are eight National Schools including Bullsmouth NS, Valley NS, Bunnacurry NS, Dookinella NS, Dooagh NS, Saula NS, Achill Sound NS and Tonragee NS. National schools closed down include Dooega NS, Crumpaun NS, Ashleam NS and Currane NS.\nCuisine.\nAs a popular tourist destination, Achill has many bars, cafes and restaurants which serve a full range of food. However, with the island's Atlantic location seafood is a speciality on Achill with common foods including lobster, mussels, salmon, trout and winkles. With a large sheep population, Achill lamb is a very popular meal on the island too. Furthermore, Achill has a big population of cows which produces excellent beef.\nSport.\nAchill has a Gaelic football club which competes in the junior championship and division 1E of the Mayo League. There are also Achill Rovers which play in the Mayo Association Football League.\nThere is a 9-hole links golf course on the island. Outdoor activities can be done through Achill Outdoor Education Centre. Achill Island's rugged landscape and the surrounding ocean offers multiple locations for outdoor adventure activities, like surfing, kite-surfing and sea kayaking. Fishing and watersports are also popular. Sailing regattas featuring a local vessel type, the Achill Yawl, have been popular since the 19th century, though most present-day yawls, unlike their traditional working boat ancestors, have been structurally modified to promote greater speed under sail. The island's waters and underwater sites are occasionally visited by scuba divers, though Achill's unpredictable weather generally has precluded a commercially successful recreational diving industry.\nPopulation.\nIn 2016, the population was 2,594, with 5.2% claiming they spoke the Irish on a daily basis outside the education system. The island's population has declined from around 6,000 before the Great Hunger.\nDemographics.\nThe table below reports data on Achill Island's population taken from \"Discover the Islands of Ireland\" (Alex Ritsema, Collins Press, 1999) and the census of Ireland. \nArchitecture.\nBecause of the inhospitable climate, few inhabited houses date from before the 20th century, though there are many examples of abandoned stone structures dating to the 19th century.\nThe best known of these earlier can be seen in the \"Deserted Village\" ruins near the graveyard at the foot of Slievemore. Even the houses in this village represent a relatively comfortable class of dwelling as, even as recently as a hundred years ago, some people still used \"Beehive\" style houses (small circular single-roomed dwellings with a hole in the ceiling to let out smoke).\nMany of the oldest inhabited cottages date from the activities of the Congested Districts Board for Ireland\u2014a body set up around the turn of the 20th century in Ireland to improve the welfare of the inhabitants of small villages and towns. Most of the homes in Achill at the time were very small and tightly packed together in villages. The CDB subsidised the building of new, more spacious (though still small by modern standards) homes outside of the traditional villages.\nSome of the recent building development (1980 and onwards) on the island does fit as nicely in the landscape as the earlier style of whitewashed raised gable cottages. Many holiday homes have been built but many of these houses have been built in prominent scenic areas and have damaged traditional views of the island while lying empty for most of the year."}
{"id": "1017", "revid": "39324413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1017", "title": "Allen Ginsberg", "text": "Irwin Allen Ginsberg (; June 3, 1926\u00a0\u2013 April 5, 1997) was an American poet and writer. As a student at Columbia University in the 1940s, he began friendships with William S. Burroughs and Jack Kerouac, forming the core of the Beat Generation. He vigorously opposed militarism, economic materialism, and sexual repression, and he embodied various aspects of this counterculture with his views on drugs, sex, multiculturalism, hostility to bureaucracy, and openness to Eastern religions.\nGinsberg is best known for his poem \"Howl\" in which he denounced what he saw as the destructive forces of capitalism and conformity in the United States. San Francisco police and US Customs seized \"Howl\" in 1956, and it attracted widespread publicity in 1957 when it became the subject of an obscenity trial, as it described heterosexual and homosexual sex at a time when sodomy laws made homosexual acts a crime in every state. The poem reflected Ginsberg's own sexuality and his relationships with a number of men, including Peter Orlovsky, his lifelong partner. Judge Clayton W. Horn ruled that \"Howl\" was not obscene: \"Would there be any freedom of press or speech if one must reduce his vocabulary to vapid innocuous euphemisms?\"\nGinsberg was a Buddhist who extensively studied Eastern religious disciplines. He lived modestly, buying his clothing in second-hand stores and residing in apartments in New York City's East Village. One of his most influential teachers was Tibetan Buddhist Ch\u00f6gyam Trungpa, the founder of the Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado. At Trungpa's urging, Ginsberg and poet Anne Waldman started The Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics there in 1974.\nGinsberg took part in decades of political protest against everything from the Vietnam War to the War on Drugs. His poem \"September on Jessore Road\" called attention to the plight of Bengali refugees which was caused by the 1971 Genocide and it exemplifies what literary critic Helen Vendler described as Ginsberg's persistence in protesting against \"imperial politics\" and \"persecution of the powerless\". His collection \"The Fall of America\" shared the annual National Book Award for Poetry in 1974. In 1979, he received the National Arts Club gold medal and was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was a Pulitzer Prize finalist in 1995 for his book \"Cosmopolitan Greetings: Poems 1986\u20131992\".\nBiography.\nEarly life and family.\nGinsberg was born into a Jewish family in Newark, New Jersey, and grew up in nearby Paterson. He was the second son of Louis Ginsberg, a schoolteacher and sometime poet, and the former Naomi Levy, a Russian emigree and fervent Marxist.\nAs a teenager, Ginsberg began to write letters to \"The New York Times\" about political issues, such as World War II and workers' rights. He published his first poems in the \"Paterson Morning Call\". While in high school, Ginsberg became interested in the works of Walt Whitman, inspired by his teacher's passionate reading. In 1943, Ginsberg graduated from Eastside High School and briefly attended Montclair State College before entering Columbia University on a scholarship from the Young Men's Hebrew Association of Paterson.\nIn 1945, he joined the Merchant Marine to earn money to continue his education at Columbia. While at Columbia, Ginsberg contributed to the \"Columbia Review\" literary journal, the \"Jester\" humor magazine, won the Woodberry Poetry Prize, served as president of the Philolexian Society (literary and debate group), and joined Boar's Head Society (poetry society).\nGinsberg has stated that he considered his required freshman seminar in Great Books, taught by Lionel Trilling, to be his favorite Columbia course.\nAccording to The Poetry Foundation, Ginsberg spent several months in a mental institution after he pleaded insanity during a hearing. He was allegedly being prosecuted for harboring stolen goods in his dorm room. It was noted that the stolen property was not his, but belonged to an acquaintance.\nRelationship with his parents.\nGinsberg referred to his parents, in a 1985 interview, as \"old-fashioned delicatessen philosophers\".\nHis mother was affected by a psychological illness that was never properly diagnosed. She was also an active member of the Communist Party and took Ginsberg and his brother Eugene to party meetings. Ginsberg later said that his mother \"made up bedtime stories that all went something like: 'The good king rode forth from his castle, saw the suffering workers and healed them.'\" Of his father Ginsberg said: \"My father would go around the house either reciting Emily Dickinson and Longfellow under his breath or attacking T. S. Eliot for ruining poetry with his 'obscurantism.' I grew suspicious of both sides.\"\nNaomi Ginsberg's mental illness often manifested as paranoid delusions. She would claim, for example, that the president had implanted listening devices in their home and that her mother-in-law was trying to kill her. Her suspicion of those around her caused Naomi to draw closer to young Allen, \"her little pet\", as Bill Morgan says in his biography of Ginsberg, titled, \"I Celebrate Myself: The Somewhat Private Life of Allen Ginsberg\". She also tried to kill herself by slitting her wrists and was soon taken to Greystone, a mental hospital; she would spend much of Ginsberg's youth in mental hospitals. His experiences with his mother and her mental illness were a major inspiration for his two major works, \"Howl\" and his long autobiographical poem \"Kaddish for Naomi Ginsberg (1894\u20131956)\".\nWhen he was in junior high school, he accompanied his mother by bus to her therapist. The trip deeply disturbed Ginsberg\u2014he mentioned it and other moments from his childhood in \"Kaddish\". His experiences with his mother's mental illness and her institutionalization are also frequently referred to in \"Howl\". For example, \"Pilgrim State, Rockland, and Grey Stone's foetid halls\" is a reference to institutions frequented by his mother and Carl Solomon, ostensibly the subject of the poem: Pilgrim State Hospital and Rockland State Hospital in New York and Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in New Jersey. This is followed soon by the line \"with mother finally ******.\" Ginsberg later admitted the deletion was the expletive \"fucked.\" He also says of Solomon in section three, \"I'm with you in Rockland where you imitate the shade of my mother,\" once again showing the association between Solomon and his mother.\nGinsberg received a letter from his mother after her death responding to a copy of \"Howl\" he had sent her. It admonished Ginsberg to be good and stay away from drugs; she says, \"The key is in the window, the key is in the sunlight at the window\u2014I have the key\u2014Get married Allen don't take drugs\u2014the key is in the bars, in the sunlight in the window\". In a letter she wrote to Ginsberg's brother Eugene, she said, \"God's informers come to my bed, and God himself I saw in the sky. The sunshine showed too, a key on the side of the window for me to get out. The yellow of the sunshine, also showed the key on the side of the window.\" These letters and the absence of a facility to recite kaddish inspired Ginsberg to write \"Kaddish\", which makes references to many details from Naomi's life, Ginsberg's experiences with her, and the letter, including the lines \"the key is in the light\" and \"the key is in the window\".\nNew York Beats.\nIn Ginsberg's first year at Columbia he met fellow undergraduate Lucien Carr, who introduced him to a number of future Beat writers, including Jack Kerouac, William S. Burroughs, and John Clellon Holmes. They bonded, because they saw in one another an excitement about the potential of American youth, a potential that existed outside the strict conformist confines of post\u2013World War II, McCarthy-era America. Ginsberg and Carr talked excitedly about a \"New Vision\" (a phrase adapted from Yeats' \"A Vision\"), for literature and America. Carr also introduced Ginsberg to Neal Cassady, for whom Ginsberg had a long infatuation. In the first chapter of his 1957 novel \"On the Road\" Kerouac described the meeting between Ginsberg and Cassady. Kerouac saw them as the dark (Ginsberg) and light (Cassady) side of their \"New Vision\", a perception stemming partly from Ginsberg's association with communism, of which Kerouac had become increasingly distrustful. Though Ginsberg was never a member of the Communist Party, Kerouac named him \"Carlo Marx\" in \"On the Road\". This was a source of strain in their relationship.\nAlso, in New York, Ginsberg met Gregory Corso in the Pony Stable Bar. Corso, recently released from prison, was supported by the Pony Stable patrons and was writing poetry there the night of their meeting. Ginsberg claims he was immediately attracted to Corso, who was straight, but understood of homosexuality after three years in prison. Ginsberg was even more struck by reading Corso's poems, realizing Corso was \"spiritually gifted.\" Ginsberg introduced Corso to the rest of his inner circle. In their first meeting at the Pony Stable, Corso showed Ginsberg a poem about a woman who lived across the street from him and sunbathed naked in the window. Amazingly, the woman happened to be Ginsberg's girlfriend that he was living with during one of his forays into heterosexuality. Ginsberg took Corso over to their apartment. There the woman proposed sex with Corso, who was still very young and fled in fear. Ginsberg introduced Corso to Kerouac and Burroughs and they began to travel together. Ginsberg and Corso remained lifelong friends and collaborators.\nShortly after this period in Ginsberg's life, he became romantically involved with Elise Nada Cowen after meeting her through Alex Greer, a philosophy professor at Barnard College whom she had dated for a while during the burgeoning Beat generation's period of development. As a Barnard student, Elise Cowen extensively read the poetry of Ezra Pound and T. S. Eliot, when she met Joyce Johnson and Leo Skir, among other Beat players. As Cowen had felt a strong attraction to darker poetry most of the time, Beat poetry seemed to provide an allure to what suggests a shadowy side of her persona. While at Barnard, Cowen earned the nickname \"Beat Alice\" as she had joined a small group of anti-establishment artists and visionaries known to outsiders as beatniks, and one of her first acquaintances at the college was the beat poet Joyce Johnson who later portrayed Cowen in her books, including \"Minor Characters\" and \"Come and Join the Dance\", which expressed the two women's experiences in the Barnard and Columbia Beat community. Through his association with Elise Cowen, Ginsberg discovered that they shared a mutual friend, Carl Solomon, to whom he later dedicated his most famous poem \"Howl\". This poem is considered an autobiography of Ginsberg up to 1955, and a brief history of the Beat Generation through its references to his relationship to other Beat artists of that time.\n\"Blake vision\".\nIn 1948 in an apartment in Harlem, Ginsberg had an auditory hallucination while reading the poetry of William Blake (later referred to as his \"Blake vision\"). At first, Ginsberg claimed to have heard the voice of God but later interpreted the voice as that of Blake himself reading \"Ah! Sun-flower\", \"The Sick Rose\", and \"Little Girl Lost\", also described by Ginsberg as \"voice of the ancient of days.\" The experience lasted several days. Ginsberg believed that he had witnessed the interconnectedness of the universe. He looked at latticework on the fire escape and realized some hand had crafted that; he then looked at the sky and intuited that some hand had crafted that also, or rather, that the sky was the hand that crafted itself. He explained that this hallucination was not inspired by drug use but said he sought to recapture that feeling later with various drugs. Ginsberg stated: \"[...] not that some hand had placed the sky but that the sky was the living blue hand itself. Or that God was in front of my eyes\u2014existence itself was God\", and \"And it was a sudden awakening into a totally deeper real universe than I'd been existing in.\"\nSan Francisco Renaissance.\nGinsberg moved to San Francisco during the 1950s. Before \"Howl and Other Poems\" was published in 1956 by City Lights, he worked as a market researcher.\nIn 1954, in San Francisco, Ginsberg met Peter Orlovsky (1933\u20132010), with whom he fell in love and who remained his lifelong partner. Selections from their correspondence have been published.\nAlso in San Francisco, Ginsberg met members of the San Francisco Renaissance (James Broughton, Robert Duncan, Madeline Gleason and Kenneth Rexroth) and other poets who would later be associated with the Beat Generation in a broader sense. Ginsberg's mentor William Carlos Williams wrote an introductory letter to San Francisco Renaissance figurehead Kenneth Rexroth, who then introduced Ginsberg into the San Francisco poetry scene. There, Ginsberg also met three budding poets and Zen enthusiasts who had become friends at Reed College: Gary Snyder, Philip Whalen, and Lew Welch. In 1959, along with poets John Kelly, Bob Kaufman, A. D. Winans, and William Margolis, Ginsberg was one of the founders of the \"Beatitude\" poetry magazine.\nWally Hedrick\u2014a painter and co-founder of the Six Gallery\u2014approached Ginsberg in mid-1955 and asked him to organize a poetry reading at the Six Gallery. At first, Ginsberg refused, but once he had written a rough draft of \"Howl\", he changed his \"fucking mind\", as he put it. Ginsberg advertised the event as \"Six Poets at the Six Gallery\". One of the most important events in Beat mythos, known simply as \"The Six Gallery reading\" took place on October 7, 1955. The event, in essence, brought together the East and West Coast factions of the Beat Generation. Of more personal significance to Ginsberg, the reading that night included the first public presentation of \"Howl\", a poem that brought worldwide fame to Ginsberg and to many of the poets associated with him. An account of that night can be found in Kerouac's novel \"The Dharma Bums\", describing how change was collected from audience members to buy jugs of wine, and Ginsberg reading passionately, drunken, with arms outstretched.\nGinsberg's principal work, \"Howl\", is well known for its opening line: \"I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked\u00a0[...]\" \"Howl\" was considered scandalous at the time of its publication, because of the rawness of its language. Shortly after its 1956 publication by San Francisco's City Lights Bookstore, it was banned for obscenity. The ban became a cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre among defenders of the First Amendment, and was later lifted, after Judge Clayton W. Horn declared the poem to possess redeeming artistic value. Ginsberg and Shig Murao, the City Lights manager who was jailed for selling \"Howl,\" became lifelong friends.\nBiographical references in \"Howl\".\nGinsberg claimed at one point that all of his work was an extended biography (like Kerouac's \"Duluoz Legend\"). \"Howl\" is not only a biography of Ginsberg's experiences before 1955, but also a history of the Beat Generation. Ginsberg also later claimed that at the core of \"Howl\" were his unresolved emotions about his schizophrenic mother. Though \"Kaddish\" deals more explicitly with his mother, \"Howl\" in many ways is driven by the same emotions. \"Howl\" chronicles the development of many important friendships throughout Ginsberg's life. He begins the poem with \"I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness\", which sets the stage for Ginsberg to describe Cassady and Solomon, immortalizing them into American literature. This madness was the \"angry fix\" that society needed to function\u2014madness was its disease. In the poem, Ginsberg focused on \"Carl Solomon! I'm with you in Rockland\", and, thus, turned Solomon into an archetypal figure searching for freedom from his \"straightjacket\". Though references in most of his poetry reveal much about his biography, his relationship to other members of the Beat Generation, and his own political views, \"Howl\", his most famous poem, is still perhaps the best place to start.\nTo Paris and the \"Beat Hotel\", Tangier and India.\nIn 1957, Ginsberg surprised the literary world by abandoning San Francisco. After a spell in Morocco, he and Peter Orlovsky joined Gregory Corso in Paris. Corso introduced them to a shabby lodging house above a bar at 9 rue G\u00eet-le-Coeur that was to become known as the Beat Hotel. They were soon joined by Burroughs and others. It was a productive, creative time for all of them. There, Ginsberg began his epic poem \"Kaddish\", Corso composed \"Bomb\" and \"Marriage\", and Burroughs (with help from Ginsberg and Corso) put together \"Naked Lunch\" from previous writings. This period was documented by the photographer Harold Chapman, who moved in at about the same time, and took pictures constantly of the residents of the \"hotel\" until it closed in 1963. During 1962\u20131963, Ginsberg and Orlovsky travelled extensively across India, living half a year at a time in Calcutta (now Kolkata) and Benares (Varanasi). Also during this time, he formed friendships with some of the prominent young Bengali poets of the time including Shakti Chattopadhyay and Sunil Gangopadhyay. Ginsberg had several political connections in India; most notably Pupul Jayakar who helped him extend his stay in India when the authorities were eager to expel him.\nEngland and the International Poetry Incarnation.\nIn May 1965, Ginsberg arrived in London, and offered to read anywhere for free. Shortly after his arrival, he gave a reading at Better Books, which was described by Jeff Nuttall as \"the first healing wind on a very parched collective mind\". Tom McGrath wrote: \"This could well turn out to have been a very significant moment in the history of England\u2014or at least in the history of English Poetry\".\nSoon after the bookshop reading, plans were hatched for the International Poetry Incarnation, which was held at the Royal Albert Hall in London on June 11, 1965. The event attracted an audience of 7,000, who heard readings and live and tape performances by a wide variety of figures, including Ginsberg, Adrian Mitchell, Alexander Trocchi, Harry Fainlight, Anselm Hollo, Christopher Logue, George MacBeth, Gregory Corso, Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Michael Horovitz, Simon Vinkenoog, Spike Hawkins and Tom McGrath. The event was organized by Ginsberg's friend, the filmmaker Barbara Rubin.\nPeter Whitehead documented the event on film and released it as \"Wholly Communion\". A book featuring images from the film and some of the poems that were performed was also published under the same title by Lorrimer in the UK and Grove Press in US.\nContinuing literary activity.\nThough the term \"Beat\" is most accurately applied to Ginsberg and his closest friends (Corso, Orlovsky, Kerouac, Burroughs, etc.), the term \"Beat Generation\" has become associated with many of the other poets Ginsberg met and became friends with in the late 1950s and early 1960s. A key feature of this term seems to be a friendship with Ginsberg. Friendship with Kerouac or Burroughs might also apply, but both writers later strove to disassociate themselves from the name \"Beat Generation.\" Part of their dissatisfaction with the term came from the mistaken identification of Ginsberg as the leader. Ginsberg never claimed to be the leader of a movement. He claimed that many of the writers with whom he had become friends in this period shared many of the same intentions and themes. Some of these friends include: David Amram, Bob Kaufman; Diane di Prima; Jim Cohn; poets associated with the Black Mountain College such as Charles Olson, Robert Creeley, and Denise Levertov; poets associated with the New York School such as Frank O'Hara and Kenneth Koch. LeRoi Jones before he became Amiri Baraka, who, after reading \"Howl\", wrote a letter to Ginsberg on a sheet of toilet paper. Baraka's independent publishing house Totem Press published Ginsberg's early work. Through a party organized by Baraka, Ginsberg was introduced to Langston Hughes while Ornette Coleman played saxophone.\nLater in his life, Ginsberg formed a bridge between the beat movement of the 1950s and the hippies of the 1960s, befriending, among others, Timothy Leary, Ken Kesey, Hunter S. Thompson, and Bob Dylan. Ginsberg gave his last public reading at Booksmith, a bookstore in the Haight-Ashbury neighborhood of San Francisco, a few months before his death. In 1993, Ginsberg visited the University of Maine at Orono to pay homage to the 90-year-old great Carl Rakosi.\nBuddhism and Krishna.\nIn 1950, Kerouac began studying Buddhism and shared what he learned from Dwight Goddard's \"Buddhist Bible\" with Ginsberg. Ginsberg first heard about the Four Noble Truths and such sutras as the Diamond Sutra at this time.\nGinsberg's spiritual journey began early on with his spontaneous visions, and continued with an early trip to India with Gary Snyder. Snyder had previously spent time in Kyoto to study at the First Zen Institute at Daitoku-ji Monastery. At one point, Snyder chanted the Prajnaparamita, which in Ginsberg's words \"blew my mind.\" His interest piqued, Ginsberg traveled to meet the Dalai Lama as well as the Karmapa at Rumtek Monastery. Continuing on his journey, Ginsberg met Dudjom Rinpoche in Kalimpong, who taught him: \"If you see something horrible, don't cling to it, and if you see something beautiful, don't cling to it.\"\nAfter returning to the United States, a chance encounter on a New York City street with Ch\u00f6gyam Trungpa Rinpoche (they both tried to catch the same cab), a Kagyu and Nyingma Tibetan Buddhist master, led to Trungpa becoming his friend and lifelong teacher. Ginsberg helped Trungpa and New York poet Anne Waldman in founding the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics at Naropa University in Boulder, Colorado.\nGinsberg was also involved with Krishnaism. He had started incorporating chanting the Hare Krishna mantra into his religious practice in the mid-1960s. After learning that A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the founder of the Hare Krishna movement in the Western world had rented a store front in New York, he befriended him, visiting him often and suggesting publishers for his books, and a fruitful relationship began. This relationship is documented by Satsvarupa dasa Goswami in his biographical account \"Srila Prabhupada Lilamrta\". Ginsberg donated money, materials, and his reputation to help the Swami establish the first temple, and toured with him to promote his cause.\nDespite disagreeing with many of Bhaktivedanta Swami's required prohibitions, Ginsberg often sang the Hare Krishna mantra publicly as part of his philosophy and declared that it brought a state of ecstasy. He was glad that Bhaktivedanta Swami, an authentic swami from India, was now trying to spread the chanting in America. Along with other counterculture ideologists like Timothy Leary, Gary Snyder, and Alan Watts, Ginsberg hoped to incorporate Bhaktivedanta Swami and his chanting into the hippie movement, and agreed to take part in the Mantra-Rock Dance concert and to introduce the swami to the Haight-Ashbury hippie community.\nOn January 17, 1967, Ginsberg helped plan and organize a reception for Bhaktivedanta Swami at San Francisco International Airport, where fifty to a hundred hippies greeted the Swami, chanting Hare Krishna in the airport lounge with flowers in hands. To further support and promote Bhaktivendata Swami's message and chanting in San Francisco, Allen Ginsberg agreed to attend the Mantra-Rock Dance, a musical event 1967 held at the Avalon Ballroom by the San Francisco Hare Krishna temple. It featured some leading rock bands of the time: Big Brother and the Holding Company with Janis Joplin, the Grateful Dead, and Moby Grape, who performed there along with the Hare Krishna founder Bhaktivedanta Swami and donated proceeds to the Krishna temple. Ginsberg introduced Bhaktivedanta Swami to some three thousand hippies in the audience and led the chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra.\nMusic and chanting were both important parts of Ginsberg's live delivery during poetry readings. He often accompanied himself on a harmonium, and was often accompanied by a guitarist. It is believed that the Hindi and Buddhist poet Nagarjun had introduced Ginsberg to the harmonium in Banaras. According to Malay Roy Choudhury, Ginsberg refined his practice while learning from his relatives, including his cousin Savitri Banerjee. When Ginsberg asked if he could sing a song in praise of Lord Krishna on William F. Buckley, Jr.'s TV show \"Firing Line\" on September 3, 1968, Buckley acceded and the poet chanted slowly as he played dolefully on a harmonium. According to Richard Brookhiser, an associate of Buckley's, the host commented that it was \"the most unharried Krishna I've ever heard.\"\nAt the 1967 Human Be-In in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park, the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, and the 1970 Black Panther rally at Yale campus Allen chanted \"Om\" repeatedly over a sound system for hours on end.\nGinsberg further brought mantras into the world of rock and roll when he recited the Heart Sutra in the song \"Ghetto Defendant\". The song appears on the 1982 album Combat Rock by British first wave punk band The Clash.\nGinsberg came in touch with the Hungryalist poets of Bengal, especially Malay Roy Choudhury, who introduced Ginsberg to the three fish with one head of Indian emperor Jalaluddin Mohammad Akbar. The three fish symbolised coexistence of all thought, philosophy and religion.\nIn spite of Ginsberg's attraction to Eastern religions, the journalist Jane Kramer argues that he, like Whitman, adhered to an \"American brand of mysticism\" that was \"rooted in humanism and in a romantic and visionary ideal of harmony among men.\"\nIllness and death.\nIn 1960, he was treated for a tropical disease, and it is speculated that he contracted hepatitis from an unsterilized needle administered by a doctor, which played a role in his death 37 years later.\nGinsberg was a lifelong smoker, and though he tried to quit for health and religious reasons, his busy schedule in later life made it difficult, and he always returned to smoking.\nIn the 1970s, Ginsberg suffered two minor strokes which were first diagnosed as Bell's palsy, which gave him significant paralysis and stroke-like drooping of the muscles in one side of his face.\nLater in life, he also suffered constant minor ailments such as high blood pressure. Many of these symptoms were related to stress, but he never slowed down his schedule.\nGinsberg won a 1974 National Book Award for ' (split with Adrienne Rich, ').\nIn 1986, Ginsberg was awarded the Golden Wreath by the Struga Poetry Evenings International Festival in Macedonia, the second American poet to be so awarded since W. H. Auden. At Struga, Ginsberg met with the other Golden Wreath winners, Bulat Okudzhava and Andrei Voznesensky.\nIn 1993, the French Minister of Culture appointed Ginsberg a Chevalier des Arts et des Lettres.\nGinsberg continued to help his friends as much as he could: he gave money to Herbert Huncke out of his own pocket, regularly supplied neighbor Arthur Russell with an extension cord to power his home recording setup, and housed a broke, drug-addicted Harry Smith.\nWith the exception of a special guest appearance at the NYU Poetry Slam on February 20, 1997, Ginsberg gave what is thought to be his last reading at The Booksmith in San Francisco on December 16, 1996.\nAfter returning home from the hospital for the last time, where he had been unsuccessfully treated for congestive heart failure, Ginsberg continued making phone calls to say goodbye to nearly everyone in his address book. Some of the phone calls, including one with Johnny Depp, were sad and interrupted by crying, and others were joyous and optimistic. Ginsberg continued to write through his final illness, with his last poem, \"Things I'll Not Do (Nostalgias)\", written on March 30.\nHe died on April 5, 1997, surrounded by family and friends in his East Village loft in Manhattan, succumbing to liver cancer via complications of hepatitis at the age of 70. Gregory Corso, Roy Lichtenstein, Patti Smith and others came by to pay their respects. He was cremated, and his ashes were buried in his family plot in Gomel Chesed Cemetery in Newark. He was survived by Orlovsky.\nIn 1998, various writers, including Catfish McDaris read at a gathering at Ginsberg's farm to honor Allen and the beatniks.\n\"Good Will Hunting\" (released in December 1997) was dedicated to Ginsberg, as well as Burroughs, who died four months later.\nSocial and political activism.\nFree speech.\nGinsberg's willingness to talk about taboo subjects made him a controversial figure during the conservative 1950s, and a significant figure in the 1960s. In the mid-1950s, no reputable publishing company would even consider publishing \"Howl\". At the time, such \"sex talk\" employed in \"Howl\" was considered by some to be vulgar or even a form of pornography, and could be prosecuted under law. Ginsberg used phrases such as \"cocksucker\", \"fucked in the ass\", and \"cunt\" as part of the poem's depiction of different aspects of American culture. Numerous books that discussed sex were banned at the time, including \"Lady Chatterley's Lover\". The sex that Ginsberg described did not portray the sex between heterosexual married couples, or even longtime lovers. Instead, Ginsberg portrayed casual sex. For example, in \"Howl\", Ginsberg praises the man \"who sweetened the snatches of a million girls\". Ginsberg used gritty descriptions and explicit sexual language, pointing out the man \"who lounged hungry and lonesome through Houston seeking jazz or sex or soup.\" In his poetry, Ginsberg also discussed the then-taboo topic of homosexuality. The explicit sexual language that filled \"Howl\" eventually led to an important trial on First Amendment issues. Ginsberg's publisher was brought up on charges for publishing pornography, and the outcome led to a judge going on record dismissing charges, because the poem carried \"redeeming social importance\", thus setting an important legal precedent. Ginsberg continued to broach controversial subjects throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. From 1970 to 1996, Ginsberg had a long-term affiliation with PEN American Center with efforts to defend free expression. When explaining how he approached controversial topics, he often pointed to Herbert Huncke: he said that when he first got to know Huncke in the 1940s, Ginsberg saw that he was sick from his heroin addiction, but at the time heroin was a taboo subject and Huncke was left with nowhere to go for help.\nRole in Vietnam War protests.\nGinsberg was a signer of the anti-war manifesto \"A Call to Resist Illegitimate Authority\", circulated among draft resistors in 1967 by members of the radical intellectual collective RESIST. Other signers and RESIST members included Mitchell Goodman, Henry Braun, Denise Levertov, Noam Chomsky, William Sloane Coffin, Dwight Macdonald, Robert Lowell, and Norman Mailer. In 1968, Ginsberg signed the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War, and later became a sponsor of the War Tax Resistance project, which practiced and advocated tax resistance as a form of anti-war protest.\nHe was present the night of the Tompkins Square Park riot (1988) and provided an eyewitness account to \"The New York Times\".\nRelationship to communism.\nGinsberg talked openly about his connections with communism and his admiration for past communist heroes and the labor movement at a time when the Red Scare and McCarthyism were still raging. He admired Fidel Castro and many other Marxist figures from the 20th century. In \"America\" (1956), Ginsberg writes: \"America, I used to be a communist when I was a kid I'm not sorry\". Biographer Jonah Raskin has claimed that, despite his often stark opposition to communist orthodoxy, Ginsberg held \"his own idiosyncratic version of communism\". On the other hand, when Donald Manes, a New York City politician, publicly accused Ginsberg of being a member of the Communist Party, Ginsberg objected: \"I am not, as a matter of fact, a member of the Communist party, nor am I dedicated to the overthrow of the U.S. government or any government by violence\u00a0... I must say that I see little difference between the armed and violent governments both Communist and Capitalist that I have observed\".\nGinsberg travelled to several communist countries to promote free speech. He claimed that communist countries, such as China, welcomed him because they thought he was an enemy of capitalism, but often turned against him when they saw him as a troublemaker. For example, in 1965 Ginsberg was deported from Cuba for publicly protesting the persecution of homosexuals. The Cubans sent him to Czechoslovakia, where one week after being named the \"Kr\u00e1l maj\u00e1lesu\" (\"King of May\", a students' festivity, celebrating spring and student life), Ginsberg was arrested for alleged drug use and public drunkenness, and the security agency StB confiscated several of his writings, which they considered to be lewd and morally dangerous. Ginsberg was then deported from Czechoslovakia on May 7, 1965, by order of the StB. V\u00e1clav Havel points to Ginsberg as an important inspiration.\nGay rights.\nOne contribution that is often considered his most significant and most controversial was his openness about homosexuality. Ginsberg was an early proponent of freedom for gay people. In 1943, he discovered within himself \"mountains of homosexuality.\" He expressed this desire openly and graphically in his poetry. He also struck a note for gay marriage by listing Peter Orlovsky, his lifelong companion, as his spouse in his \"Who's Who\" entry. Subsequent gay writers saw his frank talk about homosexuality as an opening to speak more openly and honestly about something often before only hinted at or spoken of in metaphor.\nIn writing about sexuality in graphic detail and in his frequent use of language seen as indecent, he challenged\u2014and ultimately changed\u2014obscenity laws. He was a staunch supporter of others whose expression challenged obscenity laws (William S. Burroughs and Lenny Bruce, for example).\nAssociation with NAMBLA.\nGinsberg was a supporter and member of the North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), a pedophilia and pederasty advocacy organization in the United States that works to abolish age of consent laws and legalize sexual relations between adults and children. Saying that he joined the organization \"in defense of free speech\", Ginsberg stated: \"Attacks on NAMBLA stink of politics, witchhunting for profit, humorlessness, vanity, anger and ignorance\u00a0...\u00a0I'm a member of NAMBLA because I love boys too\u2014everybody does, who has a little humanity\". In 1994, Ginsberg appeared in a documentary on NAMBLA called \"\" (playing on the gay male slang term \"Chickenhawk\"), in which he read a \"graphic ode to youth\".\nIn her 2002 book \"Heartbreak\", Andrea Dworkin claimed Ginsberg had ulterior motives for allying with NAMBLA:\nDemystification of drugs.\nGinsberg talked often about drug use. He organized the New York City chapter of LeMar (Legalize Marijuana). Throughout the 1960s he took an active role in the demystification of LSD, and, with Timothy Leary, worked to promote its common use. He remained for many decades an advocate of marijuana legalization, and, at the same time, warned his audiences against the hazards of tobacco in his \"Put Down Your Cigarette Rag (Don't Smoke):\" \"Don't Smoke Don't Smoke Nicotine Nicotine No / No don't smoke the official Dope Smoke Dope Dope.\"\nCIA drug trafficking.\nGinsberg worked closely with Alfred W. McCoy on the latter's book \"The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia\", which claimed that the CIA was knowingly involved in the production of heroin in the Golden Triangle of Burma, Thailand, and Laos. In addition to working with McCoy, Ginsberg personally confronted Richard Helms, the director of the CIA in the 1970s, about the matter, but Helms denied that the CIA had anything to do with selling illegal drugs. Allen wrote many essays and articles, researching and compiling evidence of the CIA's alleged involvement in drug trafficking, but it took ten years, and the publication of McCoy's book in 1972, before anyone took him seriously. In 1978 Ginsberg received a note from the chief editor of \"The New York Times\", apologizing for not having taken his allegations seriously. The political subject is dealt with in his song/poem \"CIA Dope calypso\". The United States Department of State responded to McCoy's initial allegations stating that they were \"unable to find any evidence to substantiate them, much less proof.\" Subsequent investigations by the Inspector General of the CIA, United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, a.k.a. the Church Committee, also found the charges to be unsubstantiated.\nWork.\nMost of Ginsberg's very early poetry was written in formal rhyme and meter like that of his father, and of his idol William Blake. His admiration for the writing of Jack Kerouac inspired him to take poetry more seriously. In 1955, upon the advice of a psychiatrist, Ginsberg dropped out of the working world to devote his entire life to poetry. Soon after, he wrote \"Howl\", the poem that brought him and his Beat Generation contemporaries to national attention and allowed him to live as a professional poet for the rest of his life. Later in life, Ginsberg entered academia, teaching poetry as Distinguished Professor of English at Brooklyn College from 1986 until his death.\nInspiration from friends.\nGinsberg claimed throughout his life that his biggest inspiration was Kerouac's concept of \"spontaneous prose\". He believed literature should come from the soul without conscious restrictions. Ginsberg was much more prone to revise than Kerouac. For example, when Kerouac saw the first draft of \"Howl\" he disliked the fact that Ginsberg had made editorial changes in pencil (transposing \"negro\" and \"angry\" in the first line, for example). Kerouac only wrote out his concepts of spontaneous prose at Ginsberg's insistence because Ginsberg wanted to learn how to apply the technique to his poetry.\nThe inspiration for \"Howl\" was Ginsberg's friend, Carl Solomon, and \"Howl\" is dedicated to him. Solomon was a Dada and Surrealism enthusiast (he introduced Ginsberg to Artaud) who suffered bouts of clinical depression. Solomon wanted to commit suicide, but he thought a form of suicide appropriate to dadaism would be to go to a mental institution and demand a lobotomy. The institution refused, giving him many forms of therapy, including electroshock therapy. Much of the final section of the first part of \"Howl\" is a description of this.\nGinsberg used Solomon as an example of all those ground down by the machine of \"Moloch\". Moloch, to whom the second section is addressed, is a Levantine god to whom children were sacrificed. Ginsberg may have gotten the name from the Kenneth Rexroth poem \"Thou Shalt Not Kill\", a poem about the death of one of Ginsberg's heroes, Dylan Thomas. Moloch is mentioned a few times in the Torah and references to Ginsberg's Jewish background are frequent in his work. Ginsberg said the image of Moloch was inspired by peyote visions he had of the Francis Drake Hotel in San Francisco which appeared to him as a skull; he took it as a symbol of the city (not specifically San Francisco, but all cities). Ginsberg later acknowledged in various publications and interviews that behind the visions of the Francis Drake Hotel were memories of the Moloch of Fritz Lang's film \"Metropolis\" (1927) and of the woodcut novels of Lynd Ward. Moloch has subsequently been interpreted as any system of control, including the conformist society of post-World War II America, focused on material gain, which Ginsberg frequently blamed for the destruction of all those outside of societal norms.\nHe also made sure to emphasize that Moloch is a part of humanity in multiple aspects, in that the decision to \"defy\" socially created systems of control\u2014and therefore go against Moloch\u2014is a form of self-destruction. Many of the characters Ginsberg references in \"Howl\", such as Neal Cassady and Herbert Huncke, destroyed themselves through excessive substance abuse or a generally wild lifestyle. The personal aspects of \"Howl\" are perhaps as important as the political aspects. Carl Solomon, the prime example of a \"best mind\" destroyed by defying society, is associated with Ginsberg's schizophrenic mother: the line \"with mother finally fucked\" comes after a long section about Carl Solomon, and in Part III, Ginsberg says: \"I'm with you in Rockland where you imitate the shade of my mother.\" Ginsberg later admitted that the drive to write \"Howl\" was fueled by sympathy for his ailing mother, an issue which he was not yet ready to deal with directly. He dealt with it directly with 1959's \"Kaddish\", which had its first public reading at a Catholic Worker Friday Night meeting, possibly due to its associations with Thomas Merton.\nInspiration from mentors and idols.\nGinsberg's poetry was strongly influenced by Modernism (most importantly the American style of Modernism pioneered by William Carlos Williams), Romanticism (specifically William Blake and John Keats), the beat and cadence of jazz (specifically that of bop musicians such as Charlie Parker), and his Kagyu Buddhist practice and Jewish background. He considered himself to have inherited the visionary poetic mantle handed down from the English poet and artist William Blake, the American poet Walt Whitman and the Spanish poet Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca. The power of Ginsberg's verse, its searching, probing focus, its long and lilting lines, as well as its New World exuberance, all echo the continuity of inspiration that he claimed.\nHe corresponded with William Carlos Williams, who was then in the middle of writing his epic poem \"Paterson\" about the industrial city near his home. After attending a reading by Williams, Ginsberg sent the older poet several of his poems and wrote an introductory letter. Most of these early poems were rhymed and metered and included archaic pronouns like \"thee.\" Williams disliked the poems and told Ginsberg, \"In this mode perfection is basic, and these poems are not perfect.\"\nThough he disliked these early poems, Williams loved the exuberance in Ginsberg's letter. He included the letter in a later part of \"Paterson\". He encouraged Ginsberg not to emulate the old masters, but to speak with his own voice and the voice of the common American. From Williams, Ginsberg learned to focus on strong visual images, in line with Williams' own motto \"No ideas but in things.\" Studying Williams' style led to a tremendous shift from the early formalist work to a loose, colloquial free verse style. Early breakthrough poems include \"Bricklayer's Lunch Hour\" and \"Dream Record\".\nCarl Solomon introduced Ginsberg to the work of Antonin Artaud (\"To Have Done with the Judgement of God\" and \"Van Gogh: The Man Suicided by Society\"), and Jean Genet (\"Our Lady of the Flowers\"). Philip Lamantia introduced him to other Surrealists and Surrealism continued to be an influence (for example, sections of \"Kaddish\" were inspired by Andr\u00e9 Breton's \"Free Union\"). Ginsberg claimed that the anaphoric repetition of \"Howl\" and other poems was inspired by Christopher Smart in such poems as \"Jubilate Agno\". Ginsberg also claimed other more traditional influences, such as: Franz Kafka, Herman Melville, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Edgar Allan Poe, and Emily Dickinson.\nGinsberg also made an intense study of haiku and the paintings of Paul C\u00e9zanne, from which he adapted a concept important to his work, which he called the \"Eyeball Kick\". He noticed in viewing C\u00e9zanne's paintings that when the eye moved from one color to a contrasting color, the eye would spasm, or \"kick.\" Likewise, he discovered that the contrast of two seeming opposites was a common feature in haiku. Ginsberg used this technique in his poetry, putting together two starkly dissimilar images: something weak with something strong, an artifact of high culture with an artifact of low culture, something holy with something unholy. The example Ginsberg most often used was \"hydrogen jukebox\" (which later became the title of a song cycle composed by Philip Glass with lyrics drawn from Ginsberg's poems). Another example is Ginsberg's observation on Bob Dylan during Dylan's hectic and intense 1966 electric-guitar tour, fuelled by a cocktail of amphetamines, opiates, alcohol, and psychedelics, as a \"Dexedrine Clown\". The phrases \"eyeball kick\" and \"hydrogen jukebox\" both show up in \"Howl\", as well as a direct quote from C\u00e9zanne: \"Pater Omnipotens Aeterna Deus\".\nInspiration from music.\nAllen Ginsberg also found inspiration in music. He frequently included music in his poetry, invariably composing his tunes on an old Indian harmonium, which he often played during his readings. He wrote and recorded music to accompany William Blake's \"Songs of Innocence\" and \"Songs of Experience\". He also recorded a handful of other albums. To create music for \"Howl\" and \"Wichita Vortex Sutra\" he worked with the minimalist composer, Philip Glass.\nGinsberg worked with, drew inspiration from, and inspired artists such as Bob Dylan, The Clash, Patti Smith, Phil Ochs, and The Fugs. He worked with Dylan on various projects and maintained a friendship with him over many years.\nIn 1996, he also recorded a song co-written with Paul McCartney and Philip Glass, \"The Ballad of the Skeletons\", which reached number 8 on the Triple J Hottest 100 for that year.\nStyle and technique.\nFrom the study of his idols and mentors and the inspiration of his friends\u2014not to mention his own experiments\u2014Ginsberg developed an individualistic style that's easily identified as Ginsbergian. Ginsberg stated that Whitman's long line was a dynamic technique few other poets had ventured to develop further, and Whitman is also often compared to Ginsberg because their poetry sexualized aspects of the male form.\nMany of Ginsberg's early long line experiments contain some sort of anaphora, repetition of a \"fixed base\" (for example \"who\" in \"Howl\", \"America\" in \"America\") and this has become a recognizable feature of Ginsberg's style. He said later this was a crutch because he lacked confidence; he did not yet trust \"free flight\". In the 1960s, after employing it in some sections of \"Kaddish\" (\"caw\" for example) he, for the most part, abandoned the anaphoric form.\nSeveral of his earlier experiments with methods for formatting poems as a whole became regular aspects of his style in later poems. In the original draft of \"Howl\", each line is in a \"stepped triadic\" format reminiscent of William Carlos Williams. However, he abandoned the \"stepped triadic\" when he developed his long line although the stepped lines showed up later, most significantly in the travelogues of \"The Fall of America\". \"Howl\" and \"Kaddish\", arguably his two most important poems, are both organized as an inverted pyramid, with larger sections leading to smaller sections. In \"America\", he also experimented with a mix of longer and shorter lines.\nGinsberg's mature style made use of many specific, highly developed techniques, which he expressed in the \"poetic slogans\" he used in his Naropa teaching. Prominent among these was the inclusion of his unedited mental associations so as to reveal the mind at work (\"First thought, best thought.\" \"Mind is shapely, thought is shapely.\") He preferred expression through carefully observed physical details rather than abstract statements (\"Show, don't tell.\" \"No ideas but in things.\") In these he carried on and developed traditions of modernism in writing that are also found in Kerouac and Whitman\nIn \"Howl\" and in his other poetry, Ginsberg drew inspiration from the epic, free verse style of the 19th-century American poet Walt Whitman. Both wrote passionately about the promise (and betrayal) of American democracy, the central importance of erotic experience, and the spiritual quest for the truth of everyday existence. J. D. McClatchy, editor of the \"Yale Review\", called Ginsberg \"the best-known American poet of his generation, as much a social force as a literary phenomenon.\" McClatchy added that Ginsberg, like Whitman, \"was a bard in the old manner\u2014outsized, darkly prophetic, part exuberance, part prayer, part rant. His work is finally a history of our era's psyche, with all its contradictory urges.\" McClatchy's barbed eulogies define the essential difference between Ginsberg (\"a beat poet whose writing was\u00a0[...] journalism raised by combining the recycling genius with a generous mimic-empathy, to strike audience-accessible chords; always lyrical and sometimes truly poetic\") and Kerouac (\"a poet of singular brilliance, the brightest luminary of a 'beat generation' he came to symbolise in popular culture\u00a0[...] [though] in reality he far surpassed his contemporaries\u00a0[...] Kerouac is an originating genius, exploring then answering\u2014like Rimbaud a century earlier, by necessity more than by choice\u2014the demands of authentic self-expression as applied to the evolving quicksilver mind of America's only literary virtuoso\u00a0[...]\").\nHonors.\nHis collection \"The Fall of America\" shared the annual U.S. National Book Award for Poetry in 1974. In 1979, he received the National Arts Club gold medal and was inducted into the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. Ginsberg was a Pulitzer Prize finalist in 1995 for his book \"Cosmopolitan Greetings: Poems 1986\u20131992\".\nIn 2014, Ginsberg was one of the inaugural honorees in the Rainbow Honor Walk, a walk of fame in San Francisco's Castro neighborhood noting LGBTQ people who have \"made significant contributions in their fields.\""}
{"id": "1018", "revid": "995525600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1018", "title": "Algebraically closed field", "text": "In mathematics, a field is algebraically closed if every non-constant polynomial in (the univariate polynomial ring with coefficients in ) has a root in .\nExamples.\nAs an example, the field of real numbers is not algebraically closed, because the polynomial equation \"x\"2\u00a0+\u00a01\u00a0=\u00a00\u00a0 has no solution in real numbers, even though all its coefficients (1 and 0) are real. The same argument proves that no subfield of the real field is algebraically closed; in particular, the field of rational numbers is not algebraically closed. Also, no finite field \"F\" is algebraically closed, because if \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., \"an\" are the elements of \"F\", then the polynomial (\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"1)(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"2)\u00a0\u22ef\u00a0(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"\"n\")\u00a0+\u00a01\nhas no zero in \"F\". By contrast, the fundamental theorem of algebra states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed. Another example of an algebraically closed field is the field of (complex) algebraic numbers.\nEquivalent properties.\nGiven a field \"F\", the assertion \"\"F\" is algebraically closed\" is equivalent to other assertions:\nThe only irreducible polynomials are those of degree one.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if the only irreducible polynomials in the polynomial ring \"F\"[\"x\"] are those of degree one.\nThe assertion \"the polynomials of degree one are irreducible\" is trivially true for any field. If \"F\" is algebraically closed and \"p\"(\"x\") is an irreducible polynomial of \"F\"[\"x\"], then it has some root \"a\" and therefore \"p\"(\"x\") is a multiple of \"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\". Since \"p\"(\"x\") is irreducible, this means that \"p\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"k\"(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"), for some \"k\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"F\"\u00a0\\\u00a0{0}. On the other hand, if \"F\" is not algebraically closed, then there is some non-constant polynomial \"p\"(\"x\") in \"F\"[\"x\"] without roots in \"F\". Let \"q\"(\"x\") be some irreducible factor of \"p\"(\"x\"). Since \"p\"(\"x\") has no roots in \"F\", \"q\"(\"x\") also has no roots in \"F\". Therefore, \"q\"(\"x\") has degree greater than one, since every first degree polynomial has one root in \"F\".\nEvery polynomial is a product of first degree polynomials.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial \"p\"(\"x\") of degree \"n\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a01, with coefficients in \"F\", splits into linear factors. In other words, there are elements \"k\",\u00a0\"x\"1,\u00a0\"x\"2,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"xn\" of the field \"F\" such that \"p\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"k\"(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"x\"1)(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"x\"2)\u00a0\u22ef\u00a0(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"xn\").\nIf \"F\" has this property, then clearly every non-constant polynomial in \"F\"[\"x\"] has some root in \"F\"; in other words, \"F\" is algebraically closed. On the other hand, that the property stated here holds for \"F\" if \"F\" is algebraically closed follows from the previous property together with the fact that, for any field \"K\", any polynomial in \"K\"[\"x\"] can be written as a product of irreducible polynomials.\nPolynomials of prime degree have roots.\nIf every polynomial over \"F\" of prime degree has a root in \"F\", then every non-constant polynomial has a root in \"F\". It follows that a field is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial over \"F\" of prime degree has a root in \"F\".\nThe field has no proper algebraic extension.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if it has no proper algebraic extension.\nIf \"F\" has no proper algebraic extension, let \"p\"(\"x\") be some irreducible polynomial in \"F\"[\"x\"]. Then the quotient of \"F\"[\"x\"] modulo the ideal generated by \"p\"(\"x\") is an algebraic extension of \"F\" whose degree is equal to the degree of \"p\"(\"x\"). Since it is not a proper extension, its degree is 1 and therefore the degree of \"p\"(\"x\") is\u00a01.\nOn the other hand, if \"F\" has some proper algebraic extension \"K\", then the minimal polynomial of an element in \"K\"\u00a0\\\u00a0\"F\" is irreducible and its degree is greater than\u00a01.\nThe field has no proper finite extension.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if it has no proper finite extension because if, within the previous proof, the term \"algebraic extension\" is replaced by the term \"finite extension\", then the proof is still valid. (Note that finite extensions are necessarily algebraic.)\nEvery endomorphism of \"Fn\" has some eigenvector.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if, for each natural number \"n\", every linear map from \"Fn\" into itself has some eigenvector.\nAn endomorphism of \"Fn\" has an eigenvector if and only if its characteristic polynomial has some root. Therefore, when \"F\" is algebraically closed, every endomorphism of \"Fn\" has some eigenvector. On the other hand, if every endomorphism of \"Fn\" has an eigenvector, let \"p\"(\"x\") be an element of \"F\"[\"x\"]. Dividing by its leading coefficient, we get another polynomial \"q\"(\"x\") which has roots if and only if \"p\"(\"x\") has roots. But if \"q\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"xn\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"a\"\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\"x\"\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01+\u00a0\u22ef\u00a0+\u00a0\"a\"0, then \"q\"(\"x\") is the characteristic polynomial of the \"n\u00d7n\" companion matrix\nDecomposition of rational expressions.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if every rational function in one variable \"x\", with coefficients in \"F\", can be written as the sum of a polynomial function with rational functions of the form \"a\"/(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"b\")n, where \"n\" is a natural number, and \"a\" and \"b\" are elements of \"F\".\nIf \"F\" is algebraically closed then, since the irreducible polynomials in \"F\"[\"x\"] are all of degree 1, the property stated above holds by the theorem on partial fraction decomposition.\nOn the other hand, suppose that the property stated above holds for the field \"F\". Let \"p\"(\"x\") be an irreducible element in \"F\"[\"x\"]. Then the rational function 1/\"p\" can be written as the sum of a polynomial function \"q\" with rational functions of the form \"a\"/(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"b\")n. Therefore, the rational expression\ncan be written as a quotient of two polynomials in which the denominator is a product of first degree polynomials. Since \"p\"(\"x\") is irreducible, it must divide this product and, therefore, it must also be a first degree polynomial.\nRelatively prime polynomials and roots.\nFor any field \"F\", if two polynomials \"p\"(\"x\"),\"q\"(\"x\")\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"F\"[\"x\"] are relatively prime then they do not have a common root, for if \"a\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"F\" was a common root, then\u00a0\"p\"(\"x\") and \u00a0\"q\"(\"x\") would both be multiples of \"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\" and therefore they would not be relatively prime. The fields for which the reverse implication holds (that is, the fields such that whenever two polynomials have no common root then they are relatively prime) are precisely the algebraically closed fields.\nIf the field \"F\" is algebraically closed, let \"p\"(\"x\") and \"q\"(\"x\") be two polynomials which are not relatively prime and let \"r\"(\"x\") be their greatest common divisor. Then, since \"r\"(\"x\") is not constant, it will have some root \"a\", which will be then a common root of \"p\"(\"x\") and \"q\"(\"x\").\nIf \"F\" is not algebraically closed, let \"p\"(\"x\") be a polynomial whose degree is at least 1 without roots. Then \"p\"(\"x\") and \"p\"(\"x\") are not relatively prime, but they have no common roots (since none of them has roots).\nOther properties.\nIf \"F\" is an algebraically closed field and \"n\" is a natural number, then \"F\" contains all \"n\"th roots of unity, because these are (by definition) the \"n\" (not necessarily distinct) zeroes of the polynomial \"xn\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01. A field extension that is contained in an extension generated by the roots of unity is a \"cyclotomic extension\", and the extension of a field generated by all roots of unity is sometimes called its \"cyclotomic closure\". Thus algebraically closed fields are cyclotomically closed. The converse is not true. Even assuming that every polynomial of the form \"xn\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\" splits into linear factors is not enough to assure that the field is algebraically closed.\nIf a proposition which can be expressed in the language of first-order logic is true for an algebraically closed field, then it is true for every algebraically closed field with the same characteristic. Furthermore, if such a proposition is valid for an algebraically closed field with characteristic\u00a00, then not only is it valid for all other algebraically closed fields with characteristic\u00a00, but there is some natural number \"N\" such that the proposition is valid for every algebraically closed field with characteristic\u00a0\"p\" when \"p\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"N\".\nEvery field \"F\" has some extension which is algebraically closed. Such an extension is called an algebraically closed extension. Among all such extensions there is one and only one (up to isomorphism, but not unique isomorphism) which is an algebraic extension of \"F\"; it is called the algebraic closure of \"F\".\nThe theory of algebraically closed fields has quantifier elimination."}
{"id": "1019", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1019", "title": "August 6", "text": ""}
{"id": "1020", "revid": "36294989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1020", "title": "Anatoly Karpov", "text": "Anatoly Yevgenyevich Karpov (; born May 23, 1951) is a Russian chess player and former World Champion. He was the official world champion from 1975 to 1985 when he was defeated by Garry Kasparov. \nKarpov played five matches against Kasparov for the title from 1984 to 1990 without ever defeating him in a match, later becoming FIDE World Champion once again after Kasparov broke away from FIDE in 1993. He held the title until 1999, when he resigned his title in protest against FIDE's new world championship rules.\nHis tournament successes include over 160 first-place finishes. He had a peak Elo rating of 2780, and his 102 total months at world number one is the third longest of all time, behind Magnus Carlsen and Garry Kasparov, since the inception of the FIDE ranking list in 1970.\nEarly life.\nKarpov was born on May 23, 1951, in Zlatoust, in the Urals region of the former Soviet Union, and learned to play chess at the age of four. His early rise in chess was swift, as he became a candidate master by age 11. At 12, he was accepted into Mikhail Botvinnik's prestigious chess school, though Botvinnik made the following remark about the young Karpov: \"The boy does not have a clue about chess, and there's no future at all for him in this profession.\" \nKarpov acknowledged that his understanding of chess theory was very confused at that time, and later wrote that the homework Botvinnik assigned greatly helped him, since it required that he consult chess books and work diligently. Karpov improved so quickly under Botvinnik's tutelage that he became the youngest Soviet master in history at fifteen in 1966; this tied the record established by Boris Spassky in 1952.\nCareer.\nYoung master.\nKarpov finished first in his first international tournament in T\u0159inec several months later, ahead of Viktor Kupreichik. In 1967, he won the annual Niemeyer Tournament at Groningen. Karpov won a gold medal for academic excellence in high school, and entered Moscow State University in 1968 to study mathematics. He later transferred to Leningrad State University, eventually graduating from there in economics. One reason for the transfer was to be closer to his coach, grandmaster Semyon Furman, who lived in Leningrad. In his writings, Karpov credits Furman as a major influence on his development as a world-class player.\nIn 1969, Karpov became the first Soviet player since Spassky (1955) to win the World Junior Championship, scoring an undefeated 10/11 in the final A at Stockholm. This victory earned him the international master title. In 1970, he tied for fourth and fifth places with Pal Benko at an international tournament in Caracas, Venezuela, and earned the international grandmaster title. FIDE awarded him the title during its 41st congress, held during the Chess Olympiad in Siegen, West Germany in September 1970.\nTop-class grandmaster.\nHe won the 1971 Alekhine Memorial tournament in Moscow (jointly with Leonid Stein), ahead of a star-studded field, for his first significant adult victory. His Elo rating shot from 2540 in 1971 to 2660 in 1973, when he shared second place in the USSR Chess Championship.\nCandidate.\nKarpov's world junior championship qualified him for one of the two Interzonals, a stage in the 1975 World Championship cycle to choose the challenger to play world champion Bobby Fischer. He finished equal first in the Leningrad Interzonal, qualifying for the 1974 Candidates Matches.\nKarpov defeated Lev Polugaevsky by the score of +3=5 in the first Candidates' match, earning the right to face former champion Boris Spassky in the semifinal round. Karpov was on record saying that he believed Spassky would easily beat him and win the Candidates' cycle to face Fischer, and that he (Karpov) would win the following Candidates' cycle in 1977. Spassky won the first game as Black in good style, but tenacious, aggressive play from Karpov secured him overall victory by +4\u22121=6.\nThe Candidates' final was played in Moscow with Korchnoi. Karpov took an early lead, winning the second game against the Sicilian Dragon, then scoring another victory in the sixth game. Following ten consecutive draws, Korchnoi threw away a winning position in the seventeenth game to give Karpov a 3\u20130 lead. In game 19, Korchnoi succeeded in winning a long endgame, then notched a speedy victory after a blunder by Karpov two games later. Three more draws, the last agreed by Karpov in a clearly better position, closed the match, as he thus prevailed +3\u22122=19, moving on to challenge Fischer for the world title.\nMatch with Fischer in 1975.\nThough a world championship match between Karpov and Fischer was highly anticipated, those hopes were never realised. Fischer not only insisted that the match be the first to ten wins (draws not counting), but also that the champion retain the crown if the score was tied 9\u20139. FIDE, the International Chess Federation, refused to allow this proviso, and gave both players a deadline of April 1, 1975 to agree to play the match under the FIDE-approved rules. When Fischer did not agree, FIDE President Max Euwe declared on April 3, 1975 that Fischer had forfeited his title and Karpov was the new World Champion. Karpov later attempted to set up another match with Fischer, but the negotiations fell through. This thrust the young Karpov into the role of World Champion without having faced the reigning champion. \nGarry Kasparov argued that Karpov would have had good chances, because he had beaten Spassky convincingly and was a new breed of tough professional, and indeed had higher quality games, while Fischer had been inactive for three years. This view is echoed by Karpov himself. Spassky thought that Fischer would have won in 1975 but Karpov would have qualified again and beaten Fischer in 1978.\nKarpov is on record saying that if he had had the opportunity to play Fischer for the crown in his twenties, he could have been a much better player as a result.\nWorld champion.\nDetermined to prove himself a legitimate champion, Karpov participated in nearly every major tournament for the next ten years. He convincingly won the very strong Milan tournament in 1975, and captured his first of three Soviet titles in 1976. He created a phenomenal streak of tournament wins against the strongest players in the world. Karpov held the record for most consecutive tournament victories (9) until it was shattered by Garry Kasparov (14). As a result, most chess professionals soon agreed that Karpov was a legitimate world champion.\nIn 1978, Karpov's first title defence was against Viktor Korchnoi, the opponent he had defeated in the 1973\u201375 Candidates' cycle; the match was played at Baguio, Philippines, with the winner needing six victories.\nAs in 1974, Karpov took an early lead, winning the eighth game after seven draws to open the match. When the score was +5\u22122=20 in Karpov's favour, Korchnoi staged a comeback, and won three of the next four games to draw level with Karpov. Karpov then won the very next game to retain the title (+6\u22125=21).\nThree years later Korchnoi reemerged as the Candidates' winner against German finalist Robert H\u00fcbner to challenge Karpov in Merano, Italy. Karpov handily won this match, 11\u20137 (+6\u22122=10), in what is remembered as the \"Massacre in Merano\".\nKarpov's tournament career reached a peak at the Montreal \"Tournament of Stars\" tournament in 1979, where he finished joint first (+7\u22121=10) with Mikhail Tal ahead of a field of strong grandmasters completed by Jan Timman, Ljubomir Ljubojevi\u0107, Boris Spassky, Vlastimil Hort, Lajos Portisch, H\u00fcbner, Bent Larsen and Lubomir Kavalek. He dominated Las Palmas 1977 with 13\u00bd/15. He also won the prestigious Bugojno tournament in 1978 (shared), 1980 and 1986, the Linares tournament in 1981 (shared with Larry Christiansen) and 1994, the Tilburg tournament in 1977, 1979, 1980, 1982, and 1983, and the Soviet Championship in 1976, 1983, and 1988.\nKarpov represented the Soviet Union at six Chess Olympiads, in all of which the USSR won the team gold medal. He played as the first reserve at Skopje 1972, winning the board prize with 13/15. At Nice 1974, he advanced to board one and again won the board prize with 12/14. At La Valletta 1980, he was again board one and scored 9/12. At Lucerne 1982, he scored 6\u00bd/8 on board one. At Dubai 1986, he scored 6/9 on board two. His last was Thessaloniki 1988, where on board two he scored 8/10. In Olympiad play, Karpov lost only two games out of 68 played.\nTo illustrate Karpov's dominance over his peers as champion, his score was +11\u22122=20 versus Spassky, +5=12 versus Robert H\u00fcbner, +6\u22121=16 versus Ulf Andersson, +3\u22121=10 versus Vasily Smyslov, +1=16 versus Mikhail Tal, and +10\u22122=13 versus Ljubomir Ljubojevi\u0107.\nRivalry with Kasparov.\nKarpov had cemented his position as the world's best player and world champion by the time Garry Kasparov arrived on the scene. In their first match, the World Chess Championship 1984 in Moscow, the first player to win six games would win the match. Karpov built a 4\u20130 lead after nine games. The next 17 games were drawn, setting a record for world title matches, and it took Karpov until game 27 to gain his fifth win. In game 31, Karpov had a winning position but failed to take advantage and settled for a draw. He lost the next game, after which 14 more draws ensued. Karpov held a solidly winning position in Game 41, but again blundered and had to settle for a draw. After Kasparov won games 47 and 48, FIDE President Florencio Campomanes unilaterally terminated the match, citing the players' health. Karpov is said to have lost 10kg over the course of the match. The match had lasted an unprecedented five months, with five wins for Karpov, three for Kasparov, and 40 draws.\nA rematch was set for later in 1985, also in Moscow. The events of the so-called Marathon Match forced FIDE to return to the previous format, with a match limited to 24 games (with Karpov remaining champion if the match finished 12\u201312). Karpov needed to win the final game to draw the match and retain his title, but lost, surrendering the title to his opponent. The final score was 13\u201311 (+3\u22125=16) in favour of Kasparov.\nKarpov remained a formidable opponent (and the world No. 2) until the early 1990s. He fought Kasparov in three more world championship matches in 1986 (held in London and Leningrad), 1987 (in Seville), and 1990 (in New York City and Lyon). All three matches were extremely close: the scores were 11\u00bd\u201312\u00bd (+4\u22125=15), 12\u201312 (+4\u22124=16), and 11\u00bd\u201312\u00bd (+3\u22124=17). In all three matches, Karpov had winning chances up to the last games. In particular, the 1987 Seville match featured an astonishing blunder by Kasparov in the 23rd game. In the final game, needing only a draw to win the title, Karpov cracked under time pressure at the end of the first session of play, missed a variation leading to an almost forced draw, and allowed Kasparov to adjourn the game with an extra pawn. After a further mistake in the second session, Karpov was slowly ground down and resigned on move 64, ending the match and allowing Kasparov to keep the title.\nIn their five world championship matches, Karpov scored 19 wins, 21 losses, and 104 draws in 144 games.\nFIDE champion again (1993\u20131999).\nIn 1992, Karpov lost a Candidates Match against Nigel Short. But in the World Chess Championship 1993, Karpov reacquired the FIDE World Champion title when Kasparov and Short split from FIDE. Karpov defeated Timman \u2013 the loser of the Candidates' final against Short.\nThe next major meeting of Kasparov and Karpov was the 1994 Linares chess tournament. The field, in eventual finishing order, was Karpov, Kasparov, Shirov, Bareev, Kramnik, Lautier, Anand, Kamsky, Topalov, Ivanchuk, Gelfand, Illescas, Judit Polg\u00e1r, and Beliavsky; with an average Elo rating of 2685, the highest ever at that time. Impressed by the strength of the tournament, Kasparov had said several days before the tournament that the winner could rightly be called the world champion of tournaments. Perhaps spurred on by this comment, Karpov played the best tournament of his life. He was undefeated and earned 11 points out of 13 (the best world-class tournament winning percentage since Alekhine won San Remo in 1930), finishing 2\u00bd points ahead of second-place Kasparov and Shirov. Many of his wins were spectacular (in particular, his win over Topalov is considered possibly the finest of his career). This performance against the best players in the world put his Elo rating tournament performance at 2985, the highest performance rating of any player in history up until 2009, when Magnus Carlsen won the category XXI Pearl Spring chess tournament with a performance of 3002. Chess statistician Jeff Sonas considers Karpov's Linares performance the best tournament result in history.\nKarpov defended his FIDE title against Gata Kamsky (+6\u22123=9) in 1996. In 1998, FIDE largely scrapped the old system of Candidates' Matches, instead having a large knockout event in which a large number of players contested short matches against each other over just a few weeks. In the first of these events, the FIDE World Chess Championship 1998, champion Karpov was seeded straight into the final, defeating Viswanathan Anand (+2\u22122=2, rapid tiebreak 2\u20130). In the subsequent cycle, the format was changed, with the champion having to qualify. Karpov refused to defend his title, and ceased to be FIDE World Champion after the FIDE World Chess Championship 1999.\nTowards retirement.\nKarpov's classical tournament play has been seriously limited since 1997, since he prefers to be more involved in Russian politics. He had been a member of the Supreme Soviet Commission for Foreign Affairs and the president of the Soviet Peace Fund before the Soviet Union dissolved. In addition, he has been involved in several disputes with FIDE. In the September 2009 FIDE rating list, he dropped out of the world's Top 100 for the first time.\nKarpov usually limits his play to exhibition events, and has revamped his style to specialize in rapid chess. In 2002 he won a match against Kasparov, defeating him in a rapid time control match 2\u00bd\u20131\u00bd. In 2006, he tied for first with Kasparov in a blitz tournament, ahead of Korchnoi and Judit Polg\u00e1r.\nKarpov and Kasparov played a mixed 12-game match from September 21\u201324, 2009, in Valencia, Spain. It consisted of four rapid (or semi-rapid) and eight blitz games and took place exactly 25 years after the two players' legendary encounter at the World Chess Championship 1984. Kasparov won the match 9\u20133.\nKarpov played a match against Yasser Seirawan in 2012 in St. Louis, Missouri, an important center of the North American chess scene, winning 8\u20136 (+5\u22123=6).\nIn November 2012, he won the Cap d'Agde rapid tournament that bears his name (Anatoly Karpov Trophy), beating Vassily Ivanchuk (ranked 9th in the October 2012 FIDE world rankings) in the final.\nPersonal life after retirement.\nSince 2005, he has been a member of the Public Chamber of Russia. He has recently involved himself in several humanitarian causes, such as advocating the use of iodised salt. On December 17, 2012, Karpov supported the law in the Russian Parliament banning adoption of Russian orphans by citizens of the US.\nKarpov expressed support of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, and accused Europe of trying to demonize Putin. In August 2019, Maxim Dlugy said that Karpov had been waiting since March for the approval of a non-immigrant visa to the United States, despite frequently visiting the country since 1972. Karpov had been scheduled to teach a summer camp at the Chess Max Academy. Dlugy said that Karpov had been questioned at the US embassy in Moscow about whether he planned to communicate with American politicians.\nCandidate for FIDE presidency.\nIn March 2010 Karpov announced that he would be a candidate for the presidency of FIDE. The election took place in September 2010 at the 39th Chess Olympiad. In May a fund-raising event took place in New York with the participation of Kasparov and of Magnus Carlsen, both of whom supported his bid and campaigned for him. Nigel Short also supported Karpov's candidacy. On September 29, 2010, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was reelected as president of FIDE, 95 votes to 55.\nStyle.\nKarpov's \"boa constrictor\" playing style is solidly positional, taking minimal risks but reacting mercilessly to any tiny errors made by his opponents. As a result, he is often compared to Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca, the third world champion. Karpov himself describes his style as follows:Let us say the game may be continued in two ways: one of them is a beautiful tactical blow that gives rise to variations that don't yield to precise calculations; the other is clear positional pressure that leads to an endgame with microscopic chances of victory... I would choose [the latter] without thinking twice. If the opponent offers keen play I don't object; but in such cases I get less satisfaction, even if I win, than from a game conducted according to all the rules of strategy with its ruthless logic.\nHobbies.\nKarpov's extensive stamp collection of Belgian philately and Belgian Congo stamps and postal history covering mail from 1742 through 1980 was sold by David Feldman's auction company between December 2011 and 2012. He is also known to have a large chess stamp and chess book collections. His private chess library consists of 9000 books.\nBooks.\nKarpov has authored or co-authored several books, most of which have been translated into English.\nExternal links.\n \n \n "}
{"id": "1021", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1021", "title": "Aspect ratio", "text": "The aspect ratio of a geometric shape is the ratio of its sizes in different dimensions. For example, the aspect ratio of a rectangle is the ratio of its longer side to its shorter sidethe ratio of width to height, when the rectangle is oriented as a \"landscape\".\nThe aspect ratio is most often expressed as two integer numbers separated by a colon (x:y), less commonly as a simple or decimal fraction. The values x and y do not represent actual widths and heights but, rather, the proportion between width and height. As an example, 8:5, 16:10, 1.6:1, and 1.6 are all ways of representing the same aspect ratio.\nIn objects of more than two dimensions, such as hyperrectangles, the aspect ratio can still be defined as the ratio of the longest side to the shortest side.\nApplications and uses.\nThe term is most commonly used with reference to:\nAspect ratios of simple shapes.\nRectangles.\nFor a rectangle, the aspect ratio denotes the ratio of the width to the height of the rectangle. A square has the smallest possible aspect ratio of 1:1.\nExamples:\nEllipses.\nFor an ellipse, the aspect ratio denotes the ratio of the major axis to the minor axis. An ellipse with an aspect ratio of 1:1 is a circle.\nAspect ratios of general shapes.\nIn geometry, there are several alternative definitions to aspect ratios of general compact sets in a d-dimensional space:\nIf the dimension d is fixed, then all reasonable definitions of aspect ratio are equivalent to within constant factors.\nNotations.\nAspect ratios are mathematically expressed as \"x\":\"y\" (pronounced \"x-to-y\").\nCinematographic aspect ratios are usually denoted as a (rounded) decimal multiple of width vs unit height, while photographic and videographic aspect ratios are usually defined and denoted by whole number ratios of width to height. In digital images there is a subtle distinction between the \"display\" aspect ratio (the image as displayed) and the \"storage\" aspect ratio (the ratio of pixel dimensions); see Distinctions."}
{"id": "1022", "revid": "2824367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1022", "title": "Auto racing", "text": "Auto racing (also known as car racing, motor racing, or automobile racing) is a motorsport involving the racing of automobiles for competition.\nAuto racing has existed since the invention of the automobile. Races of various sorts were organised, with the first recorded as early as 1867. Many of the earliest events were effectively reliability trials, aimed at proving these new machines were a practical mode of transport, but soon became an important way for automobile makers to demonstrate their machines. By the 1930s, specialist racing cars had developed.\nThere are now numerous different categories, each with different rules and regulations.\nHistory.\nThe first prearranged match race of two self-powered road vehicles over a prescribed route occurred at 4:30 A.M. on August 30, 1867, between Ashton-under-Lyne and Old Trafford, a distance of eight miles. It was won by the carriage of Isaac Watt Boulton.\nInternal combustion auto racing events began soon after the construction of the first successful gasoline-fueled automobiles. The first organized contest was on April 28, 1887, by the chief editor of Paris publication \"Le V\u00e9locip\u00e8de\", Monsieur Fossier. It ran from Neuilly Bridge to the Bois de Boulogne.\nOn July 22, 1894, the Parisian magazine \"Le Petit Journal\" organized what is considered to be the world's first motoring competition, from Paris to Rouen. One hundred and two competitors paid a 10-franc entrance fee.\nThe first American automobile race is generally held to be the Thanksgiving Day \"Chicago Times-Herald\" race of November 28, 1895. Press coverage of the event first aroused significant American interest in the automobile.\nThe Targa Florio was an open road endurance automobile race held in the mountains of Sicily near the island's capital of Palermo. Founded in 1906, it was the oldest sports car racing event, part of the World Sportscar Championship between 1955 and 1973.\nWith auto construction and racing dominated by France, the French automobile club ACF staged a number of major international races, usually from or to Paris, connecting with another major city, in France or elsewhere in Europe.\nAspendale Racecourse, in Australia, was the world's first purpose-built motor racing circuit, opening in January 1906. The pear shaped track was close to a mile in length, with slightly banked curves and a gravel surface of crushed cement.\nBrooklands, in Surrey, was the first purpose-built 'banked' motor racing venue, opening in June 1907. It featured a concrete track with high-speed banked corners.\nOne of the oldest existing purpose-built automobile racing circuits in the United States, still in use, is the Indianapolis Motor Speedway in Speedway, Indiana. It is the largest capacity sports venue of any variety worldwide, with a top capacity of some 257,000+ seated spectators.\nNASCAR was founded by Bill France, Sr. on February 21, 1948, with the help of several other drivers of the time. The first NASCAR \"Strictly Stock\" race ever was held on June 19, 1949, at Daytona Beach, Florida.\nFrom 1962, sports cars temporarily took a back seat to GT cars, with the FIA replacing the World Championship for Sports Cars with the International Championship for GT Manufacturers.\nFrom 1962 through 2001, NASCAR's premier series was called the Winston Cup Series, sponsored by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company cigarette brand Winston. The changes that resulted from RJR's involvement, as well as the reduction of the schedule from 34 to 56 races a year, established 1972 as the beginning of NASCAR's \"modern era\".\nThe IMSA GT Series evolved into the American Le Mans Series, which ran its first season in 1998. The European races eventually became the closely related Le Mans Series, both of which mix prototypes and GTs.\nTurismo Carretera (Road racing, lit., Road Touring) is a popular touring car racing series in Argentina, and one of the oldest car racing series still active in the world. The first TC competition took place in 1931 with 12 races, each in a different province. Future Formula One star Juan Manuel Fangio (Chevrolet) won the 1940 and 1941 editions of the TC. It was during this time that the series' Chevrolet-Ford rivalry began, with Ford acquiring most of its historical victories.\nCategories.\nOpen-wheel racing.\nThe two most popular varieties of open-wheel road racing are Formula One and the IndyCar Series.\nF1 is a worldwide series that runs only street circuit and race tracks. These cars are heavily based around technology and their aerodynamics. The speed record was set in 2005 by Juan Pablo Montoya hitting 373\u00a0km/h (232\u00a0mph). Some of the most prominent races are the Monaco Grand Prix, the Italian Grand Prix, and the British Grand Prix. The season ends with the crowning of the World Championship for drivers and constructors.\nIn single-seater (open-wheel), the wheels are not covered, and the cars often have aerofoil wings front and rear to produce downforce and enhance adhesion to the track. In Europe and Asia, open-wheeled racing is commonly referred to as 'Formula', with appropriate hierarchical suffixes. In North America, the 'Formula' terminology is not followed (with the exception of F1). The sport is usually arranged to follow an international format (such as F1), a regional format (such as the Formula 3 Euro Series), and/or a domestic, or country-specific, format (such as the German Formula 3 championship, or the British Formula Ford).\nIn the United States, the most popular series is the IndyCar Series. The cars have traditionally been similar to, though less technologically sophisticated than, F1 cars, with more restrictions on technology aimed at controlling costs. While these cars are not as technologically advanced, they are faster, mainly because they compete on oval race tracks, being able to average a lap at 388\u00a0km/h (241\u00a0mph). The series' biggest race is the Indianapolis 500, which is commonly referred to as \"The Greatest Spectacle in Racing\" due to being the longest continuously run race and having the largest crowd for a single-day sporting event (350,000+).\nThe other major international single-seater racing series is Formula 2 (formerly known as Formula 3000 and GP2 Series). Regional series include Formula Nippon and Formula V6 Asia (specifically in Asia), Formula Renault 3.5 (also known as the World Series by Renault, succession series of World Series by Nissan), Formula Three, Formula Palmer Audi and Formula Atlantic. In 2009, the FIA Formula Two Championship brought about the revival of the F2 series. Domestic, or country-specific, series include Formula Three and Formula Renault, with the leading introductory series being Formula Ford.\nSingle-seater racing is not limited merely to professional teams and drivers. There exist many amateur racing clubs. In the UK, the major club series are the Monoposto Racing Club, BRSCC F3 (Formerly ClubF3, formerly ARP F3), Formula Vee and Club Formula Ford. Each series caters for a section of the market, with some primarily providing low-cost racing, while others aim for an authentic experience using the same regulations as the professional series (BRSCC F3).\nThere are other categories of single-seater racing, including kart racing, which employs a small, low-cost machine on small tracks. Many of the current top drivers began their careers in karts. Formula Ford represents the most popular first open-wheel category for up-and-coming drivers stepping up from karts. The series is still the preferred option, as it has introduced an aero package and slicks, allowing the junior drivers to gain experience in a race car with dynamics closer to F1. The Star Mazda Series is another entry-level series.\nStudents at colleges and universities can also take part in single-seater racing through the Formula SAE competition, which involves designing and building a single-seater car in a multidisciplinary team and racing it at the competition. This also develops other soft skills, such as teamwork, while promoting motorsport and engineering.\nThe world's first all-female Formula racing team was created in 2006. The group was an assemblage of drivers from different racing disciplines and formed for an MTV reality pilot, which was shot at Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca.\nIn December 2005, the FIA gave approval to Superleague Formula racing, which debuted in 2008, whereby the racing teams are owned and run by prominent sports clubs such as A.C. Milan and Liverpool F.C.\nAfter 25 years away from the sport, former Formula 2 champion Jonathan Palmer reopened the F2 category again; most drivers have graduated from the Formula Palmer Audi series. The category is officially registered as the FIA Formula Two championship. Most rounds have two races and are support races to the FIA World Touring Car Championship.\nTouring car racing.\nTouring car racing is a style of road racing that is run with production-derived race cars. It often features full-contact racing due to the small speed differentials and large grids.\nThe major touring car championships conducted worldwide are the Supercars Championship (Australia), British Touring Car Championship, Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters (DTM), and the World Touring Car Championship. The European Touring Car Cup is a one-day event open to Super 2000 specification touring cars from Europe's many national championships.\nThe Sports Car Club of America's SPEED World Challenge Touring Car and GT championships are dominant in North America. America's historic Trans-Am Series is undergoing a period of transition, but is still the longest-running road racing series in the U.S. The National Auto Sport Association also provides a venue for amateurs to compete in home-built factory-derived vehicles on various local circuits.\nSports car racing.\nIn sports car racing, production-derived versions of sports cars, also known as grand tourers (GTs), and purpose-built sports prototype cars compete within their respective classes on closed circuits. The premier championship series of sports car racing is the FIA World Endurance Championship. The main series for GT car racing is the Blancpain GT Series, divided into two separate championships: the Blancpain GT World Challenge Europe and the Blancpain GT Series Endurance Cup. This series has formed after the folding of the various FIA GT championships.\nOther major GT championships include the Blancpain GT World Challenge America, Blancpain GT World Challenge Asia, Super GT, and the International GT Open. There are minor regional and national GT series using mainly GT4 and GT3 cars featuring both amateur and professional drivers.\nSports prototypes, unlike GT cars, do not rely on road-legal cars as a base. They are closed-wheel and often closed-cockpit purpose-built race cars intended mainly for endurance racing. They have much lower weight and more down force compared to GT cars, making them much faster. They are raced in the 24 hours of Le Mans (held annually since 1923) and in the (European) Le Mans series, Asian Le Mans Series and the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship. These cars are referred to as LMP (Le Mans prototype) cars with LMP1 being run mainly by manufacturers and the slightly less powerful LMP2 cars run by privateer teams. All three Le Mans Series run GT cars in addition to Le Mans Prototypes; these cars have different restrictions than the FIA GT cars.\nAnother prototype and GT racing championship exists in the United States; the Grand-Am, which began in 2000, sanctions its own endurance series, the Rolex Sports Car Series, which consists of slower and lower-cost race cars compared to LMP and FIA GT cars. The Rolex Sports Car Series and American Le Mans Series announced a merger between the two series forming the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship starting in 2014.\nThese races are often conducted over long distances, at least , and cars are driven by teams of two or more drivers, switching every few hours. Due to the performance difference between production-based sports cars and purpose-built sports prototypes, one race usually involves several racing classes, each fighting for their own championship.\nFamous sports car races include the 24 Hours of Le Mans, the Rolex 24 at Daytona, 24 Hours of Spa-Franchorchamps, the 12 Hours of Sebring, the 6 Hours of Watkins Glen, and the Petit Le Mans at Road Atlanta. There is also the 24 Hours of the N\u00fcrburgring on the infamous Nordschleife track and the Dubai 24 Hour, which is aimed at GT3 and below cars with a mixture of professional and pro-am drivers.\nProduction-car racing.\nProduction-car racing, otherwise known as \"showroom stock\" in the US, is an economical and rules-restricted version of touring-car racing, mainly used to restrict costs. Numerous production racing categories are based on particular makes of cars.\nMost series, with a few exceptions, follow the Group N regulation. There are several different series that are run all over the world, most notably, Japan's Super Taikyu and IMSA's Firehawk Series, which ran in the 1980s and 1990s all over the United States.\nOne-make racing.\nOne-make, or single marque, championships often employ production-based cars from a single manufacturer or even a single model from a manufacturer's range. There are numerous notable one-make formulae from various countries and regions, some of which\u00a0\u2013 such as the Porsche Supercup and, previously, IROC\u00a0\u2013 have fostered many distinct national championships. Single marque series are often found at club level, to which the production-based cars, limited modifications, and close parity in performance are very well suited. Some of the better-known single-make series are the Mini 7 Championship (Europe's longest-running one make championship), the Radical European Masters, John Cooper Mini Challenge, Clio Cup, Ginettas, Caterhams, BMWs, and MX5s. There are also single-chassis single seater formulae, such as Formula Renault and Formula BMW, usually as \"feeder\" series for \"senior\" race formula (in the fashion of farm teams).\nTime Attack Series.\nTime attack events began in Japan in the mid-1960s. They have since spread around the world.\nTime Attack racing is a type of motorsport in which the racers compete for the best lap time. Each vehicle is timed through numerous circuits of the track. The racers make a preliminary circuit, then run the timed laps, and then finish with a cool-down lap.\nTime Attack and time trial events differ by competition format and rules. Time Attack has a limited number of laps, time trial has open sessions.\nUnlike other timed motorsport disciplines such as sprinting and hillclimbing, the car is required to start off under full rolling start conditions following a warm up lap in which they will have to accelerate out as fast as possible to determine how fast they enter their timed lap. Commonly, as the cars are modified road-going cars, they are required to have tires authorized for road use.\nStock car racing.\nIn North America, stock car racing is the most popular form of auto racing. Primarily raced on oval tracks, stock cars vaguely resemble production cars, but are in fact purpose-built racing machines that are built to tight specifications and, together with touring cars, also called Silhouette racing cars.\nThe largest stock car racing governing body is NASCAR (National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing). NASCAR's premier series is the NASCAR Cup Series, its most famous races being the Daytona 500, the Southern 500, the Coca-Cola 600, and the Brickyard 400. NASCAR also runs several feeder series, including the Xfinity Series and Gander RV &amp; Outdoors Truck Series (a pickup truck racing series). The series conduct races across the entire continental United States. The NASCAR Pinty's Series conducts races across Canada and the NASCAR PEAK Mexico Series conducts races across Mexico.\nNASCAR also governs several smaller regional series, such as the Whelen Modified Tour. Modified cars are best described as open-wheel cars. Modified cars have no parts related to the stock vehicle for which they are named after. A number of modified cars display a \"manufacturer's\" logo and \"vehicle name\", yet use components produced by another automobile manufacturer.\nThere are also other stock car governing bodies, most notably the Automobile Racing Club of America (ARCA).\nIn the UK, British Stock car racing is also referred to as \"Short Circuit Racing\". UK Stock car racing started in the 1950s and grew rapidly through the 1960s and 1970s. Events take place on shale or tarmac tracks\u00a0\u2013 usually around 1/4\u00a0mile long. The governing bodies for the sport are the Oval Racing Council (ORC) and BriSCA. Both bodies are made up of individual stadium promoters. There are around 35 tracks in the UK and upwards of 7000 active drivers. The sport is split into three basic divisions\u00a0\u2013 distinguished by the rules regarding car contact during racing. The most famous championship is the BriSCA F1 Stock Cars. Full-contact formulas include Bangers, Bombers and Rookie Bangers\u00a0\u2013 and racing features Demolitions Derbies, Figure of Eight and Oval Racing.\nSemi Contact Formulas include BriSCA F1, F2 and Superstox\u00a0\u2013 where bumpers are used tactically.\nNon-contact formulas include National Hot Rods, Stock Rods, and Lightning Rods.\nRallying.\nRallying at international and most national championship levels involves two classes of homologated road-legal production-based cars; Group N production cars and more modified Group A cars. Cars compete on closed public roads or off-road areas on a point-to-point format where participants and their co-drivers \"rally\" to a set of points, leaving in regular intervals from start points. A rally is typically conducted over a number of \"special stages\" on any terrain, which entrants are often allowed to scout beforehand at reduced speeds compiling detailed shorthand descriptions of the track or road as they go. These detailed descriptions are known as pace notes. During the actual rally, the co-driver reads the pace notes aloud (using an in-helmet intercom system) to the driver, enabling them to complete each stage as quickly as possible. Competition is based on lowest total elapsed time over the course of an event's special stages, including penalties.\nThe top series is the World Rally Championship (WRC), first contested in 1973, but there are also regional championships, and many countries have their own national championships. Some famous rallies include the Monte Carlo Rally, Rally Argentina, Rally Finland, and Rally GB. Another famous event (actually best described as a rally raid) is the Paris-Dakar Rally, conceived in 1978. There are also many smaller, club level, categories of rallies, which are popular with amateurs, making up the \"grass roots\" of motor sports. Cars at this level may not comply fully with the requirements of group A or group N homologation.\nOther major rally events include the British Rally Championship, Intercontinental Rally Challenge, African Rally Championship, Asia-Pacific Rally Championship, and endurance rally events like the Dakar Rally.\nThe Targa Tasmania, held on the Australian island state of Tasmania and run annually since 1992, takes its name from the Targa Florio, a former motoring event held on the island of Sicily. The competition concept is drawn directly from the best features of the Mille Miglia, the Coupe des Alpes, and the Tour de Corse. Similarly named events around the world include the Targa Newfoundland based in Canada, Targa West based in Western Australia, Targa New Zealand, and other smaller events.\nDrag racing.\nIn drag racing, the objective is to complete a given straight-line distance, from a standing start, ahead of a vehicle in a parallel lane. This distance is traditionally , though has become popular since the 1990s. The vehicles may or may not be given the signal to start at the same time, depending on the class of racing. Vehicles range from the everyday car to the purpose-built dragster. Speeds and elapsed time differ from class to class. Average street cars cover the mile in 12 to 16\u00a0seconds, whereas a top fuel dragster takes 4.5\u00a0seconds or less, reaching speeds of up to . Drag racing was organized as a sport by Wally Parks in the early 1950s through the National Hot Rod Association (NHRA). The NHRA was formed to discourage street racing.\nWhen launching, a top fuel dragster will accelerate at 3.4 g (33\u00a0m/s\u00b2), and when braking parachutes are deployed the deceleration is 4\u00a0g (39\u00a0m/s\u00b2), more than the Space Shuttle experiences. A top fuel car can be heard over away and can generate a reading from 1.5 to 3.9 on the Richter scale.\nDrag racing is two cars head-to-head, the winner proceeding to the next round. Professional classes are all first to the finish line wins. Sportsman racing is handicapped (slower car getting a head start) using an index (a lowest e.t. allowed), and cars running under (quicker than) their index \"break out\" and lose. The slowest cars, bracket racers, are also handicapped, but rather than an index, they use a dial-in.\nOff-road racing.\nIn off-road racing, various classes of specially modified vehicles, including cars, compete in races through off-road environments. In North America these races often take place in the desert, such as the famous Baja 1000. Another format for off-road racing happens on closed-course short course tracks such as Crandon International Off-Road Raceway. In the 1980s and 1990s, short course was extended to racing inside stadiums in the Mickey Thompson Entertainment Group; this format was revived by Robby Gordon in 2013 with his Stadium Super Trucks series.\nIn Europe, \"offroad\" refers to events such as autocross or rallycross, while desert races and rally-raids such as the Paris-Dakar, Master Rallye or European \"bajas\" are called \"cross-country rallies.\"\nKart racing.\nThe modern kart was invented by Art Ingels, a fabricator at the Indianapolis-car manufacturer Kurtis-Kraft, in Southern California in 1956. Ingels took a small chainsaw engine and mounted it to a simple tube-frame chassis weighing less than 100\u00a0lb. Ingels, and everyone else who drove the kart, were startled at its performance capabilities. The sport soon blossomed in Southern California, and quickly spread around the world. Although often seen as the entry point for serious racers into the sport, kart racing, or karting, can be an economical way for amateurs to try racing and is also a fully fledged international sport in its own right. A large proportion of professional racing drivers began in karts, often from a very young age, such as Michael Schumacher and Fernando Alonso. Several former motorcycle champions have also taken up the sport, notably Wayne Rainey, who was paralysed in a racing accident and now races a hand-controlled kart. As one of the cheapest ways to race, karting is seeing its popularity grow worldwide.\nDespite their diminutive size, karts of the most powerful class, superkart, can have a power-to-weight ratio of 440\u00a0hp/tonne.\nHistorical racing.\nAs modern motor racing is centered on modern technology with many corporate sponsors and much politics involved, historical racing tends to be the opposite. Because it is based on a particular era it is more hobbyist oriented, reducing corporate sponsorship and politics. Events are regulated to only allow cars of a certain era to participate. The only modern equipment used is related to safety and timing. A historical event can be of a number of different motorsport disciplines.\nNotably some of the most famous events of them all are the Goodwood Festival of Speed and Goodwood Revival in Britain and Monterey Historic in the United States. Championships range from \"grass root\" Austin Seven racing to the FIA Thoroughbred Grand Prix Championship for classic Formula One chassis.\nWhile there are several professional teams and drivers in historical racing, this branch of auto sport tends to be contested by wealthy car owners and is thus more amateur and less competitive in its approach.\nUse of flags.\nIn many types of auto races, particularly those held on closed courses, flags are displayed to indicate the general status of the track and to communicate instructions to competitors. While individual series have different rules, and the flags have changed from the first years (e.g., red used to start a race), these are generally accepted.\nAccidents.\nThe worst accident in racing history is the 1955 Le Mans disaster, where more than 80 people died, including the French driver Pierre Levegh.\nRacing-car setup.\nIn auto racing, the racing setup or car setup is the set of adjustments made to the vehicle to optimize its behaviour (performance, handling, reliability, etc.). Adjustments can occur in suspensions, brakes, transmissions, engines, tires, and many others.\nAerodynamics.\nAerodynamics and airflow play big roles in the setup of a racecar. Aerodynamic downforce improves the race car's handling by lowering the center of gravity and distributing the weight of the car equally on each tire. Once this is achieved, fuel consumption decreases and the forces against the car are significantly lowered. Many aerodynamic experiments are conducted in wind tunnels, to simulate real life situations while measuring the various drag forces on the car. These \"Rolling roads\" produce many wind situations and direct air flow at certain speeds and angles. When a diffuser is installed under the car, the amount of drag force is significantly lowered, and the overall aerodynamics of the vehicle is positively adjusted. Wings and canards channel the airflow in the most efficient way to get the least amount of drag from the car. It is experimentally proven that downforce is gained and the vehicles handling is considerably changed when aerodynamic wings on the front and rear of the vehicle are installed.\nSuspension.\nSuspension plays a huge part in giving the racecar the ability to be driven optimally. Shocks are mounted vertically or horizontally to prevent the body from rolling in the corners. The suspension is important because it makes the car stable and easier to control and keeps the tires on the road when driving on uneven terrain. It works in three different ways including vertically, longitudinally, and laterally to control movement when racing on various tracks.\nTires.\nTires called R-Compounds are commonly used in motorsports for high amounts of traction. The soft rubber allows them to expand when they are heated up, making more surface area on the pavement, therefore producing the most traction. These types of tires do not have grooves on them. Tire pressure is dependent on the temperature of the tire and track when racing. Each time a driver pulls into the pits, the tire pressure and temperature should be tested for optimal performance. When the tires get too hot they will swell or inflate and need to be deflated to the correct pressure. When the tires are not warmed up they will not perform as well.\nBrakes.\nBrakes on a race car are imperative in slowing and stopping the car at precise times and wear quickly depending on the road or track on which the car is being raced, how many laps are being run, track conditions due to weather, and how many caution runs require more braking. There are three variables to consider in racing: brake pedal displacement, brake pedal force, and vehicle deceleration. Various combinations of these variables work together to determine the stiffness, sensitivity, and pedal force of the brakes. When using the brakes effectively, the driver must go through a buildup phase and end with a modulating phase. These phases include attaining maximum deceleration and modulating the brake pressure. Brake performance is measured in bite and consistency. Bite happens when the driver first applies the brakes and they have not warmed up to the correct temperature to operate efficiently. Consistency is measured in how consistent the friction is during the entire time of braking. These two measurements determine the wear of the brakes.\nEngine.\nThe race car's engine needs a considerable amount of air to produce maximum power. The air intake manifold sucks the air from scoops on the hood and front bumper and feeds it into the engine. Many engine modifications to increase horsepower and efficiency are commonly used in many racing sanctioning bodies. Engines are tuned on a machine called a dynamometer that is commonly known in the racing world as a DYNO. The car is driven onto the DYNO and many gauges and sensors are hooked up to the car that are controlled on an online program to test force, torque, or power. Through the testing, the car's engine maps can be changed to get the most horsepower and ultimately speed out of the vehicle.\nRacing driver.\nRacing drivers at the highest levels are usually paid by the team, or by sponsors, and can command very substantial salaries.\nContrary to what may be popularly assumed, racing drivers as a group do not have unusually better reflexes or peripheral response time. During repeated physiological (and psychological) evaluations of professional racing drivers, the two characteristics that stand out are racers' near-obsessive need to control their surroundings (the psychological aspect), and an unusual ability to process fast-moving information (physiological). In this, researchers have noted a strong correlation between racers' psychological profiles and those of fighter pilots. In tests comparing racers to members of the general public, the greater the complexity of the information processing matrix, the greater the speed gap between racers and the public.\nDue partly to the performance capabilities of modern racing cars, racing drivers require a high level of fitness, focus and the ability to concentrate at high levels for long periods in an inherently difficult environment. Racing drivers mainly complain about pains in the lumbar, shoulder and neck regions.\nRacing drivers experience extremely large g-forces because formula cars and sports prototypes generate more downforce and are able to corner at significantly higher speeds. Formula 1 drivers routinely experience g-loadings in excess of 4.5 g."}
{"id": "1023", "revid": "1013068450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1023", "title": "Anarcho-capitalism", "text": "Anarcho-capitalism is a political philosophy and economic theory that advocates the elimination of centralized states in favor of a system of private property enforced by private agencies, free markets and the right-libertarian interpretation of self-ownership, which extends the concept to include control of private property as part of the self. In the absence of statute, anarcho-capitalists hold that society tends to contractually self-regulate and civilize through participation in the free market which they describe as a voluntary society. Anarcho-capitalists support wage labour and believe that neither protection of person and property nor victim compensation requires a state. In a theoretical anarcho-capitalist society, the system of private property would still exist and be enforced by private defense agencies and insurance companies selected by customers which would operate competitively in an open market and fulfill the roles of courts and the police.\nAnarcho-capitalists claim that various theorists have espoused legal philosophies similar to anarcho-capitalism. However, anarcho-capitalism was developed in the 20th century and the first person to use the term \"anarcho-capitalism\" was Murray Rothbard. Rothbard synthesized elements from the Austrian School, classical liberalism and 19th-century American individualist anarchists and mutualists Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker while rejecting their labor theory of value and the anti-capitalist and socialist norms they derived from it. Rothbard's anarcho-capitalist society would operate under a mutually agreed-upon \"legal code which would be generally accepted, and which the courts would pledge themselves to follow\". This legal code would recognize contracts, private property, self-ownership and tort law in keeping with the non-aggression principle.\nAnarcho-capitalists are distinguished from anarchists and minarchists. The latter advocate a night-watchman state limited to protecting individuals from aggression and enforcing private property. On the other hand, anarchists support personal property (defined in terms of possession and use, i.e. mutualist usufruct) and oppose capital concentration, interest, monopoly, private ownership of productive property such as the means of production (capital, land and the means of labor), profit, rent, usury and wage slavery which are viewed as inherent to capitalism and not rejected by anarcho-capitalists. Anarchism's emphasis on anti-capitalism, egalitarianism and for the extension of community and individuality sets it apart from anarcho-capitalism and other types of economic libertarianism. Anarcho-capitalists are seen by most anarchist schools of thought which reject the notion of capitalism, hierarchies and private property as fraudulent and an oxymoron. The anti-capitalism of classical anarchism has remained prominent within contemporary anarchism, including individualist anarchism.\nPhilosophy.\nAccording to Patrik Schumacher, the political ideology and programme of Anarcho-capitalism envisages the radicalisation of the neoliberal \"roll back of the state\", and calls for the extension of \"entrepreneurial freedom\" and \"competitive market rationality\" to the point where the scope for private enterprise is all-encompassing and \"leaves no space for state action whatsoever\".\nThe two principal moral approaches to anarcho-capitalism differ in regard to whether anarcho-capitalist society is justified on deontological or consequentialist ethics, or both. Natural-law anarcho-capitalism as advocated by Murray Rothbard holds that a universal system of rights can be derived from natural law. Other anarcho-capitalists do not rely upon the idea of natural rights and present economic justifications for a free-market capitalist society. This latter approach has been offered by David D. Friedman in \"The Machinery of Freedom\". Unlike other anarcho-capitalists, most notably Rothbard, Friedman has never tried to deny the theoretical cogency of the neoclassical literature on \"market failure\", but he openly applies the theory to both market and government institutions to compare the net result, nor has he been inclined to attack economic efficiency as a normative benchmark.\nJohn Kosanke sees such a debate as irrelevant. Kosanke believes that in the absence of statutory law the non-aggression principle is \"naturally\" enforced because individuals are automatically held accountable for their actions via tort and contract law. Kosanke also argues that communities of sovereign individuals naturally expel aggressors in the same way that ethical business practices are allegedly naturally required among competing businesses that are subject to what he describes as the \"discipline of the marketplace\". For Kosanke, the only thing that needs to be debated is the nature of the contractual mechanism that abolishes the state, or prevents it from coming into existence where new communities form.\nOn the state.\nAnarcho-capitalists opposition to the state is reflected in their goal of keeping but privatizing all functions of the state. They see capitalism and the \"free market\" as the basis for a free and prosperous society. Murray Rothbard, who is credited with coining the term \"anarcho-capitalism\", stated that the difference between free-market capitalism and state capitalism is the difference between \"peaceful, voluntary exchange\" and a collusive partnership between business and government that uses coercion to subvert the free market.\nRothbard argued that all government services, including defense, are inefficient because they lack a market-based pricing mechanism regulated by \"the voluntary decisions of consumers purchasing services that fulfill their highest-priority needs\" and by investors seeking the most profitable enterprises to invest in. Many anarcho-capitalists also argue that private defense and court agencies would have to have a good reputation in order to stay in business. Furthermore, Linda and Morris Tannehill believe that no coercive monopoly of force can arise on a truly free market and that a government's citizenry can not desert them in favor of a competent protection and defense agency.\nRothbard stated that he based his philosophy on \"natural law\" grounds and provided economic explanations of why he thinks anarcho-capitalism is preferable on pragmatic grounds as well. David D. Friedman says that he is not an absolutist rights theorist, but he is also \"not a utilitarian\". However, Friedman believes that \"utilitarian arguments are usually the best way to defend libertarian views\". Peter Leeson argues that \"the case for anarchy derives its strength from empirical evidence, not theory\". Hans-Hermann Hoppe uses \"argumentation ethics\" for his foundation of \"private property anarchism\" which is closer to Rothbard's natural law approach. Rothbard wrote:\nNon-aggression principle.\nAlthough anarcho-capitalists are against centralized states, they hold that all people would naturally share and agree to a specific moral theory. While the Friedmanian formulation of anarcho-capitalism is robust to the presence of violence and in fact assumes some degree of violence will occur, anarcho-capitalism as formulated by Rothbard and others holds strongly to the central libertarian nonaggression axiom. Rothbard wrote:\nRothbard's defense of the self-ownership principle stems from what he believed to be his falsification of all other alternatives, namely that either a group of people can own another group of people, or that no single person has full ownership over one's self. Rothbard dismisses these two cases on the basis that they cannot result in a universal ethic, i.e. a just natural law that can govern all people, independent of place and time. The only alternative that remains to Rothbard is self-ownership which he believes is both axiomatic and universal.\nIn general, the non-aggression axiom is described by Rothbard as a prohibition against the initiation of force, or the threat of force, against persons (in which he includes direct violence, assault and murder) or property (in which he includes fraud, burglary, theft and taxation). The initiation of force is usually referred to as aggression or coercion. The difference between anarcho-capitalists and other libertarians is largely one of the degree to which they take this axiom. Minarchist libertarians such as libertarian political parties would retain the state in some smaller and less invasive form, retaining at the very least public police, courts and military. However, others might give further allowance for other government programs. In contrast, Rothbard rejects any level of \"state intervention\", defining the state as a coercive monopoly and as the only entity in human society that derives its income from what he refers to as \"legal aggression\", an entity that inherently violates the central axiom of libertarianism.\nSome anarcho-capitalists such as Rothbard accept the non-aggression axiom on an intrinsic moral or natural law basis. It is in terms of the non-aggression principle that Rothbard defined his interpretation of anarchism, \"a system which provides no legal sanction for such aggression ['against person and property']\"; and wrote that \"what anarchism proposes to do, then, is to abolish the State, i.e. to abolish the regularized institution of aggressive coercion\". In an interview published in the American libertarian journal \"The New Banner\", Rothbard stated that \"capitalism is the fullest expression of anarchism, and anarchism is the fullest expression of capitalism\".\nProperty.\nPrivate property.\nAnarcho-capitalists postulate the privatization of everything, including cities with all their infrastructures, public spaces, streets and urban management systems.\nCentral to Rothbardian anarcho-capitalism are the concepts of self-ownership and original appropriation that combines personal and private property. Rothbard wrote:\nRothbard however rejected the Lockean proviso, and followed the rule of \"first come, first served\", without any consideration how much resources are left for other individuals, which opposed John Locke's beliefs.\nAnarcho-capitalists advocate private ownership of the means of production and the allocation of the product of labor created by workers within the context of wage labour and the free market \u2013 that is through decisions made by property and capital owners, regardless of what an individual needs or does not need. Original appropriation allows an individual to claim any never-before used resources, including land and by improving or otherwise using it, own it with the same \"absolute right\" as their own body, and retaining those rights forever, regardless if the resource is still being used by them. According to Rothbard, property can only come about through labor, therefore original appropriation of land is not legitimate by merely claiming it or building a fence around it\u2014it is only by using land and by mixing one's labor with it that original appropriation is legitimized: \"Any attempt to claim a new resource that someone does not use would have to be considered invasive of the property right of whoever the first user will turn out to be\". Rothbard argued that the resource need not continue to be used in order for it to be the person's property as \"for once his labor is mixed with the natural resource, it remains his owned land. His labor has been irretrievably mixed with the land, and the land is therefore his or his assigns' in perpetuity\".\nAs a practical matter, anarcho-capitalists say that in terms of the ownership of land there are few, if any, parcels of land left on Earth whose ownership was not at some point in time obtained in violation of the homestead principle \"through seizure by the state or put in private hands with the assistance of the state\". Rothbard wrote:\nIn \"Justice and Property Right\", Rothbard wrote that \"any identifiable owner (the original victim of theft or his heir) must be accorded his property\". In the case of slavery, Rothbard claimed that in many cases \"the old plantations and the heirs and descendants of the former slaves can be identified, and the reparations can become highly specific indeed\". Rothbard believed slaves rightfully own any land they were forced to work on under the homestead principle. If property is held by the state, Rothbard advocated its confiscation and \"return to the private sector\", writing that \"any property in the hands of the State is in the hands of thieves, and should be liberated as quickly as possible\". Rothbard proposed that state universities be seized by the students and faculty under the homestead principle. Rothbard also supported expropriation of nominally \"private property\" if it is the result of state-initiated force such as businesses who receive grants and subsidies. Rothbard further proposed that businesses who receive at least 50% of their funding from the state be confiscated by the workers, writing: \"What we libertarians object to, then, is not government \"per se\" but crime, what we object to is unjust or criminal property titles; what we are for is not 'private' property \"per se\" but just, innocent, non-criminal private property\".\nSimilarly, Karl Hess wrote that \"libertarianism wants to advance principles of property but that it in no way wishes to defend, willy nilly, all property which now is called private [...] Much of that property is stolen. Much is of dubious title. All of it is deeply intertwined with an immoral, coercive state system\".\nBy accepting an axiomatic definition of private property and property rights, anarcho-capitalists deny the legitimacy of a state on principle. Hans-Hermann Hoppe argues:\nAnarchists view capitalism as an inherently authoritarian and hierarchical system and seek the abolishment of private property. There is disagreement between anarchists and anarcho-capitalists as the former generally rejects anarcho-capitalism as a form of anarchism and considers \"anarcho-capitalism\" an oxymoron while the latter holds that the abolishment of private property would require expropriation which is \"counterproductive to order\" and would require a state in their opinion.\nCommon property.\nAs opposed to anarchists, most anarcho-capitalists reject the commons. However, some of them propose that non-state public or community property can also exist in an anarcho-capitalist society. For anarcho-capitalists, what is important is that it is \"acquired\" and transferred without help or hindrance from what the call the \"compulsory state\". Deontological anarcho-capitalists believe that the only just and most economically beneficial way to acquire property is through voluntary trade, gift, or labor-based original appropriation, rather than through aggression or fraud.\nAnarcho-capitalists state that there could be cases where common property may develop in a Lockean natural rights framework. Anarcho-capitalists make the example of a number of private businesses which may arise in an area, each owning the land and buildings that they use, but they argue that the paths between them become cleared and trodden incrementally through customer and commercial movement. These thoroughfares may become valuable to the community, but according to them ownership cannot be attributed to any single person and original appropriation does not apply because many contributed the labor necessary to create them. In order to prevent it from falling to the \"tragedy of the commons\", anarcho-capitalists suggest transitioning from common to private property, wherein an individual would make a homesteading claim based on disuse, acquire title by assent of the community consensus, form a corporation with other involved parties, or other means.\nSome vast areas, except the scarce resources they contain, such as the air, rivers, oceans, the Moon and orbital paths are considered by anarcho-capitalists as largely unownable by individuals and consider them to be property common to all. However, they see challenges stemming from this idea such as whether an individual might claim fishing rights in the area of a major shipping lane and thereby forbid passage through it. In contrast, Hoppe's work on anarcho-capitalist theory is based on the assumption that all property is privately held, \"including all streets, rivers, airports, and harbors\" which forms the foundation of his views on immigration.\nContractual society.\nThe society envisioned by anarcho-capitalists has been called the \"contractual society\" which Rothbard described as \"a society based purely on voluntary action, entirely unhampered by violence or threats of violence\" The system relies on contracts between individuals as the legal framework which would be enforced by private police and security forces as well as private arbitrations.\nRothbard argues that limited liability for corporations could also exist through contract, arguing that \"[c]orporations are not at all monopolistic privileges; they are free associations of individuals pooling their capital. On the purely free market, those men would simply announce to their creditors that their liability is limited to the capital specifically invested in the corporation\". However, corporations created in this way would not be able to replicate the limit on liabilities arising non-contractually such as liability in tort for environmental disasters or personal injury which corporations currently enjoy. Rothbard acknowledges that \"limited liability for torts is the illegitimate conferring of a special privilege\".\nThere are limits to the right to contract under some interpretations of anarcho-capitalism. Rothbard believes that the right to contract is based in inalienable rights and because of this any contract that implicitly violates those rights can be voided at will, preventing a person from permanently selling himself or herself into unindentured slavery. However, Rothbard justifies the practice of child selling. Other interpretations conclude that banning such contracts would in itself be an unacceptably invasive interference in the right to contract.\nIncluded in the right of contract is \"the right to contract oneself out for employment by others\". While anarchists criticize wage labour describing it as wage slavery, anarcho-capitalists view it as a consensual contract. Some anarcho-capitalists prefer to see self-employment prevail over wage labor. David D. Friedman has expressed preference for a society where \"almost everyone is self-employed\" and \"instead of corporations there are large groups of entrepreneurs related by trade, not authority. Each sells not his time, but what his time produces\".\nLaw and order and the use of violence.\nDifferent anarcho-capitalists propose different forms of anarcho-capitalism and one area of disagreement is in the area of law. In \"The Market for Liberty\", Morris and Linda Tannehill object to any statutory law whatsoever. They argue that all one has to do is ask if one is aggressing against another in order to decide if an act is right or wrong. However, while also supporting a on force and fraud, Rothbard supports the establishment of a mutually agreed-upon centralized libertarian legal code which private courts would pledge to follow, as he presumes a high degree of convergence amongst individuals about what constitutes natural justice.\nUnlike both the Tannehills and Rothbard who see an ideological commonality of ethics and morality as a requirement, David D. Friedman proposes that \"the systems of law will be produced for profit on the open market, just as books and bras are produced today. There could be competition among different brands of law, just as there is competition among different brands of cars\". Friedman says whether this would lead to a libertarian society \"remains to be proven\". He says it is a possibility that very unlibertarian laws may result, such as laws against drugs, but he thinks this would be rare. He reasons that \"if the value of a law to its supporters is less than its cost to its victims, that law [...] will not survive in an anarcho-capitalist society\".\nAnarcho-capitalists only accept collective defense of individual liberty (i.e. courts, military or police forces) insofar as such groups are formed and paid for on an explicitly voluntary basis. However, their complaint is not just that the state's defensive services are funded by taxation, but that the state assumes it is the only legitimate practitioner of physical force\u2014that is, they believe it forcibly prevents the private sector from providing comprehensive security, such as a police, judicial and prison systems to protect individuals from aggressors. Anarcho-capitalists believe that there is nothing morally superior about the state which would grant it, but not private individuals, a right to use physical force to restrain aggressors. If competition in security provision were allowed to exist, prices would also be lower and services would be better according to anarcho-capitalists. According to Molinari: \"Under a regime of liberty, the natural organization of the security industry would not be different from that of other industries\". Proponents point out that private systems of justice and defense already exist, naturally forming where the market is allowed to \"compensate for the failure of the state\", namely private arbitration, security guards, neighborhood watch groups and so on. These private courts and police are sometimes referred to generically as private defense agencies (PDAs). The defense of those unable to pay for such protection might be financed by charitable organizations relying on voluntary donation rather than by state institutions relying on taxation, or by cooperative self-help by groups of individuals. Edward Stringham argues that private adjudication of disputes could enable the market to internalize externalities and provide services that customers desire.\nIn the context of revolution, Rothbard stated that the American Revolutionary War was the only war involving the United States that could be justified. Some anarcho-capitalists such as Rothbard feel that violent revolution is counter-productive and prefer voluntary forms of economic secession to the extent possible. Like classical liberalism and unlike anarcho-pacifism, anarcho-capitalism permits the use of force as long as it is in the defense of persons or property. The permissible extent of this defensive use of force is an arguable point among anarcho-capitalists. Retributive justice, meaning retaliatory force, is often a component of the contracts imagined for an anarcho-capitalist society. According to Matthew O'Keefee, some anarcho-capitalists believe prisons or indentured servitude would be justifiable institutions to deal with those who violate anarcho-capitalist property relations while others believe exile or forced restitution are sufficient.\nBruce L. Benson argues that legal codes may impose punitive damages for intentional torts in the interest of deterring crime. Benson gives the example of a thief who breaks into a house by picking a lock. Even if caught before taking anything, Benson argues that the thief would still owe the victim for violating the sanctity of his property rights. Benson opines that despite the lack of objectively measurable losses in such cases, \"standardized rules that are generally perceived to be fair by members of the community would, in all likelihood, be established through precedent, allowing judgments to specify payments that are reasonably appropriate for most criminal offenses\".\nMorris and Linda Tannehill raise a similar example, saying that a bank robber who had an attack of conscience and returned the money would still owe reparations for endangering the employees' and customers' lives and safety, in addition to the costs of the defense agency answering the teller's call for help. However, they believe that the robber's loss of reputation would be even more damaging. They suggest that specialized companies would list aggressors so that anyone wishing to do business with a man could first check his record, provided they trust the veracity of the companies' records. They further theorise that the bank robber would find insurance companies listing him as a very poor risk and other firms would be reluctant to enter into contracts with him.\nInfluences.\nMurray Rothbard has listed different ideologies of which his interpretations, he said, have influenced anarcho-capitalism. This includes his interpretation of anarchism, and more precisely individualist anarchism; classical liberalism and the Austrian School of economic thought. Scholars additionally associate anarcho-capitalism with neo-classical liberalism, radical neoliberalism and right-libertarianism.\nAnarchism.\nIn both its social and individualist forms, anarchism is usually considered an anti-capitalist and radical left-wing or far-left movement that promotes libertarian socialist economic theories such as collectivism, communism, individualism, mutualism and syndicalism. Because anarchism is usually described alongside libertarian Marxism as the libertarian wing of the socialist movement and as having a historical association with anti-capitalism and socialism, anarchists believe that capitalism is incompatible with social and economic equality and therefore do not recognize anarcho-capitalism as an anarchist school of thought. In particular, anarchists argue that capitalist transactions are not voluntary and that maintaining the class structure of a capitalist society requires coercion which is incompatible with an anarchist society. The usage of \"libertarian\" is also in dispute. While both anarchists and anarcho-capitalist have used it, \"libertarian\" was synonymous with \"anarchist\" until the mid-20th century, when anarcho-capitalist theory developed.\nAnarcho-capitalists are distinguished from the dominant anarchist tradition by their relation to property and capital. While both anarchism and anarcho-capitalism share general antipathy towards power by government authority, the latter exempts power wielded through free-market capitalism. Anarchists, including egoists such as Max Stirner, have supported the protection of an individual's freedom from powers of both government and private property owners. In contrast, while condemning governmental encroachment on personal liberties, anarcho-capitalists support freedoms based on private property rights. Anarcho-capitalist theorist Murray Rothbard argued that protesters should rent a street for protest from its owners. The abolition of public amenities is a common theme in some anarcho-capitalist writings.\nAs anarcho-capitalism puts \"laissez-faire\" economics before economic equality, it is commonly viewed as incompatible with the anti-capitalist and egalitarian tradition of anarchism. Although anarcho-capitalist theory implies the abolition of the state in favour of a fully \"laissez-faire\" economy, it lies outside the tradition of anarchism. While using the language of anarchism, anarcho-capitalism only shares anarchism's antipathy towards the state and not anarchism's antipathy towards hierarchy as theorists expect from anarcho-capitalist economic power relations. It follows a different paradigm from anarchism and has a fundamentally different approach and goals. In spite of the \"anarcho-\" in its title, anarcho-capitalism is more closely affiliated with capitalism and right-libertarianism than with anarchism. Some within this \"laissez-faire\" tradition reject the designation of \"anarcho-capitalism\", believing that \"capitalism\" may either refer to the \"laissez-faire\" market they support or the government-regulated system that they oppose.\nRothbard claimed that anarcho-capitalism is the only true form of anarchism\u2014the only form of anarchism that could possibly exist in reality as he maintained that any other form presupposes an authoritarian enforcement of political ideology such as \"redistribution of private property\" which he attributed to anarchism. According to this argument, the capitalist free market is \"the natural situation\" that would result from people being free from state authority and entails the establishment of all voluntary associations in society such as cooperatives, non-profit organizations, businesses and so on. Moreover, anarcho-capitalists as well as classical liberal minarchists argue that the application of anarchist ideals as advocated by what they term \"left-wing anarchists\" would require an authoritarian body of some sort to impose it. Based on their understanding and interpretation of anarchism, in order to forcefully prevent people from accumulating capital, which they believe is a goal of anarchists, there would necessarily be a redistributive organization of some sort which would have the authority to in essence exact a tax and re-allocate the resulting resources to a larger group of people. They conclude that this theoretical body would inherently have political power and would be nothing short of a state. The difference between such an arrangement and an anarcho-capitalist system is what anarcho-capitalists see as the voluntary nature of organization within anarcho-capitalism contrasted with a \"centralized ideology\" and a \"paired enforcement mechanism\" which they believe would be necessary under what they describe as a \"coercively\" egalitarian-anarchist system.\nDespite their name, anarcho-capitalists are generally seen by anarchists, who reject the notion of capitalism, hierarchies and private property, as fraudulent and an oxymoron. Albert Meltzer argued that anarcho-capitalism simply cannot be anarchism because capitalism and the state are inextricably interlinked and because capitalism exhibits domineering hierarchical structures such as that between an employer and an employee. Anna Morgenstern approaches this topic from the opposite perspective, arguing that anarcho-capitalists are not really capitalists because \"mass concentration of capital is impossible\" without the state. According to Jeremy Jennings, \"[i]t is hard not to conclude that these ideas\", referring to anarcho-capitalism, argued to have \"roots deep in classical liberalism\" more so than in anarchism, \"are described as anarchist only on the basis of a misunderstanding of what anarchism is\". For Jennings, \"anarchism does not stand for the untrammelled freedom of the individual (as the 'anarcho-capitalists' appear to believe) but, as we have already seen, for the extension of individuality and community\". Similarly, Barbara Goodwin, Emeritus Professor of Politics at the University of East Anglia, Norwich, argues that anarcho-capitalism's \"true place is in the group of right-wing libertarians\", not in anarchism. Nonetheless, some right-libertarian scholars like Michael Huemer, who identify with the ideology, describe anarcho-capitalism as a \"variety of anarchism\".\nWhile both anarchism and anarcho-capitalism are in opposition to the state, it is a necessary but not sufficient condition because anarchists and anarcho-capitalists interpret state-rejection differently. Austrian school economist David Prychitko, in the context of anarcho-capitalism says that \"while society without a state is necessary for full-fledged anarchy, it is nevertheless insufficient\". According to Ruth Kinna, anarcho-capitalists are anti-statists who draw more on right-wing liberal theory and the Austrian School than anarchist traditions. Kinna writes that \"[i]n order to highlight the clear distinction between the two positions\", anarchists describe anarcho-capitalists as \"propertarians\". Anarcho-capitalism is usually seen as part of the New Right.\nClassical liberalism.\nIn his essay \"The Production of Security\", Gustave de Molinari argued that \"[n]o government should have the right to prevent another government from going into competition with it, or to require consumers of security to come exclusively to it for this commodity\". Molinari and this new type of anti-state liberal grounded their reasoning on liberal ideals and classical economics. Historian and libertarian Ralph Raico argues that what these liberal philosophers \"had come up with was a form of individualist anarchism, or, as it would be called today, anarcho-capitalism or market anarchism\". Unlike the liberalism of John Locke which saw the state as evolving from society, the anti-state liberals saw a fundamental conflict between the voluntary interactions of people, i.e. society; and the institutions of force, i.e. the state. This society vs. state idea was expressed in various ways such as natural society vs. artificial society, liberty vs. authority, society of contract vs. society of authority and industrial society vs. militant society, just to name a few. The anti-state liberal tradition in Europe and the United States continued after Molinari in the early writings of Herbert Spencer as well as in thinkers such as Paul \u00c9mile de Puydt and Auberon Herbert.\nRuth Kinna writes that \"anarcho-capitalism\" is a term coined by Murray Rothbard to describe \"a commitment to unregulated private property and laissez-faire economics, prioritizing the liberty-rights of individuals, unfettered by government regulation, to accumulate, consume and determine the patterns of their lives as they see fit\". According to Kinna, anarcho-capitalists \"will sometimes label themselves market anarchists because they recognize the negative connotations of 'capitalism'. But the literatures of anarcho-capitalism draw on classical liberal theory, particularly the Austrian School \u2013 Friedrich von Hayek and Ludwig von Mises \u2013 rather than recognizable anarchist traditions. Ayn Rand's laissez-faire, anti-government, corporate philosophy \u2013 objectivism \u2013 is sometimes associated with anarcho-capitalism\". Other scholars similarly associate anarcho-capitalism with anti-state classical liberalism, neo-classical liberalism, radical neoliberalism and right-libertarianism.\nIndividualist anarchism.\nMurray Rothbard, a student of Ludwig von Mises, stated that he was influenced by the work of the 19th-century American individualist anarchists. In the winter of 1949, Rothbard decided to reject minimal state \"laissez-faire\" and embrace his interpretation of individualist anarchism. In 1965, Rothbard wrote that \"Lysander Spooner and Benjamin R. Tucker were unsurpassed as political philosophers and nothing is more needed today than a revival and development of the largely forgotten legacy they left to political philosophy\". However, Rothbard thought that they had a faulty understanding of economics as the 19th century individualist anarchists had a labor theory of value as influenced by the classical economists and was a student of Austrian School economics which does not agree with the labor theory of value. Rothbard sought to meld 19th-century American individualist anarchists' advocacy of economic individualism and free markets with the principles of Austrian School economics, arguing that \"[t]here is, in the body of thought known as 'Austrian economics', a scientific explanation of the workings of the free market (and of the consequences of government intervention in that market) which individualist anarchists could easily incorporate into their political and social Weltanschauung\". Rothbard held that the economic consequences of the political system they advocate would not result in an economy with people being paid in proportion to labor amounts, nor would profit and interest disappear as they expected. Tucker thought that unregulated banking and money issuance would cause increases in the money supply so that interest rates would drop to zero or near to it. Peter Marshall states that \"anarcho-capitalism overlooks the egalitarian implications of traditional individualist anarchists like Spooner and Tucker\".\nIn \"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's View\", Rothbard explained his disagreements. Rothbard disagreed with Tucker that it would cause the money supply to increase because he believed that the money supply in a free market would be self-regulating. If it were not, then Rothbard argued inflation would occur so it is not necessarily desirable to increase the money supply in the first place. Rothbard claimed that Tucker was wrong to think that interest would disappear regardless because he believed people in general do not wish to lend their money to others without compensation, so there is no reason why this would change just because banking was unregulated. Tucker held a labor theory of value and thought that in a free market people would be paid in proportion to how much labor they exerted and that exploitation or usury was taking place if they were not. As Tucker explained in \"State Socialism and Anarchism\", his theory was that unregulated banking would cause more money to be available and that this would allow proliferation of new businesses which would in turn raise demand for labor. This led Tucker to believe that the labor theory of value would be vindicated and equal amounts of labor would receive equal pay. As an Austrian School economist, Rothbard did not agree with the labor theory and believed that prices of goods and services are proportional to marginal utility rather than to labor amounts in the free market. He did not think that there was anything exploitative about people receiving an income according to how much \"buyers of their services value their labor\" or what that labor produces.\nWithout the labor theory of value, some argue that 19th-century individualist anarchists approximate the modern movement of anarcho-capitalism, although this has been contested or rejected. As economic theory changed, the popularity of the labor theory of classical economics was superseded by the subjective theory of value of neoclassical economics and Rothbard combined Mises' Austrian School of economics with the absolutist views of human rights and rejection of the state he had absorbed from studying the individualist American anarchists of the 19th century such as Tucker and Spooner. In the mid-1950s, Rothbard wrote \"Are Libertarians 'Anarchists'?\", concerned with differentiating himself from communist and socialistic economic views of anarchists, including the individualist anarchists of the 19th century, concluding that \"we are \"not\" anarchists and that those who call us anarchists are not on firm etymological ground, and are being completely unhistorical. On the other hand, it is clear that we are not archists either: we do not believe in establishing a tyrannical central authority that will coerce the noninvasive as well as the invasive. Perhaps, then, we could call ourselves by a new name: \"non\"archist.\" Joe Peacott, an American individualist anarchist in the mutualist tradition, criticizes anarcho-capitalists for trying to hegemonize the individualist anarchism label and make appear as if all individualist anarchists are in favor of capitalism. Peacott states that \"individualists, both past and present, agree with the communist anarchists that present-day capitalism is based on economic coercion, not on voluntary contract. Rent and interest are mainstays of modern capitalism, and are protected and enforced by the state. Without these two unjust institutions, capitalism could not exist\".\nAnarchist activists and scholars do not consider anarcho-capitalism as a part of the anarchist movement because anarchism has historically been an anti-capitalist movement and see it as incompatible with capitalist forms. Although some regard anarcho-capitalism as a form of individualist anarchism, many others disagree or contest the existence of an individualist\u2013socialist divide because individualist anarchism is largely libertarian socialist. In coming to terms that anarchism identified with socialism, Rothbard wrote that individualist anarchism is different from anarcho-capitalism and other capitalist theories due to the individualist anarchists retaining the labor theory of value and socialist doctrines. Similarly, many writers deny that anarcho-capitalism is a form of anarchism or that capitalism is compatible with anarchism.\n\"The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism\" writes that \"[a]s Benjamin Franks rightly points out, individualisms that defend or reinforce hierarchical forms such as the economic-power relations of anarcho-capitalism are incompatible with practices of social anarchism based on developing immanent goods which contest such as inequalities\". Laurence Davis cautiosly asks \"[I]s anarcho-capitalism really a form of anarchism or instead a wholly different ideological paradigm whose adherents have attempted to expropriate the language of anarchism for their own anti-anarchist ends?\" Davis cites Iain McKay, \"whom Franks cites as an authority to support his contention that 'academic analysis has followed activist currents in rejecting the view that anarcho-capitalism has anything to do with social anarchism'\", as arguing \"quite emphatically on the very pages cited by Franks that anarcho-capitalism is by no means a type of anarchism\". McKay writes that \"[i]t is important to stress that anarchist opposition to the so-called capitalist 'anarchists' does \"not\" reflect some kind of debate within anarchism, as many of these types like to pretend, but a debate between anarchism and its old enemy capitalism. [...] Equally, given that anarchists and 'anarcho'-capitalists have fundamentally \"different\" analyses and goals it is hardly 'sectarian' to point this out\".\nDavis writes that \"Franks asserts without supporting evidence that most major forms of individualist anarchism have been largely anarcho-capitalist in content, and concludes from this premise that most forms of individualism are incompatible with anarchism\". Davis argues that \"the conclusion is unsuistainable because the premise is false, depending as it does for any validity it might have on the further assumption that anarcho-capitalism is indeed a form of anarchism. If we reject this view, then we must also reject the individual anarchist versus the communal anarchist 'chasm' style of argument that follows from it\". Davis maintains that \"the ideological core of anarchism is the belief that society can and should be organised without hierarchy and domination. Historically, anarchists have struggles against a wide range of regimes of domination, from capitalism, the state system, patriarchy, heterosexism, and the domination of nature to colonialism, the war system, slavery, fascism, white supremacy, and certain forms of organised religion\". According to Davis, \"[w]hile these visions range from the predominantly individualistic to the predominantly communitarian, features common to virtually all include an emphasis on self-management and self-regulatory methods of organisation, voluntary association, decentralised society, based on the principle of free association, in which people will manage and govern themselves\". Finally, Davis includes a footnote stating that \"[i]ndividualist anarchism may plausibly be re regarded as a form of both socialism and anarchism. Whether the individualist anarchists were \"consistent\" anarchists (and socialists) is another question entirely. [...] McKay comments as follows: 'any individualist anarchism which support wage labour is \"inconsistent\" anarchism. It \"can\" easily be made \"consistent\" anarchism by applying its own principles consistenly. In contrast 'anarcho'-capitalism rejects so many of the basic, underlying, principles of anarchism [...] that it cannot be made consistent with the ideals of anarchism'\".\nHistorical precedents.\nSeveral right-libertarians have discussed historical precedents of what they believe were examples of anarcho-capitalism.\nFree cities of medieval Europe.\nEconomist and libertarian scholar Bryan Caplan considers the free cities of medieval Europe as examples of \"anarchist\" or \"nearly anarchistic\" societies, further arguing:\nMedieval Iceland.\nAccording to the libertarian theorist David D. Friedman, \"[m]edieval Icelandic institutions have several peculiar and interesting characteristics; they might almost have been invented by a mad economist to test the lengths to which market systems could supplant government in its most fundamental functions\". While not directly labeling it anarcho-capitalist, Friedman argues that the legal system of the Icelandic Commonwealth comes close to being a real-world anarcho-capitalist legal system. Although noting that there was a single legal system, Friedman argues that enforcement of law was entirely private and highly capitalist, providing some evidence of how such a society would function. Friedman further wrote that \"[e]ven where the Icelandic legal system recognized an essentially 'public' offense, it dealt with it by giving some individual (in some cases chosen by lot from those affected) the right to pursue the case and collect the resulting fine, thus fitting it into an essentially private system\". Commenting on its political structure, libertarian scholar Roderick T. Long writes:\nLong suggests that the system of free contract between farmers and chieftains was threatened when harassment from Norwegian kings that began around AD 1000 forced the people of Iceland to accept Christianity as the national religion. This paved the way for the introduction of a compulsory tax in AD 1096 which was to be paid to the local chieftain who owned a churchstead. Long further believes that this gave an unfair advantage to some chieftains who at least in part did not need to rely upon the voluntary support of their clients in order to receive some income which gradually lead to the concentration of power in the hands of a few big chieftains, enabling them to restrict competition and eventually establish effective monopolies. Although the Commonwealth was politically stable for over three centuries, Long suggests that the downfall of the Icelandic system was brought about \"not through having too much privatization, but through having too little\". Long writes:\nAmerican Old West.\nAccording to Terry L. Anderson and P. J. Hill, the Old West in the United States in the period of 1830 to 1900 was similar to anarcho-capitalism in that \"private agencies provided the necessary basis for an orderly society in which property was protected and conflicts were resolved\" and that the common popular perception that the Old West was chaotic with little respect for property rights is incorrect. Since squatters had no claim to western lands under federal law, extra-legal organizations formed to fill the void. Benson explains:\nAccording to Anderson, \"[d]efining anarcho-capitalist to mean minimal government with property rights developed from the bottom up, the western frontier was anarcho-capitalistic. People on the frontier invented institutions that fit the resource constraints they faced\".\nGaelic Ireland.\nIn his work \"For a New Liberty\", Murray Rothbard has claimed ancient Gaelic Ireland as an example of nearly anarcho-capitalist society. In his depiction, citing the work of Professor Joseph Peden, the basic political unit of ancient Ireland was the tuath, which is portrayed as \"a body of persons voluntarily united for socially beneficial purposes\" with its territorial claim being limited to \"the sum total of the landed properties of its members\". Civil disputes were settled by private arbiters called \"brehons\" and the compensation to be paid to the wronged party was insured through voluntary surety relationships. Commenting on the \"kings\" of tuaths, Rothbard stated:\nLaw merchant, admiralty law and early common law.\nSome libertarians have cited law merchant, admiralty law and early common law as examples of anarcho-capitalism.\nIn his work \"Power and Market\", Rothbard stated:\nSomalia from 1991 to 2006.\nEconomist Alex Tabarrok claimed that Somalia in its stateless period provided a \"unique test of the theory of anarchy\", in some aspects near of that espoused by anarcho-capitalists David D. Friedman and Murray Rothbard. Nonetheless, both anarchists and some anarcho-capitalists argue that Somalia was not an anarchist society.\nCriticism.\nState, justice and defense.\nAnarchists such as Brian Morris argue that anarcho-capitalism does not in fact get rid of the state. He says that anarcho-capitalists \"simply replaced the state with private security firms, and can hardly be described as anarchists as the term is normally understood\". In \"Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy\", anarchist Peter Sabatini notes:\nSimilarly, Bob Black argues that an anarcho-capitalist wants to \"abolish the state to his own satisfaction by calling it something else\". He states that they do not denounce what the state does, they just \"object to who's doing it\". It has also been argued that anarcho-capitalism dissolves into city states. Randall G. Holcombe argues that anarcho-capitalism turns justice into a commodity as private defense and court firms would favour those who pay more for their services. He argues that defense agencies could form cartels and oppress people without fear of competition. Philosopher Albert Meltzer argued that since anarcho-capitalism promotes the idea of private armies, it actually supports a \"limited State\". He contends that it \"is only possible to conceive of Anarchism which is free, communistic and offering no economic necessity for repression of countering it\".\nRobert Nozick argues that a competitive legal system would evolve toward a monopoly government\u2014even without violating individuals rights in the process. In \"Anarchy, State, and Utopia\", Nozick argues that an anarcho-capitalist society would inevitably transform into a minarchist state through the eventual emergence of a monopolistic private defense and judicial agency that no longer faces competition. He argues that anarcho-capitalism results in an unstable system that would not endure in the real world. While anarcho-capitalists such as Roy Childs and Murray Rothbard have rejected Nozick's arguments, John Jefferson actually advocates Nozick's argument and states that such events would best operate in \"laissez-faire\". Paul Birch argues that legal disputes involving several jurisdictions and different legal systems will be too complex and costly, therefore the largest private protection business in a territory will develop into a natural monopoly. Robert Ellickson presented a Hayekian case against anarcho-capitalism, calling it a \"pipe-dream\" and stating that anarcho-capitalists \"by imagining a stable system of competing private associations, ignore both the inevitability of territorial monopolists in governance, and the importance of institutions to constrain those monopolists' abuses\".\nRights and freedom.\nNegative and positive rights are rights that oblige either action (positive rights) or inaction (negative rights). Anarcho-capitalists believe that negative rights should be recognized as legitimate, but positive rights should be rejected as an intrusion. Some critics reject the distinction between positive and negative rights. Peter Marshall also states that the anarcho-capitalist definition of freedom is entirely negative and that it cannot guarantee the positive freedom of individual autonomy and independence.\nAbout anarcho-capitalism, Noam Chomsky says:\nEconomics and property.\nAnarchists argue that certain capitalist transactions are not voluntary and that maintaining the class structure of a capitalist society requires coercion which violates anarchist principles. Anthropologist David Graeber noted his skepticism about anarcho-capitalism along the same lines, arguing:\nSome critics argue that the anarcho-capitalist concept of voluntary choice ignores constraints due to both human and non-human factors such as the need for food and shelter as well as active restriction of both used and unused resources by those enforcing property claims. If a person requires employment in order to feed and house himself, the employer\u2013employee relationship could be considered involuntary. Another criticism is that employment is involuntary because the economic system that makes it necessary for some individuals to serve others is supported by the enforcement of coercive private property relations. Some philosophies view any ownership claims on land and natural resources as immoral and illegitimate. Objectivist philosopher Harry Binswanger criticizes anarcho-capitalism by arguing that \"capitalism requires government\", questioning who or what would enforce treaties and contracts.\nJulian Assange rejects anarcho-capitalism as a \u201cmisnomer\u201d, denying the perceived \u201cvirtues\u201d of capitalism and the possibility of any substantive connection between anti-statism, capitalism and emancipatory praxis.\nSome right-libertarian critics of anarcho-capitalism who support the full privatization of capital such as geolibertarians argue that land and the raw materials of nature remain a distinct factor of production and cannot be justly converted to private property because they are not products of human labor. Some socialists, including market anarchists and mutualists, adamantly oppose absentee ownership. Anarcho-capitalists have strong abandonment criteria, namely that one maintains ownership until one agrees to trade or gift it. Anti-state critics of this view posit comparatively weak abandonment criteria, arguing that one loses ownership when one stops personally occupying and using it as well as the idea of perpetually binding original appropriation is anathema to traditional schools of anarchism.\nLiterature.\nNonfiction.\nThe following is a partial list of notable nonfiction works discussing anarcho-capitalism.\nFiction.\nAnarcho-capitalism has been examined in and influenced by certain works of literature, particularly science fiction. One of the earliest and influential works is Robert A. Heinlein's 1966 novel \"The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress\" in which a penal colony on the Moon revolts against the rule of Earth, creating a society based on what the author terms \"rational anarchism\".\n\"Sharper Security: A Sovereign Security Company Novel\", part of a series by Thomas Sewell, is \"set a couple of decades into the near-future with a liberty view of society based on individual choice and free market economics\" and features a society where individuals hire a security company to protect and insure them from crime. The security companies are sovereign, but customers are free to switch between them. They behave as a combination of insurance/underwriting and para-military police forces. Anarcho-capitalist themes abound, including an exploration of not honoring sovereign immunity, privately owned road systems, a \"laissez-faire\" market and competing currencies.\nSandy Sandfort's, Scott Bieser's and Lee Oaks's Webcomic \"Escape from Terra\" examines a market anarchy based on Ceres and its interaction with the aggressive statist society Terra."}
{"id": "1026", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1026", "title": "Anarcho-capitalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "1027", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1027", "title": "August 9", "text": ""}
{"id": "1028", "revid": "7314633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1028", "title": "Aristophanes", "text": "Aristophanes (; , ; c. 446 \u2013 c. 386 BC), son of Philippus, of the deme Kydathenaion (), was a comic playwright or comedy-writer of ancient Athens and a poet of Old Attic Comedy. Eleven of his forty plays survive virtually complete. These provide the most valuable examples of a genre of comic drama known as Old Comedy and are used to define it, along with fragments from dozens of lost plays by Aristophanes and his contemporaries.\nAlso known as \"The Father of Comedy\" and \"the Prince of Ancient Comedy\", Aristophanes has been said to recreate the life of ancient Athens more convincingly than any other author. His powers of ridicule were feared and acknowledged by influential contemporaries; Plato singled out Aristophanes' play \"The Clouds\" as slander that contributed to the trial and subsequent condemning to death of Socrates, although other satirical playwrights had also caricatured the philosopher.\nAristophanes' second play, \"The Babylonians\" (now lost), was denounced by Cleon as a slander against the Athenian \"polis\". It is possible that the case was argued in court, but details of the trial are not recorded and Aristophanes caricatured Cleon mercilessly in his subsequent plays, especially \"The Knights\", the first of many plays that he directed himself. \"In my opinion,\" he says through that play's Chorus, \"the author-director of comedies has the hardest job of all.\"\nBiography.\nLess is known about Aristophanes than about his plays. In fact, his plays are the main source of information about him and his life. It was conventional in Old Comedy for the chorus to speak on behalf of the author during an address called the parabasis and thus some biographical facts can be found there. However, these facts relate almost entirely to his career as a dramatist and the plays contain few clear and unambiguous clues about his personal beliefs or his private life. He was a comic poet in an age when it was conventional for a poet to assume the role of teacher (didaskalos), and though this specifically referred to his training of the Chorus in rehearsal, it also covered his relationship with the audience as a commentator on significant issues.\nAristophanes claimed to be writing for a clever and discerning audience, yet he also declared that \"other times\" would judge the audience according to its reception of his plays. He sometimes boasts of his originality as a dramatist yet his plays consistently espouse opposition to radical new influences in Athenian society. He caricatured leading figures in the arts (notably Euripides, whose influence on his own work however he once grudgingly acknowledged), in politics (especially the populist Cleon), and in philosophy/religion (where Socrates was the most obvious target). Such caricatures seem to imply that Aristophanes was an old-fashioned conservative, yet that view of him leads to contradictions.\nIt has been argued that Aristophanes produced plays mainly to entertain the audience and to win prestigious competitions. His plays were written for production at the great dramatic festivals of Athens, the Lenaia and City Dionysia, where they were judged and awarded prizes in competition with the works of other comic dramatists. An elaborate series of lotteries, designed to prevent prejudice and corruption, reduced the voting judges at the City Dionysia to just five. These judges probably reflected the mood of the audiences yet there is much uncertainty about the composition of those audiences. The theatres were certainly huge, with seating for at least 10,000 at the Theatre of Dionysus. The day's program at the City Dionysia for example was crowded, with three tragedies and a satyr play ahead of a comedy, but it is possible that many of the poorer citizens (typically the main supporters of demagogues like Cleon) occupied the festival holiday with other pursuits. The conservative views expressed in the plays might therefore reflect the attitudes of the dominant group in an unrepresentative audience.\nThe production process might also have influenced the views expressed in the plays. Throughout most of Aristophanes' career, the Chorus was essential to a play's success and it was recruited and funded by a \"choregus\", a wealthy citizen appointed to the task by one of the archons. A choregus could regard his personal expenditure on the Chorus as a civic duty and a public honour, but Aristophanes showed in \"The Knights\" that wealthy citizens might regard civic responsibilities as punishment imposed on them by demagogues and populists like Cleon. Thus the political conservatism of the plays may reflect the views of the wealthiest section of Athenian society, on whose generosity all dramatists depended for putting on their plays.\nWhen Aristophanes' first play \"The Banqueters\" was produced, Athens was an ambitious, imperial power and the Peloponnesian War was only in its fourth year. His plays often express pride in the achievement of the older generation (the victors at Marathon) yet they are not jingoistic, and they are staunchly opposed to the war with Sparta. The plays are particularly scathing in criticism of war profiteers, among whom populists such as Cleon figure prominently. By the time his last play was produced (around 386 BC) Athens had been defeated in war, its empire had been dismantled and it had undergone a transformation from being the political to the intellectual centre of Greece. Aristophanes was part of this transformation and he shared in the intellectual fashions of the period\u2014the structure of his plays evolves from Old Comedy until, in his last surviving play, \"Wealth II\", it more closely resembles New Comedy. However it is uncertain whether he led or merely responded to changes in audience expectations.\nAristophanes won second prize at the City Dionysia in 427 BC with his first play \"The Banqueters\" (now lost). He won first prize there with his next play, \"The Babylonians\" (also now lost). It was usual for foreign dignitaries to attend the City Dionysia, and \"The Babylonians\" caused some embarrassment for the Athenian authorities since it depicted the cities of the Delian League as slaves grinding at a mill. Some influential citizens, notably Cleon, reviled the play as slander against the \"polis\" and possibly took legal action against the author. The details of the trial are unrecorded but, speaking through the hero of his third play \"The Acharnians\" (staged at the Lenaia, where there were few or no foreign dignitaries), the poet carefully distinguishes between the \"polis\" and the real targets of his acerbic wit:\nAristophanes repeatedly savages Cleon in his later plays. But these satirical diatribes appear to have had no effect on Cleon's political career\u2014a few weeks after the performance of \"The Knights\"\u2014a play full of anti-Cleon jokes\u2014Cleon was elected to the prestigious board of ten generals. Cleon also seems to have had no real power to limit or control Aristophanes: the caricatures of him continued up to and even beyond his death.\nIn the absence of clear biographical facts about Aristophanes, scholars make educated guesses based on interpretation of the language in the plays. Inscriptions and summaries or comments by Hellenistic and Byzantine scholars can also provide useful clues. We know however from a combination of these sources, and especially from comments in \"The Knights\" and \"The Clouds\", that Aristophanes' first three plays were not directed by him\u2014they were instead directed by Callistratus and Philoneides, an arrangement that seemed to suit Aristophanes since he appears to have used these same directors in many later plays as well (Philoneides for example later directed \"The Frogs\" and he was also credited, perhaps wrongly, with directing \"The Wasps\".) Aristophanes's use of directors complicates our reliance on the plays as sources of biographical information because apparent self-references might have been made with reference to his directors instead. Thus for example a statement by the chorus in \"The Acharnians\" seems to indicate that the \"poet\" had a close, personal association with the island of Aegina. Similarly, the hero in \"The Acharnians\" complains about Cleon \"dragging me into court\" over \"last year's play.\"\nComments made by the Chorus referring to Aristophanes in \"The Clouds\" have been interpreted as evidence that he can hardly have been more than 18 years old when his first play \"The Banqueters\" was produced. The second parabasis in \"Wasps\" appears to indicate that he reached some kind of temporary accommodation with Cleon following either the controversy over \"The Babylonians\" or a subsequent controversy over \"The Knights\". It has been inferred from statements in \"The Clouds\" and \"Peace\" that Aristophanes was prematurely bald.\nWe know that Aristophanes was probably victorious at least once at the City Dionysia (with \"Babylonians\" in 427) and at least three times at the Lenaia, with \"The Acharnians\" in 425, \"Knights\" in 424, and \"Frogs\" in 405. \"Frogs\" in fact won the unique distinction of a repeat performance at a subsequent festival. We know that a son of Aristophanes, Araros, was also a comic poet and he could have been heavily involved in the production of his father's play \"Wealth II\" in 388. Araros is also thought to have been responsible for the posthumous performances of the now lost plays \"Aeolosicon II\" and \"Cocalus\", and it is possible that the last of these won the prize at the City Dionysia in 387. It appears that a second son, Philippus, was twice victorious at the Lenaia and he could have directed some of Eubulus\u2019 comedies. A third son was called either Nicostratus or Philetaerus, and a man by the latter name appears in the catalogue of Lenaia victors with two victories, the first probably in the late 370s.\nPlato's \"The Symposium\" appears to be a useful source of biographical information about Aristophanes, but its reliability is open to doubt. It purports to be a record of conversations at a dinner party at which both Aristophanes and Socrates are guests, held some seven years after the performance of \"The Clouds\", the play in which Socrates was cruelly caricatured. One of the guests, Alcibiades, even quotes from the play when teasing Socrates over his appearance and yet there is no indication of any ill-feeling between Socrates and Aristophanes. Plato's Aristophanes is in fact a genial character and this has been interpreted as evidence of Plato's own friendship with him (their friendship appears to be corroborated by an epitaph for Aristophanes, \"reputedly\" written by Plato, in which the playwright's soul is compared to an eternal shrine for the Graces). Plato was only a boy when the events in \"The Symposium\" are supposed to have occurred and it is possible that his Aristophanes is in fact based on a reading of the plays. For example, conversation among the guests turns to the subject of Love and Aristophanes explains his notion of it in terms of an amusing allegory, a device he often uses in his plays. He is represented as suffering an attack of hiccoughs and this might be a humorous reference to the crude physical jokes in his plays. He tells the other guests that he is quite happy to be thought amusing but he is wary of appearing ridiculous. This fear of being ridiculed is consistent with his declaration in \"The Knights\" that he embarked on the career of comic playwright warily after witnessing the public contempt and ridicule that other dramatists had incurred.\nAristophanes survived The Peloponnesian War, two oligarchic revolutions and two democratic restorations; this has been interpreted as evidence that he was not actively involved in politics despite his highly political plays. He was probably appointed to the Council of Five Hundred for a year at the beginning of the fourth century but such appointments were very common in democratic Athens. Socrates, in the trial leading up to his own death, put the issue of a personal conscience in those troubled times quite succinctly:\nPoetry.\nThe language of Aristophanes' plays, and in Old Comedy generally, was valued by ancient commentators as a model of the Attic dialect. The orator Quintilian believed that the charm and grandeur of the Attic dialect made Old Comedy an example for orators to study and follow, and he considered it inferior in these respects only to the works of Homer. A revival of interest in the Attic dialect may have been responsible for the recovery and circulation of Aristophanes' plays during the 4th and 5th centuries AD, resulting in their survival today. In Aristophanes' plays, the Attic dialect is couched in verse and his plays can be appreciated for their poetic qualities.\nFor Aristophanes' contemporaries the works of Homer and Hesiod formed the cornerstones of Hellenic history and culture. Thus poetry had a moral and social significance that made it an inevitable topic of comic satire. Aristophanes was very conscious of literary fashions and traditions and his plays feature numerous references to other poets. These include not only rival comic dramatists such as Eupolis and Hermippus and predecessors such as Magnes, Crates and Cratinus, but also tragedians, notably Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, all three of whom are mentioned in e.g. \"The Frogs\". Aristophanes was the equal of these great tragedians in his subtle use of lyrics. He appears to have modelled his approach to language on that of Euripides in particular, so much so that the comic dramatist Cratinus labelled him a 'Euripidaristophanist' addicted to hair-splitting niceties.\nA full appreciation of Aristophanes' plays requires an understanding of the poetic forms he employed with virtuoso skill, and of their different rhythms and associations. There were three broad poetic forms: iambic dialogue, tetrameter verses and lyrics:\nThe rhythm begins at a typical anapestic gallop, slows down to consider the revered poets Hesiod and Homer, then gallops off again to its comic conclusion at the expense of the unfortunate Pantocles. Such subtle variations in rhythm are common in the plays, allowing for serious points to be made while still whetting the audience's appetite for the next joke.\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em\"&gt;\nThough to myself I often seem\nNone comes close to Amynias,\nClan, a man I once saw\nNow as poor as Antiphon,\nYet he got himself appointed\nWay up there in Thessaly,\nHappy to be where everyone\nIt can be argued that the most important feature of the language of the plays is imagery, particularly the use of similes, metaphors and pictorial expressions. In \"The Knights\", for example, the ears of a character with selective hearing are represented as parasols that open and close. In \"The Frogs\", Aeschylus is said to compose verses in the manner of a horse rolling in a sandpit. Some plays feature revelations of human perfectibility that are poetic rather than religious in character, such as the marriage of the hero Pisthetairos to Zeus's paramour in \"The Birds\" and the \"recreation\" of old Athens, crowned with roses, at the end of \"The Knights\".\nRhetoric.\nIt is widely believed that Aristophanes condemned rhetoric on both moral and political grounds. He states, \"a speaker trained in the new rhetoric may use his talents to deceive the jury and bewilder his opponents so thoroughly that the trial loses all semblance of fairness\" He is speaking to the \"art\" of flattery, and evidence points towards the fact that many of Aristophanes' plays were actually created with the intent to attack the view of rhetoric. The most noticeable attack can be seen in his play Banqueters, in which two brothers from different educational backgrounds argue over which education is better. One brother comes from a background of \"old-fashioned\" education while the other brother appears to be a product of the sophistic education\nThe chorus was mainly used by Aristophanes as a defense against rhetoric and would often talk about topics such as the civic duty of those who were educated in classical teachings. In Aristophanes' opinion it was the job of those educated adults to protect the public from deception and to stand as a beacon of light for those who were more gullible than others. One of the main reasons why Aristophanes was so against the sophists came into existence from the requirements listed by the leaders of the organization. Money was essential, which meant that roughly all of the pupils studying with the sophists came from upper-class backgrounds and excluded the rest of the polis. Aristophanes believed that education and knowledge was a public service and that anything that excluded willing minds was nothing but an abomination. He concludes that all politicians that study rhetoric must have \"doubtful citizenships, unspeakable morals, and too much arrogance\".\nOld Comedy.\nThe Greek word for comedy (\"k\u014dm\u014did\u00eda\") derives from the words for 'revel' and 'song' (\"k\u014dmos\" and \"\u014dd\u0113\") and according to Aristotle comic drama actually developed from song. The first official comedy at the City Dionysia was not staged until 487/6 BC, by which time tragedy had already been long established there. The first comedy at the Lenaia was staged later still, only about 20 years before the performance there of \"The Acharnians\", the first of Aristophanes' surviving plays. According to Aristotle, comedy was slow to gain official acceptance because nobody took it seriously, yet only 60 years after comedy first appeared at the City Dionysia, Aristophanes observed that producing comedies was the most difficult work of all. Competition at the Dionysian festivals needed dramatic conventions for plays to be judged, but it also fuelled innovations. Developments were quite rapid and Aristotle could distinguish between 'old' and 'new' comedy by 330 BC.\nThe trend from Old Comedy to New Comedy saw a move away from highly topical concerns with real individuals and local issues towards generalized situations and stock characters. This was partly due to the internationalization of cultural perspectives during and after the Peloponnesian War. For ancient commentators such as Plutarch, New Comedy was a more sophisticated form of drama than Old Comedy. However, Old Comedy was in fact a complex and sophisticated dramatic form incorporating many approaches to humour and entertainment. In Aristophanes' early plays, the genre appears to have developed around a complex set of dramatic conventions, and these were only gradually simplified and abandoned.\nThe City Dionysia and the Lenaia were celebrated in honour of Dionysus, the god of wine and ecstasy. (Euripides' play \"The Bacchae\" offers the best insight into 5th century ideas about this god.) Old Comedy can be understood as a celebration of the exuberant sense of release inherent in his worship. It was more interested in finding targets for satire than in any kind of advocacy. During the City Dionysia, a statue of the god was brought to the theatre from a temple outside the city, and it remained in the theatre throughout the festival, overseeing the plays like a privileged member of the audience. In \"The Frogs\", the god appears also as a dramatic character, and he enters the theatre ludicrously disguised as Hercules. He observes to the audience that every time he is on hand to hear a joke from a comic dramatist like Phrynichus (one of Aristophanes' rivals) he ages by more than a year. This scene opens the play, and it is a reminder to the audience that nobody is above mockery in Old Comedy\u2014not even its patron god and its practitioners. Gods, artists, politicians and ordinary citizens were legitimate targets; comedy was a kind of licensed buffoonery, and there was no legal redress for anyone who was slandered in a play. There were certain limits to the scope of the satire, but they are not easily defined. Impiety could be punished in 5th century Athens, but the absurdities implicit in the traditional religion were open to ridicule. The polis was not allowed to be slandered, but as stated in the biography section of this article, that could depend on who was in the audience and which festival was involved.\nFor convenience, Old Comedy, as represented by Aristophanes' early plays, is analysed below in terms of three broad characteristics\u2014 topicality, festivity and complexity. Dramatic structure contributes to the complexity of Aristophanes' plays. However, it is associated with poetic rhythms and meters that have little relevance to English translations and it is therefore treated in a separate section.\nTopicality.\nOld Comedy's emphasis on real personalities and local issues makes the plays difficult to appreciate today without the aid of scholarly commentaries\u2014see for example articles on \"The Knights\", \"The Wasps\" and \"Peace\" for lists of topical references. The topicality of the plays had unique consequences for both the writing and the production of the plays in ancient Athens.\nFestivity.\nThe Lenaia and City Dionysia were religious festivals, but they resembled a gala rather than a church service.\nComplexity.\nThe development of New Comedy involved a trend towards more realistic plots, a simpler dramatic structure and a softer tone. Old Comedy was the comedy of a vigorously democratic polis at the height of its power and it gave Aristophanes the freedom to explore the limits of humour, even to the point of undermining the humour itself.\nDramatic structure.\nThe structural elements of a typical Aristophanic plot can be summarized as follows:\nThe rules of competition did not prevent a playwright arranging and adjusting these elements to suit his particular needs. In \"The Acharnians\" and \"Peace\", for example, there is no formal agon whereas in \"The Clouds\" there are two agons.\nParabasis.\nThe parabasis is an address to the audience by the chorus or chorus leader while the actors leave or have left the stage. In this role, the chorus is sometimes out of character, as the author's voice, and sometimes in character, although these capacities are often difficult to distinguish. Generally the parabasis occurs somewhere in the middle of a play and often there is a second parabasis towards the end. The elements of a parabasis have been defined and named by scholars but it is probable that Aristophanes' own understanding was less formal. The selection of elements can vary from play to play and it varies considerably within plays between first and second parabasis. The early plays (\"The Acharnians\" to \"The Birds\") are fairly uniform in their approach however and the following elements of a parabasis can be found within them.\n\"The Wasps\" is thought to offer the best example of a conventional approach and the elements of a parabasis can be identified and located in that play as follows.\nTextual corruption is probably the reason for the absence of the antistrophe in the second parabasis.\nHowever, there are several variations from the ideal even within the early plays. For example, the parabasis proper in \"The Clouds\" (lines 518\u201362) is composed in eupolidean meter rather than in anapests and the second parabasis includes a kommation but it lacks strophe, antistrophe and antepirrhema (\"The Clouds\" lines 1113\u201330). The second parabasis in \"The Acharnians\" lines 971\u201399 can be considered a hybrid parabasis/song (i.e. the declaimed sections are merely continuations of the strophe and antistrophe) and, unlike the typical parabasis, it seems to comment on actions that occur on stage during the address. An understanding of Old Comedy conventions such as the parabasis is necessary for a proper understanding of Aristophanes' plays; on the other hand, a sensitive appreciation of the plays is necessary for a proper understanding of the conventions.\nInfluence and legacy.\nThe tragic dramatists, Sophocles and Euripides, died near the end of the Peloponnesian War and the art of tragedy thereafter ceased to develop, yet comedy did continue to evolve after the defeat of Athens and it is possible that it did so because, in Aristophanes, it had a master craftsman who lived long enough to help usher it into a new age. Indeed, according to one ancient source (Platonius, c.9th Century AD), one of Aristophanes's last plays, \"Aioliskon\", had neither a parabasis nor any choral lyrics (making it a type of Middle Comedy), while \"Kolakos\" anticipated all the elements of New Comedy, including a rape and a recognition scene. Aristophanes seems to have had some appreciation of his formative role in the development of comedy, as indicated by his comment in \"Clouds\" that his audience would be judged by other times according to its reception of his plays. \"Clouds\" was awarded third (i.e. last) place after its original performance and the text that has come down to the modern age was a subsequent draft that Aristophanes intended to be read rather than acted. The circulation of his plays in manuscript extended their influence beyond the original audience, over whom in fact they seem to have had little or no practical influence: they did not affect the career of Cleon, they failed to persuade the Athenians to pursue an honourable peace with Sparta and it is not clear that they were instrumental in the trial and execution of Socrates, whose death probably resulted from public animosity towards the philosopher's disgraced associates (such as Alcibiades), exacerbated of course by his own intransigence during the trial. The plays, in manuscript form, have been put to some surprising uses\u2014as indicated earlier, they were used in the study of rhetoric on the recommendation of Quintilian and by students of the Attic dialect in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries AD. It is possible that Plato sent copies of the plays to Dionysius of Syracuse so that he might learn about Athenian life and government.\nLatin translations of the plays by Andreas Divus (Venice 1528) were circulated widely throughout Europe in the Renaissance and these were soon followed by translations and adaptations in modern languages. Racine, for example, drew \"Les Plaideurs\" (1668) from \"The Wasps\". Goethe (who turned to Aristophanes for a warmer and more vivid form of comedy than he could derive from readings of Terence and Plautus) adapted a short play \"Die V\u00f6gel\" from \"The Birds\" for performance in Weimar. Aristophanes has appealed to both conservatives and radicals in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries\u2014Anatoly Lunacharsky, first Commissar of Enlightenment for the USSR in 1917, declared that the ancient dramatist would have a permanent place in proletarian theatre and yet conservative, Prussian intellectuals interpreted Aristophanes as a satirical opponent of social reform. The avant-gardist stage-director Karolos Koun directed a version of \"The Birds\" under the Acropolis in 1959 that established a trend in modern Greek history of breaking taboos through the voice of Aristophanes.\nThe plays have a significance that goes beyond their artistic function, as historical documents that open the window on life and politics in classical Athens, in which respect they are perhaps as important as the writings of Thucydides. The artistic influence of the plays is immeasurable. They have contributed to the history of European theatre and that history in turn shapes our understanding of the plays. Thus for example the operettas of Gilbert and Sullivan can give us insights into Aristophanes' plays and similarly the plays can give us insights into the operettas. The plays are a source of famous sayings, such as \"By words the mind is winged.\"\nListed below are some of the many works influenced (more or less) by Aristophanes.\nTranslation of Aristophanes.\nAlan H. Sommerstein believes that although there are good translations of Aristophanes' comedies in English, none could be flawless, \"for there is much truth in the paradox that the only really perfect translation is the original.\" In spite of that, it is crucial to be cited that there are competent respectable translations in other languages such as Farsi (by Reza Shirmarz, a well-known Iranian playwright, translator and researcher), French and German which seems quite fascinating not only for the scholars and academics, but also for theater professionals to be stages or performed in radio. Additionally, despite the fact that English translations of Aristophanes might not be perfect, \"the reception of Aristophanes has gained extraordinary momentum as a topic of academic interest in the last few years.\" \nWorks.\nSurviving plays.\nMost of these are traditionally referred to by abbreviations of their \"Latin\" titles; Latin remains a customary language of scholarship in classical studies.\nDatable non-surviving (lost) plays.\nThe standard modern edition of the fragments is Rudolf Kassel and Colin Fran\u00e7ois Lloyd Austin's, \"Poetae Comici Graeci\" III.2."}
{"id": "1029", "revid": "28331428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1029", "title": "Albert Schweitzer", "text": "Ludwig Philipp Albert Schweitzer (; 14 January 1875\u00a0\u2013 4 September 1965) was an Alsatian polymath. He was a theologian, organist, writer, humanitarian, philosopher, and physician. A Lutheran, Schweitzer challenged both the secular view of Jesus as depicted by the historical-critical method current at this time, as well as the traditional Christian view. His contributions to the interpretation of Pauline Christianity concern the role of Paul's mysticism of \"being in Christ\" as primary and the doctrine of Justification by Faith as secondary.\nHe received the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize for his philosophy of \"Reverence for Life\", becoming the eighth Frenchman to be awarded that prize. His philosophy was expressed in many ways, but most famously in founding and sustaining the Albert Schweitzer Hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, which up to 1958 was situated in French Equatorial Africa, and after this in Gabon. As a music scholar and organist, he studied the music of German composer Johann Sebastian Bach and influenced the Organ Reform Movement (\"Orgelbewegung\").\nEarly years.\nSchweitzer was born 14 January 1875 in Kaysersberg in Alsace, in what had less than four years previously become The Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine in The German Empire; he later became a citizen of France after World War I, when Alsace became a French territory. He was the son of Louis Schweitzer and Ad\u00e8le Schillinger. He spent his childhood in Gunsbach, also in Alsace, where his father, the local Lutheran-Evangelical pastor of the EPCAAL, taught him how to play music. The tiny village would become home to the Association Internationale Albert Schweitzer (AIAS). The medieval parish church of Gunsbach was shared by the Protestant and Catholic congregations, which held their prayers in different areas at different times on Sundays. This compromise arose after the Protestant Reformation and the Thirty Years' War. Schweitzer, the pastor's son, grew up in this exceptional environment of religious tolerance, and developed the belief that true Christianity should always work towards a unity of faith and purpose.\nSchweitzer's first language was the Alsatian dialect of German. At the Mulhouse gymnasium he received his \"Abitur\" (the certificate at the end of secondary education) in 1893. He studied organ in Mulhouse from 1885 to 1893 with Eug\u00e8ne Munch, organist at the Protestant cathedral, who inspired Schweitzer with his enthusiasm for the music of German composer Richard Wagner. In 1893, he played for the French organist Charles-Marie Widor (at Saint-Sulpice, Paris), for whom Johann Sebastian Bach's organ music contained a mystic sense of the eternal. Widor, deeply impressed, agreed to teach Schweitzer without fee, and a great and influential friendship thus began.\nFrom 1893 Schweitzer studied Protestant theology at the Kaiser Wilhelm University in Strasbourg. There he also received instruction in piano and counterpoint from professor Gustav Jacobsthal, and associated closely with Ernest Munch, the brother of his former teacher, organist of St William church, who was also a passionate admirer of J. S. Bach's music. Schweitzer served his one-year compulsory military service in 1894. Schweitzer saw many operas of Richard Wagner in Strasbourg (under Otto Lohse) and in 1896 he managed to afford a visit to the Bayreuth Festival to see Wagner's \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" and \"Parsifal\", both of which impressed him. In 1898, he returned to Paris to write a PhD dissertation on \"The Religious Philosophy of Kant\" at the Sorbonne, and to study in earnest with Widor. Here he often met with the elderly Aristide Cavaill\u00e9-Coll. He also studied piano at that time with Marie Ja\u00ebll. In 1899, Schweitzer spent the summer semester at the University of Berlin and eventually obtained his theology degree at the University of Strasbourg. He published his PhD thesis at the University of T\u00fcbingen in 1899.\nIn 1905, Schweitzer began his study of medicine at the University of Strasbourg, culminating in the degree of M.D. in 1913.\nMusic.\nSchweitzer rapidly gained prominence as a musical scholar and organist, dedicated also to the rescue, restoration and study of historic pipe organs. With theological insight, he interpreted the use of pictorial and symbolical representation in J. S. Bach's religious music. In 1899, he astonished Widor by explaining figures and motifs in Bach's Chorale Preludes as painter-like tonal and rhythmic imagery illustrating themes from the words of the hymns on which they were based. They were works of devotional contemplation in which the musical design corresponded to literary ideas, conceived visually. Widor had not grown up with knowledge of the old Lutheran hymns.\nThe exposition of these ideas, encouraged by Widor and Munch, became Schweitzer's last task, and appeared in the masterly study \"J. S. Bach: Le Musicien-Po\u00e8te\", written in French and published in 1905. There was great demand for a German edition, but, instead of translating it, he decided to rewrite it. The result was two volumes (\"J. S. Bach\"), which were published in 1908 and translated into English by Ernest Newman in 1911. Ernst Cassirer, a contemporaneous German philosopher, called it \"one of the best interpretations\" of Bach. During its preparation Schweitzer became a friend of Cosima Wagner, then resident in Strasbourg, with whom he had many theological and musical conversations, exploring his view of Bach's descriptive music, and playing the major Chorale Preludes for her at the Temple Neuf. Schweitzer's interpretative approach greatly influenced the modern understanding of Bach's music. He became a welcome guest at the Wagners' home, Wahnfried. He also corresponded with composer Clara Faisst, who became a good friend.\nHis pamphlet \"The Art of Organ Building and Organ Playing in Germany and France\" (1906, republished with an appendix on the state of the organ-building industry in 1927) effectively launched the 20th-century \"Orgelbewegung\", which turned away from romantic extremes and rediscovered baroque principles\u2014although this sweeping reform movement in organ building eventually went further than Schweitzer had intended. In 1909, he addressed the \"Third Congress of the International Society of Music\" at Vienna on the subject. Having circulated a questionnaire among players and organ-builders in several European countries, he produced a very considered report. This provided the basis for the \"International Regulations for Organ Building\". He envisaged instruments in which the French late-romantic full-organ sound should work integrally with the English and German romantic reed pipes, and with the classical Alsace Silbermann organ resources and baroque flue pipes, all in registers regulated (by stops) to access distinct voices in fugue or counterpoint capable of combination without loss of distinctness: different voices singing the same music together.\nSchweitzer also studied piano under Isidor Philipp, head of the piano department at the Paris Conservatory.\nIn 1905, Widor and Schweitzer were among the six musicians who founded the Paris Bach Society, a choir dedicated to performing J. S. Bach's music, for whose concerts Schweitzer took the organ part regularly until 1913. He was also appointed organist for the Bach Concerts of the Orf\u00e9o Catal\u00e0 at Barcelona, Spain, and often travelled there for that purpose. He and Widor collaborated on a new edition of Bach's organ works, with detailed analysis of each work in three languages (English, French, German). Schweitzer, who insisted that the score should show Bach's notation with no additional markings, wrote the commentaries for the Preludes and Fugues, and Widor those for the Sonatas and Concertos: six volumes were published in 1912\u201314. Three more, to contain the Chorale Preludes with Schweitzer's analyses, were to be worked on in Africa, but these were never completed, perhaps because for him they were inseparable from his evolving theological thought.\nOn departure for Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in 1913, he was presented with a pedal piano, a piano with pedal attachments to operate like an organ pedal-keyboard. Built especially for the tropics, it was delivered by river in a huge dug-out canoe to Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, packed in a zinc-lined case. At first, he regarded his new life as a renunciation of his art, and fell out of practice, but after some time he resolved to study and learn by heart the works of Bach, Mendelssohn, Widor, C\u00e9sar Franck, and Max Reger systematically. It became his custom to play during the lunch hour and on Sunday afternoons. Schweitzer's pedal piano was still in use at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in 1946. According to a visitor, Dr. Gaine Cannon, of Balsam Grove, N.C., the old, dilapidated piano-organ was still being played by Dr. Schweitzer in 1962, and stories told that \"his fingers were still lively\" on the old instrument at 88 years of age.\nSir Donald Tovey dedicated his conjectural completion of Bach's \"The Art of Fugue\" to Schweitzer.\nSchweitzer's recordings of organ-music, and his innovative recording technique, are described below.\nOne of his pupils was conductor and composer Hans M\u00fcnch.\nTheology.\nIn 1899, Schweitzer became a deacon at the church of Saint Nicholas in Strasbourg. In 1900, with the completion of his licentiate in theology, he was ordained as curate, and that year he witnessed the Oberammergau Passion Play. In the following year he became provisional Principal of the Theological College of Saint Thomas, from which he had just graduated, and in 1903 his appointment was made permanent.\nIn 1906, he published \"Geschichte der Leben-Jesu-Forschung\" [History of Life-of-Jesus research]. This book, which established his reputation, was first published in English in 1910 as \"The Quest of the Historical Jesus\". Under this title the book became famous in the English-speaking world. A second German edition was published in 1913, containing theologically significant revisions and expansions: this revised edition did not appear in English until 2001. In 1931, he published \"Mystik des Apostels Paulus\" (\"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\"); a second edition was published in 1953.\n\"The Quest of the Historical Jesus (1906)\".\nIn \"The Quest\", Schweitzer maintained that the life of Jesus must be interpreted in the light of Jesus' own convictions, which reflected late Jewish eschatology and apocalypticism. Schweitzer writes:\nSchweitzer cross-referenced the many New Testament verses declaring imminent fulfilment of the promise of the World's ending within the lifetime of Jesus's original followers. He wrote that in his view, in the Gospel of Mark, Jesus speaks of a \"tribulation\", with his \"coming in the clouds with great power and glory\" (St. Mark), and states that it will happen but it has not: \"This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled\" (St. Matthew, 24:34) or, \"have taken place\" (Luke 21:32). Similarly, in 1st Peter 1:20, \"Christ, who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world but was manifest in these last times for you\", as well as \"But the end of all things is at hand\" (1 Peter 4:7) and \"Surely, I come quickly.\" (Revelation 22:20).\nSchweitzer concluded his treatment of Jesus with what has been called the most famous words of twentieth-century theology:\n\u201cHe comes to us as One unknown, without a name, as of old, by the lake-side, He came to those men who knew him not. He speaks to us the same word: \u2018Follow thou me\u2019 and sets us to the task which He has to fulfill for our time. He commands. And to those who obey Him, whether they be wise or simple, He will reveal Himself in the toils, the conflicts, the sufferings which they shall pass through in His fellowship, and as an ineffable mystery, they shall learn in their own experience Who He is.\u201d \n\"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\" (1931).\nIn \"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\", Schweitzer first distinguishes between two categories of mysticism: primitive and developed. Primitive mysticism \"has not yet risen to a conception of the universal, and is still confined to naive views of earthly and super-earthly, temporal and eternal\". Additionally, he argues that this view of a \"union with the divinity, brought about by efficacious ceremonies, is found even in quite primitive religions\".\nOn the other hand, a more developed form of mysticism can be found in the Greek mystery-cults that were popular in first-century A.D. society. These included the cults of Attis, Osiris, and Mithras. A developed form of mysticism is attained when the \"conception of the universal is reached and a man reflects upon his relation to the totality of being and to Being in itself\". Schweitzer claims that this form of mysticism is more intellectual and can be found \"among the Brahmans and in the Buddha, in Platonism, in Stoicism, in Spinoza, Schopenhauer, and Hegel\".\nNext, Schweitzer poses the question: \"Of what precise kind then is the mysticism of Paul?\" He locates Paul between the two extremes of primitive mysticism and developed mysticism. Paul stands high above primitive mysticism, due to his intellectual writings, but never speaks of being one with God or being in God. Instead, he conceives of sonship to God as \"mediated and effected by means of the mystical union with Christ\". He summarizes Pauline mysticism as \"being in Christ\" rather than \"being in God\".\nPaul's imminent eschatology (from his background in Jewish eschatology) causes him to believe that the kingdom of God has not yet come and that Christians are now living in the time of Christ. Christ-mysticism holds the field until God-mysticism becomes possible, which is in the near future. Therefore, Schweitzer argues that Paul is the only theologian who does not claim that Christians can have an experience of \"being-in-God\". Rather, Paul uses the phrase \"being-in-Christ\" to illustrate how Jesus is a mediator between the Christian community and God. Additionally, Schweitzer explains how the experience of \"being-in-Christ\" is not a \"static partaking in the spiritual being of Christ, but as the real co-experiencing of His dying and rising again\". The \"realistic\" partaking in the mystery of Jesus is only possible within the solidarity of the Christian community.\nOne of Schweitzer's major arguments in \"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\" is that Paul's mysticism, marked by his phrase \"being in Christ\", gives the clue to the whole of Pauline theology. Rather than reading justification by faith as the main topic of Pauline thought, which has been the most popular argument set forward by Martin Luther, Schweitzer argues that Paul's emphasis was on the mystical union with God by \"being in Christ\". Jaroslav Pelikan, in his foreword to \"The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle\", points out that:\nPaul's \"Realism\" versus Hellenistic \"Symbolism\".\nSchweitzer contrasts Paul's \"realistic\" dying and rising with Christ to the \"symbolism\" of Hellenism. Although Paul is widely influenced by Hellenistic thought, he is not controlled by it. Schweitzer explains that Paul focused on the idea of fellowship with the divine being through the \"realistic\" dying and rising with Christ rather than the \"symbolic\" Hellenistic act of becoming like Christ through deification. After baptism, the Christian is continually renewed throughout their lifetime due to participation in the dying and rising with Christ (most notably through the Sacraments). On the other hand, the Hellenist \"lives on the store of experience which he acquired in the initiation\" and is not continually affected by a shared communal experience.\nAnother major difference between Paul's \"realism\" and Hellenistic \"symbolism\" is the exclusive nature of the former and the inclusive nature of the latter. Schweitzer unabashedly emphasizes the fact that \"Paul's thought follows predestinarian lines\". He explains, \"only the man who is elected thereto can enter into relation with God\". Although every human being is invited to become a Christian, only those who have undergone the initiation into the Christian community through baptism can share in the \"realistic\" dying and rising with Christ.\nMedicine.\nAt the age of 30, in 1905, Schweitzer answered the call of The Society of the Evangelist Missions of Paris, which was looking for a physician. The committee of this missionary society was not ready to accept his offer, considering his Lutheran theology to be \"incorrect\". He could easily have obtained a place in a German evangelical mission, but wished to follow the original call despite the doctrinal difficulties. Amid a hail of protests from his friends, family and colleagues, he resigned his post and re-entered the university as a student in a three-year course towards the degree of Doctorate in Medicine, a subject in which he had little knowledge or previous aptitude. He planned to spread the Gospel by the example of his Christian labour of healing, rather than through the verbal process of preaching, and believed that this service should be acceptable within any branch of Christian teaching.\nEven in his study of medicine, and through his clinical course, Schweitzer pursued the ideal of the philosopher-scientist. By extreme application and hard work, he completed his studies successfully at the end of 1911. His medical degree dissertation was another work on the historical Jesus, \"The Psychiatric Study of Jesus\". He defended Jesus' mental health in it. In June 1912, he married Helene Bresslau, municipal inspector for orphans and daughter of the Jewish pan-Germanist historian Harry Bresslau.\nIn 1912, now armed with a medical degree, Schweitzer made a definite proposal to go as a physician to work at his own expense in the Paris Missionary Society's mission at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 on the Ogoou\u00e9 river, in what is now Gabon, in Africa (then a French colony). He refused to attend a committee to inquire into his doctrine, but met each committee member personally and was at last accepted. Through concerts and other fund-raising, he was ready to equip a small hospital. In early 1913, he and his wife set off to establish a hospital (Albert Schweitzer Hospital) near an existing mission post. The site was nearly 200 miles (14 days by raft) upstream from the mouth of the Ogoou\u00e9 at Port Gentil (Cape Lopez) (and so accessible to external communications), but downstream of most tributaries, so that internal communications within Gabon converged towards Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9.\nIn the first nine months, he and his wife had about 2,000 patients to examine, some travelling many days and hundreds of kilometres to reach him. In addition to injuries, he was often treating severe sandflea and crawcraw sores, \"framboesia\" (yaws), tropical eating sores, heart disease, tropical dysentery, tropical malaria, sleeping sickness, leprosy, fevers, strangulated hernias, necrosis, abdominal tumours and chronic constipation and nicotine poisoning, while also attempting to deal with deliberate poisonings, fetishism and fear of cannibalism among the Mbahouin.\nSchweitzer's wife, Helene Schweitzer, was an anaesthetist for surgical operations. After briefly occupying a shed formerly used as a chicken hut, in late 1913 they built their first hospital of corrugated iron, with two 13-foot rooms (consulting room and operating theatre) and with a dispensary and sterilising room in spaces below the broad eaves. The waiting room and dormitory (42 by 20 feet) were built, like native huts, of unhewn logs along a 30-yard path leading from the hospital to the landing-place. The Schweitzers had their own bungalow and employed as their assistant Joseph, a French-speaking Galoa (Mpongwe) who first came as a patient.\nAfter World War I broke out in July 1914, Schweitzer and his wife, German citizens in a French colony when the countries were at war, were put under supervision by the French military at Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, where Schweitzer continued his work. In 1917, exhausted by over four years' work and by tropical anaemia, they were taken to Bordeaux and interned first in Garaison and then from March 1918 in Saint-R\u00e9my-de-Provence. In July 1918, after being transferred to his home in Alsace, he was a free man again. At this time Schweitzer, born a German citizen, had his parents' former (pre-1871) French citizenship reinstated and became a French citizen. Then, working as medical assistant and assistant-pastor in Strasbourg, he advanced his project on the philosophy of civilization, which had occupied his mind since 1900. By 1920, his health recovering, he was giving organ recitals and doing other fund-raising work to repay borrowings and raise funds for returning to Gabon. In 1922, he delivered the Dale Memorial Lectures in the University of Oxford, and from these in the following year appeared Volumes I and II of his great work, \"The Decay and Restoration of Civilization\" and \"Civilization and Ethics\". The two remaining volumes, on \"The World-View of Reverence for Life \" and a fourth on the Civilized State, were never completed.\nIn 1924, Schweitzer returned without his wife, with an Oxford undergraduate Noel Gillespie as his assistant. Everything was heavily decayed, and building and doctoring progressed together for months. He now had salvarsan for treating syphilitic ulcers and framboesia. Additional medical staff, nurse (Miss) Kottmann and Dr. Victor Nessmann, joined him in 1924, and Dr. Mark Lauterberg in 1925; the growing hospital was manned by native orderlies. Later Dr. Trensz replaced Nessmann, and Martha Lauterberg and Hans Muggenstorm joined them. Joseph also returned. In 1925\u20136, new hospital buildings were constructed, and also a ward for white patients, so that the site became like a village. The onset of famine and a dysentery epidemic created fresh problems. Much of the building work was carried out with the help of local people and patients. Drug advances for sleeping sickness included Germanin and tryparsamide. Trensz conducted experiments showing that the non-amoebic strain of dysentery was caused by a paracholera vibrion (facultative anaerobic bacteria). With the new hospital built and the medical team established, Schweitzer returned to Europe in 1927, this time leaving a functioning hospital at work.\nHe was there again from 1929 to 1932. Gradually his opinions and concepts became acknowledged, not only in Europe, but worldwide. There was a further period of work in 1935. In January 1937, he returned again to Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 and continued working there throughout World War II.\nHospital conditions.\nThe journalist James Cameron visited Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in 1953 (when Schweitzer was 78) and found significant flaws in the practices and attitudes of Schweitzer and his staff. The hospital suffered from squalor and was without modern amenities, and Schweitzer had little contact with the local people. Cameron did not make public what he had seen at the time: according to a BBC dramatisation, he made the unusual journalistic decision to withhold the story, and resisted the expressed wish of his employers to publish an expos\u00e9.\nThe poor conditions of the hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 were also famously criticized by Nigerian professor and novelist Chinua Achebe in his essay on Joseph Conrad's novel \"Heart of Darkness\": \"In a comment which has often been quoted Schweitzer says: 'The African is indeed my brother but my junior brother.' And so he proceeded to build a hospital appropriate to the needs of junior brothers with standards of hygiene reminiscent of medical practice in the days before the germ theory of disease came into being.\"\nSchweitzer's views.\nColonialism.\nSchweitzer considered his work as a medical missionary in Africa to be his response to Jesus' call to become \"fishers of men\" but also as a small recompense for the historic guilt of European colonizers:\nSchweitzer was one of colonialism's harshest critics. In a sermon that he preached on 6 January 1905, before he had told anyone of his plans to dedicate the rest of his life to work as a physician in Africa, he said:\nPaternalism.\nSchweitzer was nonetheless still sometimes accused of being paternalistic in his attitude towards Africans. For instance, he thought that Gabonese independence came too early, without adequate education or accommodation to local circumstances. Edgar Berman quotes Schweitzer as having said in 1960, \"No society can go from the primeval directly to an industrial state without losing the leavening that time and an agricultural period allow.\" Schweitzer believed dignity and respect must be extended to blacks, while also sometimes characterizing them as children. He summarized his views on European-African relations by saying \"With regard to the negroes, then, I have coined the formula: 'I am your brother, it is true, but your elder brother.'\" Chinua Achebe has criticized him for this characterization, though Achebe acknowledges that Schweitzer's use of the word \"brother\" at all was, for a European of the early 20th century, an unusual expression of human solidarity between Europeans and Africans. Schweitzer eventually emended and complicated this notion with his later statement that \"The time for speaking of older and younger brothers has passed\".\nAmerican journalist John Gunther visited Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 in the 1950s and reported Schweitzer's patronizing attitude towards Africans. He also noted the lack of Africans trained to be skilled workers. By comparison, his English contemporary Dr. Albert Cook in Uganda had been training nurses and midwives since the 1910s, and had published a manual of midwifery in the local language of Luganda. After three decades in Africa, Schweitzer still depended on Europe for nurses.\nReverence for life.\nThe keynote of Schweitzer's personal philosophy (which he considered to be his greatest contribution to mankind) was the idea of \"Reverence for Life\" (\"Ehrfurcht vor dem Leben\"). He thought that Western civilization was decaying because it had abandoned affirmation of life as its ethical foundation.\nIn the Preface to \"Civilization and Ethics\" (1923) he argued that Western philosophy from Descartes to Kant had set out to explain the objective world expecting that humanity would be found to have a special meaning within it. But no such meaning was found, and the rational, life-affirming optimism of the Age of Enlightenment began to evaporate. A rift opened between this world-view, as material knowledge, and the life-view, understood as Will, expressed in the pessimist philosophies from Schopenhauer onward. Scientific materialism (advanced by Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin) portrayed an objective world process devoid of ethics, entirely an expression of the will-to-live.\nSchweitzer wrote, \"True philosophy must start from the most immediate and comprehensive fact of consciousness, and this may be formulated as follows: 'I am life which wills to live, and I exist in the midst of life which wills to live.'\" In nature one form of life must always prey upon another. However, human consciousness holds an awareness of, and sympathy for, the will of other beings to live. An ethical human strives to escape from this contradiction so far as possible.\nThough we cannot perfect the endeavour we should strive for it: the will-to-live constantly renews itself, for it is both an evolutionary necessity and a spiritual phenomenon. Life and love are rooted in this same principle, in a personal spiritual relationship to the universe. Ethics themselves proceed from the need to respect the wish of other beings to exist as one does towards oneself. Even so, Schweitzer found many instances in world religions and philosophies in which the principle was denied, not least in the European Middle Ages, and in the Indian Brahminic philosophy.\nFor Schweitzer, mankind had to accept that objective reality is ethically neutral. It could then affirm a new Enlightenment through spiritual rationalism, by giving priority to volition or ethical will as the primary meaning of life. Mankind had to choose to create the moral structures of civilization: the world-view must derive from the life-view, not vice versa. Respect for life, overcoming coarser impulses and hollow doctrines, leads the individual to live in the service of other people and of every living creature. In contemplation of the will-to-life, respect for the life of others becomes the highest principle and the defining purpose of humanity.\nSuch was the theory which Schweitzer sought to put into practice in his own life. According to some authors, Schweitzer's thought, and specifically his development of reverence for life, was influenced by Indian religious thought and in particular the Jain principle of ahimsa, or non-violence. Albert Schweitzer noted the contribution of Indian influence in his book \"Indian Thought and Its Development\":\nFurther on ahimsa and the reverence for life in the same book, he elaborates on the ancient Indian didactic work of the Tirukkural, which he observed that, like the Buddha and the Bhagavad Gita, \"stands for the commandment not to kill and not to damage\". Translating several couplets from the work, he remarked that the Kural insists on the idea that \"good must be done for its own sake\" and said, \"There hardly exists in the literature of the world a collection of maxims in which we find so much lofty wisdom.\"\nLater life.\nAfter the birth of their daughter (Rhena Schweitzer Miller), Albert's wife, Helene Schweitzer was no longer able to live in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 due to her health. In 1923, the family moved to K\u00f6nigsfeld im Schwarzwald, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, where he was building a house for the family. This house is now maintained as a Schweitzer museum.\nFrom 1939 to 1948, he stayed in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, unable to go back to Europe because of the war. Three years after the end of World War II, in 1948, he returned for the first time to Europe and kept travelling back and forth (and once to the US) as long as he was able. During his return visits to his home village of Gunsbach, Schweitzer continued to make use of the family house, which after his death became an archive and museum to his life and work. His life was portrayed in the 1952 movie \"Il est minuit, Docteur Schweitzer\", starring Pierre Fresnay as Albert Schweitzer and Jeanne Moreau as his nurse Marie. Schweitzer inspired actor Hugh O'Brian when O'Brian visited in Africa. O'Brian returned to the United States and founded the Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership Foundation (HOBY).\nSchweitzer was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize of 1952, accepting the prize with the speech, \"The Problem of Peace\". From 1952 until his death he worked against nuclear tests and nuclear weapons with Albert Einstein, Otto Hahn and Bertrand Russell. In 1957 and 1958, he broadcast four speeches over Radio Oslo which were published in \"Peace or Atomic War\". In 1957, Schweitzer was one of the founders of The Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy. On 23 April 1957, Schweitzer made his \"Declaration of Conscience\" speech; it was broadcast to the world over Radio Oslo, pleading for the abolition of nuclear weapons. His speech ended, \"The end of further experiments with atom bombs would be like the early sunrays of hope which suffering humanity is longing for.\"\nWeeks prior to his death, an American film crew was allowed to visit Schweitzer and Drs. Muntz and Friedman, both Holocaust survivors, to record his work and daily life at the hospital. The film \"The Legacy of Albert Schweitzer\", narrated by Henry Fonda, was produced by Warner Brothers and aired once. It resides in their vault today in deteriorating condition. Although several attempts have been made to restore and re-air the film, all access has been denied.\nIn 1955, he was made an honorary member of the Order of Merit (OM) by Queen Elizabeth II. He was also a chevalier of the Military and Hospitaller Order of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem.\nSchweitzer died on 4 September 1965 at his beloved hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, now in independent Gabon. His grave, on the banks of the Ogoou\u00e9 River, is marked by a cross he made himself.\nHis cousin Anne-Marie Schweitzer Sartre was the mother of Jean-Paul Sartre. Her father, Charles Schweitzer, was the older brother of Albert Schweitzer's father, Louis Th\u00e9ophile.\nSchweitzer is often cited in vegetarian literature as being an advocate of vegetarianism in his later years. Schweitzer was not a vegetarian in his earlier life. For example, in 1950, biographer Magnus C. Ratter commented that Schweitzer never \"commit[ted] himself to the anti- vivisection, vegetarian, or pacifist positions, though his thought leads in this direction\". Biographer James Bentley has written that Schweitzer became a vegetarian after his wife's death in 1957 and he was \"living almost entirely on lentil soup\". In contrast to this, historian David N. Stamos has written that Schweitzer was not a vegetarian in his personal life nor imposed it on his missionary hospital but he did help animals and was opposed to hunting. Stamos noted that Schweitzer held the view that evolution ingrained humans with an instinct for meat so it was useless in trying to deny it. \nThe Albert Schweitzer Fellowship was founded in 1940 by Schweitzer to unite US supporters in filling the gap in support for his Hospital when his European supply lines were cut off by war, and continues to support the Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 Hospital today. Schweitzer considered his ethic of Reverence for Life, not his hospital, his most important legacy, saying that his Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 Hospital was just \"my own improvisation on the theme of Reverence for Life. Everyone can have their own Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9\". Today ASF helps large numbers of young Americans in health-related professional fields find or create \"their own Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9\" in the US or internationally. ASF selects and supports nearly 250 new US and Africa Schweitzer Fellows each year from over 100 of the leading US schools of medicine, nursing, public health, and every other field with some relation to health (including music, law, and divinity). The peer-supporting lifelong network of \"Schweitzer Fellows for Life\" numbered over 2,000 members in 2008, and is growing by nearly 1,000 every four years. Nearly 150 of these Schweitzer Fellows have served at the Hospital in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9, for three-month periods during their last year of medical school.\nInternational Albert Schweitzer Prize.\nThe prize was first awarded on 29 May 2011 to Eugen Drewermann and the physician couple Rolf and Raphaela Maibach in K\u00f6nigsfeld im Schwarzwald, where Schweitzer's former residence now houses the Albert Schweitzer Museum.\nSound recordings.\nRecordings of Schweitzer playing the music of Bach are available on CD. During 1934 and 1935 he resided in Britain, delivering the Gifford Lectures at Edinburgh University, and those on \"Religion in Modern Civilization\" at Oxford and London. He had originally conducted trials for recordings for HMV on the organ of the old Queen's Hall in London. These records did not satisfy him, the instrument being too harsh. In mid-December 1935 he began to record for Columbia Records on the organ of All Hallows, Barking-by-the-Tower, London. Then at his suggestion the sessions were transferred to the church of Ste Aur\u00e9lie in Strasbourg, on a mid-18th-century organ by Johann Andreas Silbermann (brother of Gottfried), an organ-builder greatly revered by Bach, which had been restored by the Lorraine organ-builder Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric H\u00e4rpfer shortly before the First World War. These recordings were made in the course of a fortnight in October 1936.\nSchweitzer Technique.\nSchweitzer developed a technique for recording the performances of Bach's music. Known as the \"Schweitzer Technique\", it is a slight improvement on what is commonly known as mid-side. The mid-side sees a figure-8 microphone pointed off-axis, perpendicular to the sound source. Then a single cardioid microphone is placed on axis, bisecting the figure-8 pattern. The signal from the figure-8 is mult-ed, panned hard left and right, one of the signals being flipped out of polarity. In the Schweitzer method, the figure-8 is replaced by two small diaphragm condenser microphones pointed directly away from each other. The information that each capsule collects is unique, unlike the identical out-of-polarity information generated from the figure-8 in a regular mid-side. The on-axis microphone is often a large diaphragm condenser. The technique has since been used to record many modern instruments.\nColumbia recordings.\nAltogether his early Columbia discs included 25 records of Bach and eight of C\u00e9sar Franck. The Bach titles were mainly distributed as follows:\nLater recordings were made at Parish church, G\u00fcnsbach: These recordings were made by C. Robert Fine during the time Dr. Schweitzer was being filmed in G\u00fcnsbach for the documentary \"Albert Schweitzer\". Fine originally self-released the recordings but later licensed the masters to Columbia.\nThe above were released in the United States as Columbia Masterworks boxed set SL-175.\nPortrayals.\nDramatisations of Schweitzer's life include:"}
{"id": "1030", "revid": "740137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1030", "title": "Austrian School", "text": "The Austrian School is a heterodox school of economic thought that is based on methodological individualism\u2014the concept that social phenomena result exclusively from the motivations and actions of individuals.\nThe Austrian School originated in late-19th and early-20th century Vienna with the work of Carl Menger, Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser and others. It was methodologically opposed to the younger Historical School (based in Germany), in a dispute known as Methodenstreit, or \"methodology struggle\". Current-day economists working in this tradition are located in many different countries, but their work is still referred to as Austrian economics. Among the theoretical contributions of the early years of the Austrian School are the subjective theory of value, marginalism in price theory and the formulation of the economic calculation problem, each of which has become an accepted part of mainstream economics.\nSince the mid-20th century, mainstream economists have been critical of the modern day Austrian School and consider its rejection of mathematical modelling, econometrics and macroeconomic analysis to be outside mainstream economics, or \"heterodox\". In the 1970s, the Austrian School attracted some renewed interest after Friedrich Hayek shared the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe Austrian School owes its name to members of the German historical school of economics, who argued against the Austrians during the late-19th century \"Methodenstreit\" (\"methodology struggle\"), in which the Austrians defended the role of theory in economics as distinct from the study or compilation of historical circumstance. In 1883, Menger published \"Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference to Economics\", which attacked the methods of the historical school. Gustav von Schmoller, a leader of the historical school, responded with an unfavorable review, coining the term \"Austrian School\" in an attempt to characterize the school as outcast and provincial. The label endured and was adopted by the adherents themselves.\nFirst wave.\nThe school originated in Vienna in the Austrian Empire. Carl Menger's 1871 book \"Principles of Economics\" is generally considered the founding of the Austrian School. The book was one of the first modern treatises to advance the theory of marginal utility. The Austrian School was one of three founding currents of the marginalist revolution of the 1870s, with its major contribution being the introduction of the subjectivist approach in economics. Despite this claim, John Stuart Mill had used \"value in use\" in this sense in 1848 in \"Principles of Political Economy\":\nWhile marginalism was generally influential, there was also a more specific school that began to coalesce around Menger's work, which came to be known as the \"Psychological School\", \"Vienna School\", or \"Austrian School\".\nMenger's contributions to economic theory were closely followed by those of Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser. These three economists became what is known as the \"first wave\" of the Austrian School. B\u00f6hm-Bawerk wrote extensive critiques of Karl Marx in the 1880s and 1890s as was part of the Austrians' participation in the late 19th-century \"Methodenstreit\", during which they attacked the Hegelian doctrines of the historical school.\nEarly 20th century.\nFrank Albert Fetter (1863\u20131949) was a leader in the United States of Austrian thought. He obtained his PhD in 1894 from the University of Halle and then was made Professor of Political Economy and Finance at Cornell in 1901. Several important Austrian economists trained at the University of Vienna in the 1920s and later participated in private seminars held by Ludwig von Mises. These included Gottfried Haberler, Friedrich Hayek, Fritz Machlup, Karl Menger (son of Carl Menger), Oskar Morgenstern, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, Abraham Wald, and Michael A. Heilperin, among others, as well as the sociologist Alfred Sch\u00fctz.\nLater 20th century.\nBy the mid-1930s, most economists had embraced what they considered the important contributions of the early Austrians. Fritz Machlup quoted Hayek's statement that \"the greatest success of a school is that it stops existing because its fundamental teachings have become parts of the general body of commonly accepted thought\". Sometime during the middle of the 20th century, Austrian economics became disregarded or derided by mainstream economists because it rejected model building and mathematical and statistical methods in the study of economics. Mises' student Israel Kirzner recalled that in 1954, when Kirzner was pursuing his PhD, there was no separate Austrian School as such. When Kirzner was deciding which graduate school to attend, Mises had advised him to accept an offer of admission at Johns Hopkins because it was a prestigious university and Fritz Machlup taught there.\nAfter the 1940s, Austrian economics can be divided into two schools of economic thought and the school \"split\" to some degree in the late 20th century. One camp of Austrians, exemplified by Mises, regards neoclassical methodology to be irredeemably flawed; the other camp, exemplified by Friedrich Hayek, accepts a large part of neoclassical methodology and is more accepting of government intervention in the economy. Henry Hazlitt wrote economics columns and editorials for a number of publications and wrote many books on the topic of Austrian economics from the 1930s to the 1980s. Hazlitt's thinking was influenced by Mises. His book \"Economics in One Lesson\" (1946) sold over a million copies and he is also known for \"The Failure of the \"New Economics\"\" (1959), a line-by-line critique of John Maynard Keynes's \"General Theory\".\nThe reputation of the Austrian School rose in the late 20th century due in part to the work of Israel Kirzner and Ludwig Lachmann at New York University and to renewed public awareness of the work of Hayek after he won the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. Hayek's work was influential in the revival of \"laissez-faire\" thought in the 20th century.\nSplit among contemporary Austrians.\nEconomist Leland Yeager discussed the late 20th-century rift and referred to a discussion written by Murray Rothbard, Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Joseph Salerno and others in which they attack and disparage Hayek. Yeager stated: \"To try to drive a wedge between Mises and Hayek on [the role of knowledge in economic calculation], especially to the disparagement of Hayek, is unfair to these two great men, unfaithful to the history of economic thought\". He went on to call the rift subversive to economic analysis and the historical understanding of the fall of Eastern European communism.\nIn a 1999 book published by the Ludwig von Mises Institute, Hoppe asserted that Rothbard was the leader of the \"mainstream within Austrian Economics\" and contrasted Rothbard with Nobel Laureate Friedrich Hayek, whom he identified as a British empiricist and an opponent of the thought of Mises and Rothbard. Hoppe acknowledged that Hayek was the most prominent Austrian economist within academia, but stated that Hayek was an opponent of the Austrian tradition which led from Carl Menger and B\u00f6hm-Bawerk through Mises to Rothbard. Austrian economist Walter Block says that the Austrian School can be distinguished from other schools of economic thought through two categories\u2014economic theory and political theory. According to Block, while Hayek can be considered an Austrian economist, his views on political theory clash with the libertarian political theory which Block sees as an integral part of the Austrian School.\nHowever, both criticisms from Hoppe and Block to Hayek seem to also apply to the founder of the Austrian School, Carl Menger. Hoppe emphasizes that Hayek, which for him is from the English empirical tradition, is an opponent of the supposed rationalist tradition of the Austrian School, but Menger made strong critiques to rationalism in his works in similar vein as Hayek's. He emphasized the idea that there are several institutions which were not deliberately created, have a kind of \"superior wisdom\" and serve important functions to society. He also talked about Burke and the English tradition to sustain these positions.\nWhen saying that the libertarian political theory is an integral part of the Austrian School and supposing Hayek is not a libertarian, Block excludes Menger from the Austrian School too since Menger seems to defend broader state activity than Hayek\u2014for example, progressive taxation and extensive labour legislation.\nEconomists of the Hayekian view are affiliated with the Cato Institute, George Mason University (GMU) and New York University, among other institutions. They include Peter Boettke, Roger Garrison, Steven Horwitz, Peter Leeson and George Reisman. Economists of the Mises\u2013Rothbard view include Walter Block, Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Jes\u00fas Huerta de Soto and Robert P. Murphy, each of whom is associated with the Mises Institute and some of them also with academic institutions. According to Murphy, a \"truce between (for lack of better terms) the GMU Austro-libertarians and the Auburn Austro-libertarians\" was signed around 2011.\nInfluence.\nMany theories developed by \"first wave\" Austrian economists have long been absorbed into mainstream economics. These include Carl Menger's theories on marginal utility, Friedrich von Wieser's theories on opportunity cost and Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk's theories on time preference, as well as Menger and B\u00f6hm-Bawerk's criticisms of Marxian economics.\nFormer American Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said that the founders of the Austrian School \"reached far into the future from when most of them practiced and have had a profound and, in my judgment, probably an irreversible effect on how most mainstream economists think in this country\". In 1987, Nobel Laureate James M. Buchanan told an interviewer: \"I have no objections to being called an Austrian. Hayek and Mises might consider me an Austrian but, surely some of the others would not\". \nCurrently, universities with a significant Austrian presence are George Mason University, New York University, Grove City College, Loyola University New Orleans and Auburn University in the United States; King Juan Carlos University in Spain; and Universidad Francisco Marroqu\u00edn in Guatemala. Austrian economic ideas are also promoted by privately funded organizations such as the Mises Institute and the Cato Institute.\nMethodology.\nThe Austrian School theorizes that the subjective choices of individuals including individual knowledge, time, expectation and other subjective factors cause all economic phenomena. Austrians seek to understand the economy by examining the social ramifications of individual choice, an approach called methodological individualism. It differs from other schools of economic thought, which have focused on aggregate variables, equilibrium analysis and societal groups rather than individuals.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, economists with a methodological lineage to the early Austrian School developed many diverse approaches and theoretical orientations. For example, Ludwig von Mises organized his version of the subjectivist approach, which he called \"praxeology\", in a book published in English as \"Human Action\" in 1949. In it, Mises stated that praxeology could be used to deduce \"a priori\" theoretical economic truths and that deductive economic thought experiments could yield conclusions which follow irrefutably from the underlying assumptions. He wrote that conclusions could not be inferred from empirical observation or statistical analysis and argued against the use of probabilities in economic models.\nSince Mises' time, some Austrian thinkers have accepted his praxeological approach while others have adopted alternative methodologies. For example, Fritz Machlup, Friedrich Hayek and others did not take Mises' strong \"a priori\" approach to economics. Ludwig Lachmann, a radical subjectivist, also largely rejected Mises' formulation of Praxeology in favor of the \"verstehende Methode\" (\"interpretive method\") articulated by Max Weber.\nIn the 20th century, various Austrians incorporated models and mathematics into their analysis. Austrian economist Steven Horwitz argued in 2000 that Austrian methodology is consistent with macroeconomics and that Austrian macroeconomics can be expressed in terms of microeconomic foundations. Austrian economist Roger Garrison writes that Austrian macroeconomic theory can be correctly expressed in terms of diagrammatic models. In 1944, Austrian economist Oskar Morgenstern presented a rigorous schematization of an ordinal utility function (the Von Neumann\u2013Morgenstern utility theorem) in \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\".\nFundamental tenets.\nIn 1981, Fritz Machlup listed the typical views of Austrian economic thinking as such:\nHe included two additional tenets held by the Mises branch of Austrian economics:\nContributions to economic thought.\nOpportunity cost.\nThe opportunity cost doctrine was first explicitly formulated by the Austrian economist Friedrich von Wieser in the late 19th century. Opportunity cost is the cost of any activity measured in terms of the value of the next best alternative foregone (that is not chosen). It is the sacrifice related to the second best choice available to someone, or group, who has picked among several mutually exclusive choices.\nOpportunity cost is a key concept in mainstream economics and has been described as expressing \"the basic relationship between scarcity and choice\". The notion of opportunity cost plays a crucial part in ensuring that resources are used efficiently.\nCapital and interest.\nThe Austrian theory of capital and interest was first developed by Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk. He stated that interest rates and profits are determined by two factors, namely supply and demand in the market for final goods and time preference.\nB\u00f6hm-Bawerk's theory equates capital intensity with the degree of roundaboutness of production processes. B\u00f6hm-Bawerk also argued that the law of marginal utility necessarily implies the classical law of costs. Some Austrian economists therefore entirely reject the notion that interest rates are affected by liquidity preference.\nInflation.\nIn Mises's definition, inflation is an increase in the supply of money: \nHayek pointed out that inflationary stimulation exploits the lag between an increase in money supply and the consequent increase in the prices of goods and services: \nEconomic calculation problem.\nThe economic calculation problem refers to a criticism of socialism which was first stated by Max Weber in 1920. Mises subsequently discussed Weber's idea with his student Friedrich Hayek, who developed it in various works including \"The Road to Serfdom\". What the calculation problem essentially states, is that without price signals, the factors of production would never be allocated in the most efficient way possible, making Socialism as a system unworkable.\nAustrian theory emphasizes the organizing power of markets. Hayek stated that market prices reflect information, the totality of which is not known to any single individual, which determines the allocation of resources in an economy. Because socialist systems lack the individual incentives and price discovery processes by which individuals act on their personal information, Hayek argued that socialist economic planners lack all of the knowledge required to make optimal decisions. Those who agree with this criticism view it as a refutation of socialism, showing that socialism is not a viable or sustainable form of economic organization. The debate rose to prominence in the 1920s and 1930s and that specific period of the debate has come to be known by historians of economic thought as the socialist calculation debate.\nMises argued in a 1920 essay \"Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth\" that the pricing systems in socialist economies were necessarily deficient because if the government owned the means of production, then no prices could be obtained for capital goods as they were merely internal transfers of goods in a socialist system and not \"objects of exchange\", unlike final goods. Therefore, they were unpriced and hence the system would be necessarily inefficient since the central planners would not know how to allocate the available resources efficiently. This led him to write \"that rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth\".\nBusiness cycles.\nThe Austrian theory of the business cycle (ABCT) focuses on banks' issuance of credit as the cause of economic fluctuations. Although later elaborated by Hayek and others, the theory was first set forth by Mises, who posited that fractional reserve banks extend credit at artificially low interest rates, causing businesses to invest in relatively roundabout production processes which leads to an artificial \"boom\". Mises stated that this artificial \"boom\" then led to a misallocation of resources which he called \"malinvestment\" - which eventually must end in a \"bust\".\nMises surmised how government manipulation of money and credit in the banking system throws savings and investment out of balance, resulting in misdirected investment projects that are eventually found to be unsustainable, at which point the economy has to rebalance itself through a period of corrective recession. Austrian economist Fritz Machlup summarized the Austrian view by stating, \"monetary factors cause the cycle but real phenomena constitute it.\" For Austrians, the only prudent strategy for government is to leave money and the financial system to the free market's competitive forces to eradicate the business cycle's inflationary booms and recessionary busts, allowing markets to keep people's saving and investment decisions in place for well-coordinated economic stability and growth.\nA Keynesian would suggest government intervention during a recession to inject spending into the economy when people are not. However, the heart of Austrian macroeconomic theory states the government \"fine tuning\" through expansions and contractions in the money supply orchestrated by the government are actually the cause of business cycles because of the differing impact of the resulting interest rate changes on different stages in the structure of production. Austrian economist Thomas Woods further supports this view by arguing it is not consumption, but rather production that should be emphasized. A country cannot become rich by consuming, and therefore, by using up all their resources. Instead, production is what enables consumption as a possibility in the first place, since a producer would not be working for nothing, if not for the desire to consume.\nCentral banks.\nAccording to Ludwig von Mises, central banks enable the commercial banks to fund loans at artificially low interest rates, thereby inducing an unsustainable expansion of bank credit and impeding any subsequent contraction and argued for a gold standard to constrain growth in fiduciary media. Friedrich Hayek took a different perspective not focusing on gold but focusing on regulation of the banking sector via strong central banking.\nCriticism.\nGeneral criticism.\nMainstream economists generally reject modern-day Austrian economics, and have argued that modern-day Austrian economists are excessively averse to the use of mathematics and statistics in economics. Austrian opposition to mathematization extends to economic theorizing only, as they argue that human behavior is too variable for overarching mathematical models to hold true across time and context. Austrians do, however, support analyzing revealed preference via mathematization to aid business and finance. \nEconomist Paul Krugman has stated that they are unaware of holes in their own thinking because Austrians do not use \"explicit models\".\nEconomist Benjamin Klein has criticized the economic methodological work of Austrian economist Israel M. Kirzner. While praising Kirzner for highlighting shortcomings in traditional methodology, Klein argued that Kirzner did not provide a viable alternative for economic methodology. Economist Tyler Cowen has written that Kirzner's theory of entrepreneurship can ultimately be reduced to a neoclassical search model and is thus not in the radical subjectivist tradition of Austrian praxeology. Cowen states that Kirzner's entrepreneurs can be modeled in mainstream terms of search.\nEconomist Jeffrey Sachs argues that among developed countries those with high rates of taxation and high social welfare spending perform better on most measures of economic performance compared to countries with low rates of taxation and low social outlays. He concludes that Friedrich Hayek was wrong to argue that high levels of government spending harms an economy and \"a generous social-welfare state is not a road to serfdom but rather to fairness, economic equality and international competitiveness\". Austrian economist Sudha Shenoy responded by arguing that countries with large public sectors have grown more slowly.\nEconomist Bryan Caplan has noted that Mises has been criticized for overstating the strength of his case in describing socialism as \"impossible\" rather than as something that would need to establish non-market institutions to deal with the inefficiency.\nMethodology.\nCritics generally argue that Austrian economics lacks scientific rigor and rejects scientific methods and the use of empirical data in modelling economic behavior. Some economists describe Austrian methodology as being \"a priori\" or non-empirical.\nEconomist Mark Blaug has criticized over-reliance on methodological individualism, arguing it would rule out all macroeconomic propositions that cannot be reduced to microeconomic ones, and hence reject almost the whole of received macroeconomics.\nEconomist Thomas Mayer has stated that Austrians advocate a rejection of the scientific method which involves the development of empirically falsifiable theories. Furthermore, economists have developed numerous experiments that elicit useful information about individual preferences.\nAlthough economist Leland Yeager is sympathetic to Austrian economics, he rejects many favorite views of the Misesian group of Austrians, in particular \"the specifics of their business-cycle theory, ultra-subjectivism in value theory and particularly in interest-rate theory, their insistence on unidirectional causality rather than general interdependence, and their fondness for methodological brooding, pointless profundities, and verbal gymnastics\".\nEconomist Paul A. Samuelson wrote in 1964 that most economists believe that economic conclusions reached by pure logical deduction are limited and weak. According to Samuelson and Caplan, Mises' deductive methodology also embraced by Murray Rothbard and to a lesser extent by Mises' student Israel Kirzner was not sufficient in and of itself.\nBusiness cycle theory.\nMainstream economic research regarding Austrian business cycle theory finds that it is inconsistent with empirical evidence. Economists such as Gordon Tullock, Milton Friedman and Paul Krugman have said that they regard the theory as incorrect. Austrian economist Ludwig Lachmann noted that the Austrian theory was rejected during the 1930s: \nTheoretical objections.\nSome economists argue that Austrian business cycle theory requires bankers and investors to exhibit a kind of irrationality because the Austrian theory posits that investors will be fooled repeatedly (by temporarily low interest rates) into making unprofitable investment decisions. Milton Friedman objected to the policy implications of the theory, stating the following in a 1998 interview: \nEmpirical objections.\nMilton Friedman after examining the history of business cycles in the United States wrote that there \"appears to be no systematic connection between the size of an expansion and of the succeeding contraction\", and that further analysis could cast doubt on business cycle theories which rely on this premise. Referring to Friedman's discussion of the business cycle, Austrian economist Roger Garrison argued that Friedman's empirical findings are \"broadly consistent with both Monetarist and Austrian views\" and goes on to argue that although Friedman's model \"describes the economy's performance at the highest level of aggregation, Austrian theory offers an insightful account of the market process that might underlie those aggregates\"."}
{"id": "1032", "revid": "20764063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1032", "title": "Abscess", "text": "An abscess is a collection of pus that has built up within the tissue of the body. Signs and symptoms of abscesses include redness, pain, warmth, and swelling. The swelling may feel fluid-filled when pressed. The area of redness often extends beyond the swelling. Carbuncles and boils are types of abscess that often involve hair follicles, with carbuncles being larger.\nThey are usually caused by a bacterial infection. Often many different types of bacteria are involved in a single infection. In the United States and many other areas of the world the most common bacteria present is \"methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus\". Rarely, parasites can cause abscesses; this is more common in the developing world. Diagnosis of a skin abscess is usually made based on what it looks like and is confirmed by cutting it open. Ultrasound imaging may be useful in cases in which the diagnosis is not clear. In abscesses around the anus, computer tomography (CT) may be important to look for deeper infection.\nStandard treatment for most skin or soft tissue abscesses is cutting it open and drainage. There appears to be some benefit from also using antibiotics. A small amount of evidence supports not packing the cavity that remains with gauze after drainage. Closing this cavity right after draining it rather than leaving it open may speed healing without increasing the risk of the abscess returning. Sucking out the pus with a needle is often not sufficient.\nSkin abscesses are common and have become more common in recent years. Risk factors include intravenous drug use, with rates reported as high as 65% among users. In 2005 in the United States, 3.2 million people went to the emergency department for an abscess. In Australia, around 13,000 people were hospitalized in 2008 with the condition.\nSigns and symptoms.\nAbscesses may occur in any kind of tissue but most frequently within the skin surface (where they may be superficial pustules known as boils or deep skin abscesses), in the lungs, brain, teeth, kidneys, and tonsils. Major complications may include spreading of the abscess material to adjacent or remote tissues, and extensive regional tissue death (gangrene).\nThe main symptoms and signs of a skin abscess are redness, heat, swelling, pain, and loss of function. There may also be high temperature (fever) and chills. If superficial, abscesses may be fluctuant when palpated; this wave-like motion is caused by movement of the pus inside the abscess. \nAn internal abscess is more difficult to identify, but signs include pain in the affected area, a high temperature, and generally feeling unwell.\nInternal abscesses rarely heal themselves, so prompt medical attention is indicated if such an abscess is suspected. An abscess can potentially be fatal depending on where it is located.\nCauses.\nRisk factors for abscess formation include intravenous drug use. Another possible risk factor is a prior history of disc herniation or other spinal abnormality, though this has not been proven.\nAbscesses are caused by bacterial infection, parasites, or foreign substances.\nBacterial infection is the most common cause. Often many different types of bacteria are involved in a single infection. In the United States and many other areas of the world the most common bacteria present is \"methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus\". Among spinal subdural abscesses, methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus is the most common organism involved.\nRarely parasites can cause abscesses and this is more common in the developing world. Specific parasites known to do this include dracunculiasis and myiasis.\nPerianal abscess.\nSurgery of the anal fistula to drain an abscess treats the fistula and reduces likelihood of its recurrence and the need for repeated surgery. There is no evidence that fecal incontinence is a consequence of this surgery for abscess drainage.\nPerianal abscesses can be seen in patients with, for example, inflammatory bowel disease (such as Crohn's disease) or diabetes. Often the abscess will start as an internal wound caused by ulceration, hard stool, or penetrative objects with insufficient lubrication. This wound typically becomes infected as a result of the normal presence of feces in the rectal area, and then develops into an abscess. This often presents itself as a lump of tissue near the anus which grows larger and more painful with time. Like other abscesses, perianal abscesses may require prompt medical treatment, such as an incision and debridement or lancing.\nIncisional abscess.\nAn \"incisional abscess\" is one that develops as a complication secondary to a surgical incision. It presents as redness and warmth at the margins of the incision with purulent drainage from it. If the diagnosis is uncertain, the wound should be aspirated with a needle, with aspiration of pus confirming the diagnosis and availing for Gram stain and bacterial culture.\nPathophysiology.\nAn abscess is a defensive reaction of the tissue to prevent the spread of infectious materials to other parts of the body.\nThe organisms or foreign materials kill the local cells, resulting in the release of cytokines. The cytokines trigger an inflammatory response, which draws large numbers of white blood cells to the area and increases the regional blood flow.\nThe final structure of the abscess is an abscess wall, or capsule, that is formed by the adjacent healthy cells in an attempt to keep the pus from infecting neighboring structures. However, such encapsulation tends to prevent immune cells from attacking bacteria in the pus, or from reaching the causative organism or foreign object.\nDiagnosis.\nAn abscess is a localized collection of pus (purulent inflammatory tissue) caused by suppuration buried in a tissue, an organ, or a confined space, lined by the pyogenic membrane. Ultrasound imaging in the emergency department can help in a diagnosis.\nClassification.\nAbscesses may be classified as either \"skin abscesses\" or \"internal abscesses\". Skin abscesses are common; internal abscesses tend to be harder to diagnose, and more serious. Skin abscesses are also called cutaneous or subcutaneous abscesses.\nIV drug use.\nFor those with a history of intravenous drug use, an X-ray is recommended before treatment to verify that no needle fragments are present. In this population if there is also a fever present, infectious endocarditis should be considered.\nDifferential.\nAbscesses should be differentiated from empyemas, which are accumulations of pus in a preexisting, rather than a newly formed, anatomical cavity.\nOther conditions that can cause similar symptoms include: cellulitis, a sebaceous cyst, and necrotising fasciitis. Cellulitis typically also has an erythematous reaction, but does not confer any purulent drainage.\nTreatment.\nThe standard treatment for an uncomplicated skin or soft tissue abscess is the act of opening and draining. There does not appear to be any benefit from also using antibiotics in most cases. A small amount of evidence did not find a benefit from packing the abscess with gauze.\nIncision and drainage.\nThe abscess should be inspected to identify if foreign objects are a cause, which may require their removal. If foreign objects are not the cause, incising and draining the abscess is standard treatment.\nIn critical areas where surgery presents a high risk, it may be delayed or used as a last resort. The drainage of a lung abscess may be performed by positioning the patient in a way that enables the contents to be discharged via the respiratory tract. Warm compresses and elevation of the limb may be beneficial for a skin abscess.\nAntibiotics.\nMost people who have an uncomplicated skin abscess should not use antibiotics. Antibiotics in addition to standard incision and drainage is recommended in persons with severe abscesses, many sites of infection, rapid disease progression, the presence of cellulitis, symptoms indicating bacterial illness throughout the body, or a health condition causing immunosuppression. People who are very young or very old may also need antibiotics. If the abscess does not heal only with incision and drainage, or if the abscess is in a place that is difficult to drain such as the face, hands, or genitals, then antibiotics may be indicated.\nIn those cases of abscess which do require antibiotic treatment, \"Staphylococcus aureus\" bacteria is a common cause and an anti-staphylococcus antibiotic such as flucloxacillin or dicloxacillin is used. The Infectious Diseases Society of America advises that the draining of an abscess is not enough to address community-acquired methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA), and in those cases, traditional antibiotics may be ineffective. Alternative antibiotics effective against community-acquired MRSA often include clindamycin, doxycycline, minocycline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The American College of Emergency Physicians advises that typical cases of abscess from MRSA get no benefit from having antibiotic treatment in addition to the standard treatment. If the condition is thought to be cellulitis rather than an abscess, consideration should be given to the possibility of the strep species as a cause, that are still sensitive to traditional anti-staphylococcus agents such as dicloxacillin or cephalexin. This would be in the case of patients that are able to tolerate penicillin. Antibiotic therapy alone without surgical drainage of the abscess is seldom effective due to antibiotics often being unable to get into the abscess and their ineffectiveness at low pH levels.\nCulturing the wound is not needed if standard follow-up care can be provided after the incision and drainage. Performing a wound culture is unnecessary because it rarely gives information which can be used to guide treatment.\nPacking.\nIn North America, after drainage, an abscess cavity is often packed, perhaps with cloth, in an attempt to protect the healing wound. However, evidence from emergency medicine literature reports that packing wounds after draining causes pain to the person and does not decrease the rate of recurrence, nor bring faster healing, or fewer physician visits.\nLoop drainage.\nMore recently, several North American hospitals have opted for less-invasive loop drainage over standard drainage and wound packing. In one study of 143 pediatric outcomes, a failure rate of 1.4% was reported in the loop group versus 10.5% in the packing group (P&lt;.030), while a separate study reported a 5.5% failure rate among loop patients.\nPrimary closure.\nClosing an abscess immediately after draining it appears to speed healing without increasing the risk of recurrence. This may not apply to anorectal abscesses as while they may heal faster, there may be a higher rate of recurrence than those left open.\nPrognosis.\nEven without treatment, skin abscesses rarely result in death, as they will naturally break through the skin. Other types of abscess are more dangerous. Brain abscesses are fatal if untreated. When treated, the mortality rate reduces to 5\u201310%, but is higher if the abscess ruptures.\nEpidemiology.\nSkin abscesses are common and have become more common in recent years. Risk factors include intravenous drug use, with rates reported as high as 65% among users. In 2005 in the United States 3.2 million people went to the emergency department for an abscess. In Australia around 13,000 people were hospitalized in 2008 for the disease.\nSociety and culture.\nThe Latin medical aphorism \"ubi pus, ibi evacua\" expresses \"where there is pus, there evacuate it\" and is classical advice in the culture of Western medicine.\nNeedle exchange programmes often administer or provide referrals for abscess treatment to injection drug users as part of a harm reduction public health strategy.\nEtymology.\nAn abscess is so called \"abscess\" because there is an \"abscessus\" (a going away or departure) of portions of the animal tissue from each other to make room for the suppurated matter lodged between them.\nThe word carbuncle is believed to have originated from the Latin: \"carbunculus\", originally a small coal; diminutive of \"carbon-\", \"carbo\": charcoal or ember, but also a carbuncle stone, \"precious stones of a red or fiery colour\", usually garnets.\nOther types.\nThe following types of abscess are listed in the medical dictionary:"}
{"id": "1035", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1035", "title": "Aal", "text": ""}
{"id": "1036", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1036", "title": "Aalborg Municipality", "text": "Aalborg Municipality is a municipality (Danish, \"kommune\") in Region Nordjylland on the Jutland peninsula in northern Denmark. The municipality straddles the Limfjord, the waterway which connects the North Sea and the Kattegat east-to-west, and which separates the main body of the Jutland peninsula from the island of Vendsyssel-Thy north-to-south. It has a land area of 1,143.99\u00a0km2, population 197,426 (2010) and belongs to Region Nordjylland (\"North Jutland Region\").\nIt is also the name of the municipality's main city Aalborg and the site of its municipal council, as well as the name of a seaport.\nThe municipality and the town have chosen to retain the traditional spelling of the name as \"Aalborg\", although the new spelling \"\u00c5lborg\" is used in other contexts, such as \u00c5lborg Bight (\"\u00c5lborg Bugt\"), the body of water which lies to the east of the Jutland peninsula.\nMunicipal reform of 2007.\nAs of 1 January 2007 Aalborg municipality joined with the municipalities of Hals, Nibe, and Sejlflod to form a new Aalborg municipality. The former Aalborg municipality, including the island of Egholm, covered an area of , with a total population of 192,353 (2005). Its last mayor was Henning G. Jensen, a member of the Social Democrats (\"Socialdemokraterne\") political party. The former municipality was bordered by Sejlflod and Hals to the east, Dronninglund and Br\u00f8nderslev to the north, Aabybro and Nibe to the west, and St\u00f8vring and Sk\u00f8rping to the south. It belonged to North Jutland County.\nGeography.\nSurroundings.\nThe waters in the Limfjord splitting the municipality are called \"Langerak\" to the east and \"Gj\u00f8l Bredning\" to the west. The island of Egholm is located in \"Gj\u00f8l Bredning\", and is connected by ferry to the city of Aalborg at its southern shore.\nThe area is typical for the north of Jutland. To the west the Limfjord broadens into an irregular lake (salt water), with low, marshy shores and many islands. Northwest is Store Vildmose (\"Greater Wild bog\"), a swamp where a mirage is sometimes seen in summer. Southeast lies the similar Lille Vildmose (\"Lesser Wild bog\"). Store Vildmose was drained and farmed in the beginning of the 20th century, and Lille Vildmose is now the largest moor in Denmark.\nUrban areas in Aalborg Municipality.\nAalborg City has a total population at 123,432. The metropolitan area is a conurbation of the Aalborg urban area in Himmerland (102,312) and the N\u00f8rresundby urban area in Vendsyssel (21,120).\nEconomy.\nNorth Flying has its head office on the property of Aalborg Airport in N\u00f8rresundby, Aalborg Municipality.\nPolitics.\nMunicipal council.\nAalborg's municipal council consists of 31 members, elected every four years.\nBelow are the municipal councils elected since the Municipal Reform of 2007."}
{"id": "1038", "revid": "287645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1038", "title": "Aarhus", "text": "Aarhus (, , ; officially spelled \u00c5rhus from 1948 until 1 January 2011) is the second-largest city in Denmark and the seat of Aarhus municipality. It is located on the eastern shore of Jutland in the Kattegat sea and approximately northwest of Copenhagen. \nThe largest city in Jutland, Aarhus anchors the Central Denmark Region and the statistical region Landsdel \u00d8stjylland (L\u00d8) (Lit. Province East Jutland). The L\u00d8 is the most populous statistical region in Denmark with an estimated population of 903 974 (). Aarhus Municipality defines the greater Aarhus area as itself and 8 adjacent municipalities totalling 952,824 inhabitants () which is roughly analogous to the municipal and commercial collaboration Business Region Aarhus. The city proper, with an estimated population of 280,534 inhabitants (), ranks as the 2nd-largest city in Denmark.\nAarhus was founded in the 8th century as a Viking fort on the northern shores of a fjord by the mouth of Aarhus River. Situated on intersecting trade routes in the Danish Straits it grew from a primarily military installation into a trade hub and in 1441 it was granted Market town privileges. Buttressed by regional trade and as the seat of a bishopric population remained stable during a politically unstable period lasting until the 19th century. The industrial revolution became an inflection point as industry drove rapid population growth outpacing regional rivals. In 1934 the first university in Jutland was founded in Aarhus and today it is a university city and the largest centre for trade, services, industry, and tourism in Jutland.\nDesignated as a \"Sufficiency\" global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, the city's major cultural institutions include Den Gamle By, ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, Moesg\u00e5rd Museum, Kvindemuseet, Musikhuset and Aarhus Theatre. Known as \"Smilets By\" (Lit. City of Smiles) it is the Danish city with the youngest and fastest growing demographics and home to Scandinavia's largest university, Aarhus University. Commercially the city is the principal container port in the country and major Danish companies are headquartered there such as Vestas, Arla Foods, Salling Group and Jysk.\nEtymology.\nThe name originates from the city's location at the mouth of (Aarhus River). It is a compound of the two words , genitive of (\"river\", Modern Danish ), and (\"mouth\", in Modern Icelandic this word, spelt , is still used for \"river delta\"). In Valdemar's Census Book (1231) the city was called \"Arus\", and in Icelandic it was known as , later written as Aars.\nSpelling.\nThe spelling \"Aarhus\" is first found in 1406 and gradually became the norm in the 17th\u00a0century. With the Danish spelling reform of 1948, \"Aa\" was changed to \"\u00c5\". Some Danish cities resisted the change but Aarhus city council opted to change the name. In 2010, the city council voted to change the name back from to again with effect from 1 January 2011. \nIt is still grammatically correct to write geographical names with the letter \u00c5 and local councils are allowed to use the Aa spelling as an alternative and most newspapers and public institutions will accept either. Some official authorities such as the Danish Language Committee, publisher of the Danish Orthographic Dictionary, still retain as the main name, providing as a second option, in brackets and some institutions are still using explicitly in their official name, such as the local newspaper and the schools and . \"Aa\" was used by some major institutions between 1948 and 2011 as well, such as Aarhus University or the largest local sports club, (AGF), which has never used the \"\u00c5\"-spelling. Certain geographically affiliated names have been updated to reflect the name of the city, such as the Aarhus River, changed from to .\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nFounded in the early Viking Age, Aarhus is one of the oldest cities in Denmark, along with Ribe and Hedeby.\nArchaeological evidence under the Aros settlement's defences indicate the site was a town as early as the last quarter of the 8th\u00a0century, considerably earlier than had been generally supposed. Discoveries after a 2003 archaeological dig unearthed half-buried longhouses, firepits, glass pearls and a road dated to the late 700s. Archaeologists have conducted several excavations in the inner city since the 1960s revealing wells, streets, homes and workshops. In the buildings and adjoining archaeological layers, everyday utensils like combs, jewellery and basic multi-purpose tools from approximately the year 900 have been found.\nThe centre of Aarhus was once a pagan burial site until Aarhus's first church, Holy Trinity Church, a timber structure, was built upon it during the reign of Frode, King of Jutland, around 900. In the 900s an earth rampart for the defence of the early city was constructed, encircling the settlement, much like the defence structures found at Viking ring fortresses elsewhere. The rampart was later reinforced by Harald Bluetooth, and together with the town's geographical placement, this suggests that Aros was an important trade and military centre. There are strong indications of a former royal residence from the Viking Age in Viby, a few kilometres south of the Aarhus city centre.\nThe bishopric of Aarhus dates back to at least 948 when Adam of Bremen reported the bishop Reginbrand attended the synod of Ingelheim in Germany. The bishopric and the town's geographical location propelled prosperous growth and development of the early medieval town. The finding of six runestones in and around Aarhus indicates the city had some significance around the year 1000, as only wealthy nobles traditionally used them. The era was turbulent and violent with several naval attacks on the city, such as Harald Hardrada's assault around 1050, when the Holy Trinity Church was burned to the ground.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe growing influence of the Church during the Middle Ages gradually turned Aarhus, with its bishopric, into a prosperous religious centre. Many public and religious buildings were built in and around the city; notably Aarhus Cathedral was initiated in the late 12th\u00a0century by the influential bishop Peder Vognsen. In 1441, Christopher III issued the oldest known charter granting market town status although similar privileges may have existed as far back as the 12th\u00a0century. The charter is the first official recognition of the town as a regional power and is by some considered Aarhus's birth certificate.\nThe official and religious status spurred growth so in 1477 the defensive earthen ramparts, ringing the town since the Viking age, were abandoned to accommodate expansion. Parts of the ramparts are still in existence today and can be experienced as steep slopes at the riverside and they have also survived in some place names of the inner city, including the streets of Volden (The Rampart) and Graven (The Moat). Aarhus grew to become one of the largest cities in the country by the early 16th\u00a0century. In 1657, octroi was imposed in larger Danish cities which changed the layout and face of Aarhus over the following decades. Wooden city walls were erected to prevent smuggling, with gates and toll booths on the major thoroughfares, Mejlgade and Studsgade. The city gates funnelled most traffic through a few streets where merchant quarters were built.\nIn the 17th\u00a0century, Aarhus entered a period of recession as it suffered blockades and bombardments during the Swedish wars and trade was dampened by the preferential treatment of the capital by the state. It was not until the middle of the 18th\u00a0century growth returned in large part due to trade with the large agricultural catchment areas around the city; particularly grain proved to be a remunerative export. The first factories were established at this time as the industrial revolution reached the country and in 1810 the harbour was expanded to accommodate growing trade.\nIndustrialisation.\nFollowing the Napoleonic wars, Denmark lost Norway and was excluded from international trade for some years which caused a recession for Aarhus's trade-based economy that lasted until the 1830s. The economy turned around as the industrial revolution reached the city and factories with steam-driven machinery became more productive.\nIn 1838, the electoral laws were reformed leading to elections for the 15 seats on the city council. The rules were initially very strict allowing only the wealthiest citizens to run. In the 1844 elections only 174 citizens qualified out of a total population of more than 7,000. The first city council, mainly composed of wealthy merchants and industrialists, quickly looked to improve the harbour, situated along the Aarhus River. Larger ships and growing freight volumes made a river harbour increasingly impractical. In 1840, the harbour was moved to the coast, north of the river where it became the largest industrial harbour outside Copenhagen over the following 15 years. From the outset, the new harbour was controlled by the city council, as it is to this day.\nDuring the First Schleswig War Aarhus was occupied by German troops from 21 June to 24 July 1849. The city was spared any fighting, but in Vejlby north of the city a cavalry skirmish known as Rytterf\u00e6gtningen took place which stopped the German advance through Jutland. The war and occupation left a notable impact on the city as many streets, particularly in Frederiksbjerg, are named after Danish officers of the time. Fifteen years later, in 1864, the city was occupied again, this time for seven months, during the Second Schleswig War.\nIn spite of wars and occupation the city continued to develop. In 1851, octroi was abolished and the city walls were removed to provide easier access for trade. Regular steamship links with Copenhagen had begun with the \"Jylland\" in 1825-26 and the \"Dania\" (1827-36), and in 1862 Jutland's first railway was established between Aarhus and Randers.\nIn the second half of the 19th\u00a0century industrialisation came into full effect and a number of new industries emerged around production and refinement of agricultural products, especially oil and butter. Many companies from this time would come to leave permanent iconic marks on Aarhus. The Ceres Brewery was established in 1856 and served as Aarhus's local brewery for more than 150 years, gradually expanding into an industrial district known as Ceres-grunden (lit.: \"the Ceres-grounds\"). In 1896 local farmers and businessmen created Korn- og Foderstof Kompagniet (KFK), focused on grain and feedstuffs. KFK established departments all over the country, while its headquarters remained in Aarhus where its large grain silos still stand today. Otto M\u00f8nsted created the Danish Preserved Butter Company in 1874, focusing on butter export to England, China and Africa and later founded the Aarhus Butterine Company in 1883, the first Danish margarine factory. The industry became an important employer, with factory employees increasing from 100 in 1896 to 1,000 in 1931, effectively transforming the city from a regional trade hub into an industrial centre. Other new factories of note included the dockyard Aarhus Flydedok, the oil mill \u00c5rhus Oliefabrik and the ironworks Frichs.\nAarhus became the largest provincial city in the country by the turn of the century and the city marketed itself as the \"Capital of Jutland\". The population increased from 15,000 in 1870 to 52,000 in 1901 and, in response, the city annexed large land areas to develop new residential quarters such as Tr\u00f8jborg, Frederiksbjerg and Marselisborg. Many of its cultural institutions were also established at this time such as Aarhus Theatre (1900), the original State Library (1902), Aarhus University (1928) and several hospitals.\nSecond World War.\nOn 9 April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark, occupying Aarhus the following day and 5 years hence. The occupation was a destructive period with major disasters, loss of life and economic depression. The Port of Aarhus became a hub for supplies to the Baltics and Norway while the surrounding rail network supplied the Atlantic Wall in west Jutland and cargo headed for Germany. Combined, these factors resulted in a strong German presence, especially in 1944\u201345. The first years were peaceful in conjunction with the policies of the Danish Protectorate Government, but following the enactment of the Communist Law in August 1941 armed resistance and reprisals escalated.\nSmall resistance groups first appeared in 1941\u201342 but the first to co-ordinate with the Freedom Council was the Samsing Group, responsible for most operations from early 1943. The Samsing group, along with others in and around Aarhus, was dismantled in June 1944 when Grethe \"Thora\" Bartram turned her family and acquaintances over to German authorities. In response, requests for assistance were sent to contacts in England and in October 1944 the Royal Air Force bombed the Gestapo headquarters successfully destroying archives and obstructing the ongoing investigation. \nIn the summer of 1944 the Copenhagen based resistance group Holger Danske helped establish the 5 Kolonne group and an SOE agent arrived from England to liason with the L-groups. Subsequently resistance operations escalated which was countered with Schalburgtage terror operations by the Peter group. The increasingly destructive occupation was compounded when an ammunition barge exploded in July 1944, destroying much of the harbour area. On 5 May 1945 German forces in Denmark surrendered but during the transitional period fighting broke out resulting in 22 dead. On 8 May the British Royal Dragoons entered the city.\nPost-World War II years.\nIn the 1980s the city entered a period of rapid growth and the service sector overtook trade, industry and crafts as the leading sector of employment for the first time. Workers gradually began commuting to the city from most of east and central Jutland as the region became more interconnected. The student population tripled between 1965 and 1977 turning the city into a Danish centre of research and education. The growing and comparably young population initiated a period of creativity and optimism; Gaffa and the KaosPilot school were founded in 1983 and 1991 respectively, and Aarhus was at the centre of a renaissance in Danish rock and pop music launching bands and musicians such as TV2, Gnags, Thomas Helmig, Bamses Venner, Anne Dorte Michelsen, Mek Pek and Shit &amp; Chanel.\nThe 2000s.\nSince the turn of the millennium, Aarhus has seen an unprecedented building boom with many new institutions, infrastructure projects, city districts and recreational areas. Several of the construction projects are among the largest in Europe, such as the New University Hospital (DNU) and the harbourfront redevelopment.\nBoth the skyline and land use of the inner city is changing as former industrial sites are being redeveloped into new city districts and neighbourhoods. Starting in 2008, the former docklands known as \"De Byn\u00e6re Havnearealer\" (The Peri-urban Harbour-areas), and closest to the city seaside, are being converted to new mixed use districts. It is among the largest harbourfront projects in Europe. The northern part dubbed \"Aarhus \u00d8\" (Aarhus Docklands) is almost finished as of 2018, while the southern district dubbed \"Sydhavnskvarteret\" (The South-harbour neighbourhood) is only starting to be developed. The adjacent site of Frederiks Plads at the former DSB repair facilities have been under construction since 2014 as a new business and residential quarter. The main bus terminal close by is planned to be moved to the central railway station and the site will be redeveloped to a new residential neighbourhood. Elsewhere in the inner city, the site of the former Ceres breweries was redeveloped in 2012-2019 as a new mixed use neighbourhood known as CeresByen.\nConstruction of Aarhus Letbane, the first light rail system in the country, commenced in 2013, and the first increment was finished in December 2017. Since then, the lightrail service has been expanded with two intercity sections to the towns of Odder and Gren\u00e5, respectively, and also includes a northward leg to the suburb of Lisbjerg. The light rail system is planned to tie many other suburbs closer to central Aarhus in the future, with the next phase including local lines to Brabrand in the east and Hinnerup to the north.\nAccelerating growth since the early 2000s, brought the inner urban area to roughly 260,000 inhabitants by 2014. The rapid growth is expected to continue until at least 2030 when Aarhus municipality has set an ambitious target for 375,000 inhabitants.\nGeography.\nAarhus is located at the Bay of Aarhus facing the Kattegat sea in the east with the peninsulas of Mols and Helgen\u00e6s across the bay to the northeast. Mols and Helgen\u00e6s are both part of the larger regional peninsula of Djursland. A number of larger cities and towns is within easy reach from Aarhus by road and rail, including Randers ( by road north), Gren\u00e5 (northeast), Horsens ( south) and Silkeborg ( east).\nTopography.\nAt Aarhus's location, the Bay of Aarhus provides a natural harbour with a depth of quite close to the shore. Aarhus was founded at the mouth of a brackish water fjord, but the original fjord no longer exists, as it has gradually narrowed into what is now the Aarhus River and the Brabrand Lake, due to natural sedimentation. The land around Aarhus was once covered by forests, remains of which exist in parts of Marselisborg Forest to the south and Riis Skov to the north. Several lakes extend west from the inner city as the landscape merges with the larger region of S\u00f8h\u00f8jlandet with heights exceeding at Himmelbjerget between Skanderborg and Silkeborg. The highest natural point in Aarhus Municipality is Jelsh\u00f8j at 128 metres above sea level, in the southern district of H\u00f8jbjerg. The hilltop is home to a Bronze Age barrow shrouded in local myths and legends.\nThe hilly area around Aarhus consists of a morainal plateau from the last ice age, broken by a complex system of tunnel valleys. The most prominent valleys of this network are the Aarhus Valley in the south, stretching inland east\u2013west with the Aarhus River, Brabrand Lake, \u00c5rslev Lake and T\u00e5strup Lake, and the Eg\u00e5 Valley to the north, with the stream of Eg\u00e5en, Eg\u00e5 Engs\u00f8, the bog of Geding-Kasted Mose and Geding Lake. Most parts of the two valleys have been drained and subsequently farmed, but in the early 2000s some of the drainage was removed and parts of the wetlands were restored for environmental reasons. The valley system also includes the stream of Lyngbyg\u00e5rd \u00c5 in the west and valleys to the south of the city, following erosion channels from the pre-quaternary. By contrast, the Aarhus River Valley and the Giber River Valley are late glacial meltwater valleys. The coastal cliffs along the Bay of Aarhus consist of shallow tertiary clay from the Eocene and Oligocene (57 to 24 million years ago).\nClimate.\nAarhus has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") and the weather is constantly influenced by major weather systems from all four ordinal directions, resulting in unstable conditions throughout the year. Temperature varies a great deal across the seasons with a mild spring in April and May, warmer summer months from June to August, frequently rainy and windy autumn months in October and September and cooler winter months, often with frost and occasional snow, from December to March. The city centre experiences the same climatic effects as other larger cities with higher wind speeds, more fog, less precipitation and higher temperatures than the surrounding, open land.\nWestern winds from the Atlantic and North Sea are dominant resulting in more precipitation in western Denmark. In addition, Jutland rises sufficiently in the centre to lift air to higher, colder altitudes contributing to increased precipitation in eastern Jutland. Combined, these factors make east and south Jutland comparatively wetter than other parts of the country. Average temperature over the year is with February being the coldest month () and August the warmest (). Temperatures in the sea can reach in June to August, but it is not uncommon for beaches to register locally.\nThe geography in the area affects the local climate of the city with the Aarhus Bay imposing a temperate effect on the low-lying valley floor where central Aarhus is located. Brabrand Lake to the west further contributes to this effect and as a result the valley has a comparably mild, temperate climate. The sandy ground on the valley floor dries up quickly after winter and warms faster in the summer than the surrounding hills of moist-retaining boulder clay. These conditions affect crops and plants that often bloom 1\u20132 weeks earlier in the valley than on the northern and southern hillsides.\nBecause of the northern latitude, number of daylight hours varies considerably between summer and winter. On summer solstice, the sun rises at 04:26 and sets at 21:58, providing 17 hours 32 minutes of daylight. On winter solstice, it rises at 08:37 and sets at 15:39 with 7 hours and 2 minutes of daylight. The difference in length of days and nights between summer and winter solstices is 10 hours and 30 minutes.\nPolitics and administration.\nAarhus is the seat of Aarhus Municipality, and Aarhus City Council (\"Aarhus Byr\u00e5d\") is also the municipal government with headquarters in Aarhus City Hall. The Mayor of Aarhus since 2010 is Jacob Bundsgaard of the Social Democrats. Municipal elections are held every fourth year on the third Tuesday of November with the next election in 2021. The city council consists of 31 members elected for four-year terms. When an election has determined the composition of the council, it elects a mayor, two deputy mayors and five aldermen from their ranks. Anyone who is eligible to vote and who resides within the municipality can run for a seat on the city council provided they can secure endorsements and signatures from 50 inhabitants of the municipality.\nThe first publicly elected mayor of Aarhus was appointed in 1919. In the 1970 Danish Municipal Reform the current Aarhus municipality was created by merging 20 municipalities. Aarhus was the seat of Aarhus County until the 2007 Danish municipal reform, which substituted the Danish counties with five regions and replaced Aarhus County with Central Denmark Region (\"Region Midtjylland\"), seated in Viborg.\nSubdivisions.\nAarhus Municipality has 45 electoral wards and polling stations in four electoral districts for the Folketing (national Parliament). The diocese of Aarhus has four deaneries composed of 60 parishes within Aarhus municipality. Aarhus municipality contains 21 postal districts and some parts of another 9. The urban area of Aarhus and the immediate suburbs are divided into the districts Aarhus C, Aarhus N, Aarhus V, Viby J, H\u00f8jbjerg and Brabrand.\nEnvironmental planning.\nAarhus has increasingly been investing in environmental planning and, in accordance with national policy, aims to be CO2-neutral and independent of fossil fuels for heating by 2030. The municipal power plants were adapted for this purpose in the 2010s. In 2015, the municipality took over three private straw-fired heating plants and the year after, a new 77 MW combined heat and power biomass plant at Lisbjerg Power Station was completed while Studstrup Power Station finished a refit to move from coal to wood chips. In conjunction with the development of the Docklands district there are plans for a utility scale seawater heat pump which will take advantage of fluctuating electricity prices to supply the district heating system. Since 2015, the city has been implementing energy saving LED technology in street lighting; by January 2019, about half of the municipal street lighting had been changed. Apart from reducing the city's CO2 emissions, it saves 30% on the electricity bill, thereby making it a self-financed project over a 20-year period.\nThe municipality aims for a coherent and holistic administration of the water cycle to protect against, or clean up, previous pollution and encourage green growth and self-sufficiency. The main issues are excessive nutrients, adapting to increased (and increasing) levels of precipitation brought on by climate change, and securing the water supply. These goals have manifested in a number of large water treatment projects often in collaboration with private partners. In the 2000s, underground rainwater basins were built across the city while the two lakes \u00c5rslev Engs\u00f8 and Eg\u00e5 Engs\u00f8 were created in 2003 and 2006 respectively. The number of sewage treatment plants is planned to be reduced from 17 to 2 by 2025 as the treatment plants in Marselisborg and Eg\u00e5 are scheduled for expansion to take over all waste water treatment. They have already been refitted for biogas production to become net producers of electricity and heat. To aid the new treatment plants, and avoid floodings, sewage and stormwater throughout the municipality is planned to be separated into two different drainage systems. Construction began in 2017 in several areas, but it is a long process and is scheduled to be finished by 2085.\nAfforestation projects have been undertaken to prevent groundwater pollution, secure drinking water, sequester CO2, increase biodiversity, create an attractive countryside, provide easy access to nature and offer outdoor activities to the public. In 2000, the first project, the New Forests of Aarhus, was completed, which aimed to double the forest cover in the municipality and, in 2009, another phase was announced to double forest cover once more before the year 2030. The afforestation plans were realised as a local project in collaboration with private landowners, under a larger national agenda. Other projects to expand natural habitats include a rewilding effort in Geding-Kasted Bog and continuous monitoring of the four Natura 2000 areas in the municipality.\nDemographics.\nAarhus has a population of 261,570 on for a density of 2,874/km2 (7,444/sq mi). Aarhus municipality has a population of 330,639 on 468\u00a0km2 with a density of 706/km2 (1,829/sq mi). Less than a fifth of the municipal population resides beyond city limits and almost all live in an urban area. The population of Aarhus is both younger and better-educated than the national average which can be attributed to the high concentration of educational institutions. More than 40% of the population have an academic degree while only some 14% have no secondary education or trade. The largest age group is 20- to 29-year-olds and the average age is 37.5, making it the youngest city in the country and one of its youngest municipalities. Women have slightly outnumbered men for many years.\nThe city is home to 75 different religious groups and denominations, most of which are Christian or Muslim with a smaller number of Buddhist, Hindu and Jewish communities. Since the 1990s there has been a marked growth in diverse new spiritual groups although the total number of followers remains small. The majority of the population are members of the Protestant state church, Church of Denmark, which is by far the largest religious institution both in the city and the country as a whole. Some 20% of the population are not officially affiliated with any religion, a percentage that has been slowly rising for many years.\nDuring the 1990s there was significant immigration from Turkey and in the 2000s, there was a fast growth in the overall immigrant community, from 27,783 people in 1999 to 40,431 in 2008. The majority of immigrants have roots outside Europe and the developed world, comprising some 25,000 people from 130 different nationalities, with the largest groups coming from the Middle East and North Africa. Some 15,000 have come from within Europe, with Poland, Germany, Romania and Norway being the largest contributors.\nMany immigrants have established themselves in the suburbs of Brabrand, Hasle and Viby, where the percentage of inhabitants with foreign origins has risen by 66% since 2000. This has resulted in a few so-called ghettos, defined as residential areas with more than half of inhabitants from non-Western countries and with relatively high levels of poverty and/or crime. Gellerup is the most notable neighbourhood in that respect. The ghetto-labelling has been criticized as unnecessarily stigmatising and counterproductive for social and economical development of the related areas.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Aarhus is predominantly knowledge- and service-based, strongly influenced by the University of Aarhus and the large healthcare industry. The service sector dominates the economy and is growing as the city transitions away from manufacturing. Trade and transportation remain important sectors, benefiting from the large port and central position on the rail network. Manufacturing has been in slow but steady decline since the 1960s while agriculture has long been a marginal sector within the municipality. The municipality is home to 175,000 jobs with some 100,000 in the private sector and the rest split between state, region and municipality. The region is a major agricultural producer, with many large farms in the outlying districts. People commute to Aarhus from as far away as Randers, Silkeborg and Skanderborg and almost a third of those employed within the Aarhus municipality commute from neighbouring communities. Aarhus is a centre for retail in the Nordic and Baltic countries, with expansive shopping centres, the busiest commercial street in the country and a dense urban core with many speciality shops.\nThe job market is knowledge- and service-based, and the largest employment sectors are healthcare and social services, trade, education, consulting, research, industry and telecommunications. The municipality has more high- and middle-income jobs, and fewer low-income jobs, than the national average. Today, te majority of the largest companies in the municipality are in the sectors of trade, transport and media. The wind power industry has strong roots in Aarhus and the larger region of Central Jutland, and nationally, most of the revenue in the industry is generated by companies in the greater Aarhus area. The wind industry employs about a thousand people within the municipality, making it a central component in the local economy. The biotech industry is well-established in the city, with many small- and medium-sized companies mainly focused on research and development.\nSeveral major companies are headquartered in Aarhus, including four of the ten largest in the country. These include Arla Foods, one of the largest dairy groups in Europe, Salling Group, Denmark's largest retailer, Jysk, a worldwide retailer of household goods, Vestas, a global wind turbine manufacturer, Terma A/S, a major defence and aerospace manufacturer, Per Aarsleff, a civil engineering company and several large retail companies. Other large employers of note include Krifa, Systematic A/S, ), and Bestseller A/S. Since the early 2000s, the city has experienced an influx of larger companies moving from other parts of the Jutland peninsula. \nPort of Aarhus.\nThe Port of Aarhus is one of the largest industrial ports in northern Europe with the largest container terminal in Denmark, processing more than 50% of Denmark's container traffic and accommodating the largest container vessels in the world. It is a municipal self-governing port with independent finances. The facilities handle some 9.5\u00a0million tonnes of cargo a year (2012). Grain is the principal export, while feedstuffs, stone, cement and coal are among the chief imports. Since 2012 the port has faced increasing competition from the Port of Hamburg and freight volumes have decreased somewhat from the peak in 2008.\nThe ferry terminal presents the only alternative to the Great Belt Link for passenger transport between Jutland and Zealand. It has served different ferry companies since the first steamship route to Copenhagen opened in 1830. Currently, Mols-Linien operates the route and annually transports some two million passengers and a million vehicles. Additional roll-on/roll-off cargo ferries serve Finland and Kalundborg on a weekly basis and smaller outlying Danish ports at irregular intervals. Since the early 2000s the port has increasingly become a destination for cruise lines operating in the Baltic Sea.\nTourism.\nThe ARoS Art Museum, the Old Town Museum and Tivoli Friheden are among Denmark's top tourist attractions. With a combined total of almost 1.4\u00a0million visitors they represent the driving force behind tourism but other venues such as Moesg\u00e5rd Museum and Kvindemuseet are also popular. The city's extensive shopping facilities are also said to be a major attraction for tourists, as are festivals, especially NorthSide and SPOT. Many visitors arrive on cruise ships: in 2012, 18 vessels visited the port with over 38,000 passengers.\nIn the 2010s, there was a significant expansion of tourist facilities, culminating in the opening of the 240-room Comwell Hotel in July 2014, which increased the number of hotel rooms in the city by 25%. Some estimates put the number of visitors spending at least one night as high as 750,000 a year, most of them Danes from other regions, with the remainder coming mainly from Norway, Sweden, northern Germany and the United Kingdom. Overall, they spend roughly DKK 3\u00a0billion (\u20ac402\u00a0million) in the city each year. The primary motivation for tourists choosing Aarhus as a destination is experiencing the city and culture, family and couples vacation or as a part of a round trip in Denmark. The average stay is little more than three days on average.\nThere are more than 30 tourist information spots across the city. Some of them are staffed, while others are online, publicly accessible touchscreens. The official tourist information service in Aarhus is organised under VisitAarhus, a corporate foundation initiated in 1994 by Aarhus Municipality and local commercial interest organisations.\nResearch parks.\nThe largest research park in Aarhus is INCUBA Science Park, focused on IT and biomedical research, It is based on Denmark's first research park, \"Forskerpark Aarhus\" (Research Park Aarhus), founded in 1986, which in 2007 merged with another research park to form INCUBA Science Park. The organisation is owned partly by Aarhus University and private investors and aims to foster close relationships between public institutions and startup companies. It is physically divided across 4 locations after a new department was inaugurated in Navitas Park in 2015, which it will share with the Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering and AU Engineering. Another major centre for knowledge is Agro Food Park in Skejby, established to facilitate co-operation between companies and public institutions working within food science and agriculture. In January 2017 Arla Foods will open the global innovation centre \"Arla Nativa\" in Agro Food Park and in 2018 Aarhus University is moving the \"Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture\" there as well. In 2016 some 1000 people worked at Agro Food Park, spread across 50 companies and institutions and in August 2016 Agro Food Park management published plans to expand facilities from 92,000 m2 to .\nIn addition, Aarhus is home to the Aarhus School of Architecture, one of two Danish Ministry of Education institutions that provide degree programs in architecture, and some of the largest architecture firms in the Nordic Countries such as Schmidt Hammer Lassen Architects, Arkitema Architects and C. F. M\u00f8ller Architects. Taken together these organisations form a unique concentration of expertise and knowledge in architecture outside Copenhagen, which the Danish Ministry of Business and Growth refers to as (the architecture cluster). To promote the \"cluster\", the School of Architecture will be given new school buildings centrally in the new Freight Station Neighborhood, planned for development in the 2020s. In the interim, the city council supports a culture, business and education centre in the area, which may continue in the future neighbourhood in some form. The future occupants of the neighbourhood will be businesses and organisations selected for their ability to be involved in the local community, and it is hoped that the area will evolve into a hotspot for creativity and design.\nCityscape.\nAarhus has developed in stages, from the Viking age to modern times, all visible in the city today. Many architectural styles are represented in different parts of the city such as Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, National Romantic, Nordic Classicism, Neoclassical, Empire and Functionalism. The city has grown up around the main transport hubs, the river, the harbour and later the railway station, and as a result, the oldest parts of the city are also the most central and busiest today.\nThe streets Volden (The Rampart) and Graven (The Moat) testify to the defences of the initial Viking settlement and \"All\u00e9gaderingen\" in Midtbyen roughly follows the boundaries of that settlement. The street network in the inner city formed during the Middle Ages with narrow, curved streets and low, dense housing by the river and coast. \"Vesterport\" (Westward Gate) still bears the name of a medieval city gate and the narrow alleyways \"Posthussm\u00f8gen\" and \"Telefonsm\u00f8gen\" are remnants of toll stations from that time. The inner city has the oldest preserved buildings, especially the Latin Quarter, with houses dating back to the early 17th\u00a0century in Mejlgade and Skolegade. Medieval merchants' mansions with courtyards can be seen in Klostergade, Studsgade and Skolegade. By far, the largest part of the present day city was built during and after the industrialization of the late 1800s and the most represented architectural styles are historicism and modernism, especially Danish functionalism of which there are many fine examples.\nDevelopments.\nIn recent years, Aarhus has experienced a large demand in housing and offices, spurring a construction boom in some parts of the city. The newly built city district of Aarhus \u00d8, formerly docklands where shipping houses major housing developments, mostly consisting of privately owned apartments, designed by architects such as, CEBRA, and JDS Architects. \nIn the 2nd quarter of 2012, the population of the area stood at only 5, however that number had risen to 3,940 by October 2019.\nThe main public transportation service is bus line 23, as well as train station \u00d8stbanetorvet. In addition to this, the area will be serviced by the light rail line, Aarhus Letbane.\nLandmarks.\nAarhus Cathedral (\"\u00c5rhus Domkirke\") in the centre of Aarhus, is the longest and tallest church in Denmark at and in length and height respectively. Originally built as a Romanesque basilica in the 13th\u00a0century, it was rebuilt and enlarged as a Gothic cathedral in the late 15th and early 16th centuries. Even though the cathedral stood finished around 1300, it took more than a century to build; the associated cathedral school of \"Aarhus Katedralskole\" was already founded in 1195 and ranks as the 44th oldest school in the world. Another important and historic church in the inner city, is the Church of our Lady (\"Vor Frue Kirke\") also from the 13th\u00a0century in Romanesque and Gothic style. It is smaller and less impressive, but it was the first cathedral of Aarhus and founded on an even older church constructed in 1060; the oldest stone church in Scandinavia. Parts of this former church were excavated in the 1950s and can now be experienced as a crypt beneath the nave of \"Vor Frue Kirke\". Langelandsgade Kaserne in National Romantic Style from 1889 is the oldest former military barracks left in the country; home to the university Department of Aesthetics and Communication since 1989.\nMarselisborg Palace (\"Marselisborg Slot\"), designed by Hack Kampmann in Neoclassical and Art Nouveau styles, was donated by the city to Prince Christian and Princess Alexandrine as a wedding present in 1898. The Aarhus Custom House (\"Toldkammeret\") from 1898, is said to be Hack Kampmann's finest work.\nTivoli Friheden (Tivoli Freedom) opened in 1903 and has since been the largest amusement park in the city and a tourist attraction. Aarhus Theatre from 1916 in the Art Nouveau style is the largest provincial theatre in Denmark. The early buildings of Aarhus University, especially the main building completed in 1932, designed by Kay Fisker, Povl Stegmann and by C.F. M\u00f8ller have gained an international reputation for their contribution to functionalist architecture. The City Hall (\"Aarhus R\u00e5dhus\") from 1941 with an iconic tower clad in marble, was designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik M\u00f8ller in a modern Functionalist style.\nCulture.\nAarhus is home to many annual cultural events and festivals, museums, theatres, and sport events of both national and international importance, and presents some of the largest cultural attractions in Denmark. There is a long tradition here in music of all genres and many Danish bands have emerged from Aarhus. Libraries, cultural centres and educational institutions present free or easy opportunities for the citizens to participate in, engage in, or be creative with cultural events and productions of all kinds.\nSince 1938, Aarhus has marketed itself as \"Smilets by\" (City of smiles) which has become both an informal moniker and official slogan. In 2011, the city council opted to change the slogan to \"Aarhus. Danish for Progress\" but it was unpopular and abandoned after just a few years. Other slogans that have occasionally been used are \"Byen ved havet\" (City by the sea), \"Mellem bugt og b\u00f8geskov\" (Between bay and beechwood) and \"Verdens mindste storby\" (World's smallest big city). Aarhus is featured in popular songs such as \"Hjem til Aarhus\" by P\u00e5 Slaget 12, \"Lav sol over Aarhus\" by Gnags, \"8000 Aarhus C\" by Flemming J\u00f8rgensen, \"Pigen ud af Aarhus\" by Tina Dickow and \"Slingrer ned ad Vestergade\" by Gnags. In 1919, the number \"Sangen til Aarhus\" (Song to Aarhus) had become a popular hit for a time, but the oldest and perhaps best known \"national anthem\" for the city is the classical \"Aarhus Tappenstreg\" from 1872 by Carl Christian M\u00f8ller which is occasionally played at official events or at performances by local marching bands and orchestras.\nMuseums.\nAarhus has a range of museums, including two of the largest in the country, measured by the number of paying guests, \"Den Gamle By\" and \"ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum\". \"Den Gamle By\" (The Old Town), officially \"Danmarks K\u00f8bstadmuseum\" (Denmark's Market Town Museum), presents Danish townscapes from the 16th\u00a0century to the 1970s with individual areas focused on different time periods. 75 historic buildings collected from different parts of the country have been brought here to create a small town in its own right.\nARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the city's main art museum, is one of the largest art museums in Scandinavia with a collection covering Danish art from the 18th\u00a0century to the present day as well as paintings, installations and sculptures representing international art movements and artists from all over the world. The iconic glass structure on the roof, \"Your Rainbow Panorama\", was designed by Olafur Eliasson and features a promenade offering a colourful panorama of the city.\nThe Moesg\u00e5rd Museum specialises in archaeology and ethnography in collaboration with Aarhus University with exhibits on Denmark's prehistory, including weapon sacrifices from Illerup \u00c5dal and the Grauballe Man. Kvindemuseet, the Women's Museum, from 1984 contains collections of the lives and works of women in Danish cultural history. The Occupation Museum (\"Bes\u00e6ttelsesmuseum\") presents exhibits illustrating the German occupation of the city during the Second World War; the University Park on the campus of Aarhus University includes the Natural History Museum with 5,000 species of animals, many in their natural surroundings; and the Steno Museum is a museum of the history of science and medicine with a planetarium. Kunsthal Aarhus (Aarhus Art Hall) hosts exhibitions of contemporary art including painting, sculpture, photography, performance art, film and video. Strictly speaking it is not a museum but an arts centre, and one of the oldest in Europe, built and founded in 1917.\nLibraries and community centres.\nPublic libraries in Denmark are also cultural and community centres. They play an active role in the cultural life and host many events, exhibitions, discussion groups, workshops, educational courses and facilitate everyday cultural activities for and by the citizens. In June 2015, the large central library and cultural centre of Dokk1 opened at the harbour front. Dokk1 also includes civil administrations and services, commercial office rentals and a large underground robotic car park and aims to be a landmark for the city and a public meeting place. The building of Dokk1 and the associated squares and streetscape is also collectively known as Urban Mediaspace Aarhus and it is the largest construction project Aarhus municipality has yet undertaken. Apart from this large main library, some neighbourhoods in Aarhus have a local library engaged in similar cultural and educational activities, but on a more local scale.\nThe State Library (\"Statsbiblioteket\") at the university campus has status of a national library. The city is a member of the ICORN organisation (International Cities of Refuge Network) in an effort to provide a safe haven to authors and writers persecuted in their countries of origin.\nThere are several cultural and community centres throughout the city. This includes Folkestedet in the central \u00c5parken, facilitating events for and by non-commercial associations, organisations and clubs, and activities for the elderly, the nearby Godsbanen at the railway yard, with workshops, events and exhibitions, and Globus1 in Brabrand facilitating sports and various cultural activities.\nPerforming arts.\nThe city enjoys strong musical traditions, both classical and alternative, underground and popular, with educational and performance institutions such as the concert halls of Musikhuset, the opera of Den Jyske Opera, Aarhus Symfoniorkester (Aarhus Symphony Orchestra) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg). Musikhuset is the largest concert hall in Scandinavia, with seating for more than 3,600 people. Other major music venues include VoxHall, rebuilt in 1999, and the associated venue of Atlas, Train nightclub at the harbourfront, and Godsbanen, a former rail freight station.\nThe acting scene in Aarhus is diverse, with many groups and venues engaged in a broad span of genres, from animation theatre and children's theatre to classical theatre and improvisational theatre. Aarhus Teater is the oldest and largest venue with mostly professional classical acting performances. Svalegangen, the second largest theatre, is more experimental with its performances and other notable groups and venues includes Entr\u00e9Scenen, Katapult, Gruppe 38, Helsing\u00f8r Teater, Det Andet Teater and Teater Refleksion as well as dance venues like Bora Bora. The cultural center of Godsbanen includes several scenes and stages and the Concert Halls of \"Musikhuset\" also stage theatrical plays regularly and is home to the children's theatre Filuren and a comedy club. The city hosts a biannual international theatre festival, International Living Theatre (ILT), with the next event being scheduled for 2021.\nSince 2010 the music production centre of PROMUS (\"Produktionscentret for Rytmisk Musik\") has supported the rock scene in the city along with the publicly funded ROSA (\"Dansk Rock Samr\u00e5d\"), which promotes Danish rock music in general.\nAarhus is known for its musical history. Fuelled by a relatively young population jazz clubs sprang up in the 1950s which became a tour stop for many iconic American Jazz musicians. By the 1960s, the music scene diversified into rock and other genres and in the 1970s and 1980s, Aarhus became a centre for rock music, fostering iconic bands such as Klich\u00e9, TV-2 and Gnags and artists such as Thomas Helmig and Anne Linnet. Acclaimed bands since the 1970s include Under Byen, Michael Learns to Rock, Nephew, Carpark North, Spleen United, VETO, Hatesphere and Illdisposed in addition to individual performers such as Medina and Tina Dico.\nEvents and festivals.\nAarhus hosts many annual or recurring festivals, concerts and events, with the festival of Aarhus Festuge as the most popular and wide-ranging, along with large sports events. Aarhus Festuge is the largest multicultural festival in Scandinavia, always based on a special theme and takes place every year for ten days between late August and early September, transforming the inner city with festive activities and decorations of all kinds.\nThere are numerous music festivals; the eight-day Aarhus Jazz Festival features jazz in many venues across the city. It was founded in 1988 and usually takes place in July every year, occasionally August or September. There are several annually recurring music festivals for contemporary popular music in Aarhus. NorthSide Festival presents well known bands every year in mid June on large outdoor scenes. It is a relatively new event, founded in 2010, but grew from a one-day event to a three-day festival in its first three years, now with 35,000 paying guests in 2015. Spot festival is aiming to showcase up-and-coming Danish and Scandinavian talents at selected venues of the inner city. The outdoor Gr\u00f8n Koncert music festival takes place every year in many cities across Denmark, including Aarhus. Danmarks grimmeste festival (lit. Denmark's ugliest Festival) is a small summer music festival held in Skjoldh\u00f8jkilen, Brabrand.\nAarhus also hosts recurring events dedicated to specific art genres. International Living Theatre (ILT) is a bi-annual festival, established in 2009, with performing arts and stage art on a broad scale. The festival has a vision of showing the best plays and stage art experiences of the world, while at the same time attracting thespians and stage art interested people from both Aarhus and Europe at large. LiteratureXchange is a new annual festival from 2018, focused on literature from around the world as well as regional talents. The city actively promotes its gay and lesbian community and celebrates the annual Aarhus Pride gay pride festival while Aarhus Festuge usually includes exhibits, concerts and events designed for the LGBT communities.\nNotable events of a local scope include the university boat-race, held in the University Park since 1991, which has become a local spectator event attracting some 20,000 people. The boat race pits costumed teams from the university departments against each other in inflatable boats in a challenge to win the \"Gyldne B\u00e6kken\" (Golden Chamber Pot) trophy. The annual lighting of the Christmas lights on the Salling department store in S\u00f8ndergade has also become an attraction in recent times, packing the pedestrianised city centre with thousands of revellers. Significant dates such as Saint Lucy's Day, \"Sankt Hans\" (Saint John's Eve) and Fastelavn are traditionally celebrated with numerous events across the city.\nParks, nature and recreation.\nThe beech forests of Riis Skov and Marselisborg occupy the hills along the coast to the north and south, and apart from the city centre, sandy beaches form the coastline of the entire municipality. There are two public seabaths, the northern \"Den Permanente\" below Riis Skov and close to the harbour area, and the southern Ballehage Beach in the Marselisborg Forests. As in most of Denmark, there are no private beaches in the municipality, but access to \"Den Permanente\" requires a membership, except in the summer.\nThe relatively mild, temperate marine climate, allows for outdoor recreation year round, including walking, hiking, cycling and outdoor team sports. Mountain biking is usually restricted to marked routes. Watersports like sailing, kayaking, motor boating, etc. are also popular, and since the bay rarely freezes up in winter, they can also be practised most of the year. Recreational and transportational pathways for pedestrians and cyclists, radiate from the city centre to the countryside, providing safety from motorised vehicles and a more tranquil experience. This includes the 19 kilometre long pathway of \"Brabrandstien\", encircling the Brabrand Lake. The long-range hiking route Aarhus-Silkeborg, starts off from Brabrandstien.\nAarhus has an unusually high number of parks and green spaces, 134 of them, covering a total area of around . The central Botanical Gardens (\"Botanisk Have\") from 1875 are a popular destination, as they include The Old Town open-air museum and host a number of events throughout the year. Originally used to cultivate fruit trees and other useful plants for the local citizens, there are now a significant collection of trees and bushes from different habitats and regions of the world, including a section devoted to native Danish plants. Recently renovated tropical and subtropical greenhouses, exhibit exotic plants from throughout the world. Also in the city centre is the undulating University Park, recognised for its unique landscaped design with large old oak trees. The Memorial Park (\"Mindeparken\") at the coast below Marselisborg Palace, offers a panoramic view across the Bay of Aarhus and is popular with locals for outings, picnics or events. Other notable parks include the small central City Hall Park (\"R\u00e5dhusparken\") and Marienlyst Park (\"Marienlystparken\"). Marienlyst Park is a relatively new park from 1988, situated in Hasle out of the inner city and is less crowded, but it is the largest park in Aarhus, including woodlands, large open grasslands and soccer fields.\nMarselisborg Forests and Riis Skov, has a long history for recreational activities of all kinds, including several restaurants, hotels and opportunities for green exercise. There are marked routes here for jogging, running and mountain biking and large events are hosted regularly. This includes running events, cycle racing and orienteering, the annual Classic Race Aarhus with historic racing cars, all attracting thousands of people. Marselisborg Deer Park (\"Marselisborg Dyrehave\") in Marselisborg Forests, comprises of fenced woodland pastures with free-roaming sika and roe deer. Below the Moesg\u00e5rd Museum in the southern parts of the Marselisborg Forests, is a large historical landscape of pastures and woodlands, presenting different eras of Denmark's prehistory. Sections of the forest comprise trees and vegetation representing specific climatic epochs from the last Ice Age to the present. Dotted across the landscape are reconstructed Stone Age and Bronze Age graves, buildings from the Iron Age, Viking Age and medieval times, with grazing goats, sheep and horses in between.\nFood, drink and nightlife.\nAarhus has a large variety of restaurants and eateries offering food from cultures all over the world, especially Mediterranean and Asian, but also international gourmet cuisine, traditional Danish food and New Nordic Cuisine. Among the oldest restaurants are \"R\u00e5dhuscafeen\" (lit. The City Hall Caf\u00e9), opened in 1924, serving a menu of traditional Danish meals, and \"Peter Gift\" from 1906, a tavern with a broad beer selection and a menu of sm\u00f8rrebr\u00f8d and other Danish dishes. In Aarhus, New Nordic can be experienced at \"K\u00e4hler Villa Dining\", \"H\u00e6rv\u00e6rk\" and \"Domestic\", but local produce can be had at many places, especially at the twice-weekly food markets in Frederiksbjerg. Aarhus and Central Denmark Region was selected as European Region of Gastronomy in 2017. The city (and municipality) is a member of the D\u00e9lice Network, an international non-profit organization nurturing and facilitating knowledge exchange in gastronomy.\nAppraised high-end restaurants serving international gourmet cuisine include Frederiksh\u00f8j, Substans, Gastrom\u00e9, Det Glade Vanvid, Nordisk Spisehus, Restaurant Varna, Restaurant ET, G\u00e4st, Brasserie Belli, M\u00f8f and Pondus, all considered among the best places to eat in Denmark. Restaurants in Aarhus were the first in provincial Denmark to receive Michelin stars since 2015, when Michelin inspectors ventured outside Copenhagen for the first time.\nVendors of street food are numerous throughout the centre, often selling from small trailers on permanent locations formally known as \"P\u00f8lsevogne\" (lit. sausage wagons), traditionally serving a Danish variety of hot dogs, sausages and other fast food. There are increasingly more outlets inspired by other cultural flavours such as sushi, kebab and currywurst.\nThe city centre is packed with caf\u00e9s, especially along the river and the Latin quarter. Some of them also include an evening restaurant, such as \"Caf\u00e9 Casablanca\", \"Caf\u00e9 Carlton\", \"Caf\u00e9 Cross\" and \"Gyngen\". Aarhus Street Food and Aarhus Central Food Market are two indoor food courts from 2016 in the city centre, comprising a variety of street food restaurants, caf\u00e9s and bars.\nAarhus has a robust and diverse nightlife. The action tends to concentrate in the inner city, with the pedestrianised riverside, Frederiksgade, the Latin Quarter, and J\u00e6gerg\u00e5rdsgade on Frederiksbjerg as the most active centres at night, but things are stirring elsewhere around the city too. The nightlife scene offers everything from small joints with cheap alcohol and a homely atmosphere to fashionable night clubs serving champagne and cocktails or small and large music venues with bars, dance floors and lounges. A short selection of well-established places where you can have a drink and socialise, include the fashionable lounge and night club of \"Kup\u00e9\" at the harbour front, the relaxed \"Ris Ras Filliongongong\" offering waterpipes and an award-winning beer selection, \"Fatter Eskild\" with a broad selection of Danish bands playing mostly blues and rock, the wine and book caf\u00e9 of \"L\u00f8ve's\" in N\u00f8rregade, \"Sherlock Holmes\", a British-style pub with live music and the brew pub of \"Sct. Clemens\" with A Hereford Beefstouw restaurant across the cathedral. A few nightlife spots are aimed at gays and lesbians specifically, including \"Gbar\" (nightclub) and \"Caf\u00e9 Sappho\".\nThe \"\u00c5rhus Set\" (Danish: \u00c5rhus S\u00e6t) is a set of drinks often ordered together, named for the city and consisting of two beverages, one Ceres Top beer and one shot Arnbitter, both originally from Aarhus. Ordering \"a set\" suffices in most bars and pubs. Aarhus Bryghus is a local craft brewery with a sizeable production. The brewery is located in the southern district of Viby and a large variety of their craft brews are available there, in most larger well-assorted stores in the city, and in some bars and restaurants as well. They also export.\nLocal dialect.\nThe Aarhus dialect, commonly called \"Aarhusiansk\" (Aarhusian in English), is a Jutlandic dialect in the Mid-Eastern Jutland dialect area, traditionally spoken in and around Aarhus. Aarhusian, as with most local dialects in Denmark, has diminished in use through the 20th century and most Danes today speak some version of Standard Danish with slight regional features. Aarhusian, however, still has a strong presence in older segments of the population and in areas with high numbers of immigrants, surprisingly. Some examples of common, traditional and unique Aarhusian words are: \"tr\u00e6ls\" (tiresome), \"noller\" (silly or dumb) and \"d\u00e6lme\" (Excl. damn me). The dialect is notable for single-syllable words ending in \"d\" being pronounced with st\u00f8d while the same letter in multiple-syllable words is pronounced as \"j\", i.e., Odder is pronounced \"Ojjer\". Like other dialects in East Jutland, it has two grammatical genders, similar to Standard Danish, but different from West Jutlandic dialects, which have only one. In 2009, the University of Aarhus compiled a list of contemporary public figures who best exemplify the dialect, including Jacob Haugaard, Thomas Helmig, Steffen Brandt, Stig T\u00f8fting, Flemming J\u00f8rgensen, Tina Dickow and Camilla Martin. In popular culture, the dialect features prominently in Niels Malmros's movie \"Aarhus by Night\" and in 90s comedy sketches by Jacob Haugaard and Finn N\u00f8rbygaard.\nSports.\nAarhus has three major men's professional sports teams: the Superliga team Aarhus Gymnastikforening (AGF), Danish Handball League's Aarhus GF H\u00e5ndbold, and Danish Basketball League's Bakken Bears. Notable or historic clubs include Aarhus 1900, Idr\u00e6tsklubben Skovbakken and Aarhus Sejlklub. Aarhus Idr\u00e6tspark has hosted matches in the premiere Danish soccer league since it was formed in 1920 and matches for the national men's soccer team in 2006 and 2007. The five sailing clubs routinely win national and international titles in a range of disciplines and the future national watersports stadium will be located on the Aarhus Docklands in the city centre. The Bakken Bears have most recently won the Danish basketball championships in 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014.\nThe municipality actively supports sports organisations in and around the city, providing public organisations that aim to attract major sporting events and strengthen professional sports. The National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark counts some 380 sports organisations within the municipality and about one third of the population are members of one. Soccer is by far the most popular sport followed by Gymnastics, Handball and Badminton.\nIn recent decades, many free and public sports facilities have sprung up across the city, such as street football, basketball, climbing walls, skateboarding and beach volley. Several natural sites also offer green exercise, with exercise equipment installed along the paths and tracks reserved for mountain biking. The newly reconstructed area of Skjoldh\u00f8jkilen is a prime example.\nAarhus has hosted many sporting events including the 2010 European Women's Handball Championship, the 2014 European Men's Handball Championship, the 2013 Men's European Volleyball Championships, the 2005 European Table Tennis Championships, the Denmark Open in badminton, the UCI Women's Road Cycling World Cup, the 2006 World Orienteering Championships, the 2006 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships and the GF World Cup (women's handball). On average, Aarhus is hosting one or two international sailing competitions every year. In 2008, the city hosted the ISAF Youth Sailing World Championships and in 2018 it was host to the ISAF Sailing World Championships, the world championship for the 12 Olympic sailing disciplines. Aarhus is an important qualifier for the 2020 Olympics.\nEducation.\nAarhus is the principal centre for education in the Jutland region. It draws students from a large area, especially from the western and southern parts of the peninsula. The relatively large influx of young people and students creates a natural base for cultural activities. Aarhus has the greatest concentration of students in Denmark, fully 12% of citizens attending short, medium or long courses of study. In addition to around 25 institutions of higher education, several research forums have evolved to assist in the transfer of expertise from education to business. The city is home to more than 52,000 students.\nSince 2012, Aarhus University (AU) has been the largest university in Denmark by number of students enrolled. It is ranked among the top 100 universities in the world by several of the most influential and respected rankings. The university has approximately 41,500 Bachelor and Master students enrolled as well as about 1,500 PhD students. It is possible to engage in higher academic studies in many areas, from the traditional spheres of natural science, humanities and theology to more vocational academic areas like engineering and dentistry.\nAarhus Tech is one of the largest technical colleges in Denmark, teaching undergraduate study programmes in English, including vocational education and training (VET), continuing vocational training (CVT), and human resource development. Business Academy Aarhus is among the largest business academies in Denmark and offers undergraduate and some academic degrees, in IT, business and technical fields. The academic level technical aspects are covered in a collaboration with Aarhus Tech, Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering and Aarhus Educational Centre for Agriculture. The Danish School of Media and Journalism (DMJX) is the oldest and largest of the colleges, offering journalism courses since 1946, with approximately 1,700 students as of 2014. DMJX has been an independent institution since 1974, conducting research and teaching at undergraduate level, and in 2004, master's courses in journalism was established in a collaboration with Aarhus University. The latter is offered through the Centre for University studies in Journalism, granting degrees through the university.\nThe Royal Academy of Music in Aarhus (\"Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium\") is a conservatoire, established under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Culture in 1927. In 2010, it merged administratively with the Royal Academy of Music in Aalborg, which was founded in 1930. Under the patronage of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Frederik, it offers graduate level studies in areas such as music teaching, and solo and professional musicianship. VIA University College was established in January 2008 and is one of eight new regional organisations offering bachelor courses of all kinds, throughout the Central Denmark Region. It offers over 50 higher educations, taught in Danish or sometimes in English, with vocational education and it participates in various research and development projects. Aarhus School of Architecture (\"Arkitektskolen Aarhus\") was founded in 1965. Along with the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts of Copenhagen, it is responsible for the education of architects in Denmark. With an enrolment of approximately 900 students, it teaches in five main departments: architecture and aesthetics, urban and landscape, architectonic heritage, design and architectural design. Also of note is KaosPilots and several other higher education centres.\nTransport.\nAarhus has two ring roads; Ring 1, roughly encircling the central district of Aarhus C, and the outlying Ring 2. Six major intercity motorways radiate from the city centre, connecting with nearby cities Gren\u00e5, Randers, Viborg, Silkeborg, Skanderborg and Odder.\nIn the inner city, motorised traffic is highly regulated, larger parts are pedestrianised and in the 2000s, a system of roads prioritised for cyclists have been implemented, connecting to suburban areas.\nThe main railway station in Aarhus is Aarhus Central Station located in the city centre. DSB has connections to destinations throughout Denmark and also services to Flensburg and Hamburg in Germany.\nAarhus Letbane is a local electric light rail or tram system that opened in December 2017, connecting the central station and the inner city with the University Hospital in Skejby and also replaced local railway services to Grenaa and Odder in late 2018. It is the first electric light rail system in Denmark and more routes are planned to open in coming years. Tickets for the light rail are also valable in local yellow bus lines.\nMost city bus lines go through the inner city and pass through either Park All\u00e9 or Baneg\u00e5rdspladsen, or both, right at the central station. Regional and Inter-city buses terminate at Aarhus Bus Terminal, just east of the central station. FlixBus provides long-distance buses that travel to other cities in Denmark and Europe.\nFerries administered by Danish ferry company Mols-Linien transports passengers and motorvehicles between Aarhus and Sj\u00e6llands Odde on Zealand. The ferries comprises \"HSC KatExpress 1\" and \"HSC KatExpress 2\", the world's largest diesel-powered catamarans, and \"HSC Max Mols\".\nAarhus Airport is located on Djursland, north-east of Aarhus near Tirstrup, and provides links to both Copenhagen and international destinations. The larger Billund Airport is situated south-west of Aarhus. There has been much discussion about constructing a new airport closer to the city for many years, but so far no plans have been realised. In August 2014, the city council officially initiated a process to assert the viability of a new international airport. A small seaplane now operates four flights daily between Aarhus harbour and Copenhagen harbour.\nAarhus has a free bike sharing system, Aarhus Bycykler (Aarhus City Bikes). The bicycles are available from 1 April to 30 October at 57 stands throughout the city and can be obtained by placing a DKK 20 coin in a release slot, like caddies in a supermarket. The coin can be retrieved when the bike is returned at a random stand. Bicycles can also be hired from many shops.\nHealthcare.\nAarhus is home to Aarhus University Hospital, one of six Danish \"Super Hospitals\" officially established in 2007 when the regions reformed the Danish healthcare sector. The university hospital is the result of a series of mergers in the 2000s between the local hospitals of Skejby Sygehus, the Municipal Hospital, the County Hospital, Marselisborg Hospital and Risskov Psychiatric Hospital. It is today the largest hospital in Denmark with a combined staff of some 10,000 and 1,150 patient beds, and has been ranked the best hospital in Denmark consecutively since 2008. In 2012, construction of a new large hospital building began, known as \"Det Nye Universitetshospital\" (DNU) or The New University Hospital in English, and it is centralising and accommodating all of the former departments, ending in 2019. The new hospital is divided in four clinical centres, a service centre and one administrative unit along with twelve research centres.\nPrivate hospitals specialised in different areas from plastic surgery to fertility treatments operate in Aarhus as well. \"Ciconia Aarhus Private Hospital\" founded in 1984 is a leading Danish fertility clinic and the first of its kind in Denmark. Ciconia has provided for the birth of 6,000 children by artificial insemination and continually conducts research into the field of fertility. \"Aagaard Clinic\", established in 2004, is another private fertility and gynaecology clinic which since 2004 has undertaken fertility treatments that has resulted in 1550 births. Aarhus Municipality also offers a number of specialised services in the areas of nutrition, exercise, sex, smoking and drinking, activities for the elderly, health courses and lifestyle.\nMedia.\nThe first daily newspaper to appear in Aarhus was \"\u00c5rhus Stiftstidende\", established in 1794 as \"Aarhuus Stifts Adresse-Contoirs Tidender\", with a moderately conservative approach. Once one of Denmark's largest, it was a leading provincial newspaper for a time, but after the Second World War it increasingly faced competition from \"Demokraten\" (1884\u20131974) and \"Jyllands-Posten\", both published in Aarhus. In 1998, it merged with \"Randers Amtsavis\" and is now run by Midtjyske Medier, part of Berlingske Media. The daily newspaper of \"Jyllands-Posten\" was established in 1871 in Aarhus, and takes a generally right-wing editorial approach. With a reputation as a serious news publication, the paper has always included news from Jutland in particular, but somewhat less so since its promotion as a national newspaper in the 1960s. Today it is one of the three bestselling serious newspapers in Denmark, the others being \"Berlingske\" and \"Politiken\". Jyllands-Posten publishes \"JP Aarhus\", a section dedicated to news in and around Aarhus, and hosted a free cityguide website from 2010 to 2016. The Copenhagen-based media company of \"Politiken\", also publishes several free local papers once a week in parts of Denmark and Sweden. In Aarhus, they publish a total of five local newspapers; \"Aarhus Midt\", \"Aarhus Nord\", \"Aarhus Vest\", \"Aarhus Syd\" and \"Aarhus Onsdag\". \"Aarhus Onsdag\" (Aarhus Wednesday) is financed completely by advertisements and available in both paperform and online. It was bought from \"\u00c5rhus Stiftstidende\" in June 2017, but has been published for many years previous.\nDanmarks Radio has a large department in Aarhus with over 200 employees. It runs the DR \u00d8stjylland radio programme, provides local contributions to DR P4, and produces local regional television programmes. In 1999, TV 2 moved its Jutland headquarters from Randers to Skejby in northern Aarhus. The station broadcasts regional news and current affairs television and radio programmes. Since 2012, it has run its own TV channel, TV 2 \u00d8stjylland. Aarhus has its own local TV channel TVAarhus, transmitting since 1984. After an agreement on 1 July 2014, TVAarhus can be watched by 130,000 households in Aarhus, making it the largest cable-transmitted local TV channel in Denmark.\nWith over 1,700 students, the Danish School of Media and Journalism (\"Danmarks Medie- og Journalisth\u00f8jskole\") is the country's largest and oldest school of journalism. The school works closely with Aarhus University, where the first journalism course was established in 1946. In 2004, the two institutions established the Centre for University Studies in Journalism, which offers master's courses.\nTwin towns and consulates.\nAarhus is home to 32 consulates and the city is twinned with seven cities, all co-operating in the spheres of public schools, culture, welfare and commercial interests."}
{"id": "1043", "revid": "40600116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1043", "title": "Northern cavefish", "text": "The northern cavefish or northern blindfish, \"Amblyopsis spelaea\", is found in caves through Kentucky and southern Indiana. It is listed as a threatened species in the United States and the IUCN lists the species as near threatened.\nDuring a 2013 study of \"Amblyopsis spelaea\", scientists found that the species was divided into two distinct evolutionary lineages: one north of the Ohio River, in Indiana, and one south of the river, in Kentucky. The southern population retained the name \"A. spelaea\" and the northern was re-designated \"Amblyopsis hoosieri\" in a 2014 paper published in the journal \"ZooKeys\". Neither species is found north of the White River, flowing east to west south of Bedford, Indiana."}
{"id": "1046", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1046", "title": "Abatement", "text": "Abatement refers generally to a lessening, diminution, reduction, or moderation; specifically, it may refer to:"}
{"id": "1049", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1049", "title": "Amateur", "text": "An amateur (; ; ) is generally considered a person who pursues a particular activity or field of study independently from their source of income. Amateurs and their pursuits are also described as popular, informal, self-taught, user-generated, DIY, and hobbyist.\nHistory.\nHistorically, the amateur was considered to be the ideal balance between pure intent, open mind, and the interest or passion for a subject. That ideology spanned many different fields of interest. It may have its roots in the ancient Greek philosophy of amateur athletes competing in the Olympics. The ancient Greek citizens spent most of their time in other pursuits, but competed according to their natural talents and abilities.\nThe \"gentleman amateur\" was a phenomenon among the gentry of Great Britain from the 17th century until the 20th century. With the start of the Age of Reason, with people thinking more about how the world works around them, (see Science in the Age of Enlightenment), things like the Cabinet of Curiosities, and the writing of the book \"The Christian Virtuoso\", started to shape the idea of the gentleman amateur. He was vastly interested in a particular topic, and studied, observed, and collected things and information on his topic of choice. The Royal Society in Great Britain was generally composed of these \"gentleman amateurs\", and is one the reasons science today exists the way it does. A few examples of these gentleman amateurs are Francis Bacon, Isaac Newton, and Sir Robert Cotton, 1st Baronet, of Connington.\nAmateurism can be seen in both a negative and positive light. Since amateurs often lack formal training, some amateur work may be considered sub-par. For example, amateur athletes in sports such as basketball, baseball, or football are regarded as possessing a lower level of ability than professional athletes. On the other hand, an amateur may be in a position to approach a subject with an open mind (as a result of the lack of formal training) and in a financially disinterested manner. An amateur who dabbles in a field out of interest rather than as a profession, or possesses a general but superficial interest in any art or a branch of knowledge, is often referred to as a dilettante.\nAmateur athletics.\nThe line between \"amateur\" and \"professional\" has always been blurred in athletics with the central idea being that amateurs should not receive material reward for taking part in sports. The lack of financial benefit can be seen as a sign of commitment to a sport; until the 1970s the Olympic rules required that competitors be amateurs. Receiving payment to participate in an event disqualified an athlete from that event, as in the case of Jim Thorpe (he got payment in a different sport, but was banned in all Olympic sports). The only Olympic events that still require participants to be amateurs are boxing, wrestling and figure skating but amateurism in these cases is defined in terms of rules, mainly participation in \"professional events\", rather than whether the athlete receives any money for his sport.\nContribution of amateurs.\nMany amateurs make valuable contributions in the field of computer programming through the open source movement. Amateur dramatics is the performance of plays or musical theater, often to high standards, but lacking the budgets of professional West End or Broadway performances. Astronomy, chemistry, history, linguistics, and the natural sciences are among the fields that have benefited from the activities of amateurs. Charles Darwin and Gregor Mendel were amateur scientists who never held a position in their field of study. Leonardo da Vinci was considered an amateur artist and autodidact in his field of study. Radio astronomy was founded by Grote Reber, an amateur radio operator. Radio itself was greatly advanced by Guglielmo Marconi, a young Italian gentleman who started out by tinkering with a coherer and a spark coil as an amateur electrician. Pierre de Fermat was a highly influential mathematician whose primary vocation was law.\nIn the 2000s and 2010s, the distinction between amateur and professional has become increasingly blurred, especially in areas such as computer programming, music and astronomy. The term amateur professionalism, or pro-am, is used to describe these activities."}
{"id": "1051", "revid": "10349969", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1051", "title": "Alexis Carrel", "text": "Alexis Carrel (; 28 June 1873 \u2013 5 November 1944) was a French surgeon and biologist who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1912 for pioneering vascular suturing techniques. He invented the first perfusion pump with Charles A. Lindbergh opening the way to organ transplantation. His positive description of a miraculous healing he witnessed during a pilgrimage earned him scorn of some of his colleagues. This prompted him to relocate to the United States, where he lived most of his life. He had a leading role in implementing eugenic policies in Vichy France.\nA Nobel Prize laureate in 1912, Alexis Carrel was also elected twice, in 1924 and 1927, as an honorary member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR.\nBiography.\nBorn in Sainte-Foy-l\u00e8s-Lyon, Rh\u00f4ne, Carrel was raised in a devout Catholic family and was educated by Jesuits, though he had become an agnostic by the time he became a university student. He was a pioneer in transplantology and thoracic surgery. Alexis Carrel was also a member of learned societies in the U.S., Spain, Russia, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Vatican City, Germany, Italy and Greece and received honorary doctorates from Queen's University of Belfast, Princeton University, California, New York, Brown University and Columbia University.\nIn 1902, he was claimed to have witnessed the miraculous cure of Marie Bailly at Lourdes, made famous in part because she named Carrel as a witness of her cure. After the notoriety surrounding the event, Carrel could not obtain a hospital appointment because of the pervasive anticlericalism in the French university system at the time. In 1903 he emigrated to Montreal, Canada, but soon relocated to Chicago, Illinois, to work for Hull Laboratory. While there he collaborated with American physician Charles Claude Guthrie in work on vascular suture and the transplantation of blood vessels and organs as well as the head, and Carrel was awarded the 1912 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for these efforts.\nIn 1906 he joined the newly formed Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research in New York where he spent the rest of his career. There he did significant work on tissue cultures with pathologist Montrose Thomas Burrows. In the 1930s, Carrel and Charles Lindbergh became close friends not only because of the years they worked together but also because they shared personal, political, and social views. Lindbergh initially sought out Carrel to see if his sister-in-law's heart, damaged by rheumatic fever, could be repaired. When Lindbergh saw the crudeness of Carrel's machinery, he offered to build new equipment for the scientist. Eventually they built the first perfusion pump, an invention instrumental to the development of organ transplantation and open heart surgery. Lindbergh considered Carrel his closest friend, and said he would preserve and promote Carrel's ideals after his death.\nDue to his close proximity with Jacques Doriot's fascist Parti Populaire Fran\u00e7ais (PPF) during the 1930s and his role in implementing eugenics policies during Vichy France, he was accused after the Liberation of collaboration, but died before the trial.\nIn his later life he returned to his Catholic roots. In 1939 he met with Trappist monk Alexis Presse on a recommendation. Although Carrel was skeptical about meeting with a priest, Presse ended up having a profound influence on the rest of Carrel's life. In 1942, he said \"I believe in the existence of God, in the immortality of the soul, in Revelation and in all the Catholic Church teaches.\" He summoned Presse to administer the Catholic Sacraments on his death bed in November 1944.\nFor much of his life, Carrel and his wife spent their summers on the , which they owned. After he and Lindbergh became close friends, Carrel persuaded him to also buy a neighboring island, the Ile Illiec, where the Lindberghs often resided in the late 1930s.\nContributions to science.\nVascular suture.\nCarrel was a young surgeon in 1894, when the French president Sadi Carnot was assassinated with a knife. Carnot bled to death due to severing of his portal vein, and surgeons who treated the president felt that the vein could not be successfully reconnected. This left a deep impression on Carrel, and he set about developing new techniques for suturing blood vessels. The technique of \"triangulation\", using three stay-sutures as traction points in order to minimize damage to the vascular wall during suturing, was inspired by sewing lessons he took from an embroideress and is still used today. Julius Comroe wrote: \"Between 1901 and 1910, Alexis Carrel, using experimental animals, performed every feat and developed every technique known to vascular surgery today.\" He had great success in reconnecting arteries and veins, and performing surgical grafts, and this led to his Nobel Prize in 1912.\nWound antisepsis.\nDuring World War I (1914\u20131918), Carrel and the English chemist Henry Drysdale Dakin developed the Carrel\u2013Dakin method of treating wounds based on chlorine (Dakin's solution) which, preceding the development of antibiotics, was a major medical advance in the care of traumatic wounds. For this, Carrel was awarded the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. Carrel also advocated the use of wound debridement (cutting away necrotic or otherwise damaged tissue) and irrigation of wounds. His method of wound irrigation involved flushing the tissues with a high volume of antiseptic fluid so that dirt and other contaminants would be washed away (this is known today as \"mechanical irrigation.\") The World War I era Rockefeller War Demonstration Hospital (United States Army Auxiliary Hospital No. 1) was created, in part, to promote the Carrel\u2013Dakin method:\n\"The war demonstration hospital of the Rockefeller Institute was planned as a school in which to teach military surgeons the principles of and art of applying the Carrel-Dakin treatment.\"\nOrgan transplants.\nCarrel co-authored a book with pilot Charles A. Lindbergh, \"The Culture of Organs\", and worked with Lindbergh in the mid-1930s to create the \"perfusion pump,\" which allowed living organs to exist outside the body during surgery. The advance is said to have been a crucial step in the development of open-heart surgery and organ transplants, and to have laid the groundwork for the artificial heart, which became a reality decades later. Some critics of Lindbergh claimed that Carrel overstated Lindbergh's role to gain media attention, but other sources say Lindbergh played an important role in developing the device. Both Lindbergh and Carrel appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine on 13 June 1938.\nCellular senescence.\nCarrel was also interested in the phenomenon of senescence, or aging. He claimed that all cells continued to grow indefinitely, and this became a dominant view in the early 20th century. Carrel started an experiment on 17 January 1912, where he placed tissue cultured from an embryonic chicken heart in a stoppered Pyrex flask of his own design. He maintained the living culture for over 20 years with regular supplies of nutrient. This was longer than a chicken's normal lifespan. The experiment, which was conducted at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, attracted considerable popular and scientific attention.\nCarrel's experiment was never successfully replicated, and in the 1960s Leonard Hayflick and Paul Moorhead proposed that differentiated cells can undergo only a limited number of divisions before dying. This is known as the Hayflick limit, and is now a pillar of biology.\nL. Hayflick has shown that a cell has a limited number of divisions, equal to the so called \"Hayflick's Limit.\" However, L. Franks and others (Loo et al. 1987; Nooden and Tompson 1995; Frolkis 1988a), have shown that the number of cell divisions can be considerably greater than that stipulated by the \"Hayflick Limit\", having practically no limit at all.\nIt is not certain how Carrel obtained his anomalous results. Leonard Hayflick suggests that the daily feeding of nutrient was continually introducing new living cells to the alleged immortal culture. J. A. Witkowski has argued that, while \"immortal\" strains of visibly mutated cells have been obtained by other experimenters, a more likely explanation is deliberate introduction of new cells into the culture, possibly without Carrel's knowledge.\nHonors.\nIn 1972, the Swedish Post Office honored Carrel with a stamp that was part of its Nobel stamp series. In 1979, the lunar crater Carrel was named after him as a tribute to his scientific breakthroughs.\nIn February 2002, as part of celebrations of the 100th anniversary of Charles Lindbergh's birth, the Medical University of South Carolina at Charleston established the Lindbergh-Carrel Prize, given to major contributors to \"development of perfusion and bioreactor technologies for organ preservation and growth\". Michael DeBakey and nine other scientists received the prize, a bronze statuette created for the event by the Italian artist C. Zoli and named \"Elisabeth\" after Elisabeth Morrow, sister of Lindbergh's wife Anne Morrow, who died from heart disease. It was in fact Lindbergh's disappointment that contemporary medical technology could not provide an artificial heart pump which would allow for heart surgery on her that led to Lindbergh's first contact with Carrel.\nAlexis Carrel and Lourdes.\nIn 1902 Alexis Carrel went from being a skeptic of the visions and miracles reported at Lourdes to being a believer in spiritual cures after experiencing a healing of Marie Bailly that he could not explain. The Catholic journal \"Le nouvelliste\" reported that she named him as the prime witness of her cure. Alexis Carrel refused to discount a supernatural explanation and steadfastly reiterated his beliefs, even writing the book \"The Voyage to Lourdes\" describing his experience, although it was not published until four years after his death. This was a detriment to his career and reputation among his fellow doctors, and feeling he had no future in academic medicine in France, he emigrated to Canada with the intention of farming and raising cattle. After a brief period, he accepted an appointment at the University of Chicago and, two years later, at the Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research.\n\"Man, the Unknown\" (1935, 1939).\nIn 1935, Carrel published a book titled \"L'Homme, cet inconnu\" (\"Man, the Unknown\"), which became a best-seller. In the book, he attempted to outline a comprehensive account what is known and more importantly unknown of the human body and human life \"in light of discoveries in biology, physics, and medicine\", to elucidate problems of the modern world, and to provide possible routes to a better life for human beings.\nFor Carrel, the fundamental problem was that:\n[M]en cannot follow modern civilization along its present course, because they are degenerating. They have been fascinated by the beauty of the sciences of inert matter. They have not understood that their body and consciousness are subjected to natural laws, more obscure than, but as inexorable as, the laws of the sidereal world. Neither have they understood that they cannot transgress these laws without being punished. They must, therefore, learn the necessary relations of the cosmic universe, of their fellow men, and of their inner selves, and also those of their tissues and their mind. Indeed, man stands above all things. Should he degenerate, the beauty of civilization, and even the grandeur of the physical universe, would vanish. ... Humanity's attention must turn from the machines of the world of inanimate matter to the body and the soul of man, to the organic and mental processes which have created the machines and the universe of Newton and Einstein.\nCarrell advocated, in part, that mankind could better itself by following the guidance of an elite group of intellectuals, and by incorporating eugenics into the social framework. He argued for an aristocracy springing from individuals of potential, writing:\nWe must single out the children who are endowed with high potentialities, and develop them as completely as possible. And in this manner give to the nation a non-hereditary aristocracy. Such children may be found in all classes of society, although distinguished men appear more frequently in distinguished families than in others. The descendants of the founders of American civilization may still possess the ancestral qualities. These qualities are generally hidden under the cloak of degeneration. But this degeneration is often superficial. It comes chiefly from education, idleness, lack of responsibility and moral discipline. The sons of very rich men, like those of criminals, should be removed while still infants from their natural surroundings. Thus separated from their family, they could manifest their hereditary strength. In the aristocratic families of Europe there are also individuals of great vitality. The issue of the Crusaders is by no means extinct. The laws of genetics indicate the probability that the legendary audacity and love of adventure can appear again in the lineage of the feudal lords. It is possible also that the offspring of the great criminals who had imagination, courage, and judgment, of the heroes of the French or Russian Revolutions, of the high-handed business men who live among us, might be excellent building stones for an enterprising minority. As we know, criminality is not hereditary if not united with feeble-mindedness or other mental or cerebral defects. High potentialities are rarely encountered in the sons of honest, intelligent, hard-working men who have had ill luck in their careers, who have failed in business or have muddled along all their lives in inferior positions. Or among peasants living on the same spot for centuries. However, from such people sometimes spring artists, poets, adventurers, saints. A brilliantly gifted and well-known New York family came from peasants who cultivated their farm in the south of France from the time of Charlemagne to that of Napoleon.\nCarrel advocated for euthanasia for criminals, and the criminally insane, specifically endorsing the use of gassing:\n(t)he conditioning of petty criminals with the whip, or some more scientific procedure, followed by a short stay in hospital, would probably suffice to insure order. Those who have murdered, robbed while armed with automatic pistol or machine gun, kidnapped children, despoiled the poor of their savings, misled the public in important matters, should be humanely and economically disposed of in small euthanasic institutions supplied with proper gasses. A similar treatment could be advantageously applied to the insane, guilty of criminal acts.\nOtherwise he endorsed voluntary positive eugenics. He wrote:\nWe have mentioned that natural selection has not played its part for a long while. That many inferior individuals have been conserved through the efforts of hygiene and medicine. But we cannot prevent the reproduction of the weak when they are neither insane nor criminal. Or destroy sickly or defective children as we do the weaklings in a litter of puppies. The only way to obviate the disastrous predominance of the weak is to develop the strong. Our efforts to render normal the unfit are evidently useless. We should, then, turn our attention toward promoting the optimum growth of the fit. By making the strong still stronger, we could effectively help the weak; For the herd always profits by the ideas and inventions of the elite. Instead of leveling organic and mental inequalities, we should amplify them and construct greater men.\nHe continued:\nCarrel's endorsement of euthanasia of the criminal and insane was published in the mid-1930s, prior to the implementation of death camps and gas chambers in Nazi Germany. In the 1936 German introduction of his book, at the publisher's request, he added the following praise of the Nazi regime which did not appear in the editions in other languages:\n(t)he German government has taken energetic measures against the propagation of the defective, the mentally diseased, and the criminal. The ideal solution would be the suppression of each of these individuals as soon as he has proven himself to be dangerous.\nThe Latvian translation of the book has been included in the 1951 list of books banned in the Soviet Union.\nFrench Foundation for the Study of Human Problems.\nIn 1937, Carrel joined Jean Coutrot's \"Centre d'Etudes des Probl\u00e8mes Humains\" - Coutrot's aim was to develop what he called an \"economic humanism\" through \"collective thinking.\" In 1941, through connections to the cabinet of Vichy France president Philippe P\u00e9tain (specifically, French industrial physicians Andr\u00e9 Gros and Jacques M\u00e9n\u00e9trier) he went on to advocate for the creation of the \"Fondation Fran\u00e7aise pour l'Etude des Probl\u00e8mes Humains\" (French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems) which was created by decree of the Vichy regime in 1941, and where he served as 'regent'.\nThe foundation was at the origin of the 11 October 1946, law, enacted by the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF), which institutionalized the field of occupational medicine. It worked on demographics (Robert Gessain, Paul Vincent, Jean Bourgeois-Pichat), on economics, (Fran\u00e7ois Perroux), on nutrition (Jean Sutter), on habitation (Jean Merlet) and on the first opinion polls (Jean Stoetzel). \"The foundation was chartered as a public institution under the joint supervision of the ministries of finance and public health. It was given financial autonomy and a budget of forty million francs\u2014roughly one franc per inhabitant\u2014a true luxury considering the burdens imposed by the German Occupation on the nation's resources. By way of comparison, the whole Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) was given a budget of fifty million francs.\"\nThe Foundation made many positive accomplishments during its time. Yet it was also behind the origin of the 16 December 1942 Act inventing the \"prenuptial certificate\", which had to precede any marriage and was supposed, after a biological examination, to insure the \"good health\" of the spouses, in particular in regard to sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and \"life hygiene\" . The institute also conceived the \"scholar book\" (\"livret scolaire\"), which could be used to record students' grades in the French secondary schools, and thus classify and select them according to scholastic performance.\nAccording to Gwen Terrenoire, writing in \"Eugenics in France (1913\u20131941) : a review of research findings\", \"The foundation was a pluridisciplinary centre that employed around 300 researchers (mainly statisticians, psychologists, physicians) from the summer of 1942 to the end of the autumn of 1944. After the liberation of Paris, Carrel was suspended by the Minister of Health; he died in November 1944, but the Foundation itself was \"purged\", only to reappear in a short time as the Institut national d'\u00e9tudes d\u00e9mographiques (INED) that is still active.\" Although Carrel himself was dead most members of his team did move to the INED, which was led by demographist Alfred Sauvy, who coined the expression \"Third World\". Others joined Robert Debr\u00e9's \"Institut national d'hygi\u00e8ne\" (National Hygiene Institute), which later became the INSERM."}
{"id": "1055", "revid": "1006414620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1055", "title": "All Souls' Day", "text": "All Souls' Day, also known as the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed and the Day of the Dead, is a day of prayer and remembrance for the souls of those who have died, which is observed by Latin Catholics and other Christian denominations annually on November 2. All Souls' Day is often celebrated in Western Christianity; Saturday of Souls is a related tradition more frequently observed in Eastern Christianity. Practitioners of All Souls' Day traditions often remember deceased loved ones in various ways on the day. Beliefs and practices associated with All Souls' Day vary widely among Christian denominations.\nThe annual celebration is the last day of Allhallowtide, after All Saints' Day and its eve. Prior to the standardization of Catholic observance on 2 November by St. Odlio of Cluny during the 10th century, many Catholic congregations celebrated All Souls Day on various dates during the Easter season as it is still observed in some Eastern Orthodox Churches and associated Eastern Catholic Churches. Churches of the East Syriac Rite (Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, Chaldean Catholic Church, Assyrian Church of the East, Ancient Church of the East) commemorate all the faithful departed on the Friday before Lent.\nPopular customs.\nMany All Souls' Day traditions are associated with popular notions about purgatory. Bell tolling is meant to comfort those being cleansed. Lighting candles serves to kindle a light for the poor souls languishing in the darkness. Soul cakes are given to children coming to sing or pray for the dead (cf. trick-or-treating), giving rise to the traditions of \"going souling\" and the baking of special types of bread or cakes (cf. P\u00e3o-por-Deus).\nEurope.\nIn Tirol, cakes are left for them on the table and the room kept warm for their comfort. In Brittany, people flock to the cemeteries at nightfall to kneel, bareheaded, at the graves of their loved ones, and to anoint the hollow of the tombstone with holy water or to pour libations of milk on it. At bedtime, the supper is left on the table for the souls.\nIn Malta, on All Souls' Day (known in Maltese as \"Jum il-Mejtin\"), a traditional supper includes roasted pig, based on a custom of letting a pig loose on the streets with a bell around its neck, to be fed by the entire neighborhood and cooked on that day to feed the poor.\nIn Linz, funereal musical pieces known as aequales were played from tower tops on All Souls' Day and the evening before.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Hallow mas is variously called \"\"Und\u00e1s\", \"Todos los Santos\"\" (Spanish, \"All Saints\"), and sometimes \"Araw ng mga Patay / Yumao\" (Tagalog, \"Day of the dead / those who have passed away\"), which incorporates All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day. Filipinos traditionally observe this day by visiting the family dead to clean and repair their tombs. Offerings of prayers, flowers, candles, and food. Chinese Filipinos additionally burn incense and \"kim\". Many also spend the day and ensuing night holding reunions at the cemetery with feasts and merriment.\nReligious observance by denomination.\nByzantine (Greek) Catholic and the Eastern Orthodoxy.\nSaturday of Souls (or Soul Saturday) is a day set aside for the commemoration of the dead within the liturgical year of the Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic Churches. Saturday is a traditional day of prayer for the dead, because Christ lay dead in the Tomb on Saturday.\nThese days are devoted to prayer for departed relatives and others among the faithful who would not be commemorated specifically as saints. The Divine Services on these days have special hymns added to them to commemorate the departed. There is oftena Panikhida (Memorial Service) either after the Divine Liturgy on Saturday morning or after Vespers on Friday evening, for which Koliva (a dish made of boiled wheatberries or rice and honey) is prepared and placed on the Panikhida table. After the Service, the priest blesses the Koliva. It is then eaten as a memorial by all present.\nRadonitsa.\nAnother Memorial Day in the East, Radonitsa, does not fall on a Saturday, but on either Monday or Tuesday of the second week after Pascha (Easter). Radonitsa does not have special hymns for the dead at the Divine Services. Instead a Panikhida will follow the Divine Liturgy, and then all will bring paschal foods to the cemeteries to greet the departed with the joy of the Resurrection.\nEast Syriac tradition.\nEast Syriac churches including the Syro Malabar Church and Chaldean Catholic Church commemorates the feast of departed faithful on the last Friday of Epiphany season (which means Friday just before start of Great Lent). The season of Epiphany remembers the revelation of Christ to the world. Each Friday of Epiphany season, the church remembers important evangelistic figures.\nIn the Syro Malabar Church, the Friday before the parish festival is also celebrated as feast of departed faithful when the parish remembers the activities of forebearers who worked for the parish and faithful. They also request the intercession of all departed souls for the faithful celebration of parish festival. In East Syriac liturgy, the church remembers departed souls including saints on every Friday throughout the year since the Christ was crucified and died on Friday.\nWestern Catholicism.\nBackground.\nIn the Catholic Church, \"the faithful\" refers specifically to baptized Catholics; \"all souls\" commemorates the church penitent of souls in purgatory, whereas \"all saints\" commemorates the church triumphant of saints in Heaven. In the liturgical books of the western Catholic Church (the Latin Church) it is called the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed (), and is celebrated annually on 2 November. In the ordinary form of the Roman Rite, as well as in the Personal Ordinariates established by Benedict XVI for former Anglicans, it remains on 2 November if this date falls on a Sunday; in the 1962\u20131969 form of the Roman Rite, use of which is still authorized, it is transferred to Monday, 3 November. On this day in particular, Catholics pray for the dead. Every priest is allowed to celebrate three holy masses on All Souls' Day. \nThe Catholic Church teaches that the purification of the souls in purgatory can be assisted by the actions of the faithful on earth. Its teaching is based also on the practice of prayer for the dead mentioned as far back as 2 Maccabees 12:42\u201346. In the West there is ample evidence of the custom of praying for the dead in the inscriptions of the catacombs, with their constant prayers for the peace of the souls of the departed and in the early liturgies, which commonly contain commemorations of the dead. Tertullian, Cyprian and other early Western Fathers witness to the regular practice of praying for the dead among the early Christians. The theological basis for the feast is the doctrine that the souls which, on departing from the body, are not perfectly cleansed from venial sins, or have not fully atoned for past transgressions, are debarred from the Beatific Vision, and that the faithful on earth can help them by prayers, alms deeds and especially by the sacrifice of the Mass.\nHistory.\nIn the sixth century, it was customary in Benedictine monasteries to hold a commemoration of the deceased members at Whitsuntide. In the time of St. Isidore of Seville (d. 636) who lived in what is today Spain, the Monday after Pentecost was designated to remember the deceased. At the beginning of the ninth century, Abbot Eigil of Fulda set 17 December as commemoration of all deceased in part of what is today Germany.\nAccording to Widukind of Corvey (c. 975), there also existed a ceremony praying for the dead on 1 October in Saxony. But it was the day after All Saints' Day that Saint Odilo of Cluny chose when in the 11th century he instituted for all the monasteries dependent on the Abbey of Cluny an annual commemoration of all the faithful departed, to be observed with alms, prayers, and sacrifices for the relief of the suffering souls in purgatory. Odilo decreed that those requesting a Mass be offered for the departed should make an offering for the poor, thus linking almsgiving with fasting and prayer for the dead.\nThe 2 November date and customs spread from the Cluniac monasteries to other Benedictine monasteries and thence to the Western Church in general. The Diocese of Li\u00e8ge was the first diocese to adopt the practice under Bishop Notger (d. 1008). 2 November was adopted in Italy and Rome in the thirteenth century.\nIn the 15th century the Dominicans instituted a custom of each priest offering three Masses on the Feast of All Souls. During World War I, given the great number of war dead and the many destroyed churches where mass could no longer be said, Pope Benedict XV, granted all priests the privilege of offering three Masses on All Souls Day, a permission that still stands.\nLiturgical practice.\nIn the Roman Rite as revised in 1969, if 2 November falls on a Sunday, the Mass is of All Souls, but the Liturgy of the Hours is that of the Sunday. However, public celebration of Lauds and Vespers of the Dead with the people participating is permitted. While celebration of a Sunday, a solemnity or a feast of the Lord replacing a Sunday begins on the previous evening with Vespers and perhaps evening Mass, the general norms do not allow for anticipation on Saturday evening of the liturgy of All Souls' Day falling on a Sunday, and so they suggest that the formula of the Mass on that Saturday evening is that of the solemnity of All Saints, which outranks the Sunday of Ordinary Time whose Mass would be celebrated on that evening. However, in 2014, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops decided that for that year the Saturday evening (Sunday vigil) Mass in that country was to be that of All Souls; in countries such as Italy the situation was less clear.\nIn countries where All Saints' Day is not a holy day of obligation attendance at an evening Mass of All Saints on Saturday 1 November satisfies the Sunday obligation. In England and Wales, where holy days of obligation that fall on a Saturday are transferred to the following day, if 2 November is a Sunday, the solemnity of All Saints is transferred to that date, and All Souls Day is transferred to 3 November. In pre-1970 forms of the Roman Rite, still observed by some, if All Souls Day falls on a Sunday, it is always transferred to 3 November.\nIn the minor propers (Introit, Gradual, Tract, Sequence, Offertory, and Communion) are those used for Renaissance and Classical musical requiem settings, including the Dies Irae. This permits the performance of traditional requiem settings in the context of the Divine Worship Form of the Roman Rite on All Souls Day as well as at funerals, votive celebrations of all faithful departed, and anniversaries of deaths.\nAll Souls' indulgence.\nAccording to The Enchiridion of Indulgences, \nAn indulgence, applicable only to the souls in purgatory (commonly called the poor souls), is granted to the faithful, who devoutly visit a cemetery and pray for the departed. The indulgence is plenary, under the usual conditions, each day from the first to the eighth of November; a partial indulgence is granted on any other days of the year.\n\"A plenary indulgence, applicable ONLY to the souls in purgatory, may be obtained by those who, on All Souls Day, piously visit a church, public oratory, or - for those entitled to use it, a semi public oratory. It may be acquired either on the day designated as All Souls Day or, with the consent of the bishop, on the preceding or following Sunday or the feast of All Saints. On visiting the church or oratory it is required that one Our Father and the Creed be recited.\"\nLutheran Churches.\nAmong continental Protestants its tradition has been more tenaciously maintained. During Luther's lifetime, All Souls' Day was widely observed in Saxony although the Roman Catholic meaning of the day was discarded; ecclesiastically in the Lutheran Church, the day was merged with, and is often seen as an extension of All Saints' Day, with many Lutherans still visiting and decorating graves on all the days of Allhallowtide, including All Souls' Day. Just as it is the custom of French people, of all ranks and creeds, to decorate the graves of their dead on the \"jour des morts\", so German, Polish and Hungarian people stream to the graveyards once a year with offerings of flowers and special grave lights. Among Czech people the custom of visiting and tidying graves of relatives on the day is quite common. In 1816, Prussia introduced a new date for the remembrance of the Dead among its Lutheran citizens: Totensonntag, the last Sunday before Advent. This custom was later also adopted by the non-Prussian Lutherans in Germany, but it has not spread much beyond the Protestant areas of Germany.\nAnglican Communion.\nIn the Church of England it is called The Commemoration of the Faithful Departed and is an optional celebration; Anglicans view All Souls' Day as an extension of the observance of All Saints' Day and it serves to \"remember those who have died\", in connection with the theological doctrines of the resurrection of the body and the Communion of Saints.\nIn the Anglican Communion, All Souls' Day is known liturgically as the Commemoration of All Faithful Departed, and is an optional observance seen as \"an extension of All Saints' Day\", the latter of which marks the second day of Allhallowtide. Historically and at present, several Anglican churches are dedicated to All Souls. During the English Reformation, the observance of All Souls' Day lapsed, although a new Anglican theological understanding of the day has \"led to a widespread acceptance of this commemoration among Anglicans\". Patricia Bays, with regard to the Anglican view of All Souls' Day, wrote that:\nAs such, Anglican parishes \"now commemorate all the faithful departed in the context of the All Saints' Day celebration\", in keeping with this fresh perspective. Contributing to the revival was the need \"to help Anglicans mourn the deaths of millions of soldiers in World War I\". Members of the Guild of All Souls, an Anglican devotional society founded in 1873, \"are encouraged to pray for the dying and the dead, to participate in a requiem of All Souls' Day and say a Litany of the Faithful Departed at least once a month\".\nAt the Reformation the celebration of All Souls' Day was fused with All Saints' Day in the Church of England or, in the judgement of some, it was \"deservedly abrogated\". It was reinstated in certain parishes in connection with the Oxford Movement of the 19th century and is acknowledged in United States Anglicanism in the \"Holy Women, Holy Men\" calendar and in the Church of England with the 1980 \"Alternative Service Book\". It features in \"Common Worship\" as a Lesser Festival called \"Commemoration of the Faithful Departed (All Souls' Day)\".\nMethodist Churches.\nIn the Methodist Church, saints refer to all Christians and therefore, on All Saint's Day, the Church Universal, as well as the deceased members of a local congregation are honoured and remembered. In Methodist congregations that celebrate the liturgy on All Souls Day, the observance, as with Anglicanism and Lutheranism, is viewed as an extension of All Saints' Day and as such, Methodists \"remember our loved ones who had died\" in their observance of this feast."}
{"id": "1057", "revid": "16372761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1057", "title": "Anatole France", "text": "' (; born ', ; 16 April 1844 \u2013 12 October 1924) was a French poet, journalist, and novelist with several best-sellers. Ironic and skeptical, he was considered in his day the ideal French man of letters. He was a member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise, and won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Literature \"in recognition of his brilliant literary achievements, characterized as they are by a nobility of style, a profound human sympathy, grace, and a true Gallic temperament\".\nFrance is also widely believed to be the model for narrator Marcel's literary idol Bergotte in Marcel Proust's \"In Search of Lost Time\".\nEarly years.\nThe son of a bookseller, France, a bibliophile, spent most of his life around books. His father's bookstore specialized in books and papers on the French Revolution and was frequented by many writers and scholars. France studied at the Coll\u00e8ge Stanislas, a private Catholic school, and after graduation he helped his father by working in his bookstore. After several years, he secured the position of cataloguer at Bacheline-Deflorenne and at Lemerre. In 1876 he was appointed librarian for the French Senate.\nLiterary career.\nFrance began his literary career as a poet and a journalist. In 1869, \"Le Parnasse Contemporain\" published one of his poems, \"\". In 1875, he sat on the committee in charge of the third \"Parnasse Contemporain\" compilation. As a journalist, from 1867, he wrote many articles and notices. He became known with the novel \" (1881). Its protagonist, skeptical old scholar Sylvester Bonnard, embodied France's own personality. The novel was praised for its elegant prose and won him a prize from the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise. \nIn ' (1893) France ridiculed belief in the occult; and in ' (1893), France captured the atmosphere of the \". He was elected to the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise in 1896.\nFrance took a part in the Dreyfus affair. He signed \u00c9mile Zola's manifesto supporting Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army officer who had been falsely convicted of espionage. France wrote about the affair in his 1901 novel \"Monsieur Bergeret\".\nFrance's later works include \"L'\u00cele des Pingouins\" (\"Penguin Island\", 1908) which satirizes human nature by depicting the transformation of penguins into humans \u2013 after the birds have been baptized by mistake by the almost-blind Abbot Mael. It is a satirical history of France, starting in Medieval times, going on to the author's own time with special attention to the Dreyfus affair and concluding with a dystopian future. \"\" (\"The Gods Are Athirst\", 1912) is a novel, set in Paris during the French Revolution, about a true-believing follower of Maximilien Robespierre and his contribution to the bloody events of the Reign of Terror of 1793\u201394. It is a wake-up call against political and ideological fanaticism and explores various other philosophical approaches to the events of the time. \"La Revolte des Anges\" (\"Revolt of the Angels\", 1914) is often considered Anatole France's most profound and ironic novel. Loosely based on the Christian understanding of the War in Heaven, it tells the story of Arcade, the guardian angel of Maurice d'Esparvieu. Bored because Bishop d'Esparvieu is sinless, Arcade begins reading the bishop's books on theology and becomes an atheist. He moves to Paris, meets a woman, falls in love, and loses his virginity causing his wings to fall off, joins the revolutionary movement of fallen angels, and meets the Devil, who realizes that if he overthrew God, he would become just like God. Arcade realizes that replacing God with another is meaningless unless \"in ourselves and in ourselves alone we attack and destroy Ialdabaoth.\" \"Ialdabaoth\", according to France, is God's secret name and means \"the child who wanders\".\nHe was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1921. He died in 1924 and is buried in the Neuilly-sur-Seine community cemetery near Paris.\nOn 31 May 1922, France's entire works were put on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" (Prohibited Books Index) of the Catholic Church. He regarded this as a \"distinction\". This Index was abolished in 1966.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1877, France married Val\u00e9rie Gu\u00e9rin de Sauville, a granddaughter of Jean-Urbain Gu\u00e9rin, a miniaturist who painted Louis XVI. Their daughter Suzanne was born in 1881 (and died in 1918).\nFrance's relations with women were always turbulent, and in 1888 he began a relationship with Madame Arman de Caillavet, who conducted a celebrated literary salon of the Third Republic. The affair lasted until shortly before her death in 1910.\nAfter his divorce, in 1893, France had many liaisons, notably with a Madame Gagey, who committed suicide in 1911.\nIn 1920, France married for the second time, to Emma Lapr\u00e9votte.\nFrance was a socialist and an outspoken supporter of the 1917 Russian Revolution. In 1920, he gave his support to the newly founded French Communist Party.\nFrance had a brain size just two-thirds normal.\nReputation.\nThe English writer George Orwell defended France and declared that his work remained very readable, and that \"it is unquestionable that he was attacked partly from political motives\"."}
{"id": "1058", "revid": "38344079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1058", "title": "Andr\u00e9 Gide", "text": "Andr\u00e9 Paul Guillaume Gide (; 22 November 1869 \u2013 19 February 1951) was a French author and winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature (in 1947). Gide's career ranged from its beginnings in the symbolist movement, to the advent of anticolonialism between the two World Wars. The author of more than fifty books, at the time of his death his obituary in \"The New York Times\" described him as \"France's greatest contemporary man of letters\" and \"judged the greatest French writer of this century by the literary cognoscenti.\"\nKnown for his fiction as well as his autobiographical works, Gide exposes to public view the conflict and eventual reconciliation of the two sides of his personality (characterized by a Protestant austerity and a transgressive sexual adventurousness, respectively), which a strict and moralistic education had helped set at odds. Gide's work can be seen as an investigation of freedom and empowerment in the face of moralistic and puritanical constraints, and centers on his continuous effort to achieve intellectual honesty. His self-exploratory texts reflect his search of how to be fully oneself, including owning one's sexual nature, without at the same time betraying one's values. His political activity is shaped by the same ethos, as indicated by his repudiation of communism after his 1936 voyage to the USSR.\nEarly life.\nGide was born in Paris on 22 November 1869, into a middle-class Protestant family. His father was a Paris University professor of law who died in 1880, Jean Paul Guillaume Gide, and his mother was Juliette Maria Rondeaux. His uncle was the political economist Charles Gide. His paternal family traced its roots back to Italy, with his ancestors, the Guidos, moving to France and other western and northern European countries after converting to Protestantism during the 16th century, due to persecution.\nGide was brought up in isolated conditions in Normandy and became a prolific writer at an early age, publishing his first novel, \"The Notebooks of Andr\u00e9 Walter\" (French: \"Les Cahiers d'Andr\u00e9 Walter\"), in 1891, at the age of twenty-one.\nIn 1893 and 1894, Gide traveled in Northern Africa, and it was there that he came to accept his attraction to boys.\nHe befriended Oscar Wilde in Paris, and in 1895 Gide and Wilde met in Algiers. Wilde had the impression that he had introduced Gide to homosexuality, but, in fact, Gide had already discovered this on his own.\nThe middle years.\nIn 1895, after his mother's death, he married his cousin Madeleine Rondeaux, but the marriage remained unconsummated. In 1896, he became mayor of La Roque-Baignard, a commune in Normandy.\nIn 1901, Gide rented the property Maderia in St. Br\u00e9lade's Bay and lived there while residing in Jersey. This period, 1901\u201307, is commonly seen as a time of apathy and turmoil for him.\nIn 1908, Gide helped found the literary magazine \"Nouvelle Revue Fran\u00e7aise\" (\"The New French Review\"). In 1916, Marc All\u00e9gret, only 15 years old, became his lover. Marc was the son \u2013 one of five children \u2013 of \u00c9lie All\u00e9gret, who years before had been hired by Gide's mother to tutor her son in light of his weak grades in school, after which he and Gide became fast friends; \u00c9lie All\u00e9gret was best man at Gide's wedding. Gide and Marc fled to London, in retribution for which his wife burned all his correspondence \u2013 \"the best part of myself,\" he later commented. In 1918, he met Dorothy Bussy, who was his friend for over thirty years and translated many of his works into English.\nGide was close friends with the critic Charles Du Bos. Together they were part of the \"Foyer Franco-Belge\", in which capacity they worked to find employment, food and housing for Franco-Belgian refugees who arrived in Paris following the German invasion of Belgium. Their friendship later declined, due to Du Bos' perception of Gide as disavowing or betraying his spiritual faith, in contrast to Du Bos' own return to faith. Du Bos' essay \"Dialogue avec Andr\u00e9 Gide\" was published in 1929. The essay, informed by Du Bos' Catholic convictions, condemned Gide's homosexuality. Gide and Du Bos' mutual friend Ernst Robert Curtius criticised the book in a letter to Gide, writing that \"he [Du Bos] judges you according to Catholic morals suffices to neglect his complete indictment. It can only touch those who think like him and are convinced in advance. He has abdicated his intellectual liberty.\"\nIn the 1920s, Gide became an inspiration for writers such as Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre. In 1923, he published a book on Fyodor Dostoyevsky; however, when he defended homosexuality in the public edition of \"Corydon\" (1924) he received widespread condemnation. He later considered this his most important work.\nIn 1923, he sired a daughter, Catherine, by Elisabeth van Rysselberghe, a woman who was much younger than he. He had known her for a long time, as she was the daughter of his closest female friend, Maria Monnom, the wife of his friend the Belgian neo-impressionist painter Th\u00e9o van Rysselberghe. This caused the only crisis in the long-standing relationship between All\u00e9gret and Gide and damaged the relation with van Rysselberghe. This was possibly Gide's only sexual relationship with a woman, and it was brief in the extreme. Catherine became his only descendant by blood. He liked to call Elisabeth \"La Dame Blanche\" (\"The White Lady\"). Elisabeth eventually left her husband to move to Paris and manage the practical aspects of Gide's life (they had adjoining apartments built for each on the rue Vavin). She worshiped him, but evidently they no longer had a sexual relationship.\nGide's legal wife, Madeleine, died in 1938. Later he explored their unconsummated marriage in his memoir of Madeleine, \"Et nunc manet in te\".\nIn 1924, he published an autobiography, \"If it Die...\" (French: \"Si le grain ne meurt\").\nIn the same year, he produced the first French language editions of Joseph Conrad's \"Heart of Darkness\" and \"Lord Jim\".\nAfter 1925, he began to campaign for more humane conditions for convicted criminals.\nAfrica.\nFrom July 1926 to May 1927, he traveled through the French Equatorial Africa colony with his lover Marc All\u00e9gret. Gide went successively to Middle Congo (now the Republic of the Congo), Ubangi-Shari (now the Central African Republic), briefly to Chad and then to Cameroon before returning to France. He related his peregrinations in a journal called \"Travels in the Congo\" (French: \"Voyage au Congo\") and \"Return from Chad\" (French: \"Retour du Tchad\"). In this published journal, he criticized the behavior of French business interests in the Congo and inspired reform. In particular, he strongly criticized the \"Large Concessions\" regime (French: \"R\u00e9gime des Grandes Concessions\"), i.e., a regime that conceded part of the colony to French companies and where these companies could exploit all of the area's natural resources, in particular rubber. He related, for instance, how natives were forced to leave their village for several weeks to collect rubber in the forest, and went as far as comparing their exploitation to slavery. The book had important influence on anti-colonialism movements in France and helped re-evaluate the impact of colonialism.\nRussia.\nDuring the 1930s, he briefly became a communist, or more precisely, a fellow traveler (he never formally joined any communist party). As a distinguished writer sympathizing with the cause of communism, he was invited to speak at Maxim Gorky's funeral and to tour the Soviet Union as a guest of the Soviet Union of Writers. He encountered censorship of his speeches and was particularly disillusioned with the state of culture under Soviet communism, breaking with his socialist friends in \"Retour de L'U.R.S.S.\" in 1936.\nIn the 1949 anthology \"The God That Failed\" Gide describes his early enthusiasm:\n1930s and 1940s.\nIn 1930 Gide published a book about the Blanche Monnier case called \"La S\u00e9questr\u00e9e de Poitiers\", changing little but the names of the protagonists. Monnier was a young woman who was kept captive by her own mother for more than 25 years.\nIn 1939, Gide became the first living author to be published in the prestigious \"Biblioth\u00e8que de la Pl\u00e9iade\".\nHe left France for Africa in 1942 and lived in Tunis from December 1942 until it was re-taken by French, British and American forces in May 1943 and he was able to travel to Algiers where he stayed until the end of World War II. In 1947, he received the Nobel Prize in Literature \"for his comprehensive and artistically significant writings, in which human problems and conditions have been presented with a fearless love of truth and keen psychological insight\". He devoted much of his last years to publishing his Journal. Gide died in Paris on 19 February 1951. The Roman Catholic Church placed his works on the \"Index of Forbidden Books\" in 1952.\nGide's life as a writer.\nGide's biographer Alan Sheridan summed up Gide's life as a writer and an intellectual:\n\"Gide's fame rested ultimately, of course, on his literary works. But, unlike many writers, he was no recluse: he had a need of friendship and a genius for sustaining it.\" But his \"capacity for love was not confined to his friends: it spilled over into a concern for others less fortunate than himself.\"\nWritings.\nAndr\u00e9 Gide's writings spanned many genres \u2013 \"As a master of prose narrative, occasional dramatist and translator, literary critic, letter writer, essayist, and diarist, Andr\u00e9 Gide provided twentieth-century French literature with one of its most intriguing examples of the man of letters.\"\nBut as Gide's biographer Alan Sheridan points out, \"It is the fiction that lies at the summit of Gide's work.\" \"Here, as in the \"oeuvre\" as a whole, what strikes one first is the variety. Here, too, we see Gide's curiosity, his youthfulness, at work: a refusal to mine only one seam, to repeat successful formulas...The fiction spans the early years of Symbolism, to the \"comic, more inventive, even fantastic\" pieces, to the later \"serious, heavily autobiographical, first-person narratives\"...In France Gide was considered a great stylist in the classical sense, \"with his clear, succinct, spare, deliberately, subtly phrased sentences.\"\nGide's surviving letters run into the thousands. But it is the \"Journal\" that Sheridan calls \"the pre-eminently Gidean mode of expression.\" \"His first novel emerged from Gide's own journal, and many of the first-person narratives read more or less like journals. In \"Les faux-monnayeurs\", Edouard's journal provides an alternative voice to the narrator's.\" \"In 1946, when Pierre Herbert asked Gide which of his books he would choose if only one were to survive,\" Gide replied, 'I think it would be my \"Journal.\"'\" Beginning at the age of eighteen or nineteen, Gide kept a journal all of his life and when these were first made available to the public, they ran to thirteen hundred pages.\nStruggle for values.\n\"Each volume that Gide wrote was intended to challenge itself, what had preceded it, and what could conceivably follow it. This characteristic, according to Daniel Moutote in his \"Cahiers de Andr\u00e9 Gide\" essay, is what makes Gide's work 'essentially modern': the 'perpetual renewal of the values by which one lives.'\" Gide wrote in his \"Journal\" in 1930: \"The only drama that really interests me and that I should always be willing to depict anew, is the debate of the individual with whatever keeps him from being authentic, with whatever is opposed to his integrity, to his integration. Most often the obstacle is within him. And all the rest is merely accidental.\"\nAs a whole, \"The works of Andr\u00e9 Gide reveal his passionate revolt against the restraints and conventions inherited from 19th-century France. He sought to uncover the authentic self beneath its contradictory masks.\"\nSexuality.\nIn his journal, Gide distinguishes between adult-attracted \"sodomites\" and boy-loving \"pederasts\", categorizing himself as the latter.\nOne, but not the first, of his early sexual encounters with a young boy was in the company of Oscar Wilde. \nGide's novel \"Corydon\", which he considered his most important work, erects a defense of pederasty. At that time, the age of consent for any type of sexual activity was set at thirteen."}
{"id": "1059", "revid": "22399950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1059", "title": "Applied statistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "1061", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1061", "title": "Analysis of variance/Random effects models", "text": ""}
{"id": "1062", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1062", "title": "Analysis of variance/Degrees of freedom", "text": ""}
{"id": "1063", "revid": "993026093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1063", "title": "Algorithms for calculating variance", "text": "Algorithms for calculating variance play a major role in computational statistics. A key difficulty in the design of good algorithms for this problem is that formulas for the variance may involve sums of squares, which can lead to numerical instability as well as to arithmetic overflow when dealing with large values.\nNa\u00efve algorithm.\nA formula for calculating the variance of an entire population of size \"N\" is:\nUsing Bessel's correction to calculate an unbiased estimate of the population variance from a finite sample of \"n\" observations, the formula is:\nTherefore, a na\u00efve algorithm to calculate the estimated variance is given by the following:\nThis algorithm can easily be adapted to compute the variance of a finite population: simply divide by \"N\" instead of \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 on the last line.\nBecause and can be very similar numbers, cancellation can lead to the precision of the result to be much less than the inherent precision of the floating-point arithmetic used to perform the computation. Thus this algorithm should not be used in practice, and several alternate, numerically stable, algorithms have been proposed. This is particularly bad if the standard deviation is small relative to the mean. However, the algorithm can be improved by adopting the method of the assumed mean.\nComputing shifted data.\nThe variance is invariant with respect to changes in a location parameter, a property which can be used to avoid the catastrophic cancellation in this formula.\nwith formula_4 any constant, which leads to the new formula\nthe closer formula_4 is to the mean value the more accurate the result will be, but just choosing a value inside the\nsamples range will guarantee the desired stability. If the values formula_7 are small then there are no problems with the sum of its squares, on the contrary, if they are large it necessarily means that the variance is large as well. In any case the second term in the formula is always smaller than the first one therefore no cancellation may occur.\nIf just the first sample is taken as formula_4 the algorithm can be written in Python programming language as\ndef shifted_data_variance(data):\n if len(data) &lt; 2:\n return 0.0\n K = data[0]\n n = Ex = Ex2 = 0.0\n for x in data:\n n = n + 1\n Ex += x - K\n Ex2 += (x - K) * (x - K)\n variance = (Ex2 - (Ex * Ex) / n) / (n - 1)\n # use n instead of (n-1) if want to compute the exact variance of the given data\n # use (n-1) if data are samples of a larger population\n return variance\nThis formula also facilitates the incremental computation that can be expressed as\nK = n = Ex = Ex2 = 0.0\ndef add_variable(x):\n global K, n, Ex, Ex2\n if n == 0:\n K = x\n n += 1\n Ex += x - K\n Ex2 += (x - K) * (x - K)\ndef remove_variable(x):\n global K, n, Ex, Ex2\n n -= 1\n Ex -= x - K\n Ex2 -= (x - K) * (x - K)\ndef get_mean():\n global K, n, Ex\n return K + Ex / n\ndef get_variance():\n global n, Ex, Ex2\n return (Ex2 - (Ex * Ex) / n) / (n - 1)\nTwo-pass algorithm.\nAn alternative approach, using a different formula for the variance, first computes the sample mean,\nand then computes the sum of the squares of the differences from the mean,\nwhere \"s\" is the standard deviation. This is given by the following code:\ndef two_pass_variance(data):\n n = sum1 = sum2 = 0\n for x in data:\n n += 1\n sum1 += x\n mean = sum1 / n\n for x in data:\n sum2 += (x - mean) * (x - mean)\n variance = sum2 / (n - 1)\n return variance\nThis algorithm is numerically stable if \"n\" is small. However, the results of both of these simple algorithms (\"na\u00efve\" and \"two-pass\") can depend inordinately on the ordering of the data and can give poor results for very large data sets due to repeated roundoff error in the accumulation of the sums. Techniques such as compensated summation can be used to combat this error to a degree.\nWelford's online algorithm.\nIt is often useful to be able to compute the variance in a single pass, inspecting each value formula_11 only once; for example, when the data are being collected without enough storage to keep all the values, or when costs of memory access dominate those of computation. For such an online algorithm, a recurrence relation is required between quantities from which the required statistics can be calculated in a numerically stable fashion.\nThe following formulas can be used to update the mean and (estimated) variance of the sequence, for an additional element \"x\"\"n\". Here, \"n\" denotes the sample mean of the first \"n\" samples (\"x\"1, ..., \"xn\"), \"s\" their sample variance, and \"\u03c3\" their population variance.\nThese formulas suffer from numerical instability, as they repeatedly subtract a small number from a big number which scales with \"n\". A better quantity for updating is the sum of squares of differences from the current mean, formula_15, here denoted formula_16:\nThis algorithm was found by Welford, and it has been thoroughly analyzed. It is also common to denote formula_18 and formula_19.\nAn example Python implementation for Welford's algorithm is given below.\ndef update(existingAggregate, newValue):\n (count, mean, M2) = existingAggregate\n count += 1\n delta = newValue - mean\n mean += delta / count\n delta2 = newValue - mean\n M2 += delta * delta2\n return (count, mean, M2)\ndef finalize(existingAggregate):\n (count, mean, M2) = existingAggregate\n if count &lt; 2:\n return float(\"nan\")\n else:\n (mean, variance, sampleVariance) = (mean, M2 / count, M2 / (count - 1))\n return (mean, variance, sampleVariance)\nThis algorithm is much less prone to loss of precision due to catastrophic cancellation, but might not be as efficient because of the division operation inside the loop. For a particularly robust two-pass algorithm for computing the variance, one can first compute and subtract an estimate of the mean, and then use this algorithm on the residuals.\nThe parallel algorithm below illustrates how to merge multiple sets of statistics calculated online.\nWeighted incremental algorithm.\nThe algorithm can be extended to handle unequal sample weights, replacing the simple counter \"n\" with the sum of weights seen so far. West (1979) suggests this incremental algorithm:\ndef weighted_incremental_variance(data_weight_pairs):\n w_sum = w_sum2 = mean = S = 0\n for x, w in data_weight_pairs: # Alternatively \"for x, w in zip(data, weights):\"\n w_sum = w_sum + w\n w_sum2 = w_sum2 + w * w\n mean_old = mean\n mean = mean_old + (w / w_sum) * (x - mean_old)\n S = S + w * (x - mean_old) * (x - mean)\n population_variance = S / w_sum\n # Bessel's correction for weighted samples\n # Frequency weights\n sample_frequency_variance = S / (w_sum - 1)\n # Reliability weights\n sample_reliability_variance = S / (w_sum - w_sum2 / w_sum)\nParallel algorithm.\nChan et al. note that Welford's online algorithm detailed above is a special case of an algorithm that works for combining arbitrary sets formula_20 and formula_21:\nThis may be useful when, for example, multiple processing units may be assigned to discrete parts of the input.\nChan's method for estimating the mean is numerically unstable when formula_23 and both are large, because the numerical error in formula_24 is not scaled down in the way that it is in the formula_25 case. In such cases, prefer formula_26.\ndef parallel_variance(n_a, avg_a, M2_a, n_b, avg_b, M2_b):\n n = n_a + n_b\n delta = avg_b - avg_a\n M2 = M2_a + M2_b + delta ** 2 * n_a * n_b / n\n var_ab = M2 / (n - 1)\n return var_ab\nThis can be generalized to allow parallelization with AVX, with GPUs, and computer clusters, and to covariance.\nExample.\nAssume that all floating point operations use standard IEEE 754 double-precision arithmetic. Consider the sample (4, 7, 13, 16) from an infinite population. Based on this sample, the estimated population mean is 10, and the unbiased estimate of population variance is 30. Both the na\u00efve algorithm and two-pass algorithm compute these values correctly.\nNext consider the sample (, , , ), which gives rise to the same estimated variance as the first sample. The two-pass algorithm computes this variance estimate correctly, but the na\u00efve algorithm returns 29.333333333333332 instead of 30.\nWhile this loss of precision may be tolerable and viewed as a minor flaw of the na\u00efve algorithm, further increasing the offset makes the error catastrophic. Consider the sample (, , , ). Again the estimated population variance of 30 is computed correctly by the two-pass algorithm, but the na\u00efve algorithm now computes it as \u2212170.66666666666666. This is a serious problem with na\u00efve algorithm and is due to catastrophic cancellation in the subtraction of two similar numbers at the final stage of the algorithm.\nHigher-order statistics.\nTerriberry extends Chan's formulae to calculating the third and fourth central moments, needed for example when estimating skewness and kurtosis:\nHere the formula_28 are again the sums of powers of differences from the mean formula_29, giving\nFor the incremental case (i.e., formula_31), this simplifies to:\nBy preserving the value formula_33, only one division operation is needed and the higher-order statistics can thus be calculated for little incremental cost.\nAn example of the online algorithm for kurtosis implemented as described is:\ndef online_kurtosis(data):\n n = mean = M2 = M3 = M4 = 0\n for x in data:\n n1 = n\n n = n + 1\n delta = x - mean\n delta_n = delta / n\n delta_n2 = delta_n * delta_n\n term1 = delta * delta_n * n1\n mean = mean + delta_n\n M4 = M4 + term1 * delta_n2 * (n*n - 3*n + 3) + 6 * delta_n2 * M2 - 4 * delta_n * M3\n M3 = M3 + term1 * delta_n * (n - 2) - 3 * delta_n * M2\n M2 = M2 + term1\n # Note, you may also calculate variance using M2, and skewness using M3\n # Caution: If all the inputs are the same, M2 will be 0, resulting in a division by 0.\n kurtosis = (n * M4) / (M2 * M2) - 3\n return kurtosis\nP\u00e9ba\u00ff\nfurther extends these results to arbitrary-order central moments, for the incremental and the pairwise cases, and subsequently P\u00e9ba\u00ff et al.\nfor weighted and compound moments. One can also find there similar formulas for covariance.\nChoi and Sweetman\noffer two alternative methods to compute the skewness and kurtosis, each of which can save substantial computer memory requirements and CPU time in certain applications. The first approach is to compute the statistical moments by separating the data into bins and then computing the moments from the geometry of the resulting histogram, which effectively becomes a one-pass algorithm for higher moments. One benefit is that the statistical moment calculations can be carried out to arbitrary accuracy such that the computations can be tuned to the precision of, e.g., the data storage format or the original measurement hardware. A relative histogram of a random variable can be constructed in the conventional way: the range of potential values is\ndivided into bins and the number of occurrences within each bin are counted and plotted such that the area of each rectangle equals the portion of the sample values within that bin:\nwhere formula_35 and formula_36 represent the frequency and the relative frequency at bin formula_37 and formula_38 is the total area of the histogram. After this normalization, the formula_39 raw moments and central moments of formula_40 can be calculated from the relative histogram:\nwhere the superscript formula_43 indicates the moments are calculated from the histogram. For constant bin width formula_44 these two expressions can be simplified using formula_45:\nThe second approach from Choi and Sweetman is an analytical methodology to combine statistical moments from individual segments of a time-history such that the resulting overall moments are those of the complete time-history. This methodology could be used for parallel computation of statistical moments with subsequent combination of those moments, or for combination of statistical moments computed at sequential times.\nIf formula_48 sets of statistical moments are known:\nformula_49 for formula_50, then each formula_51 can\nbe expressed in terms of the equivalent formula_39 raw moments:\nwhere formula_54 is generally taken to be the duration of the formula_55 time-history, or the number of points if formula_56 is constant.\nThe benefit of expressing the statistical moments in terms of formula_57 is that the formula_48 sets can be combined by addition, and there is no upper limit on the value of formula_48.\nwhere the subscript formula_61 represents the concatenated time-history or combined formula_57. These combined values of formula_57 can then be inversely transformed into raw moments representing the complete concatenated time-history\nKnown relationships between the raw moments (formula_65) and the central moments (formula_66)\nare then used to compute the central moments of the concatenated time-history. Finally, the statistical moments of the concatenated history are computed from the central moments:\nCovariance.\nVery similar algorithms can be used to compute the covariance. \nNa\u00efve algorithm.\nThe na\u00efve algorithm is:\nFor the algorithm above, one could use the following Python code:\ndef naive_covariance(data1, data2):\n n = len(data1)\n sum12 = 0\n sum1 = sum(data1)\n sum2 = sum(data2)\n for i1, i2 in zip(data1, data2):\n sum12 += i1 * i2\n covariance = (sum12 - sum1 * sum2 / n) / n\n return covariance\nWith estimate of the mean.\nAs for the variance, the covariance of two random variables is also shift-invariant, so given any two constant values formula_69 and formula_70 it can be written:\nand again choosing a value inside the range of values will stabilize the formula against catastrophic cancellation as well as make it more robust against big sums. Taking the first value of each data set, the algorithm can be written as:\ndef shifted_data_covariance(data_x, data_y):\n n = len(data_x)\n if n &lt; 2:\n return 0\n kx = data_x[0]\n ky = data_y[0]\n Ex = Ey = Exy = 0\n for ix, iy in zip(data_x, data_y):\n Ex += ix - kx\n Ey += iy - ky\n Exy += (ix - kx) * (iy - ky)\n return (Exy - Ex * Ey / n) / n\nTwo-pass.\nThe two-pass algorithm first computes the sample means, and then the covariance:\nThe two-pass algorithm may be written as:\ndef two_pass_covariance(data1, data2):\n n = len(data1)\n mean1 = sum(data1) / n\n mean2 = sum(data2) / n\n covariance = 0\n for i1, i2 in zip(data1, data2):\n a = i1 - mean1\n b = i2 - mean2\n covariance += a * b / n\n return covariance\nA slightly more accurate compensated version performs the full naive algorithm on the residuals. The final sums formula_75 and formula_76 \"should\" be zero, but the second pass compensates for any small error.\nOnline.\nA stable one-pass algorithm exists, similar to the online algorithm for computing the variance, that computes co-moment formula_77:\nThe apparent asymmetry in that last equation is due to the fact that formula_79, so both update terms are equal to formula_80. Even greater accuracy can be achieved by first computing the means, then using the stable one-pass algorithm on the residuals.\nThus the covariance can be computed as\ndef online_covariance(data1, data2):\n meanx = meany = C = n = 0\n for x, y in zip(data1, data2):\n n += 1\n dx = x - meanx\n meanx += dx / n\n meany += (y - meany) / n\n C += dx * (y - meany)\n population_covar = C / n\n # Bessel's correction for sample variance\n sample_covar = C / (n - 1)\nA small modification can also be made to compute the weighted covariance:\ndef online_weighted_covariance(data1, data2, data3):\n meanx = meany = 0\n wsum = wsum2 = 0\n C = 0\n for x, y, w in zip(data1, data2, data3):\n wsum += w\n wsum2 += w * w\n dx = x - meanx\n meanx += (w / wsum) * dx\n meany += (w / wsum) * (y - meany)\n C += w * dx * (y - meany)\n population_covar = C / wsum\n # Bessel's correction for sample variance\n # Frequency weights\n sample_frequency_covar = C / (wsum - 1)\n # Reliability weights\n sample_reliability_covar = C / (wsum - wsum2 / wsum)\nLikewise, there is a formula for combining the covariances of two sets that can be used to parallelize the computation:\nWeighted batched version.\nA version of the weighted online algorithm that does batched updated also exists: let\nformula_83 denote the weights, and write\nThe covariance can then be computed as"}
{"id": "1064", "revid": "1012024959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1064", "title": "Almond", "text": "The almond (\"Prunus dulcis\", syn. \"Prunus amygdalus\") is a species of tree native to Iran and surrounding countries but widely cultivated elsewhere. The almond is also the name of the edible and widely cultivated seed of this tree. Within the genus \"Prunus\", it is classified with the peach in the subgenus \"Amygdalus\", distinguished from the other subgenera by corrugations on the shell (endocarp) surrounding the seed.\nThe fruit of the almond is a drupe, consisting of an outer hull and a hard shell with the seed, which is not a true nut, inside. Shelling almonds refers to removing the shell to reveal the seed. Almonds are sold shelled or unshelled. Blanched almonds are shelled almonds that have been treated with hot water to soften the seedcoat, which is then removed to reveal the white embryo.\nDescription.\nTree.\nThe almond is a deciduous tree, growing in height, with a trunk of up to in diameter. The young twigs are green at first, becoming purplish where exposed to sunlight, then grey in their second year. The leaves are long, with a serrated margin and a petiole. The flowers are white to pale pink, diameter with five petals, produced singly or in pairs and appearing before the leaves in early spring. Almond grows best in Mediterranean climates with warm, dry summers and mild, wet winters. The optimal temperature for their growth is between and the tree buds have a chilling requirement of 200 to 700 hours below to break dormancy.\nAlmonds begin bearing an economic crop in the third year after planting. Trees reach full bearing five to six years after planting. The fruit matures in the autumn, 7\u20138 months after flowering.\nDrupe.\nThe almond fruit is long. In botanical terms, it is not a nut but a drupe. The outer covering or exocarp, fleshy in other members of \"Prunus\" such as the plum and cherry, is instead a thick, leathery, grey-green coat (with a downy exterior), called the hull. Inside the hull is a reticulated, hard, woody shell (like the outside of a peach pit) called the endocarp. Inside the shell is the edible seed, commonly called a nut. Generally, one seed is present, but occasionally two occur. After the fruit matures, the hull splits and separates from the shell, and an abscission layer forms between the stem and the fruit so that the fruit can fall from the tree.\nOrigin and history.\nThe almond is native to Iran and surrounding countries. It was spread by humans in ancient times along the shores of the Mediterranean into northern Africa and southern Europe, and more recently transported to other parts of the world, notably California, United States. The wild form of domesticated almond grows in parts of the Levant.\nSelection of the sweet type from the many bitter types in the wild marked the beginning of almond domestication. It is unclear as to which wild ancestor of the almond created the domesticated species. The species \"Prunus fenzliana\" may be the most likely wild ancestor of the almond, in part because it is native to Armenia and western Azerbaijan, where it was apparently domesticated. Wild almond species were grown by early farmers, \"at first unintentionally in the garbage heaps, and later intentionally in their orchards\".\nAlmonds were one of the earliest domesticated fruit trees, due to \"the ability of the grower to raise attractive almonds from seed. Thus, in spite of the fact that this plant does not lend itself to propagation from suckers or from cuttings, it could have been domesticated even before the introduction of grafting\". Domesticated almonds appear in the Early Bronze Age (3000\u20132000 BC), such as the archaeological sites of Numeira (Jordan), or possibly earlier. Another well-known archaeological example of the almond is the fruit found in Tutankhamun's tomb in Egypt (c. 1325 BC), probably imported from the Levant. An article on Almond tree cultivation in Spain is brought down in Ibn al-'Awwam's 12th-century agricultural work, \"Book on Agriculture\".\nOf the European countries that the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh reported as cultivating almonds, Germany is the northernmost, though the domesticated form can be found as far north as Iceland.\nEtymology and names.\nThe word \"almond\" comes from Old French \"almande\" or \"alemande\", Late Latin *\"amandula\", derived from \"amygdala\" from the Ancient Greek \u1f00\u03bc\u03c5\u03b3\u03b4\u03ac\u03bb\u03b7 (\"amygd\u00e1l\u0113\") (cf. amygdala, an almond-shaped portion of the brain). The \"al-\" in English, for the \"a-\" used in other languages may be due a confusion with the Arabic article \"al\", the word having first dropped the \"a-\" as in the Italian form \"mandorla\"; the British pronunciation \"ah-mond\" and the modern Catalan \"ametlla\" and modern French \"amande\" show a form of the word closer to the original. Other related names of almond include \"Mandel\" or \"Knackmandel\" (German), \"mandorlo\" (Italian for the tree), \"mandorla\" (Italian for the fruit), \"am\u00eandoa\" (Portuguese), and \"almendro\" (Spanish for the tree), \"almendra\" (Spanish for the fruit). Interestingly however, in Hebrew, the word for almond (\u05e9\u05b8\u05c1\u05e7\u05b5\u05d3, pronounced shak-ed) is also the word for tonsil.\nThe adjective \"amygdaloid\" (literally \"like an almond\") is used to describe objects which are roughly almond-shaped, particularly a shape which is part way between a triangle and an ellipse. See, for example, the brain structure amygdala, which uses a direct borrowing of the Greek term \"amygdal\u0113\".\nCultivation.\nPollination.\nThe pollination of California's almonds is the largest annual managed pollination event in the world, with 1.4 million hives (nearly half of all beehives in the US) being trucked in February to the almond groves. Much of the pollination is managed by pollination brokers, who contract with migratory beekeepers from at least 49 states for the event. This business has been heavily affected by colony collapse disorder, causing nationwide shortages of honey bees and increasing the price of insect pollination. To partially protect almond growers from the rising cost of insect pollination, researchers at the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) have developed a new line of self-pollinating almond trees. Self-pollinating almond trees, such as the 'Tuono', have been around for a while, but their harvest is not as desirable as the insect-pollinated California 'Nonpareil' almond tree. The 'Nonpareil' tree produces large, smooth almonds and offers 60\u201365% edible kernel per nut. The Tuono has thicker, hairier shells and offers only 32% of edible kernel per nut, but having a thick shell has advantages. The Tuono's shell protects the nut from threatening pests such as the navel orangeworm. ARS researchers have managed to crossbreed the pest-resistant Tuono tree with the Nonpareil, resulting in hybridized cultivars of almond trees that are self-pollinated and maintain a high nut quality. The new, self-pollinating hybrids possess quality skin color, flavor, and oil content, and reduce almond growers' dependency on insect pollination.\nDiseases.\nAlmond trees can be attacked by an array of damaging organisms, including insects, fungal pathogens, plant viruses, and bacteria.\nSustainability.\nAlmond production in California is concentrated mainly in the Central Valley, where the mild climate, rich soil, abundant sunshine and water supply make for ideal growing conditions. Due to the persistent droughts in California in the early 21st century, it became more difficult to raise almonds in a sustainable manner. The issue is complex because of the high amount of water needed to produce almonds: a single almond requires roughly of water to grow properly. However, cow's milk requires more water to produce than almond milk, and in 2014, California produced 42.3 billion pounds of cow's milk, while in the same year California produced only 2.14 billion pounds of almonds.\nSustainability strategies implemented by the Almond Board of California and almond farmers include:\nProduction.\nIn 2018, world production of almonds grew by 45% over the 2017 volume to 3.2 million tonnes, with the United States providing 59% of the world total. As other leading producers, Spain, Iran, and Morocco combined contributed 18% of the world total (table).\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, production is concentrated in California where and six different almond varieties were under cultivation in 2017, with a yield of of shelled almonds. California production is marked by a period of intense pollination during late winter by rented commercial bees transported by truck across the United States to almond groves, requiring more than half of the total US honeybee population. The value of total US exports of shelled almonds in 2016 was $3.2 billion.\nSpain.\nSpain has diverse commercial cultivars of almonds grown in Catalonia, Valencia, Murcia, Andalusia, and Arag\u00f3n regions, and the Balearic Islands. Production in 2016 declined 2% nationally compared to 2015 production data.\nThe 'Marcona' almond cultivar is recognizably different from other almonds and is marketed by name. The kernel is short, round, relatively sweet, and delicate in texture. Its origin is unknown and has been grown in Spain for a long time; the tree is very productive, and the shell of the nut is very hard.\nAustralia.\nAustralia is the largest almond production region in the Southern Hemisphere. Most of the almond orchards are located along the Murray River corridor in New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.\nSweet and bitter almonds.\nThe seeds of \"Prunus dulcis\" var. \"dulcis\" are predominantly sweet but some individual trees produce seeds that are somewhat more bitter. The genetic basis for bitterness involves a single gene, the bitter flavor furthermore being recessive, both aspects making this trait easier to domesticate. The fruits from \"Prunus dulcis\" var. \"amara\" are always bitter, as are the kernels from other species of genus \"Prunus\", such as apricot, peach and cherry (although to a lesser extent).\nAmygdalin and cyanide.\nThe bitter almond is slightly broader and shorter than the sweet almond and contains about 50% of the fixed oil that occurs in sweet almonds. It also contains the enzyme emulsin which, in the presence of water, acts on the two soluble glucosides amygdalin and prunasin yielding glucose, cyanide and the essential oil of bitter almonds, which is nearly pure benzaldehyde, the chemical causing the bitter flavor. Bitter almonds may yield 4\u20139\u00a0mg of hydrogen cyanide per almond and contain 42 times higher amounts of cyanide than the trace levels found in sweet almonds. The origin of cyanide content in bitter almonds is via the enzymatic hydrolysis of amygdalin. P450 monooxygenases are involved in the amygdalin biosynthetic pathway. A point mutation in a bHLH transcription factor prevents transcription of the two cytochrome P450 genes, resulting in the sweet kernel trait.\nExtract of bitter almond was once used medicinally but even in small doses, effects are severe or lethal, especially in children; the cyanide must be removed before consumption. The acute oral lethal dose of cyanide for adult humans is reported to be of body weight (approximately 50 bitter almonds), whereas for children, consuming 5\u201310 bitter almonds may be fatal.\nAll commercially grown almonds sold as food in the United States are sweet cultivars. The US Food and Drug Administration reported in 2010 that some fractions of imported sweet almonds were contaminated with bitter almonds. Eating such almonds could result in vertigo and other typical bitter almond (cyanide) poisoning effects.\nCulinary uses.\nWhile the almond is often eaten on its own, raw or toasted, it is also a component of various dishes. Almonds are available in many forms, such as whole, slivered, and ground into flour. Almond pieces around 2\u20133\u00a0mm in size, called \"nibs\", are used for special purposes such as decoration.\nAlmonds are a common addition to breakfast muesli or oatmeal.\nUse in desserts.\nA wide range of classic sweets feature almonds as a central ingredient. Since the 19th century almonds have been used to make bread, almond butter, cakes and puddings, candied confections, almond cream-filled pastries, nougat, cookies (macaroons, biscotti and qurabiya), and cakes (financiers, Esterh\u00e1zy torte), and other sweets and desserts.\nThe young, developing fruit of the almond tree can be eaten whole (green almonds) when they are still green and fleshy on the outside and the inner shell has not yet hardened. The fruit is somewhat sour, but is a popular snack in parts of the Middle East, eaten dipped in salt to balance the sour taste. Also in the Middle East they are often eaten with dates. They are available only from mid-April to mid-June in the Northern Hemisphere; pickling or brining extends the fruit's shelf life.\nWorld cuisines.\nCertain natural food stores sell \"bitter almonds\" or \"apricot kernels\" labeled as such, requiring significant caution by consumers for how to prepare and eat these products.\nMarzipan.\nMarzipan is used in a number of elegant cakes and desserts. Princess cake is covered by marzipan (similar to fondant), as is Battenberg cake. In Sicily, sponge cake is covered with marzipan to make cassatella di sant'Agata and cassata siciliana, and marzipan is dyed and crafted into realistic fruit shaped to make frutta martorana. The Andalusian Christmas pastry \"pan de C\u00e1diz\" is filled with marzipan and candied fruit.\nAlmond milk.\nAlmonds can be processed into a milk substitute called almond milk; the nut's soft texture, mild flavor, and light coloring (when skinned) make for an efficient analog to dairy, and a soy-free choice for lactose intolerant people and vegans. Raw, blanched, and lightly toasted almonds work well for different production techniques, some of which are similar to that of soymilk and some of which use no heat, resulting in \"raw milk\" (see raw foodism).\nAlmond milk, along with almond butter and almond oil, are a versatile products used in both sweet and savoury dishes.\nIn Moroccan cuisine, sharbat billooz is one of the best known beverages, served for weddings, it is made by blending blanched almonds with milk, sugar and other flavorings.\nAlmond flour and skins.\nAlmond flour or ground almond meal combined with sugar or honey as marzipan is often used as a gluten-free alternative to wheat flour in cooking and baking.\nAlmonds contain polyphenols in their skins consisting of flavonols, flavan-3-ols, hydroxybenzoic acids and flavanones analogous to those of certain fruits and vegetables. These phenolic compounds and almond skin prebiotic dietary fiber have commercial interest as food additives or dietary supplements.\nAlmond syrup.\nHistorically, almond syrup was an emulsion of sweet and bitter almonds, usually made with barley syrup (orgeat syrup) or in a syrup of orange flower water and sugar, often flavored with a synthetic aroma of almonds. Orgeat syrup is an important ingredient in the Mai Tai and many other Tiki drinks.\nDue to the cyanide found in bitter almonds, modern syrups generally are produced only from sweet almonds. Such syrup products do not contain significant levels of hydrocyanic acid, so are generally considered safe for human consumption.\nNutrition.\nAlmonds are 4% water, 22% carbohydrates, 21% protein, and 50% fat (table). In a reference amount, almonds supply of food energy. The almond is a nutritionally dense food (table), providing a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of the B vitamins riboflavin and niacin, vitamin E, and the essential minerals calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, phosphorus, and zinc. Almonds are a moderate source (10\u201319% DV) of the B vitamins thiamine, vitamin B6, and folate, choline, and the essential mineral potassium. They also contain substantial dietary fiber, the monounsaturated fat, oleic acid, and the polyunsaturated fat, linoleic acid. Typical of nuts and seeds, almonds are a source of phytosterols such as beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol, sitostanol, and campestanol.\nHealth.\nAlmonds are included as a good source of protein among recommended healthy foods by the US Department of Agriculture. A 2016 review of clinical research indicated that regular consumption of almonds may reduce the risk of heart disease by lowering blood levels of LDL cholesterol.\nPotential allergy.\nAlmonds may cause allergy or intolerance. Cross-reactivity is common with peach allergens (lipid transfer proteins) and tree nut allergens. Symptoms range from local signs and symptoms (e.g., oral allergy syndrome, contact urticaria) to systemic signs and symptoms including anaphylaxis (e.g., urticaria, angioedema, gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms).\nOils.\nAlmonds are a rich source of oil, with 50% of kernel dry mass as fat (whole almond nutrition table). In relation to total dry mass of the kernel, almond oil contains 32% monounsaturated oleic acid (an omega-9 fatty acid), 13% linoleic acid (a polyunsaturated omega-6 essential fatty acid), and 10% saturated fatty acid (mainly as palmitic acid, USDA link in table). Linolenic acid, a polyunsaturated omega-3 fat, is not present (table). Almond oil is a rich source of vitamin E, providing 261% of the Daily Value per 100 ml (table).\nWhen almond oil is analyzed separately and expressed per 100 grams as a reference mass, the oil provides of food energy, 8 grams of saturated fat (81% of which is palmitic acid), 70 grams of oleic acid, and 17 grams of linoleic acid (oil table).\n\"Oleum amygdalae\", the fixed oil, is prepared from either sweet or bitter almonds, and is a glyceryl oleate with a slight odour and a nutty taste. It is almost insoluble in alcohol but readily soluble in chloroform or ether. Almond oil is obtained from the dried kernel of almonds.\nAflatoxins.\nAlmonds are susceptible to aflatoxin-producing molds. Aflatoxins are potent carcinogenic chemicals produced by molds such as \"Aspergillus flavus\" and \"Aspergillus parasiticus\". The mold contamination may occur from soil, previously infested almonds, and almond pests such as navel-orange worm. High levels of mold growth typically appear as gray to black filament like growth. It is unsafe to eat mold-infected tree nuts.\nSome countries have strict limits on allowable levels of aflatoxin contamination of almonds and require adequate testing before the nuts can be marketed to their citizens. The European Union, for example, introduced a requirement since 2007 that all almond shipments to EU be tested for aflatoxin. If aflatoxin does not meet the strict safety regulations, the entire consignment may be reprocessed to eliminate the aflatoxin or it must be destroyed.\nMandatory pasteurization in California.\nThe USDA approved a proposal by the Almond Board of California to pasteurize almonds sold to the public, after tracing cases of salmonellosis to almonds. The almond pasteurization program became mandatory for California companies in 2007. Raw, untreated California almonds have not been available in the U.S. since then.\nCalifornia almonds labeled \"raw\" must be steam-pasteurized or chemically treated with propylene oxide (PPO). This does not apply to imported almonds or almonds sold from the grower directly to the consumer in small quantities. The treatment also is not required for raw almonds sold for export outside of North America.\nThe Almond Board of California states: \"PPO residue dissipates after treatment\". The U.S. EPA has reported: \"Propylene oxide has been detected in fumigated food products; consumption of contaminated food is another possible route of exposure\". PPO is classified as Group 2B (\"possibly carcinogenic to humans\").\nThe USDA-approved marketing order was challenged in court by organic farmers organized by the Cornucopia Institute, a Wisconsin-based farm policy research group. According to the Cornucopia Institute, this almond marketing order has imposed significant financial burdens on small-scale and organic growers and damaged domestic almond markets. A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit in the spring of 2009 on procedural grounds. In August 2010, a federal appeals court ruled that the farmers have a right to appeal the USDA regulation. In March 2013, the court vacated the suit on the basis that the objections should have been raised in 2007 when the regulation was first proposed.\nCultural aspects.\nThe almond is highly revered in some cultures. The tree originated in the Middle East, and is mentioned numerous times in the Bible.\nIn the Hebrew Bible, the almond was a symbol of watchfulness and promise due to its early flowering. In the Bible the almond is mentioned ten times, beginning with Book of Genesis 43:11, where it is described as \"among the best of fruits\". In Numbers 17 Levi is chosen from the other tribes of Israel by Aaron's rod, which brought forth almond flowers. According to tradition, the rod of Aaron bore sweet almonds on one side and bitter on the other; if the Israelites followed the Lord, the sweet almonds would be ripe and edible, but if they were to forsake the path of the Lord, the bitter almonds would predominate. The almond blossom supplied a model for the menorah which stood in the Holy Temple, \"Three cups, shaped like almond blossoms, were on one branch, with a knob and a flower; and three cups, shaped like almond blossoms, were on the other...on the candlestick itself were four cups, shaped like almond blossoms, with its knobs and flowers\" (Exodus 25:33\u201334; 37:19\u201320). Many Sephardic Jews give 5 almonds to each guest before special occasions like weddings.\nSimilarly, Christian symbolism often uses almond branches as a symbol of the Virgin Birth of Jesus; paintings and icons often include almond-shaped haloes encircling the Christ Child and as a symbol of Mary. The word \"Luz\", which appears in Genesis 30:37, sometimes translated as \"hazel\", may actually be derived from the Aramaic name for almond (Luz), and is translated as such in some Bible versions such as the NIV. The Arabic name for almond is \u0644\u0648\u0632 \"lauz\" or \"l\u016bz\". In some parts of the Levant and North Africa it is pronounced \"loz\", which is very close to its Aramaic origin.\nLa entrada de la flor is an event celebrated on 1 February in Torrent, Spain, in which the clavarios and members of the Confrerie of the Mother of God deliver a branch of the first-blooming almond-tree to the Virgin."}
{"id": "1069", "revid": "1012715617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1069", "title": "Demographics of Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "This article is about the demographic features of the population of Antigua and Barbuda, including population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the 2011 census the estimated resident population of Antigua and Barbuda was 86,295.\nThe estimated population of is ().\nVital statistics.\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (27.05.2011) (Census) :\nEthnic groups.\nThe population of Antigua and Barbuda, is predominantly black (91.0%) or mixed (4.4%). 1.9% of the population is white and 0.7% East Indian. There is also a small Amerindian population: 177 in 1991 and 214 in 2001 (0.3% of the total population). The remaining 1.6% of the population includes people from the Middle East (0.6%) and Chinese (0.2%).\nThe 2001 census disclosed that 19,425, or 30 per cent of the total population of Antigua and Barbuda, reported their place of birth as a foreign country. Over 15,000 of these persons were from other Caribbean states, representing 80 of the total foreign born. The main countries of\norigin were Guyana, Dominica and Jamaica. Approximately 4,500 or 23 per cent of all foreign\nborn came from Guyana, 3,300 or 17 per cent came from Dominica and 2,800 or 14 per cent\ncame from Jamaica. The largest single group from a country outside the region came from the\nUnited States. Of the total of 1,715 persons, nine per cent of the foreign born, came\nfrom the United States while three per cent and one per cent came from the United Kingdom and Canada, respectively. Many of these are the children of Antiguans and Barbudans who had emigrated to these countries, mainly during the 1980s, and subsequently returned.\nOther demographics statistics.\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.\nDemographic statistics according to the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nThe island of Antigua is home to approximately 97% of the population; nearly the entire population of Barbuda lives in Codrington\nDefinition: age 15 and over has completed five or more years of schooling"}
{"id": "1070", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1070", "title": "Politics of Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "The politics of Antigua and Barbuda takes place in a framework of a unitary parliamentary representative democratic monarchy, wherein the Sovereign of Antigua and Barbuda is the head of state, appointing a Governor-General to act as vice-regal representative in the nation. A Prime Minister is appointed by the Governor-General as the head of government, and of a multi-party system; the Prime Minister advises the Governor-General on the appointment of a Council of Ministers. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the Parliament. The bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (seventeen-member body appointed by the Governor General) and the House of Representatives (seventeen seats; members are elected by proportional representation to serve five-year terms).\nAntigua and Barbuda has a long history of free elections, three of which have resulted in peaceful changes of government. Since the 1951 general election, the party system has been dominated by the Antigua Labour Party (ALP), for a long time was dominated by the Bird family, particularly Prime Ministers Vere and Lester Bird. The opposition claimed to be disadvantaged by the ALP's longstanding monopoly on patronage and its control of the media, especially in the 1999 general election. The most recent elections to the House of Representatives were held on 12 June 2014. The Antigua Labour Party government was elected with fourteen seats. The United Progressive Party has three seats in the House of Representatives.\nConstitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, press, worship, movement, and association. Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the eastern Caribbean court system. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Jurisprudence is based on English common law.\nExecutive branch.\nAs head of state, Queen Elizabeth II is represented in Antigua and Barbuda by a governor general who acts on the advice of the prime minister and the cabinet.\nLegislative branch.\nAntigua and Barbuda elects on national level a legislature. Parliament has two chambers. The House of Representatives has 19 members, 17 members elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies, 2 ex-officio member (President and Speaker). The Senate has 17 appointed members. The prime minister is the leader of the majority party in the House and conducts affairs of state with the cabinet. The prime minister and the cabinet are responsible to the Parliament. Elections must be held at least every five years but may be called by the prime minister at any time.\nThere are special legislative provisions to account for Barbuda's low population relative to that of Antigua. Barbuda is guaranteed one member of the House of Representatives and two members of the Senate. In addition, there is a Barbuda Council to govern the internal affairs of the island.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe country is divided into six parishes, Saint George, Saint John, Saint Mary, Saint Paul, Saint Peter, and Saint Philip, which are all on the island of Antigua. Additionally, the islands of Barbuda and Redonda are considered dependencies.\nJudicial branch.\nAntigua and Barbuda is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court. This court is headquartered in Saint Lucia, but at least one judge of the Supreme Court resides in Antigua and Barbuda, and presides over the High Court of Justice. The current High Court judges are Jennifer Remy and Keith Thom.\nAntigua is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice, although it has not yet acceded to Part III of the 2001 Agreement Establishing a Caribbean Court of Justice. Its supreme appellate court therefore remains the British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Indeed, of the signatories to the Agreement, as of December 2010, only Barbados has replaced appeals to Her Majesty in Council with the Caribbean Court of Justice.\nIn addition to the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, Antigua and Barbuda has a Magistrates' Court, which deals with lesser civil and criminal cases.\nPolitical pressure groups and leaders.\nAntigua Trades and Labor Union or ATLU [William ROBINSON]; People's Democratic Movement or PDM [Hugh MARSHALL]\nInternational organisation participation.\nACP Countries, ALBA, Caricom, Caribbean Development Bank, CELAC, Commonwealth of Nations, ECLAC, FAO, Group of 77, IBRD, ICAO, International Criminal Court, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, International Finance Corporation, IFRCS, International Labour Organization, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime Organization, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, Non-Aligned Movement (observer), Organization of American States, OECS, OPANAL, United Nations, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WCL, World Federation of Trade Unions, WHO, WMO, WTrO"}
{"id": "1072", "revid": "36761478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1072", "title": "Telecommunications in Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "This article is about communications systems in Antigua and Barbuda.\nTelephone.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use: 37,500 (2006)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: 110,200 (2006) (APUA PCS, Cable &amp; Wireless, Digicel)\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\" good automatic telephone system\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\" 3 fiber optic submarine cables (2 to Saint Kitts and 1 to Guadeloupe); satellite earth station \u2013 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 6, shortwave 0 (2002)\nRadios: 36,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 2 (1997)\nTelevisions: 31,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): Cable &amp; Wireless, Antigua Computer Technologies (ACT), Antigua Public Utilities Authority (APUA INET)\nInternet hosts: 2,215 (2008)\nInternet users: 60,000 (2007)\nCountry codes: AG"}
{"id": "1074", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1074", "title": "Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force", "text": "The Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force is the armed forces of Antigua and Barbuda. The RABDF has responsibility for several different roles: internal security, prevention of drug smuggling, the protection and support of fishing rights, prevention of marine pollution, search and rescue, ceremonial duties, assistance to government programs, provision of relief during natural disasters, assistance in the maintenance of essential services, and support of the police in maintaining law and order.\nThe RABDF is one of the world's smallest militaries, consisting of 245 personnel. It is much better equipped for fulfilling its civil roles as opposed to providing a deterrence against would-be aggressors or in defending the nation during a war.\nOrganisation.\nThe RABDF consists of four major units:"}
{"id": "1075", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1075", "title": "Antigua and Barbuda/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
