{"id": "1653", "revid": "1012686582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1653", "title": "Age of consent", "text": "The age of consent is the age at which a person is considered to be legally competent to consent to sexual acts. Consequently, an adult who engages in sexual activity with a person younger than the age of consent is unable to legally claim that the sexual activity was consensual, and such sexual activity may be considered child sexual abuse or statutory rape. The person below the minimum age is regarded as the victim, and their sex partner is regarded as the offender, unless both are underage. The purpose of setting an age of consent is to protect an underage person from sexual advances.\nThe term \"age of consent\" rarely appears in legal statutes. Generally, a law will instead establish the age below which it is illegal to engage in sexual activity with that person. It has sometimes been used with other meanings, such as the age at which a person becomes competent to consent to marriage, but the meaning given above is the one now generally understood. It should not be confused with other laws regarding age minimums including, but not limited to, the age of majority, age of criminal responsibility, voting age, drinking age, and driving age.\nAge of consent laws vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, though most jurisdictions set the age of consent in the range 14 to 18. The laws may also vary by the type of sexual act, the gender of the participants or other considerations, such as involving a position of trust; some jurisdictions may also make allowances for minors engaged in sexual acts with each other, rather than a single age. Charges and penalties resulting from a breach of these laws may range from a misdemeanor, such as \"corruption of a minor\", to what is popularly called \"statutory rape\".\nThere are many \"grey areas\" in this area of law, some regarding unspecific and untried legislation, others brought about by debates regarding changing societal attitudes, and others due to conflicts between federal and state laws. These factors all make age of consent an often confusing subject and a topic of highly charged debates.\nHistory and social attitudes.\nTraditional attitudes.\nIn traditional societies, the age of consent for a sexual union was a matter for the family to decide, or a tribal custom. In most cases, this coincided with signs of puberty, menstruation for a woman, and pubic hair for a man.\nReliable data for ages at marriage is scarce. In England, for example, the only reliable data in the early modern period comes from property records made after death. Not only were the records relatively rare, but not all bothered to record the participants' ages, and it seems that the more complete the records are, the more likely they are to reveal young marriages. Modern historians have sometimes shown reluctance to accept evidence of young ages of marriage, dismissing it as a 'misreading' by a later copier of the records.\nIn the 12th century, Gratian, the influential founder of canon law in medieval Europe, accepted the age of puberty for marriage (not sex) to be around twelve for girls and around fourteen for boys but acknowledged consent to be meaningful if both children were older than seven years of age. There were authorities that said that such consent for entering marriage could take place earlier. Marriage would then be valid as long as neither of the two parties annulled the marital agreement before reaching puberty, or if they had already consummated the marriage. Judges sometimes honored marriages based on mutual consent at ages younger than\u00a0seven: in contrast to established canon, there are recorded marriages of two- and three-year-olds.\nThe first \"recorded\" age-of-consent law dates from 1275 in England; as part of its provisions on rape, the Statute of Westminster 1275 made it a misdemeanor to \"ravish\" a \"maiden within age,\" whether with or without her consent. The phrase \"within age\" was later interpreted by jurist Sir Edward Coke (England, 17th century) as meaning the age of marriage, which at the time was twelve years of age.\nThe American colonies followed the English tradition, and the law was more of a guide. For example, Mary Hathaway (Virginia, 1689) was only nine when she was married to William Williams. Sir Edward Coke \"made it clear that the marriage of girls under 12 was normal, and the age at which a girl who was a wife was eligible for a dower from her husband's estate was 9 even though her husband be only four years old.\"\nIn the 16th century, a small number of Italian and German states set the minimum age for sexual intercourse for girls, setting it at twelve years. Towards the end of the 18th century, other European countries also began to enact similar laws. The first French Constitution of 1791 established the minimum age at eleven years. Portugal, Spain, Denmark and the Swiss cantons initially set the minimum age at ten to twelve years.\nAge of consent laws were, historically, difficult to follow and enforce: legal norms based on \"age\" were not, in general, common until the 19th century, because clear proof of exact age and precise date of birth were often unavailable.\nIn Australia, 18th century thought was that children were inherently sinful and vulnerable to sexual temptations. Punishment for \"giving in\" to these temptations was generally left to parents and was not seen as a government matter, except in the case of rape. Australian children had few rights and were legally considered the chattel of their parents. From the late 18th century, and especially in the 19th century, attitudes started to change. By the mid-19th century there was increased concern over child sexual abuse.\nReforms in the 19th and 20th century.\nA general shift in social and legal attitudes toward issues of sex occurred during the modern era. Attitudes on the appropriate age of permission for females to engage in sexual activity drifted toward adulthood. While ages from ten to thirteen years were typically regarded as acceptable ages for sexual consent in Western countries during the mid-19th century, by the end of the 19th century changing attitudes towards sexuality and childhood resulted in the raising of the age of consent.\nEnglish common law had traditionally set the age of consent within the range of ten to twelve years old, but the Offences Against the Person Act 1875 raised this to thirteen in Great Britain and Ireland. Early feminists of the Social Purity movement, such as Josephine Butler and others, instrumental in securing the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts, began to turn towards the problem of child prostitution by the end of the 1870s. Sensational media revelations about the scourge of child prostitution in London in the 1880s then caused outrage among the respectable middle-classes, leading to pressure for the age of consent to be raised again.\nThe investigative journalist William Thomas Stead of the \"Pall Mall Gazette\" was pivotal in exposing the problem of child prostitution in the London underworld through a publicity stunt. In 1885 he \"purchased\" one victim, Eliza Armstrong, the thirteen-year-old daughter of a chimney sweep, for five pounds and took her to a brothel where she was drugged. He then published a series of four expos\u00e9s entitled \"The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon\", which shocked its readers with tales of child prostitution and the abduction, procurement, and sale of young English virgins to Continental \"pleasure palaces\". The \"Maiden Tribute\" was an instant sensation with the reading public, and Victorian society was thrown into an uproar about prostitution. Fearing riots on a national scale, the Home Secretary, Sir William Harcourt, pleaded in vain with Stead to cease publication of the articles. A wide variety of reform groups held protest meetings and marched together to Hyde Park demanding that the age of consent be raised. The government was forced to propose the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, which raised the age of consent from thirteen to sixteen and clamped down on prostitution.\nIn the United States, as late as the 1880s most states set the minimum age at ten to twelve (in Delaware, it was seven in 1895). Inspired by the \"Maiden Tribute\" articles, female reformers in the U.S. initiated their own campaign, which petitioned legislators to raise the legal minimum age to at least sixteen, with the ultimate goal to raise the age to eighteen. The campaign was successful, with almost all states raising the minimum age to sixteen to eighteen years by 1920.\nIn France, Portugal, Denmark, the Swiss cantons and other countries, the minimum age was raised to between thirteen and sixteen years in the following decades. Though the original arguments for raising the age of consent were based on morality, since then the \"raison d'\u00eatre\" of the laws has changed to child welfare and a so-called right to childhood or innocence.\nIn France, under the Napoleonic Code, the age of consent was set in 1832 at eleven, and was raised to thirteen in 1863. It was increased to fifteen in 1945.\nIn Spain, it was set in 1822 at \"puberty age\", and changed to twelve in 1870, which was kept until 1999, when it became 13; and in 2015 it was raised to 16.\n21st century and present day situation.\nIn the 21st century, concerns about child sex tourism and commercial sexual exploitation of children gained international prominence, and have resulted in legislative changes in several jurisdictions, as well as in the adoption of several international instruments.\nThe Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (Lanzarote, 25 October 2007), and the European Union's \"Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council\" of 13 December 2011 on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography were adopted.\nThe Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography came into force in 2002.\nThe Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, which came into force in 2003, prohibits commercial sexual exploitation of children.\nThe Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (which came into force in 2008) also deals with commercial sexual exploitation of children.\nSeveral Western countries have raised their ages of consent recently. These include Canada (in 2008\u2014from 14 to 16); and in Europe, Iceland (in 2007\u2014from 14 to 15), Lithuania (in 2010\u2014from 14 to 16), Croatia (in 2013\u2014from 14 to 15), and Spain (in 2015\u2014from 13 to 16).\nThe International Criminal Court Statute does not provide a specific age of consent in its rape/sexual violence statute, but makes reference to sexual acts committed against persons \"incapable of giving genuine consent\"; and the explicative footnote states, \"It is understood that a person may be incapable of giving genuine consent if affected by natural, induced or \"age-related incapacity\".\" (see note 51)\nLaw.\nSexual relations with a person under the age of consent is a crime in most countries; Jurisdictions use a variety of terms for the offense, including \"child sexual abuse\", \"statutory rape\", \"illegal carnal knowledge\", \"corruption of a minor\", besides others.\nThe enforcement practices of age-of-consent laws vary depending on the social sensibilities of the particular culture (see above). Often, enforcement is not exercised to the letter of the law, with legal action being taken only when a sufficiently socially-unacceptable age gap exists between the two individuals, or if the perpetrator is in a position of power over the minor (e.g. a teacher, minister, or doctor). The sex of each participant can also influence perceptions of an individual's guilt and therefore enforcement.\nAge.\nThe threshold age for engaging in sexual activity varies between jurisdictions. Most jurisdictions have set a fixed age of consent. However, some jurisdictions permit sex with a person after the onset of their puberty, such as Yemen, but only in marriage. Ages can also vary based on the type of calendar used, such as the Lunar calendar, how birth dates in leap years are handled, or even the method by which birth date is calculated.\nDefenses and exceptions.\nThe age of consent is a legal barrier to the minor's ability to consent and therefore obtaining consent is not in general a defense to having sexual relations with a person under the prescribed age, for example:\nExtraterritoriality.\nA growing number of countries have specific extraterritorial legislation that prosecutes their citizens in their homeland should they engage in illicit sexual conduct in a foreign country with children. In 2008, ECPAT reported that 44 countries had extraterritorial child sex legislation. For example, PROTECT Act of 2003, a federal United States law bans sexual activity by its citizens with foreigners or with U.S. citizens from another state, if the partner is under 18 and the activity is illegal under the federal, state, or local law. This applies in cases where any of the partners travels into or out of the United States, or from one state into another, for the purpose of an illegal sexual encounter.\nOther issues.\nGender of participants.\nThere is debate as to whether the gender of those involved should lead to different treatment of the sexual encounter, in law or in practice. Traditionally, age of consent laws regarding vaginal intercourse were often meant to protect the chastity of unmarried girls. Many feminists and social campaigners in the 1970s have objected to the social importance of virginity, and have also attempted to change the stereotypes of female passivity and male aggression; demanding that the law protect children from exploitation regardless of their gender, rather than dealing with concerns of chastity. This has led to gender-neutral laws in many jurisdictions. On the other hand, there is an opposing view which argues that the act of vaginal intercourse is an \"unequal act\" for males and females, due to issues such as pregnancy, increased risk of STDs, and risk of physical injury if the girl is too young and not physically ready. In the US, in \"Michael M. v. Superior Ct.450 U.S. 464 (1981)\" it was ruled that the double standard of offering more legal protection to girls is valid because \"the Equal Protection Clause does not mean that the physiological differences between men and women must be disregarded\".\nTraditionally, many age of consent laws dealt primarily with men engaging in sexual acts with underage girls and boys (the latter acts often falling under sodomy and buggery laws). This means that in some legal systems, issues of women having sexual contact with underage partners were rarely acknowledged. For example, until 2000, in the UK, before the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 2000, there was no statutory age of consent for lesbian sex. In New Zealand, before 2005, there were no age of consent laws dealing with women having sex with underage boys. Previously, in Fiji, male offenders of child sexual abuse could receive up to life imprisonment, whilst female offenders would receive up to seven years. Situations like these have been attributed to societal views on traditional gender roles, and to constructs of male sexuality and female sexuality; according to E Martellozzo, \"[V]iewing females as perpetrators of sexual abuse goes against every stereotype that society has of women: women as mothers and caregivers and not as people who abuse and harm\". Alissa Nutting argues that women are not acknowledged as perpetrators of sex crimes because society does not accept that women have an autonomous sexuality of their own.\nMarriage and the age of consent.\nThe age at which a person can be legally married can differ from the age of consent. In jurisdictions where the marriageable age is lower than the age of consent, those laws usually override the age of consent laws in the case of a married couple where one or both partners are below the age of consent. Some jurisdictions prohibit all sex outside of marriage irrespective of age, as in the case of Yemen.\nProstitution.\nIn many countries, there are specific laws dealing with child prostitution.\nPornography and 'jailbait' images.\nIn some countries, states, or other jurisdictions, the age of consent may be lower than the age at which a person can appear in pornographic images and films. In many jurisdictions, the minimum age for participation and even viewing such material is 18. As such, in some jurisdictions, films and images showing individuals under the age of 18, but above the age of consent, that meet the legal definition of child pornography are prohibited despite the fact that the sexual acts depicted are legal to engage in otherwise under that jurisdiction's age of consent laws. In those cases, it is only the filming of the sex act that is the crime as the act itself would not be considered a sex crime. For example, in the United States under federal law it is a crime to film minors below 18 in sexual acts, even in states where the age of consent is below 18. In those states, charges such as child pornography can be used to prosecute someone having sex with a minor, who could not otherwise be prosecuted for statutory rape, provided they filmed or photographed the act.\nJailbait images can be differentiated from child pornography, as they do not feature minors before the onset of puberty, nor do they contain nudity. The images are, however, usually sexualized, often featuring tween or young teenagers in bikinis, skirts, underwear or lingerie. Whether or not these images are legal is debated. When questioned regarding their legality legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin stated he thought it was not illegal, though legal expert Sunny Hostin was more skeptical, describing jailbait images as \"borderline\" child pornography which may be illegal.\nHealth.\nThe human immune system continues to develop after puberty. The age of exposure has an influence upon if the immune system can fend off infections in general, and this is also true in the case of some sexually transmitted diseases. For example, a risk factor for HPV strains causing genital warts is sexual debut at a young age; if this extends to the cancer causing strains, then sexual debut at a young age would potentially also increase risk of persistence of HPV infections that cause the very HPV induced cancers that are being diagnosed in spiking numbers of relatively young people.\nInitiatives to change the age of consent.\nAge-of-consent reform refers to the efforts of some individuals or groups, for different reasons, to alter or abolish age-of-consent laws. These efforts advocate positions such as:"}
{"id": "1654", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1654", "title": "Alypius of Antioch", "text": "Alypius of Antioch was a geographer and a vicarius of Roman Britain, probably in the late 350s AD. He replaced Flavius Martinus after that vicarius' suicide. His rule is recorded is Ammianus XXIII 1, 3.\nLife.\nHe came from Antioch and served under Constantius II and was probably appointed to ensure that nobody with western associations was serving in Britain during a time of mistrust, rebellion and suppression symbolised by the brutal acts of the imperial notary Paulus Catena. He may have had to deal with the insurrection of the usurper named Carausius II.\nAlypius was afterwards commissioned to rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem as part of Julian's systematic attempt to reverse the Christianization of the Roman Empire by restoring pagan and, in this case, Jewish practices. Among the letters of Julian are two (29 and 30) addressed to Alypius; one inviting him to Rome, the other thanking him for a geographical treatise, which no longer exists."}
{"id": "1655", "revid": "13823627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1655", "title": "Amalasuintha", "text": "Amalasuintha (30 April 534/535) ruled the Ostrogoths as regent during the minority of her son from 526 to 534 and then as queen regnant from 534 to 535. She was the youngest daughter of Theoderic the Great, and firmly believed in the upholding of Roman virtues and values. She is best known for her diplomatic relationship with Justinian I, who invaded Italy in response to her assassination.\nPersonal life.\nIn 515, Amalasuintha married Eutharic (522), an Ostrogoth noble of the old Amali dynasty who had been previously living in the Arian Kingdom of Hispania. Her husband was the son of Widerich (born ), grandson of Berismund (born ), and great-grandson of Thorismund (died after 400), king of the Ostrogoths . It was important to Amalasuintha's father, Theoderic the Great, that she marry into a legitimate royal family, lest her own family's legitimacy be questioned.\nShe was very much an intellectual, and was well known for her extensive knowledge and reading, which included fluency in Latin, Greek and Gothic. In addition, she was a student of philosophy and was said to possess the wisdom of Solomon. Amalasuintha was also described in her day as possessing all of the central Roman virtues expected of a noble woman: happiness, fertility, and patience, although more emphasis was placed on her virtues within the political realm versus the feminine, something that separates her from other Ostrogoth princesses. Like most Ostrogoths, Amalasuintha was an Arian Christian.\nRule.\nEutharic died, apparently in the early years of his marriage to Amalasuintha, leaving her with two children, Athalaric and Matasuntha (after 550). On the death of her father on 30 August 526, her son succeeded him at the age of ten, but she held the power as regent for her son. Her tremendous influence in her position as regent can be seen in a diptych of Rufius Gennadius Probus Orestes in which she appears alongside her son, Athalaric, in 530. Deeply imbued with the old Roman culture, she gave to that son's education a more refined and literary turn than suited the ideas of her Gothic subjects. Conscious of her unpopularity she banished \u2013 and afterwards put to death \u2013 three Gothic nobles whom she suspected of conspiring against her rule. At the same time, she opened negotiations with the Byzantine emperor Justinian I with the view of removing herself and the Gothic treasure to Constantinople. Her son's death on 2 October 534 initially made little apparent change in the state of affairs.\nAfter Athalaric's death, Amalasuintha became queen, ruling alone only for a short while before making her cousin Theodahad co-ruler (not, as sometimes stated, her husband, for his wife was still living), with the intent of strengthening her position. Theodahad was a prominent leader of the Gothic military aristocracy, the very group that so opposed her pro-Roman stances. Amalasuintha believed this pairing would help to make supporters out of her harshest critics. The choice was unfortunate, for Theodahad fostered the disaffection of the Goths, and either by his orders or with his permission, Amalasuintha was imprisoned on the island of Martana, located in the lake of Bolsena in northern Lazio, where on 30 April in the spring of 534/535 she was murdered in her bath.\nDeath.\nThe death of Amalasuintha gave Justinian I a reason to go to war with the Ostrogoths and attempt to take Italy. According to the Eastern Roman historian Procopius, it is believed that Amalasuintha and Justinian I had a very close diplomatic relationship. More specifically, Procopius believed that Amalasuintha was thinking about handing over Italy to Justinian around the time of her death. Shortly after Amalasuintha's murder, Theodahad was replaced by Witigis, Amalasuintha's son-in-law. With the people's support, Witigis had Theodahad put to death.\nSources.\nThe letters of Cassiodorus, chief minister and literary adviser of Amalasuintha, and the histories of Procopius and Jordanes, give us our chief information as to the character of Amalasuintha. Cassiodorus was a part of a greater pro-Roman party that desired to Romanize the traditional Ostrogothic kingship, further evidence of the pro-Roman circle that Amalasuintha surrounded herself with.\nLegacy.\nThe life of Amalasuintha was made the subject of a tragedy, the first play written by the young Carlo Goldoni and presented at Milan in 1733.\nRomanian poet George Co\u0219buc wrote a poem entitled \"The Queen of the Ostrogoths\" in which Amalasuintha speaks to Theodahad (named Teodat in the poem) shortly before he kills her.\nAsteroid 650 Amalasuntha is named in her honour.\nAmalasuintha is portrayed by Honor Blackman in the 1968 film \"Kampf um Rom.\"\nFurther reading.\n "}
{"id": "1656", "revid": "20962961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1656", "title": "Amalric of Bena", "text": "Amalric of Bena (; ; died ) was a French theologian, philosopher and sect leader, after whom the Amalricians are named.\nBiography.\nAmalric was born in the latter part of the 12th century at Bennes, a village between Oll\u00e9 and Chauffours in the diocese of Chartres.\nAmalric taught philosophy and theology at the University of Paris and enjoyed a great reputation as a subtle dialectician, his lectures developing the philosophy of Aristotle attracted a large audience. In 1204 his doctrines were condemned by the university and, on a personal appeal to Pope Innocent III, the sentence was ratified, Amalric being ordered to return to Paris and recant his errors.\nHis death was caused, it is said, by grief at the humiliation to which he had been subjected.\nIn 1209, ten of his followers were burnt before the gates of Paris and Amalric's own body was exhumed and burnt and the ashes given to the winds. The doctrines of his followers, known as the Amalricians, were formally condemned by the fourth Lateran Council in 1215.\nPropositions.\nAmalric appears to have derived his philosophical system from Eriugena, whose principles he developed in a one-sided and strongly pantheistic form.\nOnly three propositions can be attributed to him with certainty:\nBecause of the first proposition, God himself is thought to be invisible and only recognizable in his creation.\nThese three propositions were further developed by his followers, who maintained that God revealed Himself in a threefold revelation, the first in the Biblical patriarch Abraham, marking the \"epoch of the Father\"; the second in Jesus Christ, who began the \"epoch of the Son\"; and the third in Amalric and his disciples, who inaugurated the \"era of the Holy Ghost.\"\nAmalricians taught:\nDue to persecutions, this sect does not appear to have long survived the death of its founder. Not long after the burning of ten of their members (1210), the sect itself lost its importance, while some of the surviving Amalricians became Brethren of the Free Spirit.\nAccording to Hosea Ballou, then Pierre Batiffol and George T. Knight (1914) Amalric believed that all people would eventually be saved and this was one of the counts upon which he was declared a heretic by Pope Innocent III.\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "1657", "revid": "32901653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1657", "title": "Afonso I of Portugal", "text": "Afonso I (; born 1106, 1109 or 1111; died 1185), also called Afonso Henriques, nicknamed the Conqueror (), the Founder () or the Great () by the Portuguese, and El-Bortukali (in Arabic \"the Portuguese\") and \"Ibn-Arrink\" or \"Ibn Arrinq\" (in Arabic or \"son of Henry\", \"Henriques\") by the Moors whom he fought, was the first king of Portugal. He achieved the independence of the County of Portugal, establishing a new kingdom and doubling its area with the \"Reconquista\", an objective that he pursued until his death.\nAfonso was the son of Teresa of Le\u00f3n and Henry of Burgundy, rulers of the County of Portugal. Henry died in 1112, leaving Theresa to rule alone. Unhappy with Theresa's romantic relationship with Galician Fernando P\u00e9rez de Traba and his political influence, the Portuguese nobility rallied around Afonso, who revolted and defeated his mother at the Battle of S\u00e3o Mamede in 1128 and became Count of Portugal soon afterwards. In 1139, Afonso renounced the suzerainty of the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n and established the independent Kingdom of Portugal.\nAfonso actively campaigned against the Moors in the south. In 1139 he won a decisive victory at the Battle of Ourique, and in 1147 he conquered Santar\u00e9m and Lisbon from the Moors. He secured the independence of Portugal following a victory over Le\u00f3n at Valdevez and received papal approval through \"Manifestis Probatum\". Afonso died in 1185 and was succeeded by his son, Sancho I.\nYouth.\nAfonso was the son of Teresa, the illegitimate daughter of King Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Castile, and her husband, Henry of Burgundy. According to Fern\u00e3o Lopes' \"Cr\u00f3nica de Portugal de 1419,\" the future Portuguese king was born in Guimar\u00e3es, which was at the time the most important political center of his parents. This was accepted by most Portuguese scholarship until in 1990 Torquato de Sousa Soares proposed Coimbra, the center of the county of Coimbra and another political center of Afonso's progenitors, as his birthplace, which caused outrage in Guimar\u00e3es and a polemic between this historian and Jos\u00e9 Hermano Saraiva. Almeida Fernandes later proposed Viseu as the birthplace of Afonso basing himself on the \"Chronica Gothorum\", which states Afonso was born in 1109, a position followed by Jos\u00e9 Mattoso in his biography of the king. Abel Estef\u00e2nio has suggested a different date and thesis, proposing 1106 as the birth date and the region of Tierra de Campos or even Sahag\u00fan as likely birth places based on the known itineraries of counts Henry and Teresa.\nHenry and Teresa reigned jointly as count and countess of Portugal until his death on 22 May 1112 during the siege of Astorga, after which Teresa ruled Portugal alone. She would proclaim herself queen (a claim recognised by Pope Paschal II in 1116) but was captured and forced to reaffirm her vassalage to her half-sister, Urraca of Le\u00f3n.\nIt is not known who was the tutor of Afonso. Later traditions, probably started with Jo\u00e3o Soares Coelho (a bastard descendant of Egas Moniz through a female line) in the mid-13th century and ampliated by later chronicles such as the \"Cr\u00f3nica de Portugal de 1419\", asserted he had been Egas Moniz de Ribadouro, possibly with the help of oral memories that associated the tutor to the house of Ribadouro. Yet, contemporary documents, namely from the chancery of Afonso in his early years as count of Portucale, indicate according to the historian Jos\u00e9 Mattoso that the most likely tutor of Afonso Henriques was Egas Moniz's oldest brother, Erm\u00edgio Moniz, who, besides being the senior brother within the family of Ribadouro, became the \"dapifer\" and \"majordomus\" of Afonso I from 1128 until his death in 1135, which indicates his closer proximity to the prince.\nIn an effort to pursue a larger share in the Leonese inheritance, his mother Teresa joined forces with Fernando P\u00e9rez de Trava, the most powerful count in Galicia. The Portuguese nobility disliked the alliance between Galicia and Portugal and rallied around Afonso. The Archbishop of Braga was also concerned with the dominance of Galicia, apprehensive of the ecclesiastical pretensions of his new rival the Galician Archbishop of Santiago de Compostela, Diego Gelm\u00edrez, who had claimed an alleged discovery of relics of Saint James in his town, as a way to gain power and riches over the other cathedrals in the Iberian Peninsula. In order to stop her son Alfonso from overthrowing her, Teresa exiled him when he was twelve in the year 1120. In 1122, Afonso turned fourteen, the adult age in the 12th century. In symmetry with his cousin Alfonso made himself a knight on his own account in the Cathedral of Zamora in 1125. After the military campaign of Alfonso VII against his mother in 1127, Afonso revolted against her and proceeded to take control of the county from its queen.\nSole count.\nIn 1128, near Guimar\u00e3es at the Battle of S\u00e3o Mamede, Afonso and his supporters overcame troops under both his mother and her lover, Count Fernando Peres de Trava of Galicia. Afonso exiled his mother to Galicia, and took over rule of the County of Portucale. Thus the possibility of re-incorporating Portucale into a Kingdom of Portugal and Galicia as before was eliminated and Afonso became sole ruler following demands for greater independence from the county's church and nobles. The battle was mostly ignored by the Leonese suzerain who was occupied at the time with a revolt in Castille. He was also, most likely, waiting for the reaction of the Galician families. After Teresa's death in 1131, Afonso VII of Le\u00f3n and Castille proceeded to demand vassalage from his cousin. On 6 April 1129, Afonso Henriques dictated the writ in which he proclaimed himself Prince of Portugal or Prince of the Portuguese, an act informally allowed by Afonso VII, as it was thought to be Afonso Henriques's right by blood, as one of two grandsons of the Emperor of Hispania.\nAfonso then turned his arms against the persistent problem of the Moors in the south. His campaigns were successful and, on 25 July 1139, he obtained an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Ourique, and straight after was (possibly unanimously) proclaimed King of the Portuguese by his soldiers, establishing his equality in rank to the other realms of the Peninsula, although the first reference to his royal title dates from 1140. The first assembly of the Portuguese Cortes convened at Lamego (wherein he would have been given the crown from the Archbishop of Braga, to confirm his independence) is a 17th-century embellishment of Portuguese history.\nKingship.\nComplete independence from Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n's suzerainty, however, could not be achieved by military means alone. The County of Portugal still had to be acknowledged diplomatically by the neighboring lands as a kingdom and, most importantly, by the Catholic Church and the pope. Afonso wed Mafalda of Savoy, daughter of Count Amadeus III of Savoy, and sent ambassadors to Rome to negotiate with the pope. He succeeded in renouncing the suzerainty of his cousin, Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n, becoming instead a vassal of the papacy, as the kings of Sicily and Aragon had done before him. \nIn Portugal he built several monasteries and convents and bestowed important privileges to religious orders. He is notably the builder of Alcoba\u00e7a Monastery, to which he called the Cistercian Order of his uncle Bernard of Clairvaux of Burgundy. In 1143, he wrote to Pope Innocent II to declare himself and the kingdom servants of the church, swearing to pursue driving the Moors out of the Iberian Peninsula. Bypassing any king of Le\u00f3n, Afonso declared himself the direct liege man of the papacy. Afonso continued to distinguish himself by his exploits against the Moors, from whom he wrested Santar\u00e9m (see Conquest of Santar\u00e9m) and Lisbon in 1147 (see Siege of Lisbon). He also conquered an important part of the land south of the Tagus River, although this was lost again to the Moors in the following years.\nMeanwhile, King Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n regarded the independent ruler of Portugal as nothing but a rebel. Conflict between the two was constant and bitter in the following years. Afonso became involved in a war, taking the side of the Aragonese king, an enemy of Castile. To ensure the alliance, his son Sancho was engaged to Dulce of Aragon. Finally after winning the Battle of Valdevez, the Treaty of Zamora (1143) established peace between the cousins and the recognition by the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n that Portugal was a fully independent kingdom.\nIn 1169 the now old King Afonso was possibly disabled in an engagement near Badajoz, by a fall from his horse and slamming against the castle gate, and made prisoner by the soldiers of King Ferdinand II of Le\u00f3n, his son-in-law. He spent months at the hot springs of S\u00e3o Pedro do Sul, but never recovered and from this time onward the Portuguese king never rode a horse again. However, it is not certain if this was because of the disability: according to the later Portuguese chronistic tradition, this happened because Afonso would have to surrender himself again to Ferdinand or risk war between the two kingdoms if he ever rode a horse again. Portugal was obliged to surrender as his ransom almost all the conquests Afonso had made in Galicia (north of the Minho River) in the previous years. This event became known in Portuguese history as the Disaster of Badajoz (\"o Desastre de Badajoz\"). \nIn 1179 the privileges and favors given to the Catholic Church were compensated. With consistent effort by several parties, such as the primate archbishop of Braga, Paio Mendes, in the papal court, the papal bull \"Manifestis Probatum\" was promulgated accepting the new king as vassal to the pope exclusively. In it Pope Alexander III also acknowledged Afonso as king and Portugal as an independent kingdom with the right to conquer lands from the Moors.\nIn 1184, the Almohad caliph Abu Yaqub Yusuf rallied a great Almohad force to retaliate against the Portuguese raids done since the end of a five-year truce in 1178 and besieged Santar\u00e9m, which was defended by Afonso's son Sancho. The Almohad siege failed when news arrived the archbishop of Compostella had come to the defense of the city and Fernando II of Le\u00f3n himself with his army. The Almohads ended the siege and their retreat turned into a rout due to panic in their camp, with the Almohad caliph being injured in the process (according to one version, because of a crossbow bolt) and dying on the way back to Seville. Afonso died shortly after, probably out of a sudden cause of death, on 6 December 1185. The Portuguese revere him as a hero, both on account of his personal character and as the founder of their nation. There are mythical stories that it took 10 men to carry his sword, and that Afonso wanted to engage other monarchs in personal combat, but no one would dare accept his challenge. It is also told, despite his honourable character, that he had a temper. Several chronicles give the example of a papal legate that brought a message from the Pope Paschal II refusing to acknowledge Afonso's claim as king: either after committing or saying a small offense against him or after being simply read the letter, Afonso almost killed, in his rage, the papal representative, taking several portucalense nobles and soldiers to physically restrain the young would-be king.\nScientific research.\nIn July 2006, the tomb of the king (which is located in the Santa Cruz Monastery in Coimbra) was to be opened for scientific purposes by researchers from the University of Coimbra (Portugal) and the University of Granada (Spain). The opening of the tomb provoked considerable concern among some sectors of Portuguese society and Portuguese State Agency for Architectural Patrimony (\"Instituto Portugu\u00eas do Patrim\u00f3nio Arquitect\u00f3nico\" \u2013 IPPAR) halted the opening, requesting more protocols from the scientific team because of the importance of the king in the nation's heart and public thought.\nDescendants.\nIn 1146, Afonso married Mafalda, daughter of Amadeus III, Count of Savoy and Mahaut of Albon, both appearing together for the first time in May of that year confirming royal charters. They had the following issue:\nBefore his marriage to Mafalda, King Afonso fathered his first son with Chamoa G\u00f3mez, daughter of Count G\u00f3mez N\u00fa\u00f1ez and Elvira P\u00e9rez, sister of Fernando and Bermudo P\u00e9rez de Traba:\nThe extramarital offspring by Elvira G\u00e1lter were:\nKing Afonso was also the father of:"}
{"id": "1658", "revid": "27931821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1658", "title": "Afonso II of Portugal", "text": "Afonso II (; English: \"Alphonzo\"; Archaic Portuguese: \"Affonso\"; Portuguese-Galician: \"Alfonso\" or \"Alphonso\"; Latin: \"Alphonsus\"; 23 April 118525 March 1223), nicknamed the Fat (\"o Gordo\") or the Leper (\"o Gafo\"), was the third King of Portugal and the second but eldest surviving son of Sancho I of Portugal by his wife, Dulce, \"Infanta\" of Aragon. Afonso succeeded his father on 27 March 1211.\nReign.\nAs a king, Afonso II set a different approach of government. Hitherto, his father Sancho I and his grandfather Afonso I were mostly concerned with military issues either against the neighbouring Kingdom of Castile or against the Moorish lands in the south. Afonso did not pursue territory enlargement policies and managed to ensure peace with Castile during his reign. Despite this, some towns, like Alc\u00e1cer do Sal in 1217, were conquered from the Moors by the private initiative of noblemen. This does not mean that he was a weak or somehow cowardly man. The first years of his reign were marked instead by internal disturbances between Afonso and his brothers and sisters. The king managed to keep security within Portuguese borders only by outlawing and exiling his kin.\nSince military issues were not a government priority, Afonso established the state's administration and centralized power on himself. He designed the first set of Portuguese written laws. These were mainly concerned with private property, civil justice, and minting. Afonso also sent ambassadors to European kingdoms outside the Iberian Peninsula and began amicable commercial relations with most of them.\nOther reforms included the always delicate matters with the pope. In order to get the independence of Portugal recognized by Rome, his grandfather, Afonso I, had to legislate an enormous number of privileges to the Church. These eventually created a state within the state. With Portugal's position as a country firmly established, Afonso II endeavoured to weaken the power of the clergy and to apply a portion of the enormous revenues of the Catholic Church to purposes of national utility. These actions led to a serious diplomatic conflict between the pope and Portugal. After being excommunicated for his audacities by Pope Honorius III, Afonso II promised to make amends to the church, but he died in Coimbra on 25 March 1223 before making any serious attempts to do so.\nKing Afonso was buried originally at the Monastery of Santa Cruz in Coimbra where his body remained for nearly ten years. His remains were transferred subsequently to Alcoba\u00e7a Monastery, as he had stipulated in his will. He and his wife, Queen Urraca, were buried at its Royal Pantheon.\nMarriage and descendants.\nIn 1206, he married Urraca, daughter of Alfonso VIII of Castile and Eleanor of England. The couple were both descendants of King Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n. The offspring of this marriage were:\nOut of wedlock, he had two illegitimate sons:"}
{"id": "1659", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1659", "title": "Afonso III of Portugal", "text": "Afonso III (; rare English alternatives: \"Alphonzo\" or \"Alphonse\"), or \"Affonso\" (Archaic Portuguese), \"Alfonso\" or \"Alphonso\" (Portuguese-Galician) or \"Alphonsus\" (Latin), the Boulonnais (Port. \"o Bolonh\u00eas\"), King of Portugal (5 May 121016 February 1279) was the first to use the title \"King of Portugal and the Algarve\", from 1249. He was the second son of King Afonso II of Portugal and his wife, Urraca of Castile; he succeeded his brother, King Sancho II of Portugal, who died on 4 January 1248.\nEarly life.\nAfonso was born in Coimbra. As the second son of King Afonso II of Portugal, he was not expected to inherit the throne, which was destined to go to his elder brother Sancho.\nHe lived mostly in France, where he married Matilda, the heiress of Boulogne, in 1238, thereby becoming Count of Boulogne, Mortain, Aumale and Dammartin-en-Go\u00eble \"jure uxoris\".\nReign.\nIn 1246, conflicts between his brother, the king, and the church became unbearable. In 1247, Pope Innocent IV ordered Sancho II to be removed from the throne and to be replaced by the Count of Boulogne. Afonso, of course, did not refuse the papal order and consequently marched to Portugal. Since Sancho was not a popular king the order was not hard to enforce, and he fled in exile to Toledo, Castile, where he died on 4 January 1248. Until his brother's death and his own eventual coronation, Afonso retained and used the title of \"Visitador, Curador e Defensor do Reino\" (Overseer, Curator and Defender of the Kingdom).\nIn order to ascend the throne Afonso abdicated his rights to the county of Boulogne in 1248. In 1253, he divorced Matilde in order to marry Beatrice of Castile, illegitimate daughter of Alfonso X, King of Castile, and Mayor Guill\u00e9n de Guzm\u00e1n.\nDetermined not to make the same mistakes as his brother, Afonso III paid special attention to what the middle class, composed of merchants and small land owners, had to say. In 1254, in the city of Leiria, he held the first session of the \"Cortes\", a general assembly comprising the nobility, the middle class and representatives of all municipalities. He also made laws intended to restrain the upper classes from abusing the least favored part of the population. Remembered as a notable administrator, Afonso III founded several towns, granted the title of city to many others and reorganized public administration.\nAfonso showed extraordinary vision for the time. Progressive measures taken during his kingship include: representatives of the commons, besides the nobility and clergy, were involved in governance; the end of preventive arrests such that henceforward all arrests had to be first presented to a judge to determine the detention measure; and fiscal innovation, such as negotiating extraordinary taxes with the mercantile classes and direct taxation of the Church, rather than debasement of the coinage. These may have led to his excommunication by the holy see and possibly precipitated his death, and his son Denis's premature rise to the throne at only 18 years old.\nSecure on the throne, Afonso III then proceeded to make war with the Muslim communities that still thrived in the south. In his reign the Algarve became part of the kingdom, following the capture of Faro.\nFinal years and death.\nFollowing his success against the Moors, Afonso III had to deal with a political situation concerning the country's borders with Castile. The neighbouring kingdom considered that the newly acquired lands of the Algarve should be Castilian, not Portuguese, which led to a series of wars between the two kingdoms. Finally, in 1267, the Treaty of Badajoz (1267) was signed in Badajoz, determining that the southern border between Castile and Portugal should be the River Guadiana, as it is today.\nAfonso died in Alcoba\u00e7a, Coimbra or Lisbon, aged 68.\nMarriages and descendants.\nAfonso's first wife was Matilda II, Countess of Boulogne, daughter of Renaud, Count of Dammartin, and Ida, Countess of Boulogne. They had no surviving children. He divorced Matilda in 1253 and, in the same year, married Beatrice of Castile, illegitimate daughter of Alfonso X, King of Castile, and Mayor Guill\u00e9n de Guzm\u00e1n."}
{"id": "1660", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1660", "title": "Afonso IV of Portugal", "text": "Afonso IV (; 8 February 129128 May 1357), called the Brave (), was King of Portugal from 1325 until his death. He was the only legitimate son of King Denis of Portugal by his wife Elizabeth of Aragon.\nEarly life.\nAfonso, born in Lisbon, was the rightful heir to the Portuguese throne. However, he was not Denis' favourite son, the old king preferring his illegitimate son, Afonso Sanches. The notorious rivalry between the half brothers led to civil war several times. On 7 January 1325, Afonso's father died and he, Afonso IV, became king, whereupon he exiled his rival, Afonso Sanches, to Castile, and stripped him of all the lands and fiefdom given by their father, Denis. From Castile, Afonso Sanches orchestrated a series of attempts to usurp the crown. After a few failed attempts at invasion, the brothers signed a peace treaty, arranged by Afonso's mother Queen Elizabeth.\nIn 1309, Afonso IV married Infanta Beatrice of Castile, daughter of King Sancho IV of Castile by his wife Mar\u00eda de Molina. The first-born of this union was Infanta Maria of Portugal.\nKing of Portugal and Algarve.\nIn 1325 Alfonso XI of Castile entered a child-marriage with Constanza Manuel of Castile, the daughter of one of his regents. Two years later, he had the marriage annulled so he could marry Afonso's daughter, Maria of Portugal. Maria became Queen of Castile in 1328 upon her marriage to Alfonso XI, who soon became involved publicly with a mistress. Constanza was imprisoned in a castle in Toro while her father, Juan Manuel, Prince of Villena, waged war against Alfonso XI until 1329. Eventually, the two reached a peaceful accord after mediation by Juan del Campo, Bishop of Oviedo; this secured Constance's release from prison.\nThe public humiliation of his daughter led Afonso IV to have his son and heir, Peter, marry the no less aggrieved Castilian infanta, Constanza. Afonso subsequently started a war against Castile, peace arriving four years later, through the intervention of the Infanta Maria herself. A year after the peace treaty was signed in Seville, Portuguese troops played an important role in defeating the Moors at the Battle of R\u00edo Salado in October 1340.\nLater life.\nPolitical intrigue marked the last part of Afonso IV's reign, although Castille was torn by civil war after Alfonso XI died. Henry of Trast\u00e1mara challenged the new King Peter of Castile, who sent many Castilian nobles into exile in Portugal. Afonso's heir, Pedro, fell in love with his new wife's lady-in-waiting, In\u00eas de Castro. In\u00eas was the daughter of an important noble family from Galicia, with links (albeit illegitimate) to both the royal houses of Castile and Portugal. Her brothers were aligned with the Trastamara faction, and became favorites of crown prince Pedro, much to the dismay of others at the Portuguese court, who considered them Castilian upstarts. When Constance of Pe\u00f1afiel died weeks after giving birth to their third child, Pedro began living openly with In\u00eas, recognized all her children as his and repudiated the idea of marrying anyone other than In\u00eas herself. His father refused to go to war again against Castile, hoping his heir's infatuation would end, and tried to arrange another dynastic marriage for Pedro.\nThe situation became worse as the years passed and the aging Afonso lost control over his court. His grandson and Pedro's only legitimate son, future king Fernando of Portugal, was a sickly child, while In\u00eas' illegitimate children thrived. Worried about his legitimate grandson's life, and the growing power of Castile within Portugal's borders, Afonso ordered In\u00eas de Castro first imprisoned in his mother's old convent in Coimbra, and then murdered in 1355. He expected his son to give in and marry a princess, but the heir became enraged upon learning of his lover's decapitation in front of their young children. Pedro put himself at the head of an army and devastated the country between the Douro and the Minho rivers before he was reconciled to his father in early 1357. Afonso died almost immediately after, in Lisbon in May.\nAfonso IV's nickname \"the Brave\" alludes to his martial exploits. However, his most important accomplishments were the relative peace enjoyed by the country during his long reign and the support he gave to the Portuguese Navy. Afonso granted public funding to raise a proper commercial fleet and ordered the first Portuguese maritime explorations. The conflict with Pedro, and the explorations he initiated, eventually became the foundation of the Portuguese national epic, \"Os Lus\u00edadas\" by Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es.\nThe dramatic circumstances of the relationship between father and son and In\u00eas de Castro was used as the basis for the plot of more than twenty operas and ballets. The story with its tragic denouement is immortalized in several plays and poems in Portuguese, such as \"The Lus\u00edadas\" by Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es (canto iii, stanzas 118-135), and in Spanish, including \"Nise lastimosa\" and \"Nise laureada\" (1577) by Jer\u00f3nimo Berm\u00fadez, \"Reinar despues de morir\" by Lu\u00eds V\u00e9lez de Guevara, as well as a play by French playwright Henry de Montherlant called \"La Reine morte\" (\"The Dead Queen\"). Mary Russell Mitford also wrote a drama based on the story entitled \"Inez de Castro\". \"In\u00eas de Castro\" is a novel by Maria Pilar Queralt del Hierro in Spanish and Portuguese.\nMarriage and descendants.\nOn 12 September 1309, Afonso married Beatrice of Castile, daughter of Sancho IV of Castile, and Mar\u00eda de Molina, and had four sons and three daughters. Afonso broke the tradition of previous kings and did not have any children out of wedlock."}
{"id": "1661", "revid": "1011859435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1661", "title": "Afonso V of Portugal", "text": "Afonso V () (15 January 1432 \u2013 28 August 1481), known by the sobriquet the African (), was a King of Portugal. His sobriquet refers to his military conquests in Northern Africa.\nAs of 1471, Afonso V was the first king of Portugal to claim dominion over a plural \"Kingdom of the Algarves\", instead of the singular \"Kingdom of the Algarve\". Territories added to the Portuguese crown lands in North Africa during the 15th century came to be referred to as possessions of the Kingdom of the Algarve (now a region of southern Portugal), not the Kingdom of Portugal. The \"Algarves\" then were considered to be the southern Portuguese territories on both sides of the Strait of Gibraltar.\nEarly life.\nAfonso was born in Sintra, the second son of King Edward of Portugal by his wife Eleanor of Aragon. Following the death of his older brother, Infante Jo\u00e3o (1429\u20131433), Afonso acceded to the position of heir apparent and was made the first Prince of Portugal by his father, who sought to emulate the English Court's custom of a dynastic title that distinguished the heir apparent from the other children of the monarch. He was only six years old when he succeeded his father in 1438. \nDuring his minority, Afonso V was placed under the regency of his mother in accordance with a will of his late father. As both a foreigner and a woman, the queen was not a popular choice for regent. Opposition rose and without any important ally among the Portuguese aristocracy other than Afonso, Count of Barcelos, the illegitimate half brother of King Edward, the queen's position was untenable. In 1439, the Portuguese Cortes (assembly of the kingdom) decided to replace the queen with Peter, Duke of Coimbra (Dom Pedro), the young king's oldest uncle.\nPeter's main policies were concerned with restricting the political power of the great noble houses and expanding the powers of the crown. The country prospered under his rule, but not peacefully, as his laws interfered with the ambition of powerful nobles. The count of Barcelos, a personal enemy of the Duke of Coimbra (despite being half-brothers) eventually became the king's favourite uncle and began a constant struggle for power. In 1442, the king made Afonso the first Duke of Braganza. With this title and its lands, he became the most powerful man in Portugal and one of the richest men in Europe. To secure his position as regent, Peter had Afonso marry his daughter, Isabella of Coimbra, in 1445.\nBut on 9 June 1448, when the king came of age, Peter had to surrender his power to Afonso V. The years of conspiracy by the Duke of Braganza finally came to a head. On 15 September of the same year, Afonso V nullified all the laws and edicts approved under the regency. In the following year, led by what were later discovered to be false accusations, Afonso declared Peter a rebel and defeated his army in the Battle of Alfarrobeira, in which his uncle (and father-in-law) was killed. After this battle and the loss of one of Portugal's most remarkable infantes, the Duke of Braganza became the \"de facto\" ruler of the country.\nInvasion of Morocco.\nAfonso V then turned his attentions to North Africa. In the reign of his grandfather John I, Ceuta had been conquered and taken over from the king of Morocco, and now the new king wanted to expand the conquests. The king's army conquered Alc\u00e1cer Ceguer in 1458 and Arzila in 1471. Tangiers, on the other hand, was won and lost several times between 1460 and 1464. These achievements granted the king the nickname of \"the African\" or \"Africano\". The king also supported the exploration of the Atlantic Ocean led by prince Henry the Navigator but after Henry's death in 1460, he did nothing to continue Henry's work. Administratively, Afonso V was a passive king. He chose not to pursue the revision of laws or development of commerce, preferring instead to preserve the legacy of his father Edward and grandfather John I. In 1469, King Afonso V of Portugal granted Fern\u00e3o Gomes the monopoly of trade in the Gulf of Guinea.\nIn 1452, Pope Nicholas V issued the papal bull \"Dum Diversas\", which granted Afonso V the right to reduce \"Saracens, pagans and any other unbelievers\" to hereditary slavery. This was reaffirmed and extended in the Romanus Pontifex bull of 1455 (also by Nicholas V). These papal bulls came to be seen by some as a justification for the subsequent era of slave trade and European colonialism.\nCastile.\nWhen the campaigns in Africa were over, Afonso V found new grounds for battle in neighboring Castile. On December 11, 1474 King Henry IV of Castile died without a male heir, leaving just one daughter, Joanna la Beltraneja. However, her paternity was questioned; it was rumored that his wife, Queen Joan of Portugal had an affair with a nobleman named Beltr\u00e1n de La Cueva. The death of Henry ignited a war of succession with one faction supporting Joanna and the other supporting Isabella, Henry's half-sister. Afonso V was persuaded to intervene on behalf of Joanna, his niece. He betrothed himself to her, proclaimed himself king of Castile and led troops into the kingdom. Because of their close blood-relationship, a formal marriage had to wait for papal dispensation.\nOn May 12, 1475, Afonso entered Castile with an army of 5,600 cavalry and 14,000 foot soldiers. In March, 1476, after several skirmishes and much maneuvering, the 8, 000 men of Afonso and Prince Jo\u00e3o, faced a Castilian force of similar size in the battle of Toro. The Castilians were led by Isabella's husband, Prince Ferdinand II of Aragon, Cardinal Mendoza and the Duke of Alba. The fight was fierce and confusing but the result was a stalemate: While the forces of Cardinal Mendoza and the Duke of Alba won over their opponents led by the Portuguese King \u2013who left the battlefield to take refuge in Castronu\u00f1o, the troops commanded by Prince Joao defeated and persecuted the troops of the Castilian right wing, recovered the Portuguese royal standard, remaining ordered in the battlefield where they collected the fugitives of Afonso. Both sides claimed victory but Afonso's prospects for obtaining the Castilian crown were severely damaged.\nAfter the battle, Afonso sailed to France hoping to obtain the assistance of King Louis XI in his fight against Castile. But finding himself deceived by the French monarch, he returned to Portugal in 1477. Disillusioned, he abdicated for a few days in November 1477 in favor of his son John II, then after returning to the throne, he retired to a monastery in Sintra, where he died in 1481.\nMarriages and descendants.\nAfonso married firstly, in 1447, Isabella of Coimbra, with whom he had three children:\nAfonso married secondly, in 1475, his niece Joanna of Castile, known as \"La Beltraneja\".\nBibliography.\nArticles\nBooks"}
{"id": "1662", "revid": "31685261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1662", "title": "Afonso VI of Portugal", "text": "Afonso VI (; 21 August 164312 September 1683), known as \"the Victorious\" (), was the second King of Portugal of the House of Braganza from 1656 until his death. He was initially under the regency of his mother, Luisa of Medina-Sidonia, until 1662, when he removed her to a convent and took power with the help of his favourite, the Count of Castelo Melhor.\nAfonso's reign saw the end of the Restoration War (1640\u201368) and Spain's recognition of Portugal's independence. He also negotiated a French alliance through his marriage. However, the king was physically and mentally weak. In 1668, his brother Pedro conspired to have him declared incapable of ruling, and took supreme \"de facto\" power as regent, although nominally Afonso was still sovereign. Queen Marie Fran\u00e7oise, Afonso's wife, received an annulment and subsequently married Pedro. Afonso spent the rest of his life and reign practically a prisoner.\nEarly life.\nAt the age of three, Afonso suffered an illness that left him paralyzed on the left side of his body, also leaving him mentally unstable. His father created him 10th Duke of Braganza.\nAfter the death of his eldest brother Teod\u00f3sio, Prince of Brazil in 1653, Afonso became the heir apparent to the throne of the kingdom. He received also the crown-princely title 2nd Prince of Brazil.\nSuccession.\nHe succeeded his father (Jo\u00e3o IV) in 1656 at the age of thirteen. His mother, Luisa of Medina-Sidonia, was named regent in his father's will. His mental instability and paralysis, plus his lack of interest in government, left his mother as regent for six years, until 1662. Afonso oversaw decisive military victories over the Spanish at Elvas (14 January 1659), Ameixial (8 June 1663) and Montes Claros (17 June 1665), culminating in the final Spanish recognition of sovereignty of Portugal's new ruling dynasty, the House of Braganza, on 13 February 1668 in the Treaty of Lisbon.\nColonial affairs.\nColonial affairs saw the Dutch conquest of Jaffnapatam, Portugal's last colony in Portuguese Ceylon (1658) and the cession of Bombay and Tangier to England (23 June 1661) as dowry for Afonso's sister, Catherine of Braganza, who had married King Charles II of England. English mediation in 1661 saw the Netherlands acknowledge Portuguese rule of Brazil in return for uncontested control of Ceylon.\nIn 1662, the Count of Castelo Melhor saw an opportunity to gain power at court by befriending the king. He managed to convince the king that his mother was out to steal his throne and exile her in Portugal. As a result, Afonso sent his mother to a convent.\nMarriage.\nAfonso married Marie Fran\u00e7oise of Nemours, the daughter of the Duke of Savoy in 1666, but the marriage was short-lived. Marie Fran\u00e7oise, or Maria Francisca in Portuguese, filed for an annulment in 1667 based on the impotence of the king. The Church granted her the annulment, and she married Afonso's brother, Pedro, Duke of Beja (the future Peter II).\nDownfall.\nThat same year, Pedro managed to gain enough support to force Afonso to relinquish control of the government to him, and he became Prince Regent in 1668. While Pedro never formally usurped the throne, Afonso was king in name only for the rest of his life. (The proceedings which the annulment of Afonso's marriage involved formed the basis of Jo\u00e3o M\u00e1rio Grilo's 1989 film, \"The King's Trial\" [\"O Processo do Rei\"].) For seven years after Pedro's coup, Afonso was kept on the island of Terceira in the Azores. His health broken by this captivity, he was eventually permitted to return to the Portuguese mainland, but he remained powerless and kept under guard. At Sintra he died in 1683.\nThe room where he was imprisoned is preserved at Sintra National Palace."}
{"id": "1663", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1663", "title": "Alphonso I of Spain", "text": "There has not been a monarch known as Alphonso or Alfonso I of Spain, the first king of that name of the unified Spain being Alfonso XII of Spain (1874\u20131885).\nSeveral precursor kingdoms have had an Alfonso I. You may be looking for:"}
{"id": "1664", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1664", "title": "Alfonso II of Asturias", "text": "Alfonso II of Asturias (842), nicknamed the Chaste (), was the king of Asturias during two different periods: first in the year 783 and later from 791 until his death in 842. Upon his death, Nepociano, a family member of undetermined relation, attempted to usurp the crown in place of the future Ramiro I.\nDuring his reign, which covered a span of 51 years, Alfonso discovered the supposed tomb of apostle Santiago in the town of Compostela, which later became known as the city of Santiago de Compostela. He was the son of Fruela I and Munia, a Basque woman captured and brought back to Asturias by the former following a military campaign.\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Oviedo in 759 or 760. He was put under the guardianship of his aunt Adosinda after his father's death, but one tradition relates his being put in the Monastery of San Xuli\u00e1n de Samos. He was the governor of the palace during the reign of Adosinda's husband Silo. On Silo's death, he was elected king by Adosinda's allies, but the magnates raised his uncle Mauregatus to the throne instead. Alfonso fled to \u00c1lava where he found shelter with his maternal relatives. Mauregatus was succeeded by Bermudo, Alfonso's cousin, who abdicated after his defeat at the Battle of the Burbia River.\nAlfonso proclaimed king.\nAlfonso was subsequently elected king on 14 September 791. Poets of a later generation invented the story of the secret marriage between his sister Ximena and Sancho, count of Saldana, and the feats of their son Bernardo del Carpio. Bernardo is the hero of a \"cantar de gesta\" (\"chanson de geste\") written to please the anarchical spirit of the nobles.\nAndalusian raids into Asturias.\nOn accession to the throne, Hisham I, son of Abd al-Rahman I, commenced a string of military campaigns in the eastern Pyrenees and to the north-west. In 794, a raid spearheaded by Abd al-Karim dealt a major military blow to Alfonso II on the eastern fringes of the Kingdom of Asturias (Cantabria and Castile). The Asturian king asked for the assistance of the Basque Frankish vassal Belasco, master of \u00c1lava and bordering regions at the time. Abd al-Karim advanced deeper west into Asturias and pillaged the region, while his brother Abd al-Malik ventured into the western Asturian lands.\nRelations with Charlemagne and the Papacy.\nUnder pressure from his enemies, Alfonso II reached out to Charlemagne, sending delegations to Toulouse and Aix-la-Chapelle in 796, 797, and 798. These diplomatic efforts may have aimed to strengthen his legitimacy and the Asturian government against ongoing internal unrest\u2014\u2014\"viz.\", troubles in Galicia\u2014\u2014and external attacks of the Ibn Mugait brothers, the generals Abd al-Karim and Abd al-Malik.\nAlfonso was acknowledged as a king by Charlemagne and the Pope, and Asturias as a kingdom for the first time. The king showed an interest in the Frankish cult of Saint Martin of Tours, and he encouraged Carolingian Church influence in Asturias. Also, during Alfonso's reign, the alleged resting place of St. James was revealed. Alfonso's envoys to Charlemagne's courts may have also dealt with the adoptionist controversy, which had brought Bermudo's kingdom into Charlemagne's view. It seems that Carolingian support did much to spur his raid into Andalusian territory up to Lisbon, which was captured and sacked by his troops in 798.\nLater events.\nIn 825 he defeated Cordovan forces at Nar\u00f3n and Anceo and, thanks to these victories, the \"repopulation\" of parts of Galicia, Le\u00f3n, and Castile was started\u2014 with charters granted that confirmed the possession of the territories.\nAlfonso also moved the capital from Pravia, where Silo had located it, to Oviedo, the city of his father's founding and his birth. There he constructed churches and a palace. He built San Tirso, where he is buried, and Santullano, on the outskirts. The \"Cr\u00f3nica Sebastianense\" records his death in 842, saying:\nTradition relates that in 814, the body of Saint James the Greater was discovered in Compostela and that Alfonso was the first pilgrim to that famous medieval (and modern) shrine."}
{"id": "1669", "revid": "332841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1669", "title": "Amarasimha", "text": "Amarasimha (IAST: Amara-si\u1e43ha, c. CE 375) was a Sanskrit grammarian and poet from ancient India, of whose personal history hardly anything is known. He is said to have been \"one of the nine gems that adorned the throne of Vikramaditya,\" and according to the evidence of Xuanzang, this is the Chandragupta Vikramaditya (Chandragupta II) who flourished about CE 375. Other sources describe him as belonging to the period of Vikramaditya of 7th century. Most of Amarasi\u1e43ha's works were lost, with the exception of the celebrated \"Amara-Kosha\" (IAST: \"Amarako\u015ba\") (\"Treasury of Amara\"). The first reliable mention of the \"Amarakosha\" is in the Amoghavritti of Shakatayana composed during the reign of Amoghavarsha (814-867CE)\nThe \"Amarakosha\" is a vocabulary of Sanskrit roots, in three books, and hence sometimes called \"Trikanda\" or the \"Tripartite\". It is also known as \"Namalinganushasana\". The \"Amarakosha\" contains 10,000 words, and is arranged, like other works of its class, in metre, to aid the memory.\nThe first chapter of the \"Kosha\" was printed at Rome in Tamil character in 1798. An edition of the entire work, with English notes and an index by HT Colebrooke appeared at Serampore in 1808. The Sanskrit text was printed at Calcutta in 1831. A French translation by ALA Loiseleur-Deslongchamps was published at Paris in 1839. B. L. Rice compiled the text in Kannada script with meanings in English and Kannada in 1927.\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "1672", "revid": "3378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1672", "title": "Alphonso VIII of Spain", "text": ""}
{"id": "1673", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1673", "title": "Alfonso IX of Spain", "text": ""}
{"id": "1676", "revid": "34338744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1676", "title": "Alfonso XII", "text": "Alfonso XII of Spain (Alfonso Francisco de As\u00eds Fernando P\u00edo Juan Mar\u00eda de la Concepci\u00f3n Gregorio Pelayo; 28 November 185725 November 1885), also known as El Pacificador or the Peacemaker, was King of Spain, reigning from 1874 to 1885. After a revolution that deposed his mother Isabella II from the throne in 1868, Alfonso studied in Austria and France. His mother abdicated in his favour in 1870, and he returned to Spain as king in 1874 following a military coup against the First Republic. Alfonso died aged 27 in 1885, and was succeeded by his son, Alfonso XIII, who was born the following year. To date, he is the last monarch of Spain to have died whilst on the throne.\nPolitical background, early life and paternity.\nAlfonso was born in Madrid as the eldest son of Queen Isabella II. Officially, his father was her husband, King Francisco de As\u00eds. Alfonso's biological paternity is uncertain. There is speculation that his biological father may have been Enrique Puigmolt\u00f3 y Mayans (a captain of the guard). These rumours were used as political propaganda against Alfonso by the Carlists.\nHis mother's accession created the second cause of instability, which was the Carlist Wars. The supporters of the Count of Molina as king of Spain rose to have him enthroned. In addition, within the context of the post-Napoleonic restorations and revolutions which engulfed the West both in Europe and the Americas, both the Carlistas and the Isabelino conservatives were opposed to the new Napoleonic constitutional system. Much like in Britain, which subtracted itself from the liberal constitutional process, Spanish conservatives wanted to continue with the Traditional Spanish Organic Laws such as the Fuero Juzgo, the Nov\u00edsima Recopilaci\u00f3n and the Partidas of Alfonso X. This led to the third cause of instability of note, the \"Independence of the American Kingdoms\", recognized between 1823 and 1850.\nA split nation.\nWhen Queen Isabella II and her husband were forced to leave Spain by the Revolution of 1868, Alfonso accompanied them to Paris. From there, he was sent to the Theresianum in Vienna to continue his studies. On 25 June 1870, he was recalled to Paris, where his mother abdicated in his favour, in the presence of a number of Spanish nobles who had tied their fortunes to those of the exiled queen. He assumed the name Alfonso XII, for although no king of united Spain had borne the name \"Alfonso XI\", the Spanish monarchy was regarded as continuous with the more ancient monarchy represented by the 11 kings of Asturias, Le\u00f3n and Castile also named Alfonso.\nThe Republic.\nFollowing Amadeo's abandonment in 1873, Parliament established the Federal Republic (including the territories of Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Pacific Archipelagos). The first act of President Estanislao Figueras was to extend the Abolition Act to Puerto Rico. Cuban slaves would have to wait until 1889.\nBut the republicans were not in agreement either, and they had to contend with the War in Cuba, and Muslim uprisings in Spanish Morocco. In the midst of the crisis during and after the First Spanish Republic, the Carlist party made itself strong in areas with claims over their national and institutional specificity, such as Catalonia or the Basque districts. By 1872, the Third Carlist War erupted. This unrest led to the creation of a group in favour of the Bourbon Restoration, made by some sectors of the conservatives led by Canovas del Castillo.\nThe Prince of Asturias, Alfonso, was the person chosen to develop the new road map proposed by Canovas, which led to the June 1870 abdication of Queen Isabel II in favour of her son Prince Alfonso. The new road map, which indeed ended the eternal crisis begun in 1810 was called 'Alfonsismo', and the moderate centrist C\u00e1novas del Castillo became the spokesman. As having Alfonso in Spain would be a problem, C\u00e1novas became responsible for his education. He sent Alfonso to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in England, where the training Alfonso received was severe but more cosmopolitan than in Spain, given the current atmosphere.\nOn 1 December 1874, Alfonso issued the Sandhurst Manifesto, where he set the ideological basis of the Bourbon Restoration. It was drafted in reply to a birthday greeting from his followers, a manifesto proclaiming himself the sole representative of the Spanish monarchy. At the end of 1874, Brigadier Mart\u00ednez Campos, who had long been working more or less openly for the king, led some battalions of the central army to Sagunto, rallied to his own flag the troops sent against him, and entered Valencia in the king's name. Thereupon the President resigned, and his power was transferred to the king's plenipotentiary and adviser, Antonio C\u00e1novas. The 29 December 1874 military coup of Gen. Martinez Campos in Sagunto ended the failed republic and meant the rise of the young Prince Alfonso.\nReturn from exile.\nWithin a few days after Canovas del Castillo took power as Premier, the new king, proclaimed on 29 December 1874, arrived at Madrid, passing through Barcelona and Valencia and was acclaimed everywhere (1875). In 1876, a vigorous campaign against the Carlists, in which the young king took part, resulted in the defeat of Don Carlos and the Duke's abandonment of the struggle.\nInitially led by Canovas del Castillo as moderate prime minister, what was thought at one time as a coup aimed at placing the military in the political-administrative positions of power, in reality ushered in a civilian regime that lasted until Primo de Rivera's 1923 coup d'\u00e9tat. C\u00e1novas was the real architect of the new regime of the Restoration.\nIn order to eliminate one of the problems of the reign of Isabel II, the single party and its destabilizing consequences, the Liberal Party was allowed to incorporate and participate in national politics, and the 'turnismo' or alternation was to become the new system. Turnismo would be endorsed in the Constitution of 1876 and the Pact of Pardo Palace (1885). It meant that liberal and conservative prime ministers would succeed each other ending thus the troubles.\nThis led to the end of the Carlist revolts and the victory over the New York-backed Cuban revolutionaries, and led to a huge backing both by insular and peninsular Spaniards of Alfonso as a wise and able king.\nAlfonso's short reign established the foundations for the final socioeconomic recuperation of Spain after the 1808\u20131874 crisis. Both European (the coastal regions, such as the Basque Country, Catalonia, and Asturias) and Overseas \u2013 Antilles and Pacific were able to grow steadily. Cuba and Puerto Rico prospered to the point that Spain's first train was between Havana and Camag\u00fcey, and the first telegraph in Latin America was in Puerto Rico, established by Samuel Morse, whose daughter lived there with her husband. Upon the American invasion of Puerto Rico, ten US dollars were needed to buy one Puerto Rican peso.\nFirst marriage.\nOn 23 January 1878 at the Basilica of Atocha in Madrid, Alfonso married his first cousin, Princess Maria de las Mercedes, but she died within six months of the marriage.\nSecond marriage and rule.\nOn 29 November 1879 at the Basilica of Atocha in Madrid, Alfonso married his double third cousin, Archduchess Maria Christina of Austria. During the honeymoon, a pastry cook named Otero fired at the young sovereign and his wife as they were driving in Madrid.\nThe children of this marriage were:\nAlfonso had two sons by Elena Armanda Nicolasa Sanz y Mart\u00ednez de Arizala (15 December 1849, in Castell\u00f3n de la Plana \u2013 24 December 1898, in Paris):\nIn 1881 Alfonso refused to sanction a law by which the ministers were to remain in office for a fixed term of 18 months. Upon the consequent resignation of Canovas del Castillo, he summoned Pr\u00e1xedes Mateo Sagasta, the Liberal leader, to form a new cabinet.\nDeath and impact.\nIn November 1885, Alfonso died, just short of his 28th birthday, at the Royal Palace of El Pardo near Madrid. He had been suffering from tuberculosis, but the immediate cause of his death was a recurrence of dysentery.\nIn 1902, his widow Maria Cristina initiated a national contest to build a monument in memory of Alfonso. The winning design, by Jos\u00e9 Grases Riera, was erected in an artificial lake in Madrid's Parque del Buen Retiro in 1922.\nComing to the throne at such an early age Alfonso had served no apprenticeship in the art of ruling. Benevolent and sympathetic in disposition, he won the affection of his people by fearlessly visiting districts ravaged by cholera or devastated by earthquake in 1885. His capacity for dealing with men was considerable, and he never allowed himself to become the instrument of any particular party. During his short reign, peace was established both at home and abroad, finances were well regulated, and the various administrative services were placed on a basis that afterwards enabled Spain to pass through the disastrous war with the United States without the threat of a revolution."}
{"id": "1677", "revid": "22039575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1677", "title": "Alfonso XIII", "text": "Alfonso XIII (17 May 1886\u00a0\u2013 28 February 1941), also known as El Africano or the African, was King of Spain from 1886 until the proclamation of the Second Republic in 1931. He was a monarch from birth as his father, Alfonso XII, had died the previous year. Alfonso's mother, Maria Christina of Austria, served as regent until he assumed full powers on his sixteenth birthday in 1902.\nDuring Alfonso's reign of the Kingdom of Spain, the country experienced four major problems that contributed to the end of the liberal monarchy: the lack of real political representation of broad social groups; the poor situation of the popular classes, especially peasants; problems arising from the Rif War; and Catalan nationalism. The political and social turbulence that began with the Spanish\u2013American War prevented the turnaround parties from establishing a true liberal democracy, which led to the establishment of the dictatorship of Miguel Primo de Rivera. With the political failure of the dictatorship, Alfonso impelled a return to the democratic normality with the intention of regenerating the regime. Nevertheless, it was abandoned by all political classes, as they felt betrayed by the king's support of the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera.\nHe left Spain voluntarily after the municipal elections of April 1931, which were taken as a plebiscite on abolishing the monarchy.\nAlfonso was nicknamed \"the Royal Knight of Charity\" for his unprecedented work with the European War Office during World War I. For this great humanitarian endeavour, he was nominated to the Nobel Peace Prize in 1917, and came close to receiving the award, but this was ultimately won by the Red Cross. As of today, he remains the only monarch in history to have ever received a nomination to a Nobel Prize.\nReign.\nBirth and regency.\nAlfonso was born at Royal Palace of Madrid in Madrid on 17 May 1886. He was the posthumous son of Alfonso XII of Spain, who had died in November 1885, and became King of Spain upon his birth. Just after he was born, he was carried naked to the Spanish prime minister Pr\u00e1xedes Mateo on a silver tray.\nFive days later he was carried in a solemn court procession with a Golden Fleece round his neck and was baptized with water specially brought from the River Jordan in Israel. The French newspaper \"Le Figaro\" described the young king in 1889 as \"the happiest and best-loved of all the rulers of the earth\". His mother, Maria Christina of Austria, served as his regent until his 16th birthday. During the regency, in 1898, Spain lost its colonial rule over Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippines to the United States as a result of the Spanish\u2013American War.\nAt five years old, Alfonso became seriously ill during the 1889\u20131890 flu pandemic. His health deteriorated around 10 January 1890 and doctors reported his condition as the flu attacked his nervous system leaving the young king in a state of indolence. He eventually recovered.\nWhen he came of age in May 1902, the week of his majority was marked by festivities, bullfights, balls and receptions throughout Spain. He took his oath to the constitution before members of the Cortes on 17 May.\nHe received to a large extent a military education that imbued him with \"a Spanish nationalism strengthened by his military vocation\". Besides the clique of military tutors, Alfonso also received political teachings from a liberal\u2014\u2014and moral precepts from an integrist, Jos\u00e9 Fern\u00e1ndez de la Monta\u00f1a.\nEngagement and marriage.\nBy 1905, Alfonso was looking for a suitable consort. On a state visit to the United Kingdom, he stayed in London at Buckingham Palace with King Edward VII. There he met Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, the daughter of Edward's youngest sister Princess Beatrice, and a granddaughter of Queen Victoria. He found her attractive, and she returned his interest. There were obstacles to the marriage. Victoria was a Protestant, and would have to become a Catholic. Victoria's brother Leopold was a haemophiliac, so there was a 50 percent chance that Victoria was a carrier of the trait. Finally, Alfonso's mother Maria Christina wanted him to marry a member of her family, the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, or some other Catholic princess, as she considered the Battenbergs to be non-dynastic.\nVictoria was willing to change her religion, and her being a haemophilia carrier was only a possibility. Maria Christina was eventually persuaded to drop her opposition. In January 1906 she wrote an official letter to Princess Beatrice proposing the match. Victoria met Maria Christina and Alfonso in Biarritz, France, later that month, and converted to Catholicism in San Sebasti\u00e1n in March.\nIn May, diplomats of both kingdoms officially executed the agreement of marriage. Alfonso and Victoria were married at the Royal Monastery of San Jer\u00f3nimo in Madrid on 31 May 1906, with British royalty in attendance, including Victoria's cousins the Prince and Princess of Wales (later King George V and Queen Mary). The wedding was marked by an assassination attempt on Alfonso and Victoria by Catalan anarchist Mateu Morral. As the wedding procession returned to the palace, he threw a bomb from a window which killed 30 bystanders and members of the procession, while 100 others were wounded.\nOn 10 May 1907, the couple's first child, Alfonso, Prince of Asturias, was born. Victoria was in fact a haemophilia carrier, and Alfonso inherited the condition.\nNeither of the two daughters born to the King and Queen were haemophilia carriers, but another of their sons, Gonzalo (1914\u20131934), had the condition. Alfonso distanced himself from his wife for transmitting the condition to their sons. From 1914 on, he had several mistresses, and fathered five illegitimate children. A sixth illegitimate child had been born before his marriage.\nWorld War I.\nDuring World War I, because of his family connections with both sides and the division of popular opinion, Spain remained neutral. The King established an office for assistance to prisoners of war on all sides. This office used the Spanish diplomatic and military network abroad to intercede for thousands of POWs \u2013 transmitting and receiving letters for them, and other services. The office was located in the Royal Palace.\nAlfonso became gravely ill during the 1918 flu pandemic. Spain was neutral and thus under no wartime censorship restrictions, so his illness and subsequent recovery were reported to the world, while flu outbreaks in the belligerent countries were concealed. This gave the misleading impression that Spain was the most-affected area and led to the pandemic being dubbed \"the Spanish Flu.\"\nRif War and Miguel Primo de Rivera.\nFollowing World War I, Spain entered the lengthy yet victorious Rif War (1920\u20131926) to preserve its colonial rule over northern Morocco. Critics of the monarchy thought the war was an unforgivable loss of money and lives, and nicknamed Alfonso \"el Africano\" (\"the African\"). Alfonso had not acted as a strict constitutional monarch, and supported the Africanists who wanted to conquer for Spain a new empire in Africa to compensate for the lost empire in the Americas and Asia. The Rif War had starkly polarized Spanish society between the Africanists who wanted to conquer an empire in Africa vs. the \"abandonistas\" who wanted to abandon Morocco as not worth the blood and treasure. Alfonso liked to play favourites with his generals, and one of his most favored generals was Manuel Fern\u00e1ndez Silvestre. In 1921, when Silvestre advanced up into the Rif mountains of Morocco, Alfonso sent him a telegram whose first line read \"Hurrah for real men!\", urging Silvestre not to retreat at a time when Silvestre was experiencing major difficulties. Silvestre stayed the course, leading his men into the Battle of Annual, one of Spain's worst defeats. Alfonso, who was on holiday in the south of France at the time, was informed of the \"Disaster of the Annual\" while he was playing golf. Reportedly, Alfonso's response to the news was to shrug his shoulders and say \"Chicken meat is cheap\", before resuming his game. Alfonso remained in France and did not return to Spain to comfort the families of the soldiers lost in the battle, which many people at the time saw as a callous and cold act, a sign that the King was indifferent over the lives of his soldiers. In 1922, the \"Cortes\" started an investigation into the responsibility for the Annual disaster and soon discovered evidence that the King had been one of the main supporters of Silvestre's advance into the Rif mountains.\nAfter the \"Disaster of the Annual\", Spain's war in the Rif went from bad to worse, and as the Spanish were barely hanging onto Morocco, support for the \"abandonistas\" grew as many people could see no point to the war. In August 1923, Spanish soldiers embarking for Morocco mutinied, other soldiers in M\u00e1laga simply refused to board the ships that were to take them to Morocco, while in Barcelona huge crowds of left-wingers had staged anti-war protests at which Spanish flags were burned while the flag of the Rif Republic was waved about. With the Africanists comprising only a minority, it was clear that it was only a matter of time before the \"abandonistas\" forced the Spanish to give up on the Rif, which was part of the reason for the military coup d'\u00e9tat later in 1923. On September 13, 1923, General Miguel Primo de Rivera, seized power in a military coup. He ruled as a dictator with Alfonso's support until 1930. It is believed that one of Alfonso's main reasons for supporting the coup was his desire to suppress the publication of the damning \"Cortes\" report into the Annual disaster. The poetic Generation of '27 as well as Catalan and Basque nationalism grew in this era.\nDownfall and Second Republic.\nOn 28 January 1930, amid economic problems, general unpopularity and an impending putschist plot led by General Manuel Goded of which Alfonso XIII was most probably aware, Miguel Primo de Rivera was forced to resign, exiling to Paris, only to die a few weeks later of the complications from diabetes in combination with the effects of a flu. Alfonso XIII appointed General D\u00e1maso Berenguer as the new Prime Minister, leading to the period known as the \"dictablanda\". The King was so closely associated with the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera that it was difficult for him to distance himself from the regime that he had supported for almost seven years. The enforced changes relied on the incorrect assumption that Spaniards would accept the notion that nothing had happened after 1923 and that going back to the prior state of things was possible.\nIn April 1931, General Jos\u00e9 Sanjurjo told him that even the army was not loyal. On 12 April, the monarchic parties won a thin majority but lost in major cities in the 1931 municipal elections, which were perceived as a plebiscite on monarchy. Alfonso left the country on night of the 14 to 15 April as the Second Spanish Republic was proclaimed earlier that day in order to avoid a civil war but did not formally abdicate. He eventually settled in Rome.\nBy a law of 26 November 1931, Alfonso was accused by the Cortes of high treason. This law would later be repealed by a new law dated 15 December 1938, signed by Francisco Franco.\nExile.\nIn 1933, his two eldest sons, Alfonso and Jaime, renounced their claims to the defunct throne, and in 1934 his youngest son Gonzalo died. This left his third son Juan, Count of Barcelona his only male heir. Juan later was the father of Juan Carlos I.\nCivil War.\nWhen the Army rose up against the democratically elected Republican Government and war broke out, Alfonso made it clear he favoured the Nationalist military rebels against the Republic, but in September 1936 the Nationalist leader, General Francisco Franco, declared that the Nationalists would not restore Alfonso as king. (The Nationalist army included many Carlist supporters of a rival pretender.) Although Alfonso sent his son Juan to Spain in 1936 to participate in the uprising, General Emilio Mola had Juan arrested near the French border and expelled from the country.\nOn 29 September 1936, upon the death of Infante Alfonso Carlos, Duke of San Jaime, the Carlist pretender, Alfonso also became the senior heir of Hugh Capet and so was hailed by some French legitimists as King Alphonse I of France and Navarre.\nRenunciation of claims to the defunct throne and death.\nOn 15 January 1941, Alfonso XIII renounced his rights to the defunct Spanish throne in favour of Juan. He died of a heart attack in Rome on 28 February of that year.\nIn Spain, the \"caudillo\" Franco ordered three days of national mourning. His funeral was held in Rome in the Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri. Alfonso was buried in the Church of Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli, the Spanish national church in Rome, immediately below the tombs of Popes Callixtus III and Alexander VI. In January 1980 his remains were transferred to El Escorial in Spain.\nLegacy.\nAlfonso was a promoter of tourism in Spain. The need for the lodging of his wedding guests prompted the construction of the luxurious Hotel Palace in Madrid. He also supported the creation of a network of state-run lodges, paradores, in historic buildings of Spain. His fondness for the sport of football led to the patronage of several \"Royal\" (\"Real\" in Spanish) football clubs, the first being Real Club Deportivo de La Coru\u00f1a in 1907. Selected others include Real Madrid, Real Sociedad, Real Betis, Real Uni\u00f3n, Espanyol, Real Zaragoza and Real Racing Club.\nAn avenue in the northern Madrid neighbourhood of Chamart\u00edn, Avenida de Alfonso XIII, is named after him. A plaza or town center in Iloilo City, Philippines (now Plaza Libertad) was named in his honour called Plaza Alfonso XIII. A street in Merthyr Tydfil, in Wales, was built especially to house Spanish immigrants in the mining industry and named Alphonso Street after Alfonso XIII.\nAlfonso XIII appears as \"King Buby\" in Luis Coloma's story of Ratoncito P\u00e9rez (1894), which was written for the King when he was 8 years old. The story of Ratoncito P\u00e9rez has been adapted into further literary works and movies since then, with the character of Alfonso XIII appearing in some. Alfonso XIII is also mentioned on the plaque to Ratoncito P\u00e9rez on the second floor of \"la calle del Arenal\".\nLegitimate and illegitimate children.\nAlfonso and his wife Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg (Ena) had seven children:\nAlfonso also had a number of reported illegitimate children that are known, including: (1905\u20131980; by French aristocrat M\u00e9lanie de Gaufridy de Dortan, married to Philippe de Vilmorin); Juana Alfonsa Mil\u00e1n y Qui\u00f1ones de Le\u00f3n (1916\u20132005; by Alfonso's \"governess\" B\u00e9atrice Noon); Anna Mar\u00eda Teresa Ruiz y Moragas (1925\u20131965) and (1929\u20132016; both last two by Spanish actress Carmen Ruiz Moragas); and Carmen Gravina (by Carmen de Navascu\u00e9s).\nHonours.\nForeign honours.\nIn the Royal Library of Madrid, there are books containing different emblems of the Spanish monarch."}
{"id": "1678", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1678", "title": "Alphonsus a Sancta Maria", "text": ""}
{"id": "1679", "revid": "4870610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1679", "title": "Alfonso the Battler", "text": "Alfonso I (\"c\". 1073/10747 September 1134), called the Battler or the Warrior (), was the king of Aragon and Navarre from 1104 until his death in 1134. He was the second son of King Sancho Ram\u00edrez and successor of his brother Peter I. With his marriage to Urraca, queen regnant of Castile, Le\u00f3n and Galicia, in 1109, he began to use, with some justification, the grandiose title Emperor of Spain, formerly employed by his father-in-law, Alfonso VI. Alfonso the Battler earned his sobriquet in the Reconquista. He won his greatest military successes in the middle Ebro, where he conquered Zaragoza in 1118 and took Ejea, Tudela, Calatayud, Borja, Tarazona, Daroca, and Monreal del Campo. He died in September 1134 after an unsuccessful battle with the Muslims at the Battle of Fraga.\nHis nickname comes from the Aragonese version of the \"Chronicle of San Juan de la Pe\u00f1a\" (c. 1370), which says that \"they called him lord Alfonso the battler because in Spain there wasn't as good a knight who won twenty-nine battles\" (\"clamabanlo don Alfonso batallador porque en Espayna no ovo tan buen cavallero que veynte nueve batallas ven\u00e7i\u00f3\").\nEarly life.\nHis earliest years were passed in the monastery of Siresa, learning to read and write and to practice the military arts under the tutelage of Lope Garc\u00e9s the Pilgrim, who was repaid for his services by his former charge with the county of Pedrola when Alfonso came to the throne.\nDuring his brother's reign, he participated in the taking of Huesca (the Battle of Alcoraz, 1096), which became the largest city in the kingdom and the new capital. He also joined El Cid's expeditions in Valencia. His father gave him the lordships of Biel, Luna, Ardenes, and Bailo.\nA series of deaths put Alfonso directly in line for the throne. His brother's children, Isabella and Peter (who married Mar\u00eda Rodr\u00edguez, daughter of El Cid), died in 1103 and 1104 respectively.\nMatrimonial conflicts.\nA passionate fighting-man (he fought twenty-nine battles against Christian or Moor), he was married (when well over 30 years and a habitual bachelor) in 1109 to the ambitious Queen Urraca of Le\u00f3n, a passionate woman unsuited for a subordinate role. The marriage had been arranged by her father Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n in 1106 to unite the two chief Christian states against the Almoravids, and to supply them with a capable military leader. But Urraca was tenacious of her right as queen regnant and had not learnt chastity in the polygamous household of her father. Husband and wife quarrelled with the brutality of the age and came to open war, even placing Urraca under siege at Astorga in 1112. Alfonso had the support of one section of the nobles who found their account in the confusion. Being a much better soldier than any of his opponents he won the Battle of Candespina and the Battle of Viadangos, but his only trustworthy supporters were his Aragonese, who were not numerous enough to keep Castile and Le\u00f3n subjugated. The marriage of Alfonso and Urraca was declared null by the pope, as they were second cousins, in 1110, but he ignored the papal nuncio and clung to his liaison with Urraca until 1114. During his marriage, he had called himself \"King and Emperor of Castile, Toledo, Arag\u00f3n, Pamplona, Sobrarbe, and Ribagorza\" in recognition of his rights as Urraca's husband; of his inheritance of the lands of his father, including the kingdom of his great-uncle Gonzalo; and his prerogative to conquer Andalusia from the Muslims. He inserted the title of \"imperator\" on the basis that he had three kingdoms under his rule.\nAlfonso's late marriage and his failure to remarry and produce the essential legitimate heir that should have been a dynastic linchpin of his aggressive territorial policies have been adduced as a lack of interest in women. Ibn al-Athir (1166\u20131234) describes Alfonso as a tireless soldier who would sleep in his armor without benefit of cover, whom when asked why he did not take his pleasure from one of the captives of Muslim chiefs, responded that the man devoted to war needs the companionship of men not women.\nChurch relations.\nThe king quarrelled with the church, and particularly the Cistercians, almost as violently as with his wife. As he defeated her, so he drove Archbishop Bernard into exile and expelled the monks of Sahag\u00fan. He was finally compelled to give way in Castile and Le\u00f3n to his stepson, Alfonso VII of Castile, son of Urraca and her first husband. The intervention of Pope Calixtus II brought about an arrangement between the old man and his young namesake.\nIn 1122 in Belchite, he founded a confraternity of knights to fight against the Almoravids. It was the start of the military orders in Aragon. Years later, he organised a branch of the \"Militia Christi\" of the Holy Land at Monreal del Campo.\nMilitary expansion.\nAlfonso spent his first four years as king in near-constant war with the Muslims. In 1105, he conquered Ejea and Tauste and refortified Castellar and Juslibol. In 1106, he defeated Ahmad II al-Musta'in of Zaragoza at Valtierra. In 1107, he took Tamarite de Litera and Esteban de la Litera. Then followed a period dominated by his relations with Castile and Le\u00f3n through his wife, Urraca. He resumed his conquest in 1117 by conquering Fitero, Corella, Cintru\u00e9nigo, Murchante, Monteagudo, and Cascante.\nIn 1118, the Council of Toulouse declared a crusade to assist in the conquest of Zaragoza. Many Frenchmen consequently joined Alfonso at Ayerbe. They took Almud\u00e9var, Gurrea de G\u00e1llego, and Zuera, besieging Zaragoza itself by the end of May. The city fell on 18 December, and the forces of Alfonso occupied the Azuda, the government tower. The great palace of the city was given to the monks of Bernard. Promptly, the city was made Alfonso's capital. Two years later, in 1120, he defeated a Muslim army intent on reconquering his new capital at the Battle of Cutanda. He promulgated the \"fuero\" of \"tortum per tortum\", facilitating taking the law into one's own hands, which among others reassumed the Muslim right to dwell in the city and their right to keep their properties and practice their religion under their own jurisdiction as long as they maintained tax payment and relocated to the suburbs.\nIn 1119, he retook Cervera, Tudejen, Castell\u00f3n, Tarazona, \u00c1greda, Magall\u00f3n, Borja, Alag\u00f3n, Novillas, Mall\u00e9n, Rueda, \u00c9pila and populated the region of Soria. He began the siege of Calatayud, but left to defeat the army at Cutanda trying to retake Zaragoza. When Calatayud fell, he took Bubierca, Alhama de Arag\u00f3n, Ariza, and Daroca (1120). In 1123, he besieged and took Lleida, which was in the hands of the count of Barcelona. From the winter of 1124 to September 1125, he was on a risky expedition to Pe\u00f1a Cadiella deep in Andalusia.\nIn the great raid of 1125, he carried away a large part of the subject Christians from Granada, and in the south-west of France, he had rights as king of Navarre. From 1125 to 1126, he was on campaign against Granada, where he was trying to install a Christian prince, and C\u00f3rdoba, where he got only as far as Motril. In 1127, he reconquered Longares, but simultaneously lost all his Castilian possessions to Alfonso VII. He confirmed a treaty with Castile the next year (1128) with the Peace of T\u00e1mara, which fixed the boundaries of the two realms.\nHe conquered Molina de Arag\u00f3n and populated Monz\u00f3n in 1129, before besieging Valencia, which had fallen again upon the Cid's death.\nHe went north of the Pyrenees in October 1130 to protect the Val d'Aran. Early in 1131, he besieged Bayonne. It is said he ruled \"from Belorado to Pallars and from Bayonne to Monreal.\"\nAt the siege of Bayonne in October 1131, three years before his death, he published a will leaving his kingdom to three autonomous religious orders based in Palestine and politically largely independent - the Knights Templars, the Hospitallers, and the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre, whose influences might have been expected to cancel one another out. The will has greatly puzzled historians, who have read it as a bizarre gesture of extreme piety uncharacteristic of Alfonso's character, one that effectively undid his life's work. Elena Lourie (1975) suggested instead that it was Alfonso's attempt to neutralize the papacy's interest in a disputed succession \u2014 Aragon had been a fief of the Papacy since 1068 \u2014 and to fend off Urraca's son from her first marriage, Alfonso VII of Castile, for the Papacy would be bound to press the terms of such a pious testament.&lt;/ref&gt; Generous bequests to important churches and abbeys in Castile had the effect of making the noble churchmen there beneficiaries who would be encouraged by the will to act as a brake on Alfonso VII's ambitions to break it \u2014 and yet among the magnates witnessing the will in 1131 there is not a single cleric. In the event it was a will that his nobles refused to carry out \u2014 instead bringing his brother Ramiro from the monastery to assume royal powers \u2014 an eventuality that Lourie suggests was Alfonso's hidden intent.\nHis final campaigns were against Mequinenza (1133) and Fraga (1134), where Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez, the future king of Navarre, and a mere 500 other knights fought with him. It fell on 17 July. He was dead by September. His tomb is in the monastery of San Pedro in Huesca.\nDeath.\nSuccession.\nThe testament of Alfonso leaving his kingdom to the three orders was dismissed out of hand by the nobility of his kingdoms, and possible successors were sought. Alfonso's only brother, Ramiro, had been a Benedictine monk since childhood, and his commitment to the church, his temperament and vow of celibacy made him ill-suited to rule a kingdom under constant military threat and in need of a stable line of succession. The step-son of the deceased king, Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n, as reigning monarch and legitimate descendant of Sancho III of Navarre, put himself forward but garnered no local support. The nobility of Navarre aligned behind Pedro de Atar\u00e9s, the grandson of Alfonso's illegitimate uncle, while the Aragonese nobility rallied around the abbot-bishop Ramiro. A convention was called at Borja to develop a consensus, but there Peter so alienated his own partisans with perceived arrogance that they abandoned him, yet were unwilling to accept Ramiro. The convention broke up without arriving at a compromise and the two regional factions then acted independently.\nThe choice of the Navarrese lords fell on Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez, Lord of Monz\u00f3n, descendant of an illegitimate son of Garc\u00eda S\u00e1nchez III and prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Alfonso VII to be their king. The Aragonese took Ramiro out of a monastery and made him king, marrying him without papal dispensation to Agnes, sister of the Duke of Aquitaine, then betrothing their newborn daughter to Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, who was then named Ramiro's heir. \"The result of the crisis produced by the result of Alfonso I's will was a major reorientation of the peninsula's kingdoms: the separation of Aragon and Navarre, the union of Aragon and Catalonia and \u2014 a moot point but stressed particularly by some Castilian historians \u2014 the affirmation of 'Castilian hegemony' in Spain\" by the rendering of homage for Zaragoza by Alfonso's eventual heir, Ramon Berenguer IV of Barcelona.\nPseudo-Alfonso the Battler.\nSometime during the reign of Alfonso II of Aragon, the Battler's grandnephew, a man came forward claiming to be Alfonso the Battler. The only contemporary references to this event are two letters of Alfonso II addressed to Louis VII of France; they were carried to Louis by Berengar, the Bishop of Lleida, but are not dated. According to the second of these, the pretender was then living in Louis's domains, meaning the Principality of Catalonia, which was ruled by Alfonso under Louis's suzerainty. This pretender was an old man (appropriately, since the Battler had died some decades earlier) and Alfonso II expressed confidence that Louis would arrest him at the earliest possible moment and bring him to justice. The first letter supplies sufficient information to date it approximately, since the Bishop sojourned at the court of Louis on his way to Rome. It is known from other sources that Berengar attended the Third Lateran Council in March 1179. The letters were probably written towards the end of 1178 or in January 1179 at the latest. According to an annalist source for the years 1089\u20131196, the pretender was received with honour and pomp in Zaragoza, Calatayud, and Daroca, which the Battler had conquered, but after it was found out that he was false he was executed before the city of Barcelona in 1181. Modern historian Antonio Ubieto Arteta has hypothesised that the Aragonese lords of the tenancies of Zaragoza, Calatayud, and Daroca \u2014 Pedro de Luesia, Loferrench de Luna, Pedro de Castillazuelo (lord of Calatayud), Pedro Cornel (lord of Murillo de G\u00e1llego), and the majordomo Jimeno de Artusilla, all of whom disappear between 1177 and 1181 in the documentation of their tenancies \u2014 supported, at least initially, the pretender. These lords also appear in the later legend of the Bell of Huesca, which has no historical basis, as the victims of Ramiro II (1136). Since, historically, they were not active in the 1130s, it is possible that the historically-based legend of the pseudo-Alfonso had some influence on the genesis of the Bell of Huesca.\nThe earliest chronicle source for the imposture is Rodrigo Jim\u00e9nez de Rada, writing in the middle of the thirteenth century, who records that there were several legends then current about the death of Alfonso the Battler: some believed he perished in the battle of Fraga, some that his body had never been recovered, others that he was buried in the monastery of Montearag\u00f3n, and still others that he had fled from Fraga in shame after his defeat and became a pilgrim as an act of penance. Some years later, Rodrigo writes, though he does not give a year, an impostor arose and was received by many as the Battler, though Alfonso II had him arrested and hanged. This is the earliest reference to the impostor's end. The legend was amplified in later years. According to the fourteenth-century \"Cr\u00f3nica de los Estados Peninsulares\", the Battler went on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where he lived for many years. The \"Cr\u00f3nica de San Juan de la Pe\u00f1a\" also recounts the incident, but it depends entirely on Rodrigo and the \"Estados Peninsulares\". It is not until the seventeenth-century historian Jer\u00f3nimo Zurita penned his \"Anales de la Corona de Arag\u00f3n\" that new details were added to the legend. Zurita dates the impostor's appearance to the death of Raymond Berengar IV of Barcelona, who had been exercising power in Aragon, and the succession of the child Alfonso II in 1162. The death of the impostor, by hanging, must have occurred in 1163."}
{"id": "1680", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1680", "title": "Amaryllis", "text": "Amaryllis () is the only genus in the subtribe Amaryllidinae (tribe Amaryllideae). It is a small genus of flowering bulbs, with two species. The better known of the two, \"Amaryllis belladonna\", is a native of the Western Cape region of South Africa, particularly the rocky southwest area between the Olifants River Valley and Knysna. For many years there was confusion among botanists over the generic names \"Amaryllis\" and \"Hippeastrum\", one result of which is that the common name \"amaryllis\" is mainly used for cultivars of the genus \"Hippeastrum\", widely sold in the winter months for their ability to bloom indoors. Plants of the genus \"Amaryllis\" are known as belladonna lily, Jersey lily, naked lady, amarillo, Easter lily in Southern Australia or, in South Africa, March lily due to its propensity to flower around March. This is one of numerous genera with the common name \"lily\" due to their flower shape and growth habit. However, they are only distantly related to the true lily, \"Lilium\". In the Victorian Language of Flowers (see Plant symbolism), amaryllis means \"pride, determination and radiant beauty\".\nDescription.\n\"Amaryllis\" is a bulbous plant, with each bulb being in diameter. It has several strap-shaped, hysteranthous, green leaves with midrib, long and broad, arranged in two rows.\nEach bulb produces one or two leafless, stout, persistent and erect stems 30\u201360\u00a0cm tall, each of which bears at the top a cluster of two to twelve zygomorphic, funnel-shaped flowers without a tube. Each flower is diameter with six spreading tepals (three outer sepals, three inner petals, with similar appearance to each other). The usual color is white with crimson veins, but pink or purple also occur naturally. Stamens are very shortly connate basally, declinate, unequal. Style is declinate, stigma is three-lobed. Ovules are approx. 8 per locule. Seeds are compressed-globose, white to pink. Number of chromosomes is 2\"n\" = 22.\nTaxonomy.\nThe single genus is in subtribe Amaryllidinae, in the tribe Amaryllideae. The taxonomy of the genus has been controversial. In 1753 Carl Linnaeus created the name \"Amaryllis belladonna\", the type species of the genus \"Amaryllis\". At the time both South African and South American plants were placed in the same genus; subsequently they were separated into two different genera. The key question is whether Linnaeus's type was a South African plant or a South American plant. If the latter, \"Amaryllis\" would be the correct name for the genus \"Hippeastrum\", and a different name would have to be used for the genus discussed here. Alan W. Meerow et al. have briefly summarized the debate, which took place from 1938 onwards and involved botanists on both sides of the Atlantic. The outcome was a decision by the 14th International Botanical Congress in 1987 that \"Amaryllis\" should be a conserved name (i.e. correct regardless of priority) and ultimately based on a specimen of the South African \"Amaryllis belladonna\" from the Clifford Herbarium at the Natural History Museum in London.\nSpecies.\n, \"Amaryllis\" had only two accepted species, both native to the Cape Provinces of South Africa:\nPhylogeny.\nAmaryllidinae are placed within Amaryllideae as follow:\nThese are phylogenetically related as follows:\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Amaryllis\" is taken from a shepherdess in Virgil's pastoral \"Eclogues\", (from the Greek (\"\"), meaning \"to sparkle\") and also from \"amarella\" for the bitterness of the bulb.\nAlthough the 1987 decision settled the question of the scientific name of the genus, the common name \"amaryllis\" continues to be used differently. Bulbs sold as amaryllis and described as \"ready to bloom for the holidays\" belong to the allied genus \"Hippeastrum\". The common name \"naked lady\" comes from the plant's pattern of flowering when the foliage has died down. This name is also used for other bulbs with a similar growth and flowering pattern; some of these have their own widely used and accepted common names, such as the resurrection lily (\"Lycoris squamigera\").\nHabitat.\nIn areas of its native habitat with mountainous fynbos flowering tends to be suppressed until after bush fires as dense overhead vegetation prevents growth. In more open sandy areas of the Western Cape, the plant flowers annually. Plants tend to be very localized in dense concentrations due to the seeds' large size and heavy weight. Strong winds shake loose the seeds, which fall to ground and immediately start to germinate, aided by the first winter rains.\nEcology.\nThe leaves are produced in the autumn or early spring in warm climates depending on the onset of rain and eventually die down by late spring. The bulb is then dormant until late summer. The plant is not frost-tolerant, nor does it do well in tropical environments since they require a dry resting period between leaf growth and flower spike production.\nOne or two leafless stems arise from the bulb in the dry ground in late summer (March in its native habitat and August in USDA zone 7).\nThe plant has a symbiotic relationship with carpenter bees. It is also visited by noctuid moths at night. The relative importance of these animals as pollinators has not yet been established; however, carpenter bees are thought to be the main pollinators of amaryllis on the Cape Peninsula. The plant's main parasite is the lily borer \"Brithys crini\" and/or \"Diaphone eumela\".\nCultivation.\n\"Amaryllis belladonna\" was introduced into cultivation at the beginning of the eighteenth century. It reproduces slowly by either bulb division or seeds and has gradually naturalized from plantings in urban and suburban areas throughout the lower elevations and coastal areas in much of the West Coast of the USA since these environments mimic their native South African habitat. Hardiness zones 6\u20138. It is also naturalized in Australia.\nThere is an \"Amaryllis belladonna\" hybrid which was bred in the 1800s in Australia. No one knows the exact species it was crossed with to produce color variations of white, cream, peach, magenta and nearly red hues. The hybrids were crossed back onto the original \"Amaryllis belladonna\" and with each other to produce naturally seed-bearing crosses that come in a very wide range of flower sizes, shapes, stem heights and intensities of pink. Pure white varieties with bright green stems were bred as well. The hybrids are quite distinct in that the many shades of pink also have stripes, veining, darkened edges, white centers and light yellow centers, also setting them apart from the original light pink. In addition, the hybrids often produce flowers in a fuller circle rather than the \"side-facing\" habit of the \"old-fashioned\" pink. The hybrids are able to adapt to year-round watering and fertilization but can also tolerate completely dry summer conditions if need be.\n\"A.\u00a0belladonna\" has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.\n\"Amaryllis belladonna\" has been crossed in cultivation with \"Crinum moorei\" to produce a hybrid called \u00d7\u00a0\"Amarcrinum\", which has named cultivars. Hybrids said to be between \"Amaryllis belladonna\" and \"Brunsvigia josephinae\" have been called \u00d7\u00a0\"Amarygia\". Neither hybrid genus name is accepted by the \"World Checklist of Selected Plant Families\"."}
{"id": "1682", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1682", "title": "Amasis I", "text": ""}
{"id": "1683", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1683", "title": "Alfonso III of Aragon", "text": "Alfonso III (4 November 1265, in Valencia \u2013 18 June 1291), called the Liberal (\"el Liberal\") or the Free (also \"the Frank,\" from \"el Franc\"), was the King of Aragon, King of Valencia, Count of Roussillon, Count of Sardinia and Count of Barcelona (as Alfons\u00a0II) from 1285. He conquered the Kingdom of Majorca between his succession and 1287.\nHe was a son of King Peter\u00a0III of Aragon and Constance, daughter and heiress of King Manfred of Sicily.\nSoon after assuming the throne, he conducted a campaign to reincorporate the Balearic Islands into the Kingdom of Aragon \u2013 which had been lost due to the division of the kingdom by his grandfather, James\u00a0I of Aragon. Thus in 1285 he declared war on his uncle, James\u00a0II of Majorca, and conquered both Majorca (1285) and Ibiza (1286), effectively reassuming suzerainty over the Kingdom of Majorca. He followed this with the conquest of Menorca \u2013 until then, an autonomous Muslim state (Man\u00fbrqa) within the Kingdom of Majorca \u2013 on 17 January 1287, the anniversary of which now serves as Menorca's national holiday.\nHe initially sought to maintain Aragonese control over Sicily early in his reign by supporting the claims to the island of his brother, James\u00a0II of Aragon. However, he later retracted the support for his brother shortly before his death and instead tried to make peace with the Papal States France.\nHis reign was marred by a constitutional struggle with the Aragonese nobles, which eventually culminated in the articles of the Union of Aragon \u2013 the so-called \"Magna Carta of Aragon\", which devolved several key royal powers into the hands of lesser nobles. His inability to resist the demands of his nobles was to leave a heritage of disunity in Aragon and further dissent amongst the nobility, who increasingly saw little reason to respect the throne, and brought the Kingdom of Aragon close to anarchy.\nDuring his lifetime a dynastic marriage with Eleanor, daughter of King Edward\u00a0I of England, was arranged. However Alfonso died before meeting his bride. He died at the age of 25 in 1291, and was buried in the Franciscan convent in Barcelona; since 1852 his remains have been buried in Barcelona Cathedral.\nDante Alighieri, in the Divine Comedy, recounts that he saw Alfonso's spirit seated outside the gates of Purgatory with the other monarchs whom Dante blamed for the chaotic political state of Europe during the 13th century."}
{"id": "1684", "revid": "34698996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1684", "title": "Alfonso IV of Aragon", "text": "Alfonso IV, called the Kind (also \"the Gentle\" or \"the Nice\", ) (2 November 1299 \u2013 24 January 1336) was King of Aragon and Count of Barcelona (as Alfons III) from 1327 to his death. His reign saw the incorporation of the County of Urgell, Duchy of Athens, and Duchy of Neopatria into the Crown of Aragon.\nBiography.\nAlfonso was born in Naples, the second son of James II and Blanche of Anjou. In 1314, aged 14, he married Teresa d'Enten\u00e7a y Cabrera, heiress of Urgell, who was the same age as him. Teresa's granduncle Ermengol X of Urgell had died childless in La Llitera; before his death, he had agreed to make Alfonso his heir, on condition that Alfonso would marry Teresa, who was his nearest kin. Alfonso was at this time only the second son (and not the heir) of the king of Aragon. He and his father readily agreed to Ermengol's condition, and Alfonso married Teresa in 1314 in the Cathedral of Lerida. The teenage bridegroom is reputed to have been so liberal in the expenses during the wedding, that the local counsels imposed restrictions on how much he could spend. Alfonso and Teresa became the parents of seven children.\nAlfonso became heir to the throne in December 1319 after his older brother James renounced his rights to become a monk. During the reign of his father, Alfonso was the procurator-general of the Crown, and in 1323\u20131324, he undertook the conquest of Sardinia.\nAlfonso's father and first wife Teresa died within a few days of each other in 1327. Teresa died in childbirth on 20 October 1327, and James II died on 2 November 1327, whereupon Alfonso became king. In 1329, he began a long war with the Republic of Genoa. The city of Sassari had previously surrendered to Alfonso in 1323, but rebelled three more times; its possession was contested by Genoa, which led to the protracted war.\nIn February 1329, Alfonso married Eleanor of Castile (1308\u20131359), the sister of king Alfonso XI of Castile. Eleanor had been briefly married to Alfonso's elder brother James the monk. That marriage, which James had refused to consummate, had been annulled in 1319\u201320. Eleanor had thereafter retired to a convent (although she never took the veil) and had remained unmarried. By December the same year, the couple were rejoiced to become the parents of a son, Ferdinand, who was followed five years later by another son, John.\nEleanor earnestly sought to advance the interests of her own infant sons over those of her stepson, the \"Infante\" Peter, who was the heir-apparent. She convinced her husband to grant very large and significant territories to her sons. on 28 December 1329, Alfonso granted his new-born son Ferdinand the Marquisate of Tortosa and the cities of Albarrac\u00edn, Orihuela, Callosa d'en Sarri\u00e0, Guardamar, Alicante, Monforte, Elda, La Mola, Novelda and Aspe. Eleanor's younger son John, who was born five years later, was also granted several lordships when he was only a toddler: Elche, Biel and Bolsa were all bestowed upon him. These territories would be controlled by Eleanor, who had also received the city of Huesca and some other villages and castles belonging to the Aragonese crown at the time of her wedding. Nor was this all. While all of the above grants had been made from among the possessions of the Aragonese crown, the King also sought to bestow estates located within the Kingdom of Valencia upon the toddler Ferdinand, but he was prevented from doing so. When the King granted Ferdinand the cities of X\u00e0tiva, Alzira, Sagunto, Morella, Burriana and Castell\u00f3n de la Plana, all located in the Kingdom of Valencia, the local subjects protested, and for this reason the King decided to revoked these patents. These grants of land diminished the territorial patrimony of the crown and mainly affected the \"Infante\" Peter, Alfonso's son by his first wife, who however was too young to make any significant protest. However, the issue agitated the court, created a climate of resentment and divided the nobility into two camps.\nAlfonso died in January 1336, aged only 36. He was succeeded by Peter IV, his 16-year-old son from his first marriage.\nChildren.\nBy Teresa d'Enten\u00e7a:\nBy Eleanor of Castile:"}
{"id": "1685", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1685", "title": "Amasis II", "text": "Amasis II () or Ahmose II was a pharaoh (reigned 570526 BCE) of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt, the successor of Apries at Sais. He was the last great ruler of Egypt before the Persian conquest.\nLife.\nMost of our information about him is derived from Herodotus (2.161ff) and can only be imperfectly verified by monumental evidence. According to the Greek historian, he was of common origins. He was originally an officer in the Egyptian army. His birthplace was Siuph at Sa\u00efs. \nA revolt which broke out among native Egyptian soldiers gave him his opportunity to seize the throne. These troops, returning home from a disastrous military expedition to Cyrene in Libya, suspected that they had been betrayed in order that Apries, the reigning king, might rule more absolutely by means of his Greek mercenaries; many Egyptians fully sympathized with them. General Amasis, sent to meet them and quell the revolt, was proclaimed king by the rebels instead, and Apries, who then had to rely entirely on his mercenaries, was defeated. Apries fled to the Babylonians and was captured and killed mounting an invasion of his native homeland in 567 BCE with the aid of a Babylonian army. An inscription confirms the struggle between the native Egyptian and the foreign soldiery, and proves that Apries was killed and honourably buried in the third year of Amasis ( BCE). Amasis then married Chedebnitjerbone II, one of the daughters of his predecessor Apries, in order to legitimise his kingship.\nSome information is known about the family origins of Amasis: his mother was a certain Tashereniset, as a bust of her, today located in the British Museum, shows. A stone block from Mehallet el-Kubra also establishes that his maternal grandmother\u2014Tashereniset's mother\u2014was a certain Tjenmutetj.\nHis court is relatively well known. The head of the gate guard Ahmose-sa-Neith appears on numerous monuments, including the location of his sarcophagus. He was referenced on monuments of the 30th Dynasty and apparently had a special significance in his time. Wahibre was 'Leader of the southern foreigners' and 'Head of the doors of foreigners', so he was the highest official for border security. Under Amasis the career of the doctor, Udjahorresnet, began, who was of particular importance to the Persians. Several \"heads of the fleet\" are known. Psamtek Meryneit and Pasherientaihet / Padineith are the only known viziers.\nHerodotus describes how Amasis II would eventually cause a confrontation with the Persian armies. According to Herodotus, Amasis was asked by Cambyses II or Cyrus the Great for an Egyptian ophthalmologist on good terms. Amasis seems to have complied by forcing an Egyptian physician into mandatory labor, causing him to leave his family behind in Egypt and move to Persia in forced exile. In an attempt to exact revenge for this, the physician grew very close to Cambyses and suggested that Cambyses should ask Amasis for a daughter in marriage in order to solidify his bonds with the Egyptians. Cambyses complied and requested a daughter of Amasis for marriage.\nAmasis, worrying that his daughter would be a concubine to the Persian king, refused to give up his offspring; Amasis also was not willing to take on the Persian empire, so he concocted a deception in which he forced the daughter of the ex-pharaoh Apries, whom Herodotus explicitly confirms to have been killed by Amasis, to go to Persia instead of his own offspring.\nThis daughter of Apries was none other than Nitetis, who was, as per Herodotus's account, \"tall and beautiful.\" Nitetis naturally betrayed Amasis and upon being greeted by the Persian king explained Amasis's trickery and her true origins. This infuriated Cambyses and he vowed to take revenge for it. Amasis died before Cambyses reached him, but his heir and son Psamtik III was defeated by the Persians.\nFirst, Cyrus the Great signed alliance agreements with the Lydian King Croesus and Nabonidus the Babylonian king in 542 BC. The actual aim of the agreements was to prevent aid between Egypt and her allies. With both now deprived of Egyptian support, the Persians conquered, first, Croesus's empire in 541 BCE, and, then, the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 539 BCE.\nHerodotus also describes how, just like his predecessor, Amasis relied on Greek mercenaries and councilmen. One such figure was Phanes of Halicarnassus, who would later leave Amasis, for reasons that Herodotus does not clearly know, but suspects were personal between the two figures. Amasis sent one of his eunuchs to capture Phanes, but the eunuch was bested by the wise councilman and Phanes fled to Persia, meeting up with Cambyses and providing advice for his invasion of Egypt. Egypt was finally lost to the Persians during the battle of Pelusium in 525 BC.\nEgypt's wealth.\nAmasis brought Egypt into closer contact with Greece than ever before. Herodotus relates that under his prudent administration, Egypt reached a new level of wealth; Amasis adorned the temples of Lower Egypt especially with splendid monolithic shrines and other monuments (his activity here is proved by existing remains). For example, a temple built by him was excavated at Tell Nebesha.\nAmasis assigned the commercial colony of Naucratis on the Canopic branch of the Nile to the Greeks, and when the temple of Delphi was burnt, he contributed 1,000 talents to the rebuilding. He also married a Greek princess named Ladice daughter of King Battus III and made alliances with Polycrates of Samos and Croesus of Lydia. Montaigne cites the story by Herodotus that Ladice cured Amasis of his impotence by praying to Venus/Aphropdite.\nUnder Amasis, Egypt's agricultural based economy reached its zenith. Herodotus, who visited Egypt less than a century after Amasis II's death, writes that:\nHis kingdom consisted probably of Egypt only, as far as the First Cataract, but to this he added Cyprus, and his influence was great in Cyrene, Libya. In his fourth year ( BCE), Amasis was able to defeat an invasion of Egypt by the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar II; henceforth, the Babylonians experienced sufficient difficulties controlling their empire that they were forced to abandon future attacks against Amasis. However, Amasis was later faced with a more formidable enemy with the rise of Persia under Cyrus who ascended to the throne in 559 BCE; his final years were preoccupied by the threat of the impending Persian onslaught against Egypt. With great strategic skill, Cyrus had destroyed Lydia in 546 BCE and finally defeated the Babylonians in 538 BCE which left Amasis with no major Near Eastern allies to counter Persia's increasing military might. Amasis reacted by cultivating closer ties with the Greek states to counter the future Persian invasion into Egypt but was fortunate to have died in 526 BCE shortly before the Persians attacked. The final assault instead fell upon his son Psamtik III, whom the Persians defeated in 525 BCE after he had reigned for only six months.\nTomb and desecration.\nAmasis II died in 526 BC. He was buried at the royal necropolis of Sais, and while his tomb has never been discovered, Herodotus describes it for us:\nHerodotus also relates the desecration of Ahmose II/Amasis' mummy when the Persian king Cambyses conquered Egypt and thus ended the 26th (Saite) Dynasty:\nLater reputation.\nFrom the fifth century BCE, there is evidence of stories circulating about Amasis, in Egyptian sources (including a demotic papyrus of the third century BCE), Herodotus, Hellanikos, and Plutarch's \"Convivium Septem Sapientium\". 'In those tales Amasis was presented as a non-conventional Pharaoh, behaving in ways unbecoming to a king but gifted with practical wisdom and cunning, a trickster on the throne or a kind of comic Egyptian Solomon'."}
{"id": "1686", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1686", "title": "Alfonso V of Aragon", "text": "Alfonso the Magnanimous (also Alphonso; ; 1396 \u2013 27 June 1458) was the King of Aragon (as Alfonso V), Valencia (as Alfonso III), Majorca, Sardinia and Corsica (as Alfonso II), Sicily (as Alfonso I) and Count of Barcelona (as Alfonso IV) from 1416, and King of Naples (as Alfonso I) from 1442 until his death. He was one of the most prominent figures of the early Renaissance and a knight of the Order of the Dragon.&lt;ref name=\"Ucs.mun.ca/~emiller/dragon.html_2020-03-18\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nEarly life.\nBorn at Medina del Campo, he was the son of Ferdinand of Trast\u00e1mara and Eleanor of Alburquerque. Ferdinand was the brother of King Henry III of Castile, and Alfonso was betrothed to his uncle King Henry's daughter Maria in 1408. In 1412, Ferdinand was selected to succeed to the territories of the Crown of Aragon. Alfonso and Maria's marriage was celebrated in Valencia on 12 June 1415.\nKing Ferdinand died on 2 April 1416, and Alfonso succeeded him as king of Aragon, Valencia, and Majorca and count of Barcelona. He also claimed the island of Sardinia, though it was then in the possession of Genoa. Alfonso was also in possession of much of Corsica by the 1420s.\nAlfonso's marriage with Maria was childless. His mistress Lucrezia d'Alagno served as a \"de facto\" queen at the Neapolitan court as well as an inspiring muse. With another mistress, Giraldona Carlino, Alfonso had three children: Ferdinand (1423-1494), Maria (who married Leonello d'Este), and Eleanor (who married Mariano Marzano).\nAlfonso was the object of diplomatic contacts from the Empire of Ethiopia. In 1428, he received a letter from Yeshaq I of Ethiopia, borne by two dignitaries, which proposed an alliance against the Muslims and would be sealed by a dual marriage that would require Alfonso's brother Peter to bring a group of artisans to Ethiopia where he would marry Yeshaq's daughter. In return, Alfonso sent a party of 13 craftsmen, all of whom perished on the way to Ethiopia. He later sent a letter to Yeshaq's successor Zara Yaqob in 1450, in which he wrote that he would be happy to send artisans to Ethiopia if their safe arrival could be guaranteed, but it probably never reached Zara Yaqob.\nStruggle for Naples.\nIn 1421 the childless Queen Joanna II of Naples adopted and named him as heir to the Kingdom of Naples, and Alfonso went to Naples. Here he hired the condottiero Braccio da Montone with the task of reducing the resistance of his rival claimant, Louis III of Anjou, and his forces led by Muzio Attendolo Sforza. With Pope Martin V supporting Sforza, Alfonso switched his religious allegiance to the Aragonese antipope Benedict XIII. When Sforza abandoned Louis' cause, Alfonso seemed to have all his problems solved; however, his relationship with Joanna suddenly worsened, and in May 1423 he had her lover, Gianni Caracciolo, a powerful figure in the Neapolitan court, arrested.\nAfter an attempt to arrest the queen herself had failed, Joan called on Sforza who defeated the Aragonese militias near Castel Capuano in Naples. Alfonso fled to Castel Nuovo, but the help of a fleet of 22 galleys led by Giovanni da Cardona improved his situation. Sforza and Joanna ransomed Caracciolo and retreated to the fortress of Aversa. Here she repudiated her earlier adoption of Alfonso and, with the backing of Martin V, named Louis III as her heir instead.\nThe duke of Milan, Filippo Maria Visconti, joined the anti-Aragonese coalition. Alfonso requested support from Braccio da Montone, who was besieging Joanna's troops in L'Aquila, but had to set sail for Spain, where a war had broken out between his brothers and the Kingdom of Castile. On his way towards Barcelona, Alfonso sacked Marseille, a possession of Louis III.\nIn late 1423 the Genoese fleet of Filippo Maria Visconti moved in the southern Tyrrhenian Sea, rapidly conquering Gaeta, Procida, Castellammare and Sorrento. Naples, which was held by Alfonso's brother, Pedro de Aragon, was besieged in 1424 by the Genoese ships and Joanna's troops, now led by Francesco Sforza, the son of Muzio Sforza (who had met his death at L'Aquila). The city fell in April 1424. Pedro, after a short resistance in Castel Nuovo, fled to Sicily in August. Joanna II and Louis III again took possession of the realm, although the true power was in the hands of Gianni Caracciolo.\nAn opportunity for Alfonso to reconquer Naples occurred in 1432, when Caracciolo was killed in a conspiracy. Alfonso tried to regain the favour of the queen, but failed, and had to wait for the death of both Louis (at Cosenza in 1434) and Joanna herself (February 1435). In her will, she bequeathed her realm to Ren\u00e9 of Anjou, Louis III's younger brother. This solution was opposed by the new pope, Eugene IV, who was the feudal overlord of the Kingdom of Naples. The Neapolitans having called in the French, Alfonso decided to intervene and, with the support of several barons of the kingdom, captured Capua and besieged the important sea fortress of Gaeta. His fleet of 25 galleys was met by the Genoese ships sent by Visconti, led by Biagio Assereto. In the battle of Ponza that ensued, Alfonso was defeated and taken prisoner.\nIn Milan, Alfonso impressed his captor with his cultured demeanor and persuaded him to let him go by making it plain that it was not in Milan's interest to prevent the victory of the Aragonese party in Naples. Helped by a Sicilian fleet, Alfonso recaptured Capua and set his base in Gaeta in February 1436. Meanwhile, papal troops had invaded the Neapolitan kingdom, but Alfonso bribed their commander, Cardinal Giovanni Vitelleschi, and their successes waned.\nIn the meantime, Ren\u00e9 had managed to reach Naples on 19 May 1438. Alfonso tried to besiege the city in the following September, but failed. His brother Pedro was killed during the battle. Castel Nuovo, where an Aragonese garrison resisted, fell to the Angevine mercenaries in August 1439. After the death of his condottiero Jacopo Caldora, however, Ren\u00e9's fortune started to decline: Alfonso could easily capture Aversa, Salerno, Benevento, Manfredonia and Bitonto. Ren\u00e9, whose possession included now only part of the Abruzzi and Naples, obtained 10,000 men from the pope, but the cardinal leading them signed a truce with Alfonso. Giovanni Sforza came with a reduced corps, as troops sent by Eugene IV had halted his father Francesco in the Marche.\nAlfonso, provided with the most impressive artillery of the times, again besieged Naples. The siege began on 10 November 1441, ending on 2 June the following year. After the return of Ren\u00e9 to Provence, Alfonso easily reduced the remaining resistance and made his triumphal entrance in Naples on 26 February 1443, as the monarch of a pacified kingdom.\nArt and administration.\nLike many Renaissance rulers, Alfonso V was a patron of the arts. He founded the Academy of Naples under Giovanni Pontano, and for his entrance into the city in 1443 had a magnificent triumphal arch added to the main gate of Castel Nuovo. Alfonso V supplied the theme of Renaissance sculptures over the west entrance.\nAlfonso was particularly attracted to classical literature. He reportedly brought copies of the works of Livy and Julius Caesar on his campaigns; the poet Antonio Beccadelli even claimed that Alfonso was cured of a disease by the reading of a few pages from Quintus Curtius Rufus' history of Alexander the Great. Although this reputed erudition attracted scholars to his court, Alfonso apparently enjoyed pitting them against each other in spectacles of bawdy Latin rhetoric.\nAfter his conquest of Naples in 1442, Alfonso ruled primarily through his mercenaries and political lackeys. In his Italian kingdom, he maintained the former political and administrative institutions. His holdings in Spain were governed by his brother John.\nA unified General Chancellorship for the whole Aragonese realm was set up in Naples, although the main functionaries were of Aragonese nationality. Apart from financial, administrative and artistic improvements, his other accomplishments in the Sicilian kingdom include the restoration of the aqueducts, the drainage of marshy areas, and the paving of streets.\nLater life.\nAlfonso was also a powerful and faithful supporter of Skanderbeg, whom he decided to take under his protection as a vassal in 1451, shortly after the latter had scored his second victory against Murad II. In addition to financial assistance, he supplied the Albanian leader with troops, military equipment, and sanctuary for himself and his family if such a need should arise. This was because in 1448, while Skanderbeg was victoriously fighting off the Turkish invasions, three military columns, commanded by Demetrio Reres along with his sons Giorgio and Basilio, had been dispatched to help Alfonso V defeat the barons of Naples who had rebelled against him.\nAlfonso, by formally submitting his reign to the Papacy, obtained the consent of Pope Eugene IV that the Kingdom of Naples would go to his illegitimate son, Ferdinand. He died in Castel dell'Ovo in 1458, while he was planning the conquest of Genoa. At the time, Alfonso was at odds with Pope Callixtus III, who died shortly afterwards. Alfonso's Iberian possessions had been ruled for him by his brother, who succeeded him as John II of Aragon. Sicily and Sardinia were also inherited by John II.\nMarriage and issue.\nAlfonso had been betrothed to Maria of Castile (1401\u20131458; sister of John II of Castile) in Valladolid in 1408; the marriage was celebrated in Valencia on 12 June 1415. They failed to produce children. Alfonso had been in love with a woman of noble family named Lucrezia d'Alagno, who served as a \"de facto\" queen at the Neapolitan court as well as an inspiring muse.\nGenealogical records in the Old Occitan Chronicle of Montpellier in \"Le petit Thalamus de Montpellier\" indicate that Alphonso's relationship with his mistress, Giraldona Carlino, produced three children:\nGiraldona was the daughter of Enrique Carlino and his wife, Isabel."}
{"id": "1687", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1687", "title": "Amathus", "text": "Amathus or Amathous () was an ancient city and one of the ancient royal cities of Cyprus until about 300 BC. Some of its impressive remains can be seen today on the southern coast in front of Agios Tychonas, about west of Larnaca and east of Limassol. Its ancient cult sanctuary of Aphrodite was the second most important in Cyprus, her homeland, after Paphos.\nArchaeological work has recently been continued at the site and many finds are exhibited in the Limassol Museum.\nHistory.\nPre-history and ancient era.\nThe pre-history of Amathus survives in both myth and archaeology. Archaeology has detected human activity from the earliest Iron Age, BC. \nThe city's legendary founder was Cinyras, linked with the birth of Adonis, who called the city after his mother Amathous. According to a version of the Ariadne legend noted by Plutarch, Theseus abandoned Ariadne at Amathousa, where she died giving birth to her child and was buried in a sacred tomb. According to Plutarch's source, Amathousians called the sacred grove where her shrine was situated the Wood of Aphrodite Ariadne. More purely Hellenic myth would have Amathus settled instead by one of the sons of Heracles, thus accounting for the fact that he was worshiped there.\nIt was said in antiquity that the people of Amathus were autochthonous, most likely Eteocyprian or \"Pelasgian\". Their non-Greek language is confirmed on the site by Eteocypriot inscriptions in the Cypriot syllabary which alone in the Aegean world survived the Bronze Age collapse and continued to be used down to the 4th century BC.\nAmathus was built on the coastal cliffs with a natural harbour and flourished at an early date, soon requiring several cemeteries. Greeks from Euboea left their pottery at Amathus from the 10th century BC. During the post-Phoenician era of the 8th century BC, a palace was erected and a port was also constructed, which served the trade with the Greeks and the Levantines. A special burial ground for infants, a \"tophet\" served the culture of the Phoenicians. For the Hellenes, high on the cliff a temple was built, which became a worship site devoted to Aphrodite, in her particular local presence as \"Aphrodite Amathusia\" along with a bearded male Aphrodite called \"Aphroditos\". The excavators discovered the final stage of the Temple of Aphrodite, also known as Aphrodisias, which dates approximately to the 1st century BC. According to the legend, it was where festive Adonia took place, in which athletes competed in hunting wild boars during sport competitions; they also competed in dancing and singing, all to the honour of Adonis.\nThe earliest remains hitherto found on the site are tombs of the early Iron Age period of Graeco-Phoenician influences (1000-600 BC). Amathus is identified with \"Kartihadasti\" (Phoenician \"New-Town\") in the Cypriote tribute-list of Esarhaddon of Assyria (668 BC). It certainly maintained strong Phoenician sympathies, for it was its refusal to join the philhellene league of Onesilos of Salamis which provoked the revolt of Cyprus from Achaemenid Persia in 500-494 BC, when Amathus was besieged unsuccessfully and avenged itself by the capture and execution of Onesilos. Herodotus reports\nAmathus was a rich and densely populated kingdom with a flourishing agriculture (grain and sheep) and copper mines situated very close to the northeast Kalavasos.\nHellenistic era.\nAbout 385-380 BC, the philhellene Evagoras of Salamis was similarly opposed by Amathus, allied with Citium and Soli; and even after Alexander the city resisted annexation, and was bound over to give hostages to Seleucus. Its political importance was now ended but its temple of Adonis and Aphrodite Amathusia remained famous in Roman times. The epithet \"Amathusia\" in Roman poetry often means little more than \"Cypriote,\" but attesting to the fame of the city.\nFrom the 4th century BC the pedestals of two sculptures donated by the last Basileus of Amathous, Androkles, representing his two sons, Orestheus and Andragoras, have survived. Their inscriptions are in both Eteocyprian and Greek languages.\nThe decline of Amathus is often measured by the Ptolemaic gifts to Argos, where Amathus donated only 40 drachmas in 170-160 BC, but Kition and Salamis gave 208, Kourion 172, and Paphos 100. However, this figure contradicts the archaeologic evidence of new buildings in this period including a balneion, a bath, a gymnasium, as well as fortifications of the Acropolis, including a new tower. The port of Paphos appears to have lost traffic compared to Amathus in the Ptolemaic period, an indication that Paphos, as the capital of the island, perhaps offered fewer drachmas than the other cities for different reasons, like Amathus.\nRoman era.\nIn the Roman era Amathus became the capital of one of the four administrative regions of Cyprus.\nA Roman temple was built in the 1st century AD on top of the Hellenistic predecessor. The temple facilities remained so important in Roman times that 'Amathusia' was used as a synonym for 'Cypriot'.\nLate Antiquity and the Middle Ages.\nLater, in the 4th century AD, Amasus became the see of a Christian bishop and continued to flourish until the Byzantine period. Of its bishops, Heliodorus was at the Council of Chalcedon in 451 and Alexander at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787. In the late 6th century, Saint Ioannis Eleimonas (John the Charitable), protector of the Knights of St. John, was born in Amathus and after 614 sent Theodorus, bishop of Amathus, to Jerusalem to ransom some slaves.\nToday, Amathus is a see of the Church of Cyprus and is also listed (under the name \"Amathus in Cypro\", to distinguish it from \"Amathus in Transjordan\") as a titular see by the Catholic Church, which however, in line with the practice adopted after the Second Vatican Council, has made no appointments to the bishopric since the death of the last Latin titular bishop in 1984.\nAnastasius Sinaita, the famous 7th-century prolific monk of Saint Catherine's Monastery, was born here. It is thought that he left Cyprus after the 649 Arab conquest of the island, setting out for the Holy Land, and eventually becoming a monk on Sinai.\nAmathus declined and was already almost deserted when Richard Plantagenet won Cyprus by a victory there over Isaac Comnenus in 1191. The tombs were plundered and the stones from the beautiful edifices were brought to Limassol to be used for new constructions. Much later, in 1869, a great number of blocks of stone from Amathus were used for the construction of the Suez Canal. A ruined Byzantine church marks its site.\nIn modern times.\nA new settlement close to Amathus but further inland, Agios Tychonas, is named after the bishop Saint Tychon of Amathus. The site of the ruins is within the borders of this village, though the expansion of the Limassol tourist area has threatened the ruins: it is speculated that some of the hotels are on top of the Amathus necropolis.\nThe site and archaeology.\nThe city had vanished, except for fragments of wall and of a great stone urn on the acropolis, dating from the 6th century BC of which a similar vessel was taken to the Mus\u00e9e du Louvre in 1867. It is tall and weighs 14 tons. It was made from a single piece of stone and has four curved handles carved with bulls. In the 1870s, Luigi Palma di Cesnola excavated the necropolis of Amathus, as elsewhere in Cyprus, enriching the early collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art; some objects went to the British Museum. More modern archaeological joint Cypriote-French excavations started in 1980 and still continue. The Acropolis, the Temple of Aphrodite, the agora, the city's walls, the basilica and the port have all been excavated.\nFurther archaeological objects found during the excavations are preserved at both the Cyprus Museum in Nicosia and the Limassol District Archaeological Museum.\nIn the agora there are marble columns decorated with spirals and a huge paved squares. On the coastal side of the city there is an Early Christian basilica with mosaic floors decorated with semi-precious stones. Further, near the terraced road leading to the Temple, situated on the top of the cliff, several houses built in a row dating to the Hellenistic period have been discovered. At the east and west extremes of the city the two acropoleis are situated where a number of tombs have been found, many of which are intact.\nTwo small sanctuaries, with terracotta votive offerings of Graeco-Phoenician age, lie not far off, but the location of the great shrines of Adonis and Aphrodite have not been identified (M. Ohnefalsch-Richter, \"Kypros,\" i. ch.1)."}
{"id": "1688", "revid": "2386927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1688", "title": "Alphons", "text": "Alphons (Latinized \"Alphonsus\", \"Adelphonsus\", or \"Adefonsus\") is a male given name recorded from the 8th century (Alfonso I of Asturias, r. 739-757) in the Christian successor states of the Visigothic kingdom in the Iberian peninsula. In the later medieval period it became a standard name in the Hispanic and Portuguese royal families.\nIt is derived from a Gothic name, or a conflation of several Gothic names; from \"*A\u00fealfuns\", composed of the elements \"a\u00feal\" \"noble\" and \"funs\" \"eager, brave, ready\", and perhaps influenced by names such as \"*Alafuns\", \"*Adefuns\" and \"*Hildefuns\".\nIt is recorded as \"Adefonsus\" in the 9th and 10th century, \nand as \"Adelfonsus\", \"Adelphonsus\" in the 10th to 11th. The reduced form \"Alfonso\" is recorded in the late 9th century, and the Portuguese form \"Afonso\" from the early 11th. and \"Anf\u00f3s\" in Catalan from the 12th Century until the 15th. \nVariants of the name include: \"Alfonso\" (Spanish and Italian), \"Alfons\" (Dutch, German, Catalan, Polish and Scandinavian), \"Afonso\" (Portuguese and Galician), \"Alphonse\", \"Alfonse\" (Italian, French and English), etc.\nAs a surname.\n\"Alphonse\", \"Alphonso\", \"Alfonso\" is occasionally seen as a surname derived from the given name, the latter descending from Asturias and Cantabria."}
{"id": "1689", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1689", "title": "Alfonso I", "text": "Alfonso I may refer to:"}
{"id": "1690", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1690", "title": "Amati", "text": "Amati (, ) is the last name of a family of Italian violin makers who lived at Cremona from about 1538 to 1740. Their importance is considered equal to those of the Bergonzi, Guarneri, and Stradivari families. Today, violins created by Nicol\u00f2 Amati are valued at around $600,000. Because of their age and rarity, Amati instruments are mostly kept in museum or private collections and are seldom played in public.\nFamily members.\nAndrea Amati.\nAndrea Amati (December 20, 1577) designed and created the violin, viola and cello known as the \"violin family\". He standardized the basic form, shape, size, materials and method of construction. Makers from nearby Brescia experimented, such as Gasparo da Sal\u00f2, Micheli, Zanetto and Pellegrino, but it was Andrea Amati in Cremona, Italy, who gave the modern violin family their definitive profile.\nThe first violin was ordered by Lorenzo de' Medici in 1555. His letter to Amati stated the instrument was to be \"made of the highest quality materials like that of a lute, but simple to play\". What became of this first violin is not known. A number of his instruments survived for some time, dating between 1538 (Amati made the first Cello called \"The King\" in 1538 [1]) and 1574. The largest number these are from 1560, a set for an entire orchestra of 38 ordered by Catherine de M\u00e9dicis the regent queen of France and bore hand painted royal French decorations in gold including the motto and coat of arms of her son Charles IX of France. Of these 38 instruments ordered, Amati created violins of two sizes, violas of two sizes and large-sized cellos. They were in use until the French revolution of 1789 and only 14 of these instruments survived. His work is marked by selection of the finest materials, great elegance in execution, soft clear amber, soft translucent varnish, and an in depth use of acoustic and geometrical principles in design.\nAntonio and Girolamo Amati.\nAndrea Amati was succeeded by his sons Antonio Amati (\u20131607) and Girolamo Amati (\u20131630). \"The Brothers Amati\", as they were known, implemented far-reaching innovations in design, including the perfection of the shape of the f-holes. They are also thought to have pioneered the modern alto format of viola, in contrast to older tenor violas, but the widespread belief that they were the first ones to do so is incorrect given that Gasparo da Salo made violas ranging from altos of 39\u00a0cm to tenors of 44.7\u00a0cm.\nNicolo Amati.\nNicol\u00f2 Amati (December 3, 1596April 12, 1684) was the son of Girolamo Amati. He was the most eminent of the family. He improved the model adopted by the rest of the Amatis and produced instruments capable of yielding greater power of tone. His pattern was unusually small, but he also made a wider model now known as the \"Grand Amati\", which have become his most sought-after violins.\nOf his pupils, the most famous were Antonio Stradivari and Andrea Guarneri, the first of the Guarneri family of violin makers. (There is much controversy regarding the apprenticeship of Antonio Stradivari. While the label on Stradivari's first known violin states that he was a pupil of Amati, the validity of his statement is questioned.)\nGirolamo Amati (Hieronymus II).\nThe last maker of the family was Nicol\u00f2's son, Girolamo Amati, known as Hieronymus II (February 26, 1649February 21, 1740). He improved the arching of his father's instruments.\nExtant Amati instruments.\nUnited Kingdom.\nInstruments in the UK include Andrea Amati violins from the set delivered to Charles IX of France in 1564."}
{"id": "1691", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1691", "title": "Alfonso II", "text": "Alfonso II may refer to:"}
{"id": "1692", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1692", "title": "Alfonso III", "text": "Alfonso III may refer to:"}
{"id": "1694", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1694", "title": "Alfonso IV", "text": "Alfonso IV may refer to:"}
{"id": "1695", "revid": "36491307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1695", "title": "Amazons", "text": "In Greek mythology, the Amazons (Ancient Greek: \u1f08\u03bc\u03b1\u03b6\u03cc\u03bd\u03b5\u03c2 \"Amaz\u00f3nes\", singular \u1f08\u03bc\u03b1\u03b6\u03ce\u03bd \"Amaz\u014dn\") are portrayed in a number of ancient epic poems and legends, such as the Labours of Hercules, the \"Argonautica\" and the \"Iliad\". They were a people of female warriors and hunters, who matched man in physical agility and strength, in archery, riding skills and the arts of combat. Their society was closed for men and they only raised their daughters and either killed their sons or returned them to their fathers, with whom they would only socialize briefly in order to reproduce.\nCourageous and fiercely independent, the Amazons, commanded by their queen, regularly undertook extensive military expeditions into the far corners of the world, from Scythia to Thrace, Asia Minor and the Aegean Islands, reaching as far as Arabia and Egypt. Besides military raids, the Amazons are also associated with the foundation of temples and the establishment of numerous ancient cities like Ephesos, Cyme, Smyrna, Sinope, Myrina, Magnesia, Pygela, etc.\nThe texts of the original myths envisioned the homeland of the Amazons at the periphery of the then known world. Various claims to the exact place ranged from provinces in Asia Minor (Lycia, Caria etc.) to the steppes around the Black Sea, or even Libya. However, authors most frequently referred to Pontus in northern Anatolia, at the southern shores of the Black Sea as the independent Amazon kingdom where the Amazon queen resided at her capital Themiscyra at the banks of the Thermodon river.\nPalaephatus, who himself might have been a fictional character, attempted to rationalize the Greek myths in his work \"On Unbelievable Tales\". He suspected that the Amazons were probably men who were mistaken for women by their enemies because they wore clothing that reached their feet, tied up their hair in headbands and shaved their beards. Probably the first in a long line of skeptics, he rejected any real basis for them as because they did not exist during his time, most probably they did n\u03bft exist in the past either.\nDecades of archaeological discoveries of countless burial sites of female warriors, including royalty, in the Eurasian Steppes prove that the horse cultures of Scythian, Sarmatian, Hittite and other women have inspired and fundamentally defined the Amazon myth. In 2019 a grave with multiple generations of female Scythian warriors, armed and in golden headdresses, was found near Russia's Voronezh.\nEtymology.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe origin of the word is uncertain. It may be derived from an Iranian ethnonym \"*ha-mazan-\" 'warriors', a word attested indirectly through a derivation, a denominal verb in Hesychius of Alexandria's gloss (\"\"\": 'to make war' in Persian\"), where it appears together with the Indo-Iranian root \"*kar-\" 'make'.\nIt may alternatively be a Greek word descended from \"\" 'manless, without husbands' (alpha privative combined with a derivation from \"*man-\" cognate with Proto-Balto-Slavic \"*mangj\u00e1-\", found in Czech \"mu\u017e\") has been proposed, an explanation deemed \"unlikely\" by Hjalmar Frisk. A further explanation proposes Iranian *\"ama-janah\" 'virility-killing' as source.\nAmong the ancient Greeks, the term \"Amazon\" was given a folk etymology as originating from (\u1f00\u03bc\u03b1\u03b6\u03cc\u03c2 'breastless'), connected with an etiological tradition once claimed by Marcus Justinus who alleged that Amazons had their right breast cut off or burnt out. There is no indication of such a practice in ancient works of art, in which the Amazons are always represented with both breasts, although one is frequently covered. According to Philostratus Amazon babies were just not fed with the right breast. Author Adrienne Mayor suggests that the false etymology led to the myth.\nAlternative terms.\nHerodotus used the terms \"Androktones\" () 'killers/slayers of men' and \"Androleteirai\" () 'destroyers of men, murderesses'. Amazons are called \"Antianeirai\" () 'equivalent to men' and Aeschylus used \"Styganor\" () 'those who loathe all men'.\nIn his work \"Prometheus Bound\" and in the \"The Suppliants\", Aeschylus called the Amazons \"...\u03c4\u1f70\u03c2 \u1f00\u03bd\u03ac\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03ba\u03c1\u03b5\u03bf\u03b2\u03cc\u03c1\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03c4\u1fbd \u1f08\u03bc\u03b1\u03b6\u03cc\u03bd\u03b1\u03c2\" 'the unwed, flesh-devouring Amazons'. In the Hippolytus tragedy, Phaedra calls Hippolytus, 'the son of the horse-loving Amazon' (). In his Dionysiaca, Nonnus calls the Amazons of Dionysus \"Androphonus\" () 'men slaying'.\nHerodotus stated that in the Scythian language, the Amazons were called \"Oiorpata\", which he explained as being from \"oior\" 'man' and \"pata\" 'to slay'.\nHistoriography.\nThe ancient Greeks never had any doubts that the Amazons were, or had been, real. Not the only people enchanted by warlike women of nomadic cultures, such exciting tales also come from ancient Egypt, Persia, India and China. Greek heroes of old had encounters with the queens of their martial society and fought them. However, their original home was not exactly known, thought to be in the obscure lands beyond the civilized world. \"The Amazons existed outside the range of normal human experience\". As a result, for centuries scholars believed the Amazons to be purely imaginary, although\nthere were various proposals for a historical nucleus of the Amazons in Greek historiography. Some authors preferred comparisons to cultures of Asia Minor or even Minoan Crete. The most obvious historical candidates are Lycia and Scythia &amp; Sarmatia in line with the account by Herodotus. In his Histories (5th century BC) Herodotus claims that the \"Sauromatae\" (predecessors of the Sarmatians), who ruled the lands between the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea, arose from a union of Scythians and Amazons.\nHerodotus also observed rather unusual customs among the Lycians of south-west Asia Minor. The Lycians obviously followed matrilineal rules of descent, virtue and status. They named themselves along their maternal family line and a child's status was determined by the mother's reputation. This remarkably high esteem of women and legal regulations based on maternal lines, still in effect in the 5th century BC in the Lycian regions that Herodotus had traveled to, lent him the idea that these people were descendants of the mythical Amazons.\nModern historiography no longer relies exclusively on textual and artistic material, but also on the vast archaeological evidence of over a thousand nomad graves from steppe territories from the Black Sea all the way to Mongolia. Spectacular discoveries of battle-scarred female skeletons buried with their weapons (bows and arrows, quivers and spears) prove that women warriors were not merely figments of imagination, but the product of the Scythian/Sarmatian horse-centred lifestyle. These women turned out to be able to fight, hunt, ride and utilize a bow and arrows just like the men.\nMythology.\nAccording to myth, Otrera, the first Amazon queen, is the offspring of a romance between Ares the god of war and the nymph Harmonia of the Akmonian Wood, and as such a demigod.\nEarly records refer to two events in which Amazons appeared prior to the Trojan War (before 1250 BC). Within the epic context, Bellerophon, Greek hero and grandfather of the brothers and Trojan War veterans \"Glaukos and Sarpedon\", faced Amazons during his stay in Lycia, when King Iobates sent Bellerophon to fight the Amazons, hoping they would kill him, yet Bellerophon slayed them all. The youthful King Priam of Troy fought on the side of the Phrygians, who were attacked by Amazons at the Sangarios River.\nAmazons in the Trojan War.\nThere are Amazon characters in Homer's Trojan War epic poem, the \"Iliad\", one of the oldest surviving texts in Europe (around 8th century BC).\nThe now lost epic \"Aethiopis\" (probably by Arctinus of Miletus) (6th century BC) which, like the \"Iliad\" and several other epics, is one of the works, that in combination form the Trojan War Epic Cycle. In one of the few references to the text an Amazon force under queen Penthesilea, who was of Thracian birth, came to join the ranks of the Trojans after Hector's death and initially put the Greeks under serious pressure. Only after the greatest effort and the help of the reinvigorated hero Achilles, the Greeks eventually triumphed. Penthesilea died fighting the mighty Achilles in single combat. Homer himself deemed the Amazon myths to be common knowledge all over Greece, which suggests, that they had already been known for some time before him. He was also convinced, that the Amazons lived not at its fringes, but somewhere in or around Lycia in Asia Minor - a place well within the Greek world.\nTroy is mentioned in the \"Iliad\" as the place of Myrine's death. Later identified as an Amazon queen, according to Diodorus (1st century BC), the Amazons under her rule, invaded the territories of the Atlantians, defeated the army of the Atlantian city of Cerne and razed the city to the ground.\nIn Scythia.\nThe Poet Bacchylides (6th century BC) and the historian Herodotus (5th century BC) located the Amazon homeland in \"Pontus\" at the southern shores of the Black Sea, and the capital Themiscyra at the banks of the Thermodon (modern Terme river), by the modern city of Terme. Herodotus also explains how it came to be, that some Amazons would eventually be living in Scythia. A Greek force, that after it had defeated the Amazons in battle at the Thermodon river, sailed home. The fleet included three ships, that were crowded with Amazon prisoners. Once out at sea the Amazon prisoners overwhelmed and killed the small crews of the prisoner ships and, despite not having even basic navigation skills, managed to escape and safely embark at the Scythian shore. As soon as the Amazons had caught enough horses, they easily asserted themselves in the steppe in between the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea and, according to Herodotus, would eventually assimilate with the Scythians, whose descendants were the Sauromatae, the predecessors of the Sarmatians.\nAmazon homeland.\nStrabo (1st century BC) visits and confirms the original homeland of the Amazons on the plains by the Thermodon river. However, long gone and not seen again during his life-time, the Amazons had allegedly retreated into the mountains. Strabo, however, added that other authors, among them Metrodorus of Scepsis and Hypsicrates claim that after abandoning Themiscyra, the Amazons had chosen to resettle beyond the borders of the Gargareans, an all-male tribe native to the northern foothills of the Ceraunian Mountains. The Amazons and Gargareans had for many generations met in secrecy once a year during two months in spring, in order to produce children. These encounters would take place in accordance with ancient tribal customs and collective offers of sacrifices. In an obvious culture of decency and understanding, all females were retained by the Amazons themselves, as males would be returned to the Gargareans. 5th century BC poet Magnes sings of the bravery of the Lydians in a cavalry-battle against the Amazons.\nHercules myth.\nHippolyte, an Amazon queen died by the hand of Hercules, who had set out for her in order to obtain the queen's magic belt in a task he was to accomplish as one of the Labours of Hercules. Although neither side had intended to resort to lethal combat, a misunderstanding led to the fight. In the course of this, Heracles killed the queen and several other Amazons. In awe of the strong hero, the Amazons eventually handed the belt to Heracles. In another version, Heracles does not kill the queen, but exchanges her kidnapped sister Melanippe for the belt.\nTheseus myth.\nQueen Hippolyte is abducted by Theseus, who takes her to Athens, makes her his wife and she bears him a son - Hippolytus. In other versions the kidnapped Amazon is called Antiope, the sister of Hippolyte. In revenge, the Amazons invaded Greece, plundered some cities along the coast of Attica and besieged and occupied Athens. Hippolyte, who fought on the side of Athens and according to another account with the Amazons was killed during the final battle along with all of the Amazons.\nAmazons and Dionysus.\nAccording to Plutarch, the god Dionysus and his companions fought Amazons at Ephesus. The Amazons fled to Samos and Dionysus pursued them and killed a great number of them at a site since called \"Panaema\" (blood-soaked field). The Christian author Eusebius writes that during the reign of Oxyntes, one of the mythical kings of Athens, the Amazons burned down the temple at Ephesus.\nIn another myth Dionysus unites with the Amazons to fight against Cronus and the Titans. Polyaenus writes that after Dionysus has subdued the Indians, he allies with them and the Amazons and takes them into his service, who serve him in his campaign against the Bactrians. Nonnus in his \"Dionysiaca\" reports about the Amazons of Dionysus, but states that they do not come from Thermodon.\nAmazons and Alexander the Great.\nAmazons are also mentioned by biographers of Alexander the Great, who report of Queen Thalestris bearing him a child (a story in the \"Alexander Romance\"). However, other biographers of Alexander dispute the claim, including the highly regarded Plutarch. He noted a moment when Alexander's naval commander Onesicritus read an Amazon myth passage of his \"Alexander History\" to King Lysimachus of Thrace who had taken part in the original expedition. The king smiled at him and said: \"And where was I, then?\"\nRoman and ancient Egyptian records.\nVirgil's characterization of the Volscian warrior maiden Camilla in the \"Aeneid\" borrows from the myths of the Amazons. Philostratus, in \"Heroica\", writes that the Mysian women fought on horses alongside the men, just as the Amazons. The leader was Hiera, wife of Telephus. The Amazons are also said to have undertaken an expedition against the Island of Leuke, at the mouth of the Danube, where the ashes of Achilles were deposited by Thetis. The ghost of the dead hero so terrified the horses, that they threw off and trampled upon the invaders, who were forced to retreat. Virgil touches on the Amazons and their queen Penthesilea in his epic Aeneid (around 20 BC). \nThe biographer Suetonius had Julius Caesar remark in his \"De vita Caesarum\" that the Amazons \"once ruled a large part of Asia\". Appian provides a vivid description of Themiscyra and its fortifications in his account of Lucius Lucinius Lucullus' \"Siege of Themiscyra\" in 71 BC during the Third Mithridatic War.\nAn Amazon myth has been partly preserved in two badly fragmented versions around historical people in 7th century BC Egypt. The Egyptian prince \"Petechonsis\" and allied Assyrian troops undertook a joint campaign into the \"Land of Women\", to the \"Middle East\" at the border to India. \"Petechonsis\" initially fought the Amazons, but soon fell in love with their queen \"Sarpot\" and eventually allied with her against an invading Indian army. This story is said to have originated in Egypt independently of Greek influences.\nAmazon queens.\nSources provide names of individual Amazons, that are referred to as queens of their people, even as the head of a dynasty. Wthout a male companion they are portrayed in command of their female warriors. Among the most prominent Amazon queens were:\nOtrera, was the daughter of the nymph Harmonia and god of war, Ares. She was the mother of Hippolyta, Antiope, Melanippe and Penthesilea. She is the mythical founder of the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus.\nHippolyte, daughter of Otrera and Ares, part of the Theseus and Heracles myths, Antiope is her sister there. Alcippe, the only Amazon known to have sworn a chastity oath, belongs to her entourage.\nPenthesilea, kills her sister Hippolyte in a hunting accident, comes to the aid of the hard-pressed Trojans with her warriors, is defeated by Achilles, who falls in love with the dying woman.\nMyrina, leader of a military expedition in Libya, defeats the Atlanteans, forms an alliance with the ruler of Egypt and conquers numerous cities and islands.\nThalestris, the last known Amazon queen. Meets, according to legend, the Greek conqueror Alexander the Great in 330 BC. Her home is the Thermodon region, or variably the Gates of Alexander, south of the Caspian Sea.\nVarious authors and chroniclers.\nQuintus Smyrnaeus.\nQuintus Smyrnaeus, author of the Posthomerica lists the attendant warriors of Penthesilea: \"Clonie was there, Polemusa, Derinoe, Evandre, and Antandre, and Bremusa, Hippothoe, dark-eyed Harmothoe, Alcibie, Derimacheia, Antibrote, and Thermodosa glorying with the spear.\"\nDiodorus Siculus.\nDiodorus Siculus lists twelve Amazons who challenged and died fighting Heracles during his quest for Hippolyta's girdle: Aella, Philippis, Prothoe, Eriboea, Celaeno, Eurybia, Phoebe, Deianeira, Asteria, Marpe, Tecmessa, Alcippe. After Alcippe's death, a group attack followed. Diodorus also mentions Melanippe, who Heracles set free after accepting her girdle and Antiope as ransom.\nDiodorus lists another group with Myrina as the queen who commanded the Amazons in a military expedition in Libya, as well as her sister Mytilene, after whom she named the city of the same name. Myrina also named three more cities after the Amazons who held the most important commands under her, Cyme, Pitane, and Priene.\nJustin and Paulus Orosius.\nBoth Justin in his \"Epitome of Trogus Pompeius\" and Paulus Orosius give an account of the Amazons, citing the same names. Queens Marpesia and Lampedo shared the power during an incursion in Europe and Asia, where they were slain. Marpesia's daughter Orithyia succeeded them and was greatly admired for her skill on war. She shared power with her sister Antiope, but she was engaged in war abroad when Heracles attacked. Two of Antiope's sisters were taken prisoner, Menalippe by Heracles and Hippolyta by Theseus. Heracles latter restored Menalippe to her sister after receiving the queen's arms in exchange, though, on other accounts she was killed by Telamon. They also mention Penthesilea's role in the Trojan War.\nHyginus.\nAnother list of Amazons' names is found in Hyginus' \"Fabulae\". Along with Hippolyta, Otrera, Antiope and Penthesilea, it attests the following names: Ocyale, Dioxippe, Iphinome, Xanthe, Hippothoe, Laomache, Glauce, Agave, Theseis, Clymene, Polydora.\nPerhaps the most important is Queen Otrera, consort of Ares and mother by him of Hippolyta and Penthesilea. She's also known for building a temple to Artemis at Ephesus.\nValerius Flaccus.\nAnother different set of names is found in Valerius Flaccus' \"Argonautica\". He mentions Euryale, Harpe, Lyce, Menippe and Thoe. Of these Lyce also appears on a fragment, preserved in the \"Latin Anthology\" where she is said to have killed the hero Clonus of Moesia, son of Doryclus, with her javelin.\nLate Antiquity, Middle Age and Renaissance literature.\nStephanus of Byzantium (7th-century CE) provides numerous alternative lists of the Amazons, including for those who died in combat against Hercules, describing them as the \"most prominent of their people\". Both Stephanus and Eustathius connect these Amazons with the placename \"Thibais\", which they claim to have been derived from the Amazon \"Thiba's\" name. Several of Stephanus' Amazons served as eponyms for cities in Asia Minor, like \"Cyme\" and \"Smyrna\" or \"Amastris\", who was believed to lend her name to the city previously known as \"Kromna\", although in fact it was named after the historical Amastris. The city Anaea in Caria was named after an Amazon.\nIn his work \"Getica\" (on the origin and history of the Goths, ) Jordanes asserts that the Goths' ancestors, descendants of Magog, originally lived in Scythia, at the Sea of Azov between the Dnieper and Don Rivers. When the Goths were abroad campaigning against Pharaoh Vesosis, their women, on their own successfully fended off a raid by a neighboring tribe. Emboldened, the women established their own army under Marpesia, crossed the Don and invaded eastward into Asia. Marpesia's sister Lampedo remained in Europe to guard the homeland. They procreated with men once a year. These women conquered Armenia, Syria and all of Asia Minor, even reaching Ionia and Aeolis, holding this vast territory for 100 years.\nIn the \"Grottaferrata Version\" of \"Digenes Akritas\", the twelfth century medieval epic of \"Basil, the Greco-Syrian knight\" of the Byzantine frontier, the hero battles with and kills the female warrior Maximo, descended from some Amazons and taken by Alexander from the Brahmans.\nJohn Tzetzes lists in \"Posthomerica\" twenty Amazons, who fell at Troy. This list is unique in its attestation for all the names but Antianeira and Andromache.\nAmazons continued to be subject of scholarly debate during the European Renaissance, and with the onset of the Age of Exploration, encounters were reported from ever more distant lands. In 1542, Francisco de Orellana reached the Amazon River, naming it after \"icamiabas\" a tribe of warlike women he claimed to have encountered and fought on the Nhamund\u00e1 River, a tributary of the Amazon. Afterwards the whole basin and region of the Amazon (\"Amaz\u00f4nia\" in Portuguese, \"Amazon\u00eda\" in Spanish) were named after the river. Amazons also figure in the accounts of both Christopher Columbus and Walter Raleigh. Famous medieval traveller John Mandeville mentions them in his book:\nMedieval and Renaissance authors credit the Amazons with the invention of the battle-axe. This is probably related to the \"sagaris\", an axe-like weapon associated with both Amazons and Scythian tribes by Greek authors (see also Thracian tomb of Aleksandrovo kurgan). Paulus Hector Mair expresses astonishment that such a \"manly weapon\" should have been invented by a \"tribe of women\", but he accepts the attribution out of respect for his authority, Johannes Aventinus.\nAriosto's \"Orlando Furioso\" contains a country of warrior women, ruled by Queen Orontea; the epic describes an origin much like that in Greek myth, in that the women, abandoned by a band of warriors and unfaithful lovers, rallied together to form a nation from which men were severely reduced, to prevent them from regaining power. The Amazons and Queen Hippolyta are also referenced in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\" in \"The Knight's Tale\".\nAmazons in art.\nBeginning around 550 BC. depictions of Amazons as daring fighters and equestrian warriors appeared on vases. After the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC the \"Amazon battle - Amazonomachy\" became popular motifs on pottery. By the sixth century BC, public and privately displayed artwork used the Amazon imagery for pediment reliefs, sarcophagi, mosaics, pottery, jewelry and even monumental sculptures, that adorned important buildings like the Parthenon in Athens. Amazon motifs remained popular until the Roman imperial period and into Late antiquity.\nApart from the artistic desire to express the passionate womanhood of the Amazons in contrast with the manhood of their enemies, some modern historians interpret the popularity of Amazon in art as indicators of societal trends, both positive and negative. Greek and Roman societies, however, utilized the Amazon mythology as a literary and artistic vehicle to unite against a commonly-held enemy. The metaphysical characteristics of Amazons were seen as personifications of both nature and religion. Roman authors like Virgil, Strabo, Pliny the Elder, Curtius, Plutarch, Arrian, and Pausanius advocated the greatness of the state, as Amazon myths served to discuss the creation of origin and identity for the Roman people. However, that changed over time. Amazons in Roman literature and art have many faces, such as the \"Trojan ally, the warrior goddess, the native Latin, the warmongering Celt, the proud Sarmatian, the hedonistic and passionate Thracian warrior queen, the subdued Asian city, and the worthy Roman foe\".\nIn Renaissance Europe, artists started to reevaluate and depict Amazons based on Christian ethics. Queen Elizabeth of England was associated with Amazon warrior qualities (\"the foremost ancient examples of feminism\") during her reign and was indeed depicted as such. Though, as explained in \"Divinia Viagro\" by Winfried Schleiner, Celeste T. Wright has given a detailed account of the bad reputation Amazons had in the Renaissance. She notes that she has not found any Elizabethans comparing the Queen to an Amazon and suggests that they might have hesitated to do so because of the association of Amazons with enfranchisement of women, which was considered contemptible.\nPeter Paul Rubens and Jan Brueghel depicted the Battle of the Amazons around 1598, a \"most dramatic baroque painting\", followed by a painting of the Rococo period by Johann Georg Platzer, also titled \"Battle of the Amazons\". In 19th-century European Romanticism German artist Anselm Feuerbach occupied himself with the Amazons as well. His paintings \"engendered all the aspirations of the Romantics: their desire to transcend the boundaries of the ego and of the known world; their interest in the occult in nature and in the soul; their search for a national identity, and the ensuing search for the mythic origins of the Germanic nation; finally, their wish to escape the harsh realities of the present through immersion in an idealized past.\"\nArchaeology.\nSpeculation that the idea of Amazons contains a core of reality is based on archaeological discoveries at kurgan burial sites in the steppes of southern Ukraine and Russia. The graves of numerous high-ranking Scythian and Sarmatian warrior women, who might have participated in warfare, led scholars to suggest that the Amazonian legend has been inspired by the real world. \"About 20% of the warrior graves on the lower Don and lower Volga contained women dressed for battle similar to how men dress...\" Armed women accounted for up to 25% of Sarmatian military burials. Russian archaeologist Vera Kovalevskaya asserts, that when Scythian men were abroad fighting or hunting, women would have to be able to competently defend themselves, their animals and pastures.\nIn early 20th century Minoan archeology a theory regarding Amazon origins in Minoan civilization was raised in an essay by Lewis Richard Farnell and John Myres. According to Myres, the tradition interpreted in the light of evidence furnished by supposed Amazon cults seems to have been very similar and may have even originated in Minoan culture.\nModern legacy.\nThe city of Samsun in modern-day Samsun Province, Turkey features an \"Amazon Village\" museum, to help bring attention to the legacy of the Amazons and to promote both academic interest and tourism. An annual \"Amazon Celebration Festival\" takes place in the Terme district. \nFrom 1936 to 1939, annual propaganda events, called Night of the Amazons (\"Nacht der Amazonen\") were performed in Nazi Germany at the Nymphenburg Palace Park in Munich. Announced as evening highlights of the \"International Horse Racing Week Munich-Riem\", bare-breasted variety show girls of the SS-Cavalry, 2,500 participants and international guests performed at the open-air revue. These revues served to promote an allegedly emancipated female role and a cosmopolitan and foreigner-friendly Nazi regime.\nIn literature and media.\nGames.\nAmazons are featured in the following roleplay - and video games: \"Diablo\", \"Heroes Unlimited\", \"Aliens Unlimited\", , Flight of the Amazon Queen, \"\", \"Final Fantasy IV\", , Legend of Zelda series and Yu-Gi-Oh games.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "1696", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1696", "title": "Alfonso V", "text": "Alfonso V may refer to:"}
{"id": "1697", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1697", "title": "Ambergris", "text": "Ambergris ( or , , ), \"ambergrease\", or \"grey amber\", is a solid, waxy, flammable substance of a dull grey or blackish colour produced in the digestive system of sperm whales. Freshly produced ambergris has a marine, fecal odor. It acquires a sweet, earthy scent as it ages, commonly likened to the fragrance of rubbing alcohol without the vaporous chemical astringency.\nAmbergris has been highly valued by perfumers as a fixative that allows the scent to endure much longer, although it has been mostly replaced by synthetic ambroxide. Dogs are attracted to the smell of ambergris and are sometimes used by ambergris searchers.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"ambergris\" comes from the Old French \"ambre gris\" or \"grey amber\". The word \"amber\" comes from the same source, but it has been applied almost exclusively to fossilized tree resins from the Baltic region since the late 13th century in Europe.\nHowever, the word \"amber\" is derived from the Middle Persian (Pahlavi) word \"ambar\" (variants: \"\u2019mbl, 'nbl\").\nFormation.\nAmbergris is formed from a secretion of the bile duct in the intestines of the sperm whale, and can be found floating on the sea or washed up on coastlines. It is sometimes found in the abdomens of dead sperm whales. Because the beaks of giant squids have been discovered within lumps of ambergris, scientists have theorized that the substance is produced by the whale's gastrointestinal tract to ease the passage of hard, sharp objects that it may have eaten.\nAmbergris is passed like fecal matter. It is speculated that an ambergris mass too large to be passed through the intestines is expelled via the mouth, but this remains under debate. Ambergris takes years to form. Christopher Kemp, the author of \"Floating Gold: A Natural (and Unnatural) History of Ambergris\", says that it is only produced by sperm whales, and only by an estimated one percent of them. Ambergris is rare; once expelled by a whale, it often floats for years before making landfall. The slim chances of finding ambergris and the legal ambiguity involved led perfume makers away from ambergris, and led chemists on a quest to find viable alternatives.\nAmbergris is primarily found in the Atlantic Ocean and on the coasts of South Africa, Brazil, Madagascar, the East Indies, The Maldives, China, Japan, India, Australia, New Zealand, and the Molucca Islands. Most commercially collected ambergris comes from the Bahamas in the Atlantic, particularly New Providence. Fossilised ambergris from 1.75 million years ago has also been found.\nPhysical properties.\nAmbergris is found in lumps of various shapes and sizes, usually weighing from to , sometimes more. When initially expelled by or removed from the whale, the fatty precursor of ambergris is pale white in colour (sometimes streaked with black), soft, with a strong fecal smell. Following months to years of photodegradation and oxidation in the ocean, this precursor gradually hardens, developing a dark grey or black colour, a crusty and waxy texture, and a peculiar odour that is at once sweet, earthy, marine, and animalic. Its scent has been generally described as a vastly richer and smoother version of isopropanol without its stinging harshness. In this developed condition, ambergris has a specific gravity ranging from 0.780 to 0.926. It melts at about to a fatty, yellow resinous liquid; and at it is volatilised into a white vapour. It is soluble in ether, and in volatile and fixed oils.\nChemical properties.\nAmbergris is relatively nonreactive to acid. White crystals of a terpene known as ambrein, discovered by Ru\u017ei\u010dka and Lardon in 1946, can be separated from ambergris by heating raw ambergris in alcohol, then allowing the resulting solution to cool. Breakdown of the relatively scentless ambrein through oxidation produces ambroxan and ambrinol, the main odor components of ambergris.\nAmbroxan is now produced synthetically and used extensively in the perfume industry.\nApplications.\nAmbergris has been mostly known for its use in creating perfume and fragrance much like musk. Perfumes can still be found with ambergris.\nAmbergris has historically been used in food and drink. A serving of eggs and ambergris was reportedly King Charles II of England's favorite dish. A recipe for Rum Shrub liqueur from the mid 19th century called for a thread of ambergris to be added to rum, almonds, cloves, cassia, and the peel of oranges in making a cocktail from \"The English and Australian Cookery Book\". It has been used as a flavoring agent in Turkish coffee and in hot chocolate in 18th century Europe. The substance is considered an aphrodisiac in some cultures.\nAncient Egyptians burned ambergris as incense, while in modern Egypt ambergris is used for scenting cigarettes. The ancient Chinese called the substance \"dragon's spittle fragrance\". During the Black Death in Europe, people believed that carrying a ball of ambergris could help prevent them from contracting plague. This was because the fragrance covered the smell of the air which was believed to be a cause of plague.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Europeans used ambergris as a medication for headaches, colds, epilepsy, and other ailments.\nLegality.\nFrom the 18th to the mid-19th century, the whaling industry prospered. By some reports, nearly 50,000 whales, including sperm whales, were killed each year. Throughout the 1800s, \"millions of whales were killed for their oil, whalebone, and ambergris\" to fuel profits, and they soon became endangered as a species as a result. Due to studies showing that the whale populations were being threatened, the International Whaling Commission instituted a moratorium on commercial whaling in 1982. Although ambergris is not harvested from whales, many countries also ban the trade of ambergris as part of the more general ban on the hunting and exploitation of whales.\nUrine, faeces and ambergris (that has been naturally excreted by a sperm whale) are waste products not considered parts or derivatives of a CITES species and are therefore not covered by the provisions of the Convention.\nIllegal\nLegal\nIn popular culture.\nHistorical.\nThe knowledge of ambergris and how it is produced may have been a kept secret. Ibn Battuta wrote about ambergris, \"I sent along with them all the things that I valued and the gems and ambergris...\" Glaswegian apothecary John Spreul told the historian Robert Wodrow about the substance but said he had never told anyone else.\nIn literature.\nIn chapter 91 of Herman Melville's \"Moby-Dick\" (1851), Stubb, one of the mates of the \"Pequod,\" fools the captain of a French whaler (\"Rose-bud\") into abandoning the corpse of a sperm whale found floating in the sea. His plan is to recover the corpse himself in hopes that it contains ambergris. His hope proves well founded, and the \"Pequod\"'s crew recovers a valuable quantity of the substance. Melville devotes the following chapter to a discussion of ambergris, with special attention to the irony that \"fine ladies and gentlemen should regale themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of a sick whale.\"\nIn \"A Romance of Perfume Lands or the Search for Capt. Jacob Cole\", F. S. Clifford, October 1881, the last chapter concerns one of the novel's characters discovering an area of a remote island which contains large amounts of ambergris. He hopes to use this knowledge to help make his fortune in the manufacture of perfumes.\nIn Television.\nA 2014 episode of the show Bob's Burgers is titled \"Ambergris.\" The plot revolves around the Belcher children discovering and attempting to sell a lump of the substance."}
{"id": "1698", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1698", "title": "Ambiorix", "text": "Ambiorix (Gaulish \"king of the surroundings\", or \"king-protector\") was, together with Cativolcus, prince of the Eburones, leader of a Belgic tribe of north-eastern Gaul (Gallia Belgica), where modern Belgium is located. In the nineteenth century Ambiorix became a Belgian national hero because of his resistance against Julius Caesar, as written in Caesar's \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\".\nName.\nIt is generally accepted that \"Ambiorix\" is a Gaulish personal name formed with the prefix \"ambio-\" attached to \"rix\" ('king'), but the meaning of the first element is debated. Some scholars translate \"Ambiorix\" as the 'king of the surroundings' or 'king of the enclosure', by interpreting \"ambio-\" as a thematized form of \"ambi-\" ('around, on both sides') meaning 'surroundings' or else 'enclosure' (cf. Old Irish \"imbe\" 'enclosure'). Alternatively, Fredick O. Lindeman renders \"Ambiorix\" as the 'protector-king', by deriving \"ambio-\" from the Proto-Indo-European compound \"*h\u2082mbh\u00ed\"-\"p\u00e9h\u2083\" ('protector'; cf. Old Indic \"adhi-p\u00e1-\" 'protector, ruler, master, king').\nBiography.\nEarly history.\nIn 57 BC Julius Caesar conquered parts of Gaul and also Belgica (Belgium, modern-day Northern France, Luxembourg, part of present-day Netherlands below the Rhine River; and the north-western portion of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany). There were several tribes in the country who fought against each other frequently. The Eburones were ruled by Ambiorix and Catuvolcus. In 54 BC Caesar's troops urgently needed more food, and so the local tribes were forced to give up part of their harvest, which had not been good that year. Understandably the starving Eburones were reluctant to do so and Caesar ordered that camps be built near the Eburones' villages. Each centurion was ordered to make sure the food supplies were delivered to the Roman soldiers. This created resentment among the Eburones.\nAlthough Julius Caesar had freed him from paying tribute to the Atuatuci, Ambiorix joined Catuvolcus in the winter of 54 BC in an uprising against the Roman forces under Q. Titurius Sabinus and L. Aurunculeius Cotta.\nResisting the Romans.\nBecause a drought had disrupted his grain supply, Caesar was forced to winter his legions among the rebellious Belgic tribes. Roman troops led by Q. Titurius Sabinus and L. Aurunculeius Cotta were wintering among the Eburones when they were attacked by them, led by Ambiorix and Cativolcus. Ambiorix deceived the Romans, telling them the attack was made without his consent, and further advised them to flee as a large Germanic force was preparing to cross the Rhine. Trusting Ambiorix, Sabinus and Cotta's troops left the next morning. A short distance from their camp, the Roman troops were ambushed by the Eburones and massacred.\nElsewhere, another Roman force under Q. Tullius Cicero, brother of the orator Marcus, were wintering amongst the Nervii. Leading a coalition of rebellious Belgic tribes, Ambiorix surrounded Cicero's camp. After a long while, a Roman messenger was finally able to slip through the Belgic lines and get word of the uprising to Caesar. Mobilizing his legions, Caesar immediately marched to Cicero's aid. As they approached the besieged Roman camp, the Belgae moved to engage Caesar's troops. Vastly outnumbered, Caesar ordered his troops to appear confused and frightened, and they successfully lured the Belgae to attack them on ground favourable to the Romans. Caesar's forces launched a fierce counterattack, and soon put the Belgae to flight. Later, Caesar's troops entered Cicero's camp to find most of the men wounded.\nMeanwhile, Indutiomarus, a leader of the Treveri, began to harass Labienus's camp daily, eventually provoking Labienus to send out his cavalry with specific orders to kill Indutiomarus. They did so, and routed the remnants of Indutiomarus's army. Caesar personally remained in Gaul for the remainder of winter due to the renewed Gallic threat.\nCaesar's revenge.\nWhen the Roman senate heard what had happened, Caesar swore to destroy all the Belgic tribes. Ambiorix had killed fifteen cohorts. A Belgic attack on Q. Tullius Cicero, then stationed with a legion in the territory of the Nervii, failed due to the timely appearance of Caesar. The Roman campaigns against the Belgae took a few years, but eventually the tribes were slaughtered or driven out and their fields burned. The Eburones disappeared from history after this genocidal event. According to the writer Florus, Ambiorix and his men succeeded in escaping across the Rhine. They do not appear in Roman records after this point.\nLegacy.\nCaesar wrote about Ambiorix in his commentary about his battles against the Gauls, \"De Bello Gallico\". In this text he also wrote the famous line: \"Of these [three regions], the Belgae are the bravest.\" (\"...\u00a0\"Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae\"\u00a0...\").\nAmbiorix remained a relatively obscure figure until the nineteenth century. When Belgium became independent in 1830 the national government started searching through their historical archives for people who could serve as national heroes. In Caesar's \"De Bello Gallico\", Ambiorix and his deeds were rediscovered. In 1841, the Belgian poet Joannes Nolet de Brauwere Van Steeland wrote a lyrical epic about Ambiorix. Furthermore, on September 5, 1866, a statue of Ambiorix was erected on the main market square in Tongeren, Belgium, referred to by Caesar as Atuatuca, i.e. Atuatuca Tungrorum.\nToday, Ambiorix is one of the most famous characters in Belgian history. Many companies, bars and friteries have named themselves after him, and in many Belgian comics such as Suske en Wiske and Jommeke he plays a guest role. There was also a short-lived comic called \"Ambionix\", which featured a scientist teleporting a Belgic chief, loosely based on Ambiorix, to modern-day Belgium.\nIn the French comic Asterix, in the album \"Asterix in Belgium\", Asterix, Obelix, Dogmatix and Vitalstatistix go to Belgium because they are angry with Caesar about his remark that the Belgians are the bravest of all the Gauls.\nHomage.\nIn honour of Ambiorix, visual artist Guy Bleus organized a mail art project in which 376 artists from 40 countries gave their artistic visions on the battle figure of Ambiorix. The exhibition \"ArtBiorix\" could be seen during the summer of 2000 in the Cultural Centre De Velinx of Tongeren."}
{"id": "1699", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1699", "title": "Alfonso VI", "text": ""}
{"id": "1700", "revid": "34694168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1700", "title": "August Wilhelm Ambros", "text": "August Wilhelm Ambros (17 November 181628 June 1876) was an Austrian composer and music historian of Czech descent.\nLife.\nHe was born in M\u00fdto, Rokycany District, Bohemia. His father was a cultured man, and his mother was the sister of Raphael Georg Kiesewetter (1773\u20131850), the musical archaeologist and collector. Ambros studied at the University of Prague and was well-educated in music and the arts, which were his abiding passion. He was, however, destined for the law and an official career in the Austrian civil service, and he occupied various important posts under the ministry of justice, music being an avocation.\nFrom 1850 onwards, he became well known as a critic and essay-writer, and in 1860 he began working on his magnum opus, his \"History of Music\", which was published at intervals from 1862 in five volumes, the last two (1878, 1882) being edited and completed by Otto Kade and Wilhelm Langhans.\nAmbros was a professor of the history of music at Prague from 1869 to 1871. Also in Prague, he sat on the board of governors in the Prague Royal Conservatory. By 1872, he was living in Vienna and was employed by the Department of Justice as an officer and by Prince Rudolf's family as his tutor. Through his work in Vienna, he was given a leave of absence for half the year in order to let him travel the world to collect musical information to include in his \"History of Music\" book. He was an excellent pianist, and the author of numerous compositions reminiscent of Felix Mendelssohn.\nAmbros died at Vienna, Austria at the age of 59."}
{"id": "1701", "revid": "1012959393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1701", "title": "Amazon River", "text": "The Amazon river (, ; , ) in South America is the largest river by discharge volume of water in the world, and the disputed second longest river in the world.\nThe headwaters of the Apur\u00edmac River on Nevado Mismi had been considered for nearly a century as the Amazon's most distant source, until a 2014 study found it to be the headwaters of the Mantaro River on the Cordillera Rumi Cruz in Peru. The Mantaro and Apur\u00edmac rivers join, and with other tributaries form the Ucayali River, which in turn meets the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River upstream of Iquitos, Peru, forming what countries other than Brazil consider to be the main stem of the Amazon. Brazilians call this section the Solim\u00f5es River above its confluence with the Rio Negro forming what Brazilians call the Amazon at the Meeting of Waters () at Manaus, the largest city on the river.\nAt an average discharge of about \u2014approximately , greater than the next seven largest independent rivers combined\u2014the Amazon represents 20% of the global riverine discharge to the ocean. The Amazon basin is the largest drainage basin in the world, with an area of approximately . The portion of the river's drainage basin in Brazil alone is larger than any other river's basin. The Amazon enters Brazil with only one-fifth of the flow it finally discharges into the Atlantic Ocean, yet already has a greater flow at this point than the discharge of any other river.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe Amazon was initially known by Europeans as the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, and the Peruvian part of the river is still known by that name today. It later became known as Rio Amazonas in Spanish and Portuguese, and Amazon River in English.\nThe name Rio Amazonas was reportedly given after native warriors attacked a 16th-century expedition by Francisco de Orellana. The warriors were led by women, reminding de Orellana of the Amazon warriors, a tribe of women warriors related to Iranian Scythians and Sarmatians mentioned in Greek mythology.\nThe word Amazon itself may be derived from the Iranian compound *ha-maz-an- \"(one) fighting together\" or ethnonym \"*ha-mazan-\" \"warriors\", a word attested indirectly through a derivation, a denominal verb in Hesychius of Alexandria's gloss (\"\"\": 'to make war' in Persian\"), where it appears together with the Indo-Iranian root \"*kar-\" \"make\" (from which Sanskrit \"karma\" is also derived).\nHowever, other scholars insist that the name is derived from the Native American word amassona, meaning \u201cboat destroyer.\u201d\nHistory.\nPre-Columbian era.\nDuring what many archaeologists called the \"formative stage\", Amazonian societies were deeply involved in the emergence of South America's highland agrarian systems. The trade with Andean civilizations in the terrains of the headwaters in the Andes formed an essential contribution to the social and religious development of higher-altitude civilizations like the Muisca and Incas. Early human settlements were typically based on low-lying hills or mounds.\nShell mounds were the earliest evidence of habitation; they represent piles of human refuse (waste) and are mainly dated between 7500 and 4000 years BC. They are associated with ceramic age cultures; no preceramic shell mounds have been documented so far by archaeologists. Artificial earth platforms for entire villages are the second type of mounds. They are best represented by the Marajoara culture. Figurative mounds are the most recent types of occupation.\nThere is ample evidence that the areas surrounding the Amazon River were home to complex and large-scale indigenous societies, mainly chiefdoms who developed towns and cities. Archaeologists estimate that by the time the Spanish conquistador De Orellana traveled across the Amazon in 1541, more than 3 million indigenous people lived around the Amazon. These pre-Columbian settlements created highly developed civilizations. For instance, pre-Columbian indigenous people on the island of Maraj\u00f3 may have developed social stratification and supported a population of 100,000 people. To achieve this level of development, the indigenous inhabitants of the Amazon rainforest altered the forest's ecology by selective cultivation and the use of fire. Scientists argue that by burning areas of the forest repeatedly, the indigenous people caused the soil to become richer in nutrients. This created dark soil areas known as \"terra preta de \u00edndio\" (\"Indian dark earth\"). Because of the terra preta, indigenous communities were able to make land fertile and thus sustainable for the large-scale agriculture needed to support their large populations and complex social structures. Further research has hypothesized that this practice began around 11,000 years ago. Some say that its effects on forest ecology and regional climate explain the otherwise inexplicable band of lower rainfall through the Amazon basin.\nMany indigenous tribes engaged in constant warfare. According to James S. Olson, \"The Munduruku expansion (in the 18th century) dislocated and displaced the Kawah\u00edb, breaking the tribe down into much smaller groups\u00a0... [Munduruku] first came to the attention of Europeans in 1770 when they began a series of widespread attacks on Brazilian settlements along the Amazon River.\"\nArrival of Europeans.\nIn March 1500, Spanish conquistador Vicente Y\u00e1\u00f1ez Pinz\u00f3n was the first documented European to sail up the Amazon River. Pinz\u00f3n called the stream \"R\u00edo Santa Mar\u00eda del Mar Dulce\", later shortened to \"Mar Dulce\", literally, \"sweet sea\", because of its freshwater pushing out into the ocean. Another Spanish explorer, Francisco de Orellana, was the first European to travel from the origins of the upstream river basins, situated in the Andes, to the mouth of the river. In this journey, Orellana baptized some of the affluents of the Amazonas like Rio Negro, Napo and Jurua.\nThe name Amazonas is thought to be taken from the native warriors that attacked this expedition, mostly women, that reminded De Orellana of the mythical female Amazon warriors from the ancient Hellenic culture in Greece (see also Origin of the name).\nExploration.\nGonzalo Pizarro set off in 1541 to explore east of Quito into the South American interior in search of \"El Dorado\", the \"city of gold\" and La Canela, the \"valley of cinnamon\". He was accompanied by his second-in-command Francisco de Orellana. After , the Coca River joined the Napo River (at a point now known as Puerto Francisco de Orellana); the party stopped for a few weeks to build a boat just upriver from this confluence. They continued downriver through an uninhabited area, where they could not find food. Orellana offered and was ordered to follow the Napo River, then known as \"R\u00edo de la Canela\" (\"Cinnamon River\") and return with food for the party. Based on intelligence received from a captive native chief named Delicola, they expected to find food within a few days downriver by ascending another river to the north.\nDe Orellana took about 57 men, the boat, and some canoes and left Pizarro's troops on 26 December 1541. However, De Orellana missed the confluence (probably with the Aguarico) where he was searching supplies for his men. By the time he and his men reached another village, many of them were sick from hunger and eating \"noxious plants\", and near death. Seven men died in that village. His men threatened to mutiny if the expedition turned back to attempt to rejoin Pizarro, the party being over 100 leagues downstream at this point. He accepted to change the purpose of the expedition to discover new lands in the name of the king of Spain, and the men built a larger boat in which to navigate downstream. After a journey of down the Napo River, they reached a further major confluence, at a point near modern Iquitos, and then followed the upper Amazon, now known as the Solim\u00f5es, for a further to its confluence with the Rio Negro (near modern Manaus), which they reached on 3 June 1542.\nRegarding the initial mission of finding cinnamon, Pizarro reported to the king that they had found cinnamon trees, but that they could not be profitably harvested. True cinnamon (\"Cinnamomum Verum\") is not native to South America. Other related cinnamon-containing plants (of the family \"Lauraceae\") are fairly common in that part of the Amazon and Pizarro probably saw some of these. The expedition reached the mouth of the Amazon on 24 August 1542, demonstrating the practical navigability of the Great River.\nIn 1560, another Spanish conquistador, Lope de Aguirre, may have made the second descent of the Amazon. Historians are uncertain whether the river he descended was the Amazon or the Orinoco River, which runs more or less parallel to the Amazon further north.\nPortuguese explorer Pedro Teixeira was the first European to travel up the entire river. He arrived in Quito in 1637, and returned via the same route.\nFrom 1648 to 1652, Portuguese Brazilian \"bandeirante\" Ant\u00f3nio Raposo Tavares led an expedition from S\u00e3o Paulo overland to the mouth of the Amazon, investigating many of its tributaries, including the Rio Negro, and covering a distance of over .\nIn what is currently in Brazil, Ecuador, Bolivia, Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela, several colonial and religious settlements were established along the banks of primary rivers and tributaries for trade, slaving and evangelization among the indigenous peoples of the vast rainforest, such as the Urarina. In the late 1600s, Czech Jesuit Father Samuel Fritz, an apostle of the Omagus established some forty mission villages. Fritz proposed that the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River must be the source of the Amazon, noting on his 1707 map that the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n \"has its source on the southern shore of a lake that is called Lauricocha, near Hu\u00e1nuco.\" Fritz reasoned that the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n is the largest river branch one encounters when journeying upstream, and lies farther to the west than any other tributary of the Amazon. For most of the 18th\u201319th centuries and into the 20th century, the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n was generally considered the source of the Amazon.\nScientific exploration.\nEarly scientific, zoological and botanical exploration of the Amazon River and basin took place from the 18th century through the first half of the 19th century.\nPost-colonial exploitation and settlement.\nThe Cabanagem revolt (1835\u20131840) was directed against the white ruling class. It is estimated that from 30 to 40% of the population of Gr\u00e3o-Par\u00e1, estimated at 100,000 people, died.\nThe population of the Brazilian portion of the Amazon basin in 1850 was perhaps 300,000, of whom about two-thirds were Europeans and slaves, the slaves amounting to about 25,000. The Brazilian Amazon's principal commercial city, Par\u00e1 (now Bel\u00e9m), had from 10,000 to 12,000 inhabitants, including slaves. The town of Man\u00e1os, now Manaus, at the mouth of the Rio Negro, had a population between 1,000 and 1,500. All the remaining villages, as far up as Tabatinga, on the Brazilian frontier of Peru, were relatively small.\nOn 6 September 1850, Emperor Pedro II of Brazil sanctioned a law authorizing steam navigation on the Amazon and gave the Viscount of Mau\u00e1 (Irineu Evangelista de Sousa) the task of putting it into effect. He organised the \"Companhia de Navega\u00e7\u00e3o e Com\u00e9rcio do Amazonas\" in Rio de Janeiro in 1852; in the following year it commenced operations with four small steamers, the \"Monarca\" ('Monarch'), the \"Camet\u00e1\", the \"Maraj\u00f3\" and the \"Rio Negro\".\nAt first, navigation was principally confined to the main river; and even in 1857 a modification of the government contract only obliged the company to a monthly service between Par\u00e1 and Manaus, with steamers of 200 tons cargo capacity, a second line to make six round voyages a year between Manaus and Tabatinga, and a third, two trips a month between Par\u00e1 and Camet\u00e1. This was the first step in opening up the vast interior.\nThe success of the venture called attention to the opportunities for economic exploitation of the Amazon, and a second company soon opened commerce on the Madeira, Pur\u00fas, and Negro; a third established a line between Par\u00e1 and Manaus, and a fourth found it profitable to navigate some of the smaller streams. In that same period, the Amazonas Company was increasing its fleet. Meanwhile, private individuals were building and running small steam craft of their own on the main river as well as on many of its tributaries.\nOn 31 July 1867, the government of Brazil, constantly pressed by the maritime powers and by the countries encircling the upper Amazon basin, especially Peru, decreed the opening of the Amazon to all countries, but they limited this to certain defined points: Tabatinga \u2013 on the Amazon; Camet\u00e1 \u2013 on the Tocantins; Santar\u00e9m \u2013 on the Tapaj\u00f3s; Borba \u2013 on the Madeira, and Manaus \u2013 on the Rio Negro. The Brazilian decree took effect on 7 September 1867.\nThanks in part to the mercantile development associated with steamboat navigation coupled with the internationally driven demand for natural rubber, the Peruvian city of Iquitos became a thriving, cosmopolitan center of commerce. Foreign companies settled in Iquitos, from whence they controlled the extraction of rubber. In 1851 Iquitos had a population of 200, and by 1900 its population reached 20,000. In the 1860s, approximately 3,000 tons of rubber were being exported annually, and by 1911 annual exports had grown to 44,000 tons, representing 9.3% of Peru's exports. During the rubber boom it is estimated that diseases brought by immigrants, such as typhus and malaria, killed 40,000 native Amazonians.\nThe first direct foreign trade with Manaus commenced around 1874. Local trade along the river was carried on by the English successors to the Amazonas Company\u2014the Amazon Steam Navigation Company\u2014as well as numerous small steamboats, belonging to companies and firms engaged in the rubber trade, navigating the Negro, Madeira, Pur\u00fas and many other tributaries, such as the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, to ports as distant as Nauta, Peru.\nBy the turn of the 20th century, the exports of the Amazon basin were India-rubber, cacao beans, Brazil nuts and a few other products of minor importance, such as pelts and exotic forest produce (resins, barks, woven hammocks, prized bird feathers, live animals) and extracted goods, such as lumber and gold.\n20th-century development.\nSince colonial times, the Portuguese portion of the Amazon basin has remained a land largely undeveloped by agriculture and occupied by indigenous people who survived the arrival of European diseases.\nFour centuries after the European discovery of the Amazon river, the total cultivated area in its basin was probably less than , excluding the limited and crudely cultivated areas among the mountains at its extreme headwaters. This situation changed dramatically during the 20th century.\nWary of foreign exploitation of the nation's resources, Brazilian governments in the 1940s set out to develop the interior, away from the seaboard where foreigners owned large tracts of land. The original architect of this expansion was president Get\u00falio Vargas, with the demand for rubber from the Allied forces in World War II providing funding for the drive.\nIn the 1960s, economic exploitation of the Amazon basin was seen as a way to fuel the \"economic miracle\" occurring at the time. This resulted in the development of \"Operation Amazon\", an economic development project that brought large-scale agriculture and ranching to Amazonia. This was done through a combination of credit and fiscal incentives.\nHowever, in the 1970s the government took a new approach with the National Integration Programme. A large-scale colonization program saw families from northeastern Brazil relocated to the \"land without people\" in the Amazon Basin. This was done in conjunction with infrastructure projects mainly the Trans-Amazonian Highway (\"Transamaz\u00f4nica\").\nThe Trans-Amazonian Highway's three pioneering highways were completed within ten years but never fulfilled their promise. Large portions of the Trans-Amazonian and its accessory roads, such as BR-319 (Manaus-Porto Velho), are derelict and impassable in the rainy season. Small towns and villages are scattered across the forest, and because its vegetation is so dense, some remote areas are still unexplored.\nMany settlements grew along the road from Bras\u00edlia to Bel\u00e9m with the highway and National Integration Programme, however, the program failed as the settlers were unequipped to live in the delicate rainforest ecosystem. This, although the government believed it could sustain millions, instead could sustain very few.\nWith a population of 1.9 million people in 2014, Manaus is the largest city on the Amazon. Manaus alone makes up approximately 50% of the population of the largest Brazilian state of Amazonas. The racial makeup of the city is 64% pardo (mulatto and mestizo) and 32% white.\nAlthough the Amazon river remains undammed, around 412 dams are in operation in the Amazon's tributary rivers. From these 412 dams, 151 are constructed over six of the main tributary rivers that drain into the Amazon. Since only four percent of the Amazon's hydropower potential has been developed in countries like Brazil, more damming projects are underway and hundreds more are planned. After witnessing the negative effects of environmental degradation, sedimentation, navigation and flood control caused by the Three Gorges Dam in the Yangtze River, scientists are worried that constructing more dams in the Amazon will harm its biodiversity in the same way by \"blocking-fish spawning runs, reducing the flows of vital oil nutrients and clearing forests\". Damming the Amazon River could potentially bring about the \"end of free flowing rivers\" and contribute to an \"ecosystem collapse\" that will cause major social and environmental problems.\nCourse.\nOrigins.\nThe most distant source of the Amazon was thought to be in the Apur\u00edmac river drainage for nearly a century. Such studies continued to be published even recently, such as in 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2008, where various authors identified the snowcapped Nevado Mismi peak, located roughly west of Lake Titicaca and southeast of Lima, as the most distant source of the river. From that point, Quebrada Carhuasanta emerges from Nevado Mismi, joins Quebrada Apacheta and soon forms R\u00edo Lloqueta which becomes R\u00edo Hornillos and eventually joins the R\u00edo Apur\u00edmac.\nA 2014 study by Americans James Contos and Nicolas Tripcevich in \"Area\", a peer-reviewed journal of the Royal Geographical Society, however, identifies the most distant source of the Amazon as actually being in the R\u00edo Mantaro drainage. A variety of methods were used to compare the lengths of the Mantaro river vs. the Apur\u00edmac river from their most distant source points to their confluence, showing the longer length of the Mantaro. Then distances from Lago Jun\u00edn to several potential source points in the uppermost Mantaro river were measured, which enabled them to determine that the Cordillera Rumi Cruz was the most distant source of water in the Mantaro basin (and therefore in the entire Amazon basin). The most accurate measurement method was direct GPS measurement obtained by kayak descent of each of the rivers from their source points to their confluence (performed by Contos). Obtaining these measurements was difficult given the class IV\u2013V nature of each of these rivers, especially in their lower \"Abyss\" sections. Ultimately, they determined that the most distant point in the Mantaro drainage is nearly 80\u00a0km farther upstream compared to Mt. Mismi in the Apur\u00edmac drainage, and thus the maximal length of the Amazon river is about 80\u00a0km longer than previously thought. Contos continued downstream to the ocean and finished the first complete descent of the Amazon river from its newly identified source (finishing November 2012), a journey repeated by two groups after the news spread.\nAfter about , the Apur\u00edmac then joins R\u00edo Mantaro to form the Ene, which joins the Perene to form the Tambo, which joins the Urubamba River to form the Ucayali. After the confluence of Apur\u00edmac and Ucayali, the river leaves Andean terrain and is surrounded by floodplain. From this point to the confluence of the Ucayali and the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, some , the forested banks are just above the water and are inundated long before the river attains its maximum flood stage. The low river banks are interrupted by only a few hills, and the river enters the enormous Amazon rainforest.\nThe Upper Amazon or Solim\u00f5es.\nAlthough the Ucayali\u2013Mara\u00f1\u00f3n confluence is the point at which most geographers place the beginning of the Amazon River proper, in Brazil the river is known at this point as the \"Solim\u00f5es das \u00c1guas\". The river systems and flood plains in Brazil, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela, whose waters drain into the \"Solim\u00f5es\" and its tributaries, are called the \"Upper Amazon\".\nThe Amazon proper runs mostly through Brazil and Peru, and is part of the border between Colombia and Per\u00fa. It has a series of major tributaries in Colombia, Ecuador and Peru, some of which flow into the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n and Ucayali, and others directly into the Amazon proper. These include rivers Putumayo, Caquet\u00e1, Vaup\u00e9s, Guain\u00eda, Morona, Pastaza, Nucuray, Urituyacu, Chambira, Tigre, Nanay, Napo, and Huallaga.\nAt some points the river divides into anabranches, or multiple channels, often very long, with inland and lateral channels, all connected by a complicated system of natural canals, cutting the low, flat \"igap\u00f3\" lands, which are never more than above low river, into many islands.\nFrom the town of Canaria at the great bend of the Amazon to the Negro, vast areas of land are submerged at high water, above which only the upper part of the trees of the sombre forests appear. Near the mouth of the Rio Negro to Serpa, nearly opposite the river Madeira, the banks of the Amazon are low, until approaching Manaus, they rise to become rolling hills.\nThe Lower Amazon.\nThe Lower Amazon begins where the darkly coloured waters of the Rio Negro meet the sandy coloured Rio Solim\u00f5es (the upper Amazon), and for over these waters run side by side without mixing. At \u00d3bidos, a bluff above the river is backed by low hills. The lower Amazon seems to have once been a gulf of the Atlantic Ocean, the waters of which washed the cliffs near \u00d3bidos.\nOnly about ten percent of the Amazon's water enters downstream of \u00d3bidos, very little of which is from the northern slope of the valley. The drainage area of the Amazon basin above \u00d3bidos city is about , and, below, only about (around 20%), exclusive of the of the Tocantins basin. The Tocantins River enters the southern portion of the Amazon delta.\nIn the lower reaches of the river, the north bank consists of a series of steep, table-topped hills extending for about from opposite the mouth of the Xingu as far as Monte Alegre. These hills are cut down to a kind of terrace which lies between them and the river.\nOn the south bank, above the Xingu, a line of low bluffs bordering the floodplain extends nearly to Santar\u00e9m in a series of gentle curves before they bend to the southwest, and, abutting upon the lower Tapaj\u00f3s, merge into the bluffs which form the terrace margin of the Tapaj\u00f3s river valley.\nMouth.\nBel\u00e9m is the major city and port at the mouth of the river at the Atlantic Ocean. The definition of where exactly the mouth of the Amazon is located, and how wide it is, is a matter of dispute, because of the area's peculiar geography. The Par\u00e1 and the Amazon are connected by a series of river channels called \"furos\" near the town of Breves; between them lies Maraj\u00f3, the world's largest combined river/sea island.\nIf the Par\u00e1 river and the Maraj\u00f3 island ocean frontage are included, the Amazon estuary is some wide. In this case, the width of the mouth of the river is usually measured from Cabo Norte, the cape located straight east of Pracu\u00faba in the Brazilian state of Amap\u00e1, to Ponta da Tijoca near the town of Curu\u00e7\u00e1, in the state of Par\u00e1.\nA more conservative measurement excluding the Par\u00e1 river estuary, from the mouth of the Araguari River to Ponta do Navio on the northern coast of Maraj\u00f3, would still give the mouth of the Amazon a width of over . If only the river's main channel is considered, between the islands of Curu\u00e1 (state of Amap\u00e1) and Jurupari (state of Par\u00e1), the width falls to about .\nThe plume generated by the river's discharge covers up to 1.3 million square kilometres and is responsible for muddy bottoms influencing a wide area of the tropical north Atlantic in terms of salinity, pH, light penetration, and sedimentation.\nLack of bridges.\nThere are no bridges across the entire width of the river. This is not because the river would be too wide to bridge; for most of its length, engineers could build a bridge across the river easily. For most of its course, the river flows through the Amazon Rainforest, where there are very few roads and cities. Most of the time, the crossing can be done by a ferry. The Manaus Iranduba Bridge linking the cities of Manaus and Iranduba spans the Rio Negro, the second-largest tributary of the Amazon, just before their confluence.\nDispute regarding length.\nWhile debate as to whether the Amazon or the Nile is the world's longest river has gone on for many years, the historic consensus of geographic authorities has been to regard the Amazon as the second longest river in the world, with the Nile being the longest. However, the Amazon has been reported as being anywhere between long. It is often said to be \"at least\" long. The Nile is reported to be anywhere from . Often it is said to be \"about\" long. There are several factors that can affect these measurements, such as the position of the geographical source and the mouth, the scale of measurement, and the length measuring techniques (for details see also List of rivers by length).\nIn July 2008, the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (INPE) published a news article on their webpage, claiming that the Amazon River was longer than the Nile. The Amazon's length was calculated as , taking the Apacheta Creek as its source. Using the same techniques, the length of the Nile was calculated as , which is longer than previous estimates but still shorter than the Amazon. The results were reached by measuring the Amazon downstream to the beginning of the tidal estuary of \"Canal do Sul\" and then, after a sharp turn back, following tidal canals surrounding the isle of Maraj\u00f3 and finally including the marine waters of the \"R\u00edo Par\u00e1\" bay in its entire length. According to an earlier article on the webpage of the National Geographic, the Amazon's length was calculated as by Brazilian scientist. In June 2007, Guido Gelli, director of science at the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), told London's Telegraph Newspaper that it could be considered that the Amazon was the longest river in the world. However, according to the above sources, none of the two results was published, and questions were raised about the researchers\u2019 methodology. In 2009, a peer-reviewed article, was published, concluding that the Nile is longer than the Amazon by stating a length of for the Nile and for the Amazon, measured by using a combination of satellite image analysis and field investigations to the source regions.\nAccording to the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, the final length of the Amazon remains open to interpretation and continued debate.\nWatershed.\nThe Amazon basin, the largest in the world, covers about 40% of South America, an area of approximately . It drains from west to east, from Iquitos in Peru, across Brazil to the Atlantic. It gathers its waters from 5 degrees north latitude to 20 degrees south latitude. Its most remote sources are found on the inter-Andean plateau, just a short distance from the Pacific Ocean.\nThe Amazon River and its tributaries are characterised by extensive forested areas that become flooded every rainy season. Every year, the river rises more than , flooding the surrounding forests, known as \"v\u00e1rzea\" (\"flooded forests\"). The Amazon's flooded forests are the most extensive example of this habitat type in the world. In an average dry season, of land are water-covered, while in the wet season, the flooded area of the Amazon basin rises to .\nThe quantity of water released by the Amazon to the Atlantic Ocean is enormous: up to in the rainy season, with an average of from 1973 to 1990. The Amazon is responsible for about 20% of the Earth's fresh water entering the ocean. The river pushes a vast plume of fresh water into the ocean. The plume is about long and between wide. The fresh water, being lighter, flows on top of the seawater, diluting the salinity and altering the colour of the ocean surface over an area up to in extent. For centuries ships have reported fresh water near the Amazon's mouth yet well out of sight of land in what otherwise seemed to be the open ocean.\nThe Atlantic has sufficient wave and tidal energy to carry most of the Amazon's sediments out to sea, thus the Amazon does not form a true delta. The great deltas of the world are all in relatively protected bodies of water, while the Amazon empties directly into the turbulent Atlantic.\nThere is a natural water union between the Amazon and the Orinoco basins, the so-called Casiquiare canal. The Casiquiare is a river distributary of the upper Orinoco, which flows southward into the Rio Negro, which in turn flows into the Amazon. The Casiquiare is the largest river on earth that links two major river systems, a so-called bifurcation.\nFlooding.\nNot all of the Amazon's tributaries flood at the same time of the year. Many branches begin flooding in November and might continue to rise until June. The rise of the Rio Negro starts in February or March and begins to recede in June. The Madeira River rises and falls two months earlier than most of the rest of the Amazon river.\nThe depth of the Amazon between Manacapuru and \u00d3bidos has been calculated as between . At Manacapuru, the Amazon's water level is only about above mean sea level. More than half of the water in the Amazon downstream of Manacapuru is below sea level. In its lowermost section, the Amazon's depth averages , in some places as much as .\nThe main river is navigable for large ocean steamers to Manaus, upriver from the mouth. Smaller ocean vessels of and draft can reach as far as Iquitos, Peru, from the sea. Smaller riverboats can reach higher, as far as Achual Point. Beyond that, small boats frequently ascend to the Pongo de Manseriche, just above Achual Point in Peru.\nAnnual flooding occurs in late northern latitude winter at high tide when the incoming waters of the Atlantic are funnelled into the Amazon delta. The resulting undular tidal bore is called the \"pororoca\", with a leading wave that can be up to high and travel up to inland.\nGeology.\nThe Amazon River originated as a transcontinental river in the Miocene epoch between 11.8 million and 11.3 million years ago and took its present shape approximately 2.4 million years ago in the Early Pleistocene.\nThe proto-Amazon during the Cretaceous flowed west, as part of a proto-Amazon-Congo river system, from the interior of present-day Africa when the continents were connected, forming western Gondwana. 80 million years ago, the two continents split. Fifteen million years ago, the main tectonic uplift phase of the Andean chain started. This tectonic movement is caused by the subduction of the Nazca Plate underneath the South American Plate. The rise of the Andes and the linkage of the Brazilian and Guyana bedrock shields, blocked the river and caused the Amazon Basin to become a vast inland sea. Gradually, this inland sea became a massive swampy, freshwater lake and the marine inhabitants adapted to life in freshwater.\nEleven to ten million years ago, waters worked through the sandstone from the west and the Amazon began to flow eastward, leading to the emergence of the Amazon rainforest. During glacial periods, sea levels dropped and the great Amazon lake rapidly drained and became a river, which would eventually become the world's second largest, draining the most extensive area of rainforest on the planet.\nParalleling the Amazon River is a large aquifer, dubbed the Hamza River, the discovery of which was made public in August 2011.\nFlora and fauna.\nFauna.\nMore than one-third of all known species in the world live in the Amazon rainforest, a giant tropical forest and river basin with an area that stretches more than . It is the richest tropical forest in the world in terms of biodiversity. There are over 3,000 species of fish currently recognised in the Amazon basin, with more being discovered every year. In addition to the thousands of species of fish, the river supports crabs, algae, and turtles.\nMammals.\nAlong with the Orinoco, the Amazon is one of the main habitats of the \"boto\", also known as the Amazon river dolphin (\"Inia geoffrensis\"). It is the largest species of river dolphin, and it can grow to lengths of up to . The colour of its skin changes with age; young animals are gray, but become pink and then white as they mature. The dolphins use echolocation to navigate and hunt in the river's tricky depths. The \"boto\" is the subject of a legend in Brazil about a dolphin that turns into a man and seduces maidens by the riverside.\nThe tucuxi (\"Sotalia fluviatilis\"), also a dolphin species, is found both in the rivers of the Amazon basin and in the coastal waters of South America. The Amazonian manatee (\"Trichechus inunguis\"), also known as \"seacow\", is found in the northern Amazon River basin and its tributaries. It is a mammal and a herbivore. Its population is limited to freshwater habitats, and, unlike other manatees, it does not venture into salt water. It is classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.\nThe Amazon and its tributaries are the main habitat of the giant otter (\"Pteronura brasiliensis\"). Sometimes known as the \"river wolf,\" it is one of South America's top carnivores. Because of habitat destruction and hunting, its population has dramatically decreased. It is now listed on Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), which effectively bans international trade.\nReptiles.\nThe anaconda is found in shallow waters in the Amazon basin. One of the world's largest species of snake, the anaconda spends most of its time in the water with just its nostrils above the surface. Species of caimans, that are related to alligators and other crocodilians, also inhabit the Amazon as do varieties of turtles.\nFish.\nThe Amazonian fish fauna is the centre of diversity for neotropical fishes. 5,600 species are currently known, and approximately fifty new species are discovered each year. The arapaima, known in Brazil as the \"pirarucu\", is a South American tropical freshwater fish, one of the largest freshwater fish in the world, with a length of up to . Another Amazonian freshwater fish is the arowana (or \"aruan\u00e3\" in Portuguese), such as the silver arowana (\"Osteoglossum bicirrhosum\"), which is a predator and very similar to the arapaima, but only reaches a length of . Also present in large numbers is the notorious piranha, an omnivorous fish that congregates in large schools and may attack livestock and even humans. There are approximately 30 to 60 species of piranha. However, only a few of its species are known to attack humans, most notably \"Pygocentrus nattereri\", the red-bellied piranha. The candir\u00fa, native to the Amazon River, is a species of parasitic fresh water catfish in the family Trichomycteridae, just one of more than 1200 species of catfish in the Amazon basin. Other catfish 'walk' overland on their ventral fins, while the kumakuma (\"Brachyplatystoma filamentosum\"), aka \"piraiba\" or \"goliath catfish\", can reach in length and in weight. \nThe electric eel (\"Electrophorus electricus\") and more than 100 species of electric fishes (Gymnotiformes) inhabit the Amazon basin. River stingrays (Potamotrygonidae) are also known. The bull shark (\"Carcharhinus leucas\") has been reported up the Amazon River at Iquitos in Peru.\nMicrobiota.\nFreshwater microbes are generally not very well known, even less so for a pristine ecosystem like the Amazon. Recently, metagenomics has provided answers to what kind of microbes inhabit the river. The most important microbes in the Amazon River are Actinobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria and Crenarchaeota.\nMajor tributaries.\nThe Amazon has over 1,100 tributaries, 12 of which are over long. Some of the more notable ones are:"}
{"id": "1702", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1702", "title": "Alfred of Beverley", "text": "Alredus, or Alfred of Beverley, (fl. 1143), English chronicler, was sacristan of the church of Beverley in the first half of the twelfth century.\nHe wrote, apparently about the year 1143, a chronicle entitled \"Annales sive Historia de gestis regum Britanniae\", which begins with Brutus and carries the history of England down to 1129. Geoffrey of Monmouth and Simeon of Durham are Alfred's chief sources.\nBiography.\nAlfred of Beverley, was a priest of Beverley, and is described in the preface to his book as \"treasurer of the church of Beverley\" and \"Master Alfred, sacrist of the church of Beverley\".\nAlfred of Beverley speaks of himself as contemporary with the removal of the Flemings from the north of England to Ross in Herefordshire in 1112, and writes that he compiled his chronicle \"when the church was silent, owing to the number of persons excommunicated under the decree of the council of London\", an apparent reference to the council held at Mid-Lent, 1143. His attention, by his own account, was first drawn to history by the publication (before 1139) of Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae, and he looked forward to following up the chronicle which bears his name, and which largely depends on Geoffrey's work, with a collection of excerpts from the credible portions of the Historia Regum Britanniae, but no trace of such a work is extant.\nAlfred of Beverley's chronicle is entitled \"Aluredi Beverlacensis Annales sive Historia de gestis Regum Britanni\u00e6 libris ix. ad annum 1129\". It is largely devoted to the fabulous history of Britain, and is mainly borrowed from Bede, Henry of Huntingdon, and Symeon of Durham, when Geoffrey of Monmouth is not laid under contribution. Alfred quotes occasionally from Suetonius, Orosius, and Nennius, and names many Roman authors whom he had consulted in vain for references to Britain. The chronicle is of no real use to the historical student, since it adds no new fact to the information to be found in well-known earlier authorities.\nAccording to Sidney Lee (1885) the best manuscript of Alfred's \"Annales\" was among the Hengwrt MSS. belonging to W. W. E. Wynne, Esq., of Peniarth, Merionethshire, and had not been printed. Hearne printed the \u2018Annales\u2019 in 1716 from an inferior Bodleian MS. (Rawl. B. 200)."}
{"id": "1703", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1703", "title": "Alphonso VII", "text": ""}
{"id": "1704", "revid": "3378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1704", "title": "Alphonso VIII", "text": ""}
{"id": "1705", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1705", "title": "Alphonso IX", "text": ""}
{"id": "1706", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1706", "title": "Alphonso X", "text": ""}
{"id": "1707", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1707", "title": "Alphonso XI", "text": ""}
{"id": "1708", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1708", "title": "Alphonso XII", "text": ""}
{"id": "1709", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1709", "title": "Alphonso XIII", "text": ""}
{"id": "1710", "revid": "37918255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1710", "title": "April 22", "text": ""}
{"id": "1711", "revid": "37918255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1711", "title": "August 31", "text": ""}
{"id": "1714", "revid": "25848390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1714", "title": "Autpert Ambrose", "text": "Autpert Ambrose (Ambroise) () (ca. 730 \u2013 784) was a Frankish Benedictine monk.\nHe became abbot of San Vincenzo al Volturno in South Italy in the time of Desiderius, king of the Lombards. Autpert's election as abbot caused internal dissent at St. Vicenzo, and both Pope Stephen III and Charlemagne intervened. The disagreement was based both on objections to Autpert's personality and to his Frankish origin.\nHe wrote a considerable number of works on the Bible and religious subjects generally. Among these are commentaries on the Apocalypse, on the Psalms, and on the Song of Solomon; \"Lives of Saints Paldo, Tuto and Vaso\"; \"Assumption of the Virgin\"; and a \"Combat between the Virtues and the Vices\".\nIn 2009, Pope Benedict XVI gave a homily about him in Saint Peter's square. In this homily, Autpert's death date is given as 784 (older scholarship had given a date between 778 and 779)."}
{"id": "1715", "revid": "1710008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1715", "title": "Abu Bakr", "text": "Abu Bakr Abdullah ibn Uthman (; 573 CE23 August 634 CE) was a companion and, through his daughter Aisha, a father-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, as well as the first of the Rashidun Caliphs.\nInitially a rich and respected businessman, Abu Bakr later became one of the first converts to Islam and extensively contributed his wealth in support of Muhammad's work. He was among Muhammad's closest companions, accompanying him on his migration to Medina and being present at a number of his military conflicts, such as the battles of Badr and Uhud.\nFollowing Muhammad's death in 632, Abu Bakr succeeded in the leadership of the Muslim community as the first Rashidun Caliph. During his reign, he overcame a number of uprisings, collectively known as the Ridda wars, as a result of which he was able to consolidate and expand the rule of the Muslim state over the entire Arabian peninsula. He also commanded the initial incursions into the neighbouring Sassanian and Byzantine empires, which in the years following his death, would eventually result in the Muslim conquests of Persia and the Levant. Abu Bakr died of illness after a reign of 2 years, 2 months and 14 days.\nLineage and title.\nAbu Bakr's full name was Abdullah ibn Uthman ibn Amir ibn Amr ibn Ka'b ibn Sa'd ibn Taym ibn Murrah ibn Ka'b ibn Lu'ayy Ghalib ibn Fihr.\nIn Arabic, the name \"Abd Allah\" means \"servant of Allah\". One of his early titles, preceding his conversion to Islam, was \"Ateeq\", meaning \"saved one\". Muhammad later restated this title when he said that Abu Bakr is the \"Ateeq\". He was called \"Al-Siddiq\" (the truthful) by Muhammad after he believed him in the event of Isra and Mi'raj when other people didn't, and Ali confirmed that title several times. He was also reportedly referred to in the Quran as the \"second of the two in the cave\" in reference to the event of hijra, where with Muhammad he hid in the cave in Jabal Thawr from the Meccan party that was sent after them.\nEarly life.\nAbu Bakr was born in Mecca sometime in 573 CE, to a rich family in the Banu Taym tribe of the Quraysh tribal confederacy. His father's name was Uthman and given the laqab \"Abu Quhafa\", and his mother was Salma bint Sakhar who was given the laqab of \"Umm ul-Khair\".\nHe spent his early childhood like other Arab children of the time, among the Bedouins who called themselves \"Ahl-i-Ba'eer\"- the people of the camel, and developed a particular fondness for camels. In his early years he played with the camel calves and goats, and his love for camels earned him the nickname (\"kunya\") \"Abu Bakr\", the father of the camel's calf.\nLike other children of the rich Meccan merchant families, Abu Bakr was literate and developed a fondness for poetry. He used to attend the annual fair at Ukaz, and participate in poetical symposia. He had a very good memory and had a good knowledge of the genealogy of the Arab tribes, their stories and their politics.\nA story is preserved that once when he was a child, his father took him to the Kaaba, and asked him to pray before the idols. His father went away to attend to some other business, and Abu Bakr was left alone. Addressing an idol, Abu Bakr said \"O my God, I am in need of beautiful clothes; bestow them on me\". The idol remained indifferent. Then he addressed another idol, saying, \"O God, give me some delicious food. See that I am so hungry\". The idol remained cold. That exhausted the patience of young Abu Bakr. He lifted a stone, and, addressing an idol, said, \"Here I am aiming a stone; if you are a god protect yourself\". Abu Bakr hurled the stone at the idol and left the Kaaba. Regardless, it recorded that prior to converting to Islam, Abu Bakr practised as a \"hanif\" and never worshipped idols.\nAcceptance of Islam.\nOn his return from a business trip in Yemen, friends informed him that in his absence, Muhammad had declared himself the Messenger of God and proclaimed a new religion. The historian Al-Tabari, in his \"Ta'rikh al-Tabari\", quotes from Muhammad ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, who said: \nOther Sunni and all Shi'a Muslims maintain that the second person to publicly accept Muhammed as the Messenger of God was Ali ibn Abi Talib, the first being Muhammad's wife Khadija. Ibn Kathir, in his \"Al Bidaya Wal Nihayah\", disregards this. He stated that the first woman to embrace Islam was Khadijah. Zayd ibn Harithah was the first freed slave to embrace Islam. Ali ibn Abi Talib was the first child to embrace Islam, for he has not even reached the age of puberty at that time, while Abu Bakr was the first free man to embrace Islam.\nSubsequent life in Mecca.\nHis wife Qutaylah bint Abd-al-Uzza did not accept Islam and he divorced her. His other wife, Um Ruman, became a Muslim. All his children accepted Islam except Abdul-Rahman, from whom Abu Bakr disassociated himself. His conversion also brought many people to Islam. He persuaded his intimate friends to convert, and presented Islam to other friends in such a way that many of them also accepted the faith. Those who converted to Islam at the insistence of Abu Bakr were:\nAbu Bakr's acceptance proved to be a milestone in Muhammad's mission. Slavery was common in Mecca, and many slaves accepted Islam. When an ordinary free man accepted Islam, despite opposition, he would enjoy the protection of his tribe. For slaves, however, there was no such protection and they commonly experienced persecution. Abu Bakr felt compassion for slaves, so he purchased eight (four men and four women) and then freed them, paying 40,000 dinar for their freedom.\nThe men were\nThe women were:\nMost of the slaves liberated by Abu Bakr were either women or old and frail men. When the father of Abu Bakr asked him why he didn't liberate strong and young slaves, who could be a source of strength for him, Abu Bakr replied that he was freeing the slaves for the sake of God, and not for his own sake.\nPersecution by the Quraysh, 613.\nFor three years after the birth of Islam, Muslims kept their faith secret. In 613, according to Islamic tradition, Muhammad was commanded by God to call people to Islam openly. The first public address inviting people to offer allegiance to Muhammad was delivered by Abu Bakr. In a fit of fury, the young men of the Quraysh tribe rushed at Abu Bakr and beat him till he lost consciousness. Following this incident, Abu Bakr's mother converted to Islam. Abu Bakr was persecuted many times by the Quraysh. Though Abu Bakr's beliefs would have been defended by his own clan, it would not be so for the entire Quraysh tribe.\nLast years in Mecca.\nIn 617, the Quraysh enforced a boycott against the Banu Hashim. Muhammad along with his supporters from Banu Hashim, were cut off in a pass away from Mecca. All social relations with the Banu Hashim were cut off and their state was that of imprisonment. Before it many Muslims migrated to Abyssinia (now Ethiopia). Abu Bakr, feeling distressed, set out for Yemen and then to Abyssinia from there. He met a friend of his named Ad-Dughna (chief of the Qarah tribe) outside Mecca, who invited Abu Bakr to seek his protection against the Quraysh. Abu Bakr went back to Mecca, it was a relief for him, but soon due to the pressure of Quraysh, Ad-Dughna was forced to renounce his protection. Once again the Quraysh were free to persecute Abu Bakr.\nIn 620, Muhammad's uncle and protector, Abu Talib ibn Abd al-Muttalib, and Muhammad's wife Khadija died. Abu Bakr's daughter Aisha was engaged to Muhammad, however it was decided that the actual marriage ceremony would be held later. In 620 Abu Bakr was the first person to testify to Muhammad's Isra and Mi'raj (Night Journey).\nMigration to Medina.\nIn 622, on the invitation of the Muslims of Medina, Muhammad ordered Muslims to migrate to Medina. The migration began in batches. Ali was the last to remain in Mecca, entrusted with responsibility for settling any loans the Muslims had taken out, and famously slept in the bed of Muhammad when the Quraysh, led by Ikrima, attempted to murder Muhammad as he slept. Meanwhile, Abu Bakr accompanied Muhammad to Medina. Due to the danger posed by the Quraysh, they did not take the road, but moved in the opposite direction, taking refuge in a cave in Jabal Thawr, some five miles south of Mecca. `Abdullah ibn Abi Bakr, the son of Abu Bakr, would listen to the plans and discussions of the Quraysh, and at night he would carry the news to the fugitives in the cave. Asma bint Abi Bakr, the daughter of Abu Bakr, brought them meals every day. Aamir, a servant of Abu Bakr, would bring a flock of goats to the mouth of the cave every night, where they were milked. The Quraysh sent search parties in all directions. One party came close to the entrance to the cave, but was unable to see them. Due to this, Qur'an verse was revealed. Aisha, Abu Sa\u2018id al-Khudri and Abdullah ibn Abbas in interpreting this verse said that Abu Bakr was the companion who stayed with Muhammad in the cave.\nAfter staying at the cave for three days and three nights, Abu Bakr and Muhammad proceed to Medina, staying for some time at Quba, a suburb of Medina.\nLife in Medina.\nIn Medina, Muhammad decided to construct a mosque. A piece of land was chosen and the price of the land was paid for by Abu Bakr. The Muslims, including Abu Bakr, constructed a mosque named Al-Masjid al-Nabawi at the site. Abu Bakr was paired with Khaarij ah bin Zaid Ansari (who was from Medina) as a brother in faith. Abu Bakr's relationship with Khaarijah was most cordial, which was further strengthened when Abu Bakr married Habiba, a daughter of Khaarijah. Khaarijah bin Zaid Ansari lived at Sunh, a suburb of Medina, and Abu Bakr also settled there. After Abu Bakr's family arrived in Medina, he bought another house near Muhammad's.\nWhile the climate of Mecca was dry, the climate of Medina was damp and because of this, most of the migrants fell sick on arrival. Abu Bakr contracted a fever for several days, during which time he was attended to by Khaarijah and his family. In Mecca, Abu Bakr was a wholesale trader in cloth and he started the same business in Medina. He opened his new store at Sunh, and from there cloth was supplied to the market at Medina. Soon his business flourished. Early in 623, Abu Bakr's daughter Aisha, who was already engaged to Muhammad, was handed over to Muhammad in a simple marriage ceremony, further strengthening relations between Abu Bakr and Muhammad.\nMilitary campaigns under Muhammad.\nBattle of Badr.\nIn 624, Abu Bakr was involved in the first battle between the Muslims and the Quraysh of Mecca, known as the Battle of Badr, but did not fight, instead acting as one of the guards of Muhammad's tent. In relation to this, Ali allegedly later asked his associates as to who they thought was the bravest among men. Everyone stated that Ali was the bravest of all men. Ali then replied:\nIn Sunni accounts, during one such attack, two discs from Abu Bakr's shield penetrated into Muhammad's cheeks. Abu Bakr went forward with the intention of extracting these discs but Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah requested he leave the matter to him, losing his two incisors during the process. In these stories subsequently Abu Bakr, along with other companions, led Muhammad to a place of safety.\nBattle of Uhud.\nIn 625, he participated in the Battle of Uhud, in which the majority of the Muslims were routed and he himself was wounded. Before the battle had begun, his son Abdul-Rahman, at that time still non-Muslim and fighting on the side of the Quraysh, came forward and threw down a challenge for a duel. Abu Bakr accepted the challenge but was stopped by Muhammad. Later, Abdul-Rahman approached his father and said to him \"You were exposed to me as a target, but I turned away from you and did not kill you.\" To this Abu Bakr replied \"However, if you had been exposed to me as a target I would not have turned away from you.\"\nIn the second phase of the battle, Khalid ibn al-Walid\u2019s cavalry attacked the Muslims from behind, changing a Muslim victory to defeat. Many fled from the battlefield, including Abu Bakr. However, according to his own account, he was \"the first to return\".\nBattle of the Trench.\nIn 627 he participated in the Battle of the Trench and also in the Invasion of Banu Qurayza. In the Battle of the Trench, Muhammad divided the ditch into a number of sectors and a contingent was posted to guard each sector. One of these contingents was under the command of Abu Bakr. The enemy made frequent assaults in an attempt to cross the ditch, all of which were repulsed. To commemorate this event a mosque, later known as 'Masjid-i-Siddiq', was constructed at the site where Abu Bakr had repulsed the charges of the enemy.\nBattle of Khaybar.\nAbu Bakr took part in the Battle of Khaybar. Khaybar had eight fortresses, the strongest and most well-guarded of which was called Al-Qamus. Muhammad sent Abu Bakr with a group of warriors to attempt to take it, but they were unable to do so. Muhammad also sent Umar with a group of warriors, but Umar could not conquer Al-Qamus either. Some other Muslims also attempted to capture the fort, but they were unsuccessful as well. Finally, Muhammad sent Ali, who defeated the enemy leader, Marhab.\nMilitary campaigns during final years of Muhammad.\nIn 629 Muhammad sent 'Amr ibn al-'As to Zaat-ul-Sallasal, followed by Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah in response to a call for reinforcements. Abu Bakr and Umar commanded an army under al-Jarrah, and they attacked and defeated the enemy.\nIn 630, when the Muslims conquered Mecca, Abu Bakr was part of the army. Before the conquest of Mecca his father Uthman Abu Quhafa converted to Islam.\nBattles of Hunayn and Ta'if.\nIn 630, the Muslim army was ambushed by archers from the local tribes as it passed through the valley of Hunayn, some eleven miles northeast of Mecca. Taken unaware, the advance guard of the Muslim army fled in panic. There was considerable confusion, and the camels, horses and men ran into one another in an attempt to seek cover. Muhammad, however, stood firm. Only nine companions remained around him, including Abu Bakr. Under Muhammad's instruction, Abbas shouted at the top of his voice, \"O Muslims, come to the Prophet of Allah\". The call was heard by the Muslim soldiers and they gathered beside Muhammad. When the Muslims had gathered in sufficient number, Muhammad ordered a charge against the enemy. In the hand-to-hand fight that followed the tribes were routed and they fled to Autas.\nMuhammad posted a contingent to guard the Hunayn pass and led the main army to Autas. In the confrontation at Autas the tribes could not withstand the Muslim onslaught. Believing continued resistance useless, the tribes broke camp and retired to Ta'if.\nAbu Bakr was commissioned by Muhammad to lead the attack against Ta'if. The tribes shut themselves in the fort and refused to come out in the open. The Muslims employed catapults, but without tangible result. The Muslims attempted to use a testudo formation, in which a group of soldiers shielded by a cover of cowhide advanced to set fire to the gate. However, the enemy threw red hot scraps of iron on the testudo, rendering it ineffective.\nThe siege dragged on for two weeks, and still there was no sign of weakness in the fort. Muhammad held a council of war. Abu Bakr advised that the siege might be raised and that God make arrangements for the fall of the fort. The advice was accepted, and in February 630, the siege of Ta'if was raised and the Muslim army returned to Mecca. A few days later Malik bin Auf, the commander, came to Mecca and became a Muslim.\nAbu Bakr as Amir-ul-Hajj.\nIn 631 AD, Muhammad sent from Medina a delegation of three hundred Muslims to perform the Hajj according to the new Islamic way and appointed Abu Bakr as the leader of the delegation. The day after Abu Bakr and his party had left for the Hajj, Muhammad received a new revelation: Surah Tawbah, the ninth chapter of the Qur'an. It is related that when this revelation came, someone suggested to Muhammad that he should send news of it to Abu Bakr. Muhammad said that only a man of his house could proclaim the revelation.\nMuhammad summoned Ali, and asked him to proclaim a portion of Surah Tawbah to the people on the day of sacrifice when they assembled at Mina. Ali went forth on Muhammad's slit-eared camel, and overtook Abu Bakr. When Ali joined the party, Abu Bakr wanted to know whether he had come to give orders or to convey them. Ali said that he had not come to replace Abu Bakr as Amir-ul-Hajj, and that his only mission was to convey a special message to the people on behalf of Muhammad.\nAt Mecca, Abu Bakr presided at the Hajj ceremony, and Ali read the proclamation on behalf of Muhammad. The main points of the proclamation were:\nFrom the day this proclamation was made a new era dawned, and Islam alone was to be supreme in Arabia.\nExpedition of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq.\nAbu Bakr led one military expedition, the Expedition of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, which took place in Nejd, in July 628 (third month 7AH in the Islamic calendar). Abu Bakr led a large company in Nejd on the order of Muhammad. Many were killed and taken prisoner. The Sunni Hadith collection \"Sunan Abu Dawud\" mentions the event.\nExpedition of Usama bin Zayd.\nIn 632, during the final weeks of his life, Muhammad ordered an expedition into Syria to avenge the defeat of the Muslims in the Battle of Mu'tah some years previously. Leading the campaign was Usama ibn Zayd, whose father, Muhammad's erstwhile adopted son Zayd ibn Harithah, had been killed in the earlier conflict. No more than twenty years old, inexperienced and untested, Usama's appointment was controversial, becoming especially problematic when veterans such as Abu Bakr, Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas were placed under his command. Nevertheless, the expedition was dispatched, though soon after setting off, news was received of Muhammad's death, forcing the army to return to Medina. The campaign was not reengaged until after Abu Bakr's ascension to the caliphate, at which point he chose to reaffirm Usama's command, which ultimately led to its success.\nDeath of Muhammad.\nThere are a number of traditions regarding Muhammad's final days which have been used to reinforce the idea of the great friendship and trust which is said to have existed between him and Abu Bakr. In one such episode, as Muhammad was nearing death, he found himself unable to lead prayers as he usually would. He instructed Abu Bakr to take his place, ignoring concerns from Aisha that her father was too emotionally delicate for the role. Abu Bakr subsequently took up the position, and when Muhammad entered the prayer hall one morning during Fajr prayers, Abu Bakr attempted to step back to let him to take up his normal place and lead. Muhammad however, allowed him to continue. In a related incident, around this time, Muhammad ascended the pulpit and addressed the congregation, saying \"God has given his servant the choice between this world and that which is with God and he has chosen the latter.\" Abu Bakr, understanding this to mean that Muhammad did not have long to live, responded \"Nay, we and our children will be your ransom.\" Muhammad consoled his friend and ordered that all the doors leading to the mosque be closed aside from that which led from Abu Bakr's house, \"for I know no one who is a better friend to me than he.\"\nUpon Muhammad's death, the Muslim community was unprepared for the loss of its leader and many experienced a profound shock. Umar was particularly effected, instead declaring that Muhammad had gone to consult with God and would soon return, threatening anyone who would say that Muhammad was dead. Abu Bakr, having returned to Medina, calmed Umar by showing him Muhammad's body, convincing him of his death. He then addressed those who had gathered at the mosque, saying \"If anyone worships Muhammad, Muhammad is dead. If anyone worships God, God is alive, immortal\", thus putting an end to any idolising impulse in the population. He then concluded with a verse from the Quran: \"Muhammad is no more than an apostle, and many apostles have passed away before him.\"\nSaqifa.\nIn the immediate aftermath of the death of Muhammad, a gathering of the Ansar (natives of Medina) took place in the \"Saqifah\" (courtyard) of the Banu Sa'ida clan. The general belief at the time was that the purpose of the meeting was for the Ansar to decide on a new leader of the Muslim community among themselves, with the intentional exclusion of the Muhajirun (migrants from Mecca), though this has later become the subject of debate.\nNevertheless, Abu Bakr and Umar, upon learning of the meeting, became concerned of a potential coup and hastened to the gathering. Upon arriving, Abu Bakr addressed the assembled men with a warning that an attempt to elect a leader outside of Muhammad's own tribe, the Quraysh, would likely result in dissension, as only they can command the necessary respect among the community. He then took Umar and another companion, Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah, by the hand and offered them to the Ansar as potential choices. Habab ibn Mundhir, a veteran from the Battle of Badr, countered with his own suggestion that the Quraysh and the Ansar choose a leader each from among themselves, who would then rule jointly. The group grew heated upon hearing this proposal and began to argue amongst themselves. The orientalist William Muir gives the following observation of the situation:\nUmar hastily took Abu Bakr's hand and swore his own allegiance to the latter, an example followed by the gathered men. The meeting broke up when a violent scuffle erupted between Umar and the chief of the Banu Sa'ida, Sa'd ibn Ubadah. This may indicate that the choice of Abu Bakr may not have been unanimous, with emotions running high as a result of the disagreement.\nAbu Bakr was near-universally accepted as head of the Muslim community (under the title of Caliph) as a result of Saqifah, though he did face contention because of the rushed nature of the event. Several companions, most prominent among them being Ali ibn Abi Talib, initially refused to acknowledge his authority. Among Shi'ites, it is also argued that Ali had previously been appointed as Muhammad's heir, with the election being seen as in contravention to the latter's wishes. Abu Bakr later sent Umar to confront Ali, resulting in an altercation which may have involved violence. However, after six months the group made peace with Abu Bakr and Ali offered him his allegiance.\nReign.\nAfter assuming the office of Caliph, Abu Bakr's first address was as follows:\nAbu Bakr's reign lasted for 27 months, during which he crushed the rebellion of the Arab tribes throughout the Arabian Peninsula in the successful Ridda Wars. In the last months of his rule, he sent Khalid ibn al-Walid on conquests against the Sassanid Empire in Mesopotamia and against the Byzantine Empire in Syria. This would set in motion a historical trajectory (continued later on by Umar and Uthman ibn Affan) that in just a few short decades would lead to one of the largest empires in history. He had little time to pay attention to the administration of state, though state affairs remained stable during his Caliphate. On the advice of Umar and Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah, he agreed to draw a salary from the state treasury and discontinue his cloth trade.\nRidda wars.\nTroubles emerged soon after Abu Bakr's succession, with several Arab tribes launching revolts, threatening the unity and stability of the new community and state. These insurgencies and the caliphate's responses to them are collectively referred to as the Ridda wars (\"Wars of Apostasy\").\nThe opposition movements came in two forms. One type challenged the political power of the nascent caliphate as well as the religious authority of Islam with the acclamation of rival ideologies, headed by political leaders who claimed the mantle of prophethood in the manner that Muhammad had done. These rebellions include:\nThese leaders are all denounced in Islamic histories as \"false prophets\".\nThe second form of opposition movement was more strictly political in character. Some of the revolts of this type took the form of tax rebellions in Najd among tribes such as the Banu Fazara and Banu Tamim. Other dissenters, while initially allied to the Muslims, used Muhammad's death as an opportunity to attempt to restrict the growth of the new Islamic state. They include some of the Rab\u012b\u02bfa in Bahrayn, the Azd in Oman, as well as among the Kindah and Khawlan in Yemen.\nAbu Bakr, likely understanding that maintaining firm control over the disparate tribes of Arabia was crucial to ensuring the survival of the state, suppressed the insurrections with military force. He dispatched Khalid ibn Walid and a body of troops to subdue the uprisings in Najd as well as that of Musaylimah, who posed the most serious threat. Concurrent to this, Shurahbil ibn Hasana and Al-Ala'a Al-Hadrami were sent to Bahrayn, while Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl, Hudhayfah al-Bariqi and Arfaja al-Bariqi were instructed to conquer Oman. Finally, Al-Muhajir ibn Abi Umayya and Khalid ibn Asid were sent to Yemen to aid the local governor in re-establishing control. Abu Bakr also made use of diplomatic means in addition to military measures. Like Muhammad before him, he utilised marriage alliances and financial incentives to bind former enemies to the caliphate. For instance, a member of the Banu Hanifa who had sided with the Muslims was rewarded with the granting of a land estate. Similarly, a Kindah rebel named Al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, after repenting and re-joining Islam, was later given land in Medina as well as the hand of Abu Bakr's sister Umm Farwa in marriage.\nAt their heart, the Ridda movements were challenges to the political and religious supremacy of the Islamic state. Through his success in suppressing the insurrections, Abu Bakr had in effect continued the political consolidation which had begun under Muhammad's leadership with relatively little interruption. By wars' end, he had established an Islamic hegemony over the entirety of the Arabian peninsula.\nExpeditions into Persia and Syria.\nWith Arabia having united under a single centralised state with a formidable military, the region could now be viewed as a potential threat to the neighbouring Byzantine and Sasanian empires. It may be that Abu Bakr, reasoning that it was inevitable that one of these powers would launch a pre-emptive strike against the youthful caliphate, decided that it was better to deliver the first blow himself. Regardless of the caliph's motivations, in 633, small forces were dispatched into Iraq and Palestine, capturing several towns. Though the Byzantines and Sassanians were certain to retaliate, Abu Bakr had reason to be confident; the two empires were militarily exhausted after centuries of war against each other, making it likely that any forces sent to Arabia would be diminished and weakened.\nA more pressing advantage though was the effectiveness of the Muslim fighters as well as their zeal, the latter of which was partially based on their certainty of the righteousness of their cause. Additionally, the general belief among the Muslims was that the community must be defended at all costs. Historian Theodor N\u00f6ldeke gives the somewhat controversial opinion that this religious fervour was intentionally used to maintain the enthusiasm and momentum of the \"ummah\":\nThough Abu Bakr had started these initial conflicts which eventually resulted in the Islamic conquests of Persia and the Levant, he did not live to see any real fighting, instead leaving the task to his successors.\nPreservation of the Quran.\nAbu Bakr was instrumental in preserving the Quran in written form. It is said that after the hard-won victory over Musaylimah in the Battle of Yamama in 632, Umar saw that some five hundred of the Muslims who had memorised the Quran had been killed. Fearing that it may become lost or corrupted, Umar requested that Abu Bakr authorise the compilation and preservation of the scriptures in written format. The caliph was initially hesitant, being quoted as saying \"how can we do that which the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless and keep him, did not himself do?\" He eventually relented however, and appointed Zayd ibn Thabit, who had previously served as Muhammad's secretary, for the task of gathering the scattered verses. The fragments were recovered from every quarter, including from the ribs of palm branches, scraps of leather, stone tablets and \"from the hearts of men\". The collected work was transcribed onto sheets and verified through comparison with Quran memorisers. The finished codex, termed the \"Mus'haf\", was presented to Abu Bakr, who prior to his death, bequeathed it to his successor Umar. Upon Umar's own death, the \"Mus'haf\" was left to his daughter Hafsa, who had been one of the wives of Muhammad. It was this volume, borrowed from Hafsa, which formed the basis of Uthman's legendary prototype, which became the definitive text of the Quran. All later editions are derived from this original.\nDeath.\nOn 23 August 634, Abu Bakr fell sick and did not recover. He developed a high fever and was confined to bed. His illness was prolonged, and when his condition worsened, he felt that his end was near. Realising this, he sent for Ali and requested him to perform his ghusl since Ali had also done it for Muhammad.\nAbu Bakr felt that he should nominate his successor so that the issue should not be a cause of dissension among the Muslims after his death, though there was already controversy over Ali not having been appointed. He appointed Umar for this role after discussing the matter with some companions. Some of them favoured the nomination and others disliked it, due to the tough nature of Umar.\nAbu Bakr thus dictated his last testament to Uthman ibn Affan as follows:\nUmar led the funeral prayer for him and he was buried beside the grave of Muhammad.\nAppearance.\nThe historian Al-Tabari, in regards to Abu Bakr's appearance, records the following interaction between Aisha and her paternal nephew, Abdullah ibn Abdul-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr:\nWhen she was in her howdah and saw a man from among the Arabs passing by, she said, \"I have not seen a man more like Abu Bakr than this one.\" We said to her, \"Describe Abu Bakr.\" She said, \"A slight, white man, thin-bearded and bowed. His waist wrapper would not hold but would fall down around his loins. He had a lean face, sunken eyes, a bulging forehead, and trembling knuckles.\"\nReferencing another source, Al-Tabari further describes him as being \"white mixed with yellowness, of good build, slight, \nbowed, thin, tall like a male palm tree, hook-nosed, lean-faced, sunken-eyed, thin-shanked, and strong-thighed. He used to dye himself with henna and black dye.\"\nLegacy.\nThough the period of his caliphate covers only two years, two months and fifteen days, it included successful invasions of the two most powerful empires of the time: the Sassanid Empire and Byzantine Empire.\nAbu Bakr had the distinction of being the first Caliph in the history of Islam and also the first Caliph to nominate a successor. He was the only Caliph in the history of Islam who refunded to the state treasury at the time of his death the entire amount of the allowance that he had drawn during the period of his caliphate.\nHe has the distinction of purchasing the land for Al-Masjid al-Nabawi.\nSunni view.\nSunni Muslims believe that Abu Bakr is the best man of all the human beings after the prophets. They also consider Abu Bakr as one of The Ten Promised Paradise (\"al-\u2018Ashara al-Mubashshara\") whom Muhammad had testified were destined for Paradise. He is regarded as the \"Successor of Allah's Messenger\" (\"Khalifa Rasulullah\"), and first of the Rightly Guided Caliphs \u2013 i.e. Rashidun\u2014and as the rightful successor to Muhammad. Abu Bakr had always been the closest friend and confidant of Muhammad throughout his life, being beside Muhammad at every major event. It was Abu Bakr's wisdom that Muhammad always honored. Abu Bakr is regarded among the best of Muhammad's followers; as Umar ibn Khattab stated, \"If the faith of Abu Bakr was weighed against the faith of the people of the earth, the faith of Abu Bakr would outweigh the others.\"\nShia view.\nThe Twelver Shia (as the main branch of Shia Islam, with 85% of all Shias) believe that Ali ibn Abi Talib was supposed to assume the Caliphate, and that he had been publicly and unambiguously appointed by Muhammad as his successor at Ghadir Khumm. It is also believed that Abu Bakr and Umar conspired to take over power in the Muslim nation after Muhammad's death, in a coup d'\u00e9tat against Ali. The Twelver Shi'a do not believe that Abu Bakr's being with Muhammad in the cave when the two fled Mecca was a meritorious act, and, indeed, find significant criticism of Abu Bakr in the Qur'anic verse of the cave.\nMost Twelver Shia criticize Abu Bakr because, after Muhammad's death, Abu Bakr refused to grant Muhammad's daughter, Fatimah, the lands of the village of Fadak which she claimed her father had given to her as a gift before his death. He refused to accept the testimony of her witnesses, so she claimed the land would still belong to her as inheritance from her deceased father. However, Abu Bakr replied by saying that Muhammad had told him that the prophets of God do not leave as inheritance any worldly possessions and on this basis he refused to give her the lands of Fadak. However, as Sayed Ali Asgher Razwy notes in his book \"A Restatement of the History of Islam &amp; Muslims\", Muhammad inherited a maid servant, five camels, and ten sheep. This proves that prophets can receive inheritance, and can pass on inheritance to others as well. In addition, Shias claim that Muhammad had given Fadak to Fatimah during his lifetime, and Fadak was therefore a gift to Fatimah, not inheritance. This view has also been supported some Sunnis, such as the Abbasid ruler Al-Ma'mun.\nThe Twelver Shia accuse him of participating in the burning of the house of Ali and Fatima.\nThe Twelver Shia believe that Abu Bakr sent Khalid ibn Walid to crush those who were in favour of Ali's caliphate (\"see Ridda Wars\"). The Twelver Shia strongly refute the idea that Abu Bakr or Umar were instrumental in the collection or preservation of the \"Qur'an\", claiming that they should have accepted the copy of the book in the possession of Ali.\nAfter the death of Abu Bakr, Ali raised Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr. The Twelver Shia view Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr as one of the companions of Ali. When Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was killed by the Ummayads, Aisha, the third wife of Muhammad, raised and taught her nephew Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr. Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr's mother was from Ali's family and Qasim's daughter Farwah bint al-Qasim was married to Muhammad al-Baqir and was the mother of Jafar al-Sadiq. Therefore, Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr was the grandson of Abu Bakr and the grandfather of Jafar al-Sadiq. Zaydis, the largest group amongst the Shia before the Safavid Dynasty and currently the second-largest group (although its population is only about 5% of all Shia Muslims), believe that on the last hour of Zayd ibn Ali (the uncle of Jafar al-Sadiq), he was betrayed by the people in Kufa who said to him: \"May God have mercy on you! What do you have to say on the matter of Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattab?\" Zayd ibn Ali said, \"I have not heard anyone in my family renouncing them both nor saying anything but good about them...when they were entrusted with government they behaved justly with the people and acted according to the Qur'an and the Sunnah\".\nExternal links.\nUrdu Audio"}
{"id": "1716", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1716", "title": "Ambrose Traversari", "text": "Ambrogio Traversari, also referred to as Ambrose of Camaldoli (138620 October 1439), was an Italian monk and theologian who was a prime supporter of the papal cause in the 15th century. He is honored as a saint by the Camaldolese Order.\nBiography.\nTraversari was born near Forl\u00ec, in the village of Portico di Romagna in 1386. At the age of 14 he entered the Camaldolese Order in the Monastery of St. Mary of the Angels in Florence, and rapidly became a leading theologian and Hellenist. In his study of Greek literature his master was Emmanuel Chrysoloras. He worked primarily as a scholar until he became prior general of the Order in 1431.\nAmbrose emerged as a leading advocate of papal primacy. This attitude he showed clearly when he attended the Council of Basel as legate of Pope Eugene IV and defended the primacy of the pope, adjuring the council not to \"rend asunder Christ's seamless robe\". He was next sent by the pope to the Emperor Sigismund to ask his aid in the pope's efforts to end this council, which for five years had been encroaching on papal prerogatives. The pope transferred the council from Basel to Ferrara on 18 September 1437.\nSo strong was Ambrose's hostility to some of the delegates that he described Basel as a western Babylon. He likewise supported the pope at Ferrara and Florence, and worked hard in the attempt to reconcile the Eastern and Western Churches. But in this council, and later, in that of Florence, Ambrose, by his efforts and charity toward some poor Greek bishops, greatly helped to bring about a union of the two Churches, the decree for which, 6 July 1439, he was called on to draw up.\nHe died soon after. His feastday is celebrated by the Camaldolese Order on 20 November.\nCharacter.\nAccording to the author of his biography in the eleventh edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\": \"Ambrose is interesting as typical of the new humanism which was growing up within the church. Thus while among his own colleagues he seemed merely a hypocritical and arrogant priest, in his relations with his brother humanists, such as Cosimo de' Medici, he appeared as the student of classical antiquities and especially of Greek theological authors\".\nWorks.\nHis works include a treatise on the Holy Eucharist, one on the Procession of the Holy Spirit, many lives of saints, as well as a history of his term as prior general of the Camaldolese. He also translated from Greek into Latin a life of John Chrysostom (Venice, 1533); the \"Spiritual Wisdom\" of John Moschus; \"The Ladder of Divine Ascent\" of John Climacus (Venice, 1531), P.G., LXXXVIII. Between 1424 and 1433 he worked on the translation of the \"Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers\" by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, which came to be widely circulated in manuscript form. He also translated four books against the errors of the Greeks, by Manuel Kalekas, Patriarch of Constantinople, a Dominican friar (Ingolstadt, 1608), P.G., CLII, col. 13-661, a work known only through Ambrose's translation.\nHe also translated many homilies of John Chrysostom; the writings of Dionysius Areopagita (1436); Basil of Caesarea's treatise on virginity; thirty-nine discourses of Ephrem the Syrian, and many other works of the Fathers and writers of the Greek Church. Dom Mabillon's \"Letters and Orations of St. Ambrose of Camaldoli\" was published in Florence in 1759.\nSelected works:\nA number of his manuscripts remain in the library of Saint Mark in Venice.\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "1717", "revid": "841503377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1717", "title": "Ambrosians", "text": "Ambrosians are members of one of the religious brotherhoods which at various times since the 14th century have sprung up in and around Milan and also a 16th-century sect of Anabaptist Ambrosians.\nOrders.\nOnly the oldest of the Catholic Ambrosians, the Fratres S. Ambrosii ad Nemus, had anything more than a very local significance. This order is known from a bull of Pope Gregory XI addressed to the monks of the church of St Ambrose outside Milan.\nSaint Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, certainly did not found religious orders, though he took an interest in the monastic life and watched over its beginnings in his diocese, providing for the needs of a monastery outside the walls of Milan, as Saint Augustine recounts in his \"Confessions\". Ambrose also made successful efforts to improve the moral life of women in the Milan of his time by promoting the permanent institution of Virgins, as also of widows. His exhortations and other interventions have survived in various writings: \"De virginibus\", \"De viduis\", \"De virginitate\", \"De institutione virginis\", \"De exhortatione virginitatis\", and \"De lapsu virginis consecratae\". Ambrose was the only Father of the Church to leave behind so many writings on the subject and his attentions naturally enough led to the formation of communities which later became formal monasteries of women.\nIt is against this background that two religious orders or congregations\u2014one of men and one of women, when founded in the Milan area during the 13th and 15th centuries\u2014took Saint Ambrose as their patron and hence adopted his name.\nOrder of St Ambrose.\nThe first of these groups was formed in a wood outside Milan by three noble Milanese, Alexander Grivelli, Antonio Petrasancta, and Albert Besuzzi, who were joined by others, including some priests. In 1375 Pope Gregory XI gave them the Rule of St Augustine, with set of constitutions. As a canonically recognized order they took the name \"Fratres Sancti Ambrosii ad Nemus\" and adopted a habit consisting of a brown tunic, scapular, and hood. The brethren elected a superior with the title of prior who was then instituted by the Archbishop of Milan. The priests of the congregation undertook preaching and other tasks of the ministry but were not allowed to accept charge parishes. In the liturgy they followed the Ambrosian Rite. Various monasteries were founded on these lines, but without any formal bond between them. In 1441 Pope Eugene IV merged them into one congregation called \"Congregatio Sancti Ambrosii ad Nemus\", made the original house the main seat, and laid down a system of government whereby a general chapter met every three years, elected the priors who stayed in office till the next chapter. There was a rector, or superior general, who was assisted by two \"visitors\".\nSaint Charles Borromeo, Archbishop of Milan, successfully reformed their discipline, grown lax, in 1579. In 1589 Pope Sixtus V united to the Congregation of St Ambrose the monasteries of a group known as the \"Brothers of the Apostles of the Poor Life\" (or \"Apostolini\" or \"Brothers of St. Barnabas\"), whose houses were in the province of Genoa and in the March of Ancona. This was an order that had been founded by Giovanni Scarpa at the end of the 15th century. The union was confirmed by Pope Paul V in 1606, at which time the congregation added the name of St. Barnabas to its title, adopted new constitutions, divided its houses into four provinces, two of them, St Clement's and St Pancras's, being in Rome. Published works have survived from the pen of Ascanio Tasca and Michele Mulozzani, each of whom was superior-general, and of Zaccaria Visconti, Francesco-Maria Guazzi and Paolo Fabulotti. Although various Ambrosians were given the title of Blessed in recognition of their holiness: Antonio Gonzaga of Mantua, Filippo of Fermo, and Gerardo of Monza, the order was eventually dissolved by Pope Innocent X in 1650.\nNuns.\nThe Nuns of St Ambrose (Ambrosian Sisters) wore a habit of the same colour as the Brothers of St Ambrose, conformed to their constitutions, and followed the Ambrosian Rite, but were independent in government. Pope Sixtus IV gave the nuns canonical status in 1474. Their one monastery was on the top of Monte Varese, near Lago Maggiore, on the spot where their foundress, the Blessed Catarina Morigia (or Catherine of Palanza), had first led a solitary life. Other early nuns were the Blessed Juliana of Puriselli, Benedetta Bimia, and Lucia Alciata. The nuns were esteemed by St Charles Borromeo.\nAnother group of cloistered \"Nuns of St Ambrose\", also called the Annunciatae (Italian: \"Annunziate\") of Lombardy or \"Sisters of St Marcellina\", were founded in 1408 by three young women of Pavia, Dorothea Morosini, Eleonora Contarini, and Veronica Duodi. Their houses, scattered throughout Lombardy and Venetia, were united into a congregation by St Pius V, under the Rule of St Augustine with a mother-house, residence of the prioress general, at Pavia. One of the nuns in this group was Saint Catharine Fieschi Adorno, who died on September 14, 1510.\nOblates of St. Ambrose and of St. Charles.\nIn some sense also \"Ambrosians\" are the members of a diocesan religious society founded by St Charles Borromeo, Archbishop of Milan. All priests or destined to become priests, they took a simple vow of obedience to their bishop. The model for this was a society that already existed at Brescia, under the name of \"Priests of Peace\". In August 1578 the new society was inaugurated, being entrusted with the church of the Holy Sepulchre and given the name of \"Oblates of St. Ambrose.\" They later received the approbation of Gregory XIII. St Charles died in 1584. These Oblates were dispersed by Napoleon I in 1810, while another group called the Oblates of Our Lady of Rho escaped this fate. In 1848 they were reorganized and given the name of \"Oblates of St. Charles\" and reassigned the house of the Holy Sepulchre. In the course of the 19th century similar groups were founded in a number of countries, including the \"Oblates of St Charles\", established in London by Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman."}
{"id": "1718", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1718", "title": "Ambrosiaster", "text": "Ambrosiaster is the name given to the writer of a commentary on St Paul's epistles, \"brief in words but weighty in matter,\" and valuable for the criticism of the Latin text of the New Testament. The commentary itself was written during the papacy of Pope Damasus I, that is, between 366 and 384, and is considered an important document of the Latin text of Paul before the Vulgate of Jerome, and of the interpretation of Paul prior to Augustine of Hippo.\nAttribution.\nThis commentary was erroneously attributed for a long time to St Ambrose. In 1527, though, Erasmus threw doubt on the accuracy of ascribing the authorship of this document to Ambrose. Erasmus is generally falsely credited for having coined the name \"Ambrosiaster\" (literally in Latin: \"would-be Ambrose\") to describe its author. The credit for this nickname should go to the Maurists, as Ren\u00e9 Hoven has shown. The name has remained with the unknown author. Attempts to identify this Ambrosiaster with known authors has continued, but with no success. Because Augustine cites Ambrosiaster's commentary on Romans 5.12 under the name of \"Hilary\", many critics have attempted to identify Ambroasiaster with one of the many writers named \"Hilary\" active in the period. In 1899, Germain Morin suggested that the writer was Isaac, a converted Jew and writer of a tract on the Trinity and Incarnation, who was exiled to Spain in 378-380 and then relapsed to Judaism; but he afterwards abandoned this theory of the authorship in favour of Decimus Hilarianus Hilarius, proconsul of Africa in 377. Alternatively, Paolo Angelo Ballerini attempted to sustain the traditional attribution of the work to Ambrose, in his complete edition of that Father's work. This is extremely problematic, though, since it would require Ambrose to have written the book before he became a bishop, and then added to it in later years, incorporating later remarks of Hilary of Poitiers on Romans. No identifications, therefore, have acquired lasting popularity with scholars, and his identity remains a mystery.\nSeveral other minor works have been attributed to this same author, along with a lengthy collection of exegetical and polemical tractates, the \"Quaestiones Veteris et Novi Testamenti,\" which manuscripts have traditionally ascribed to Augustine. In 1905, Alexander Souter established that this work should also be attributed to Ambrosiaster. Fragments of several other works have been ascribed with some certainty to Ambrosiaster: a commentary on Matthew 24, a discussion of the parable of the three measures of flour into which a woman placed yeast, and a treatment of Peter's denial and the arrest of Jesus in Gethsemane. The attribution of other fragments to Ambrosiaster, though, is more tentative.\nLife.\nDespite the elusive identity of Ambrosiaster, several facts about him can be established. Internal evidence suggests he was active at Rome during the reign of Pope Damasus (366\u2013384), and almost certainly a member of the Roman clergy. There are strong indications he objected to Jerome's efforts to revise the Old Latin versions of the Gospels, and that he was critical of Jerome's activity among ascetic women at Rome. Ambrosiaster shows a deep interest in Judaism and often notes that Christian practices derive from Jewish tradition.\nInfluence.\nMany scholars argue that Ambrosiaster's works were essentially Pelagian, although this is disputed. Pelagius cited him extensively. For example, Alfred Smith argued that Pelagius' \"view of Predestination he seems to have taken from Ambrosiaster. His doctrine with regard to Original Sin appears to have come from the same source\". However, Augustine also made use of Ambrosiaster's commentaries."}
{"id": "1719", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1719", "title": "Ambrosius Aurelianus", "text": "Ambrosius Aurelianus (; Anglicised as Ambrose Aurelian and called Aurelius Ambrosius in the \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" and elsewhere) was a war leader of the Romano-British who won an important battle against the Anglo-Saxons in the 5th century, according to Gildas. He also appeared independently in the legends of the Britons, beginning with the 9th-century \"Historia Brittonum\". Eventually he was transformed into the uncle of King Arthur, the brother of Arthur's father Uther Pendragon, as a ruler who precedes and predeceases them both. He also appears as a young prophet who meets the tyrant Vortigern; in this guise, he was later transformed into the wizard Merlin.\nAccording to Gildas.\nAmbrosius Aurelianus is one of the few people that Gildas identifies by name in his sermon \"De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae\", and the only one named from the 5th century. \"De Excidio\" is considered the oldest extant British document about the so-called Arthurian period of Sub-Roman Britain. Following the destructive assault of the Saxons, the survivors gather together under the leadership of Ambrosius, who is described as:\nSome basic information on Ambrosius can be deduced from the brief passage: Ambrosius was possibly of high birth and very likely a Christian (Gildas says that he won his battles \"with God's help\"). Ambrosius' parents were slain by the Saxons and he was among the few survivors of their initial invasion.\nAccording to Gildas, Ambrosius organised the survivors into an armed force and achieved the first military victory over the Saxon invaders. However, this victory was not decisive: \"Sometimes the Saxons and sometimes the citizens [meaning the Romano-British inhabitants] were victorious.\" Due to Gildas' description of him, Ambrosius is one of the figures called the Last of the Romans.\nScholarship questions.\nTwo points in Gildas' description have attracted much scholarly commentary. The first is what Gildas meant by saying Ambrosius' family \"had worn the purple\". Roman emperors and male Patricians wore clothes with a purple band to denote their class so the reference to purple may be to an aristocratic heritage. Roman military tribunes (\"tribuni militum\"), senior officers in Roman legions, wore a similar purple band so the reference may be to a family background of military leadership. The tradition was old, as the togas and pallia of already ancient senators and tribunes were trimmed with the purple band. In the church, \"the purple\" is a euphemism for blood and therefore \"wearing the purple\" may be a reference to martyrdom or a bishop's robe. In addition, in the later Roman Empire both Roman consuls and governors of consular rank also wore clothes with a purple fringe. The \"Notitia Dignitatum\", a Roman catalogue of official posts, lists four or five provincial governors in Roman Britain and two of them were of consular rank. One was the governor of Maxima Caesariensis and the other that of Valentia. The parent who wore the purple may well have been one of these governors, whose names were not recorded.\nIt has been suggested by historian Alex Woolf that Ambrosius may have been related to the 5th-century Romano-British usurpers Marcus or Gratian \u2013 Woolf expresses a preference based on nomenclature for Marcus. Frank D. Reno, an Arthurian scholar, has instead argued that the name \"Aurelianus\" indicates the possible descent of Ambrosius from the Roman emperor Lucius Domitius Aurelianus (Aurelian, reigned 270\u2013275). Aurelian's military campaigns included the conquest of the Gallic Empire. N. J. Higham suggests that Ambrosius may have been distantly related to imperial families of the late Roman Empire, such as the Theodosian dynasty. Branches of this particular dynasty were known to be active in western Roman provinces like Hispania.\nMike Ashley instead focuses on the name \"Ambrosius\" and its possible connection to Saint Ambrosius, a fourth-century Bishop of Milan, who also served as consular governor in areas of Roman Italy. The father of the Bishop is sometimes claimed to be a fourth century Praetorian prefect of Gaul named Aurelius Ambrosius, whose areas included Britain, though some modern scholars doubt that Saint Ambrosius was related to this man (instead identifying his father with an official named Uranius mentioned in an extract from the Theodosian Code). Ashley suggests that Ambrosius Aurelianus was related to the two Aurelii Ambrosii. Tim Venning points out that the name \"Aurelianus\" could be the result of a Roman adoption. When a boy was adopted into a new gens (clan), he received the family names of his new family, plus an additional cognomen indicating his descent from his original gens/family. The additional cognomen often had the form \"-anus\". When Gaius Octavius from gens Octavia was adopted into the Julii Caesares family, his new name became Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus. In this case, Ambrosius may have been a member of gens Aurelia who was adopted by another gens/family. His original name Aurelius became Aurelianus.\nThe second question is the meaning of the word \"avita\": Gildas could have meant \"ancestors\", or intended it to mean more specifically \"grandfather\" \u2013 thus indicating Ambrosius lived about a generation before the Battle of Badon. Lack of information prevents sure answers to these questions.\nGildas' motives.\nN. J. Higham wrote a book on Gildas and the literary tropes that he used. He has suggested that Gildas may have had considerable motive for drawing attention to Ambrosius. He was not attempting to write a historical biography of the man, according to Higham, but setting him as an example to his contemporaries. It was essential to the philosophy of Gildas that Briton leaders who achieved victory over the barbarians were only able to do so because of divine aid. And only those who had superior Christian virtues were deserving of this aid. Ambrosius Aurelianus was apparently known for at least one such victory over the barbarians. To fit him into his worldview, Gildas was almost required to feature the former warrior as a man of exceptional virtues and obedience to God. He was made to fit Gildas' version of a model leader.\nHigham also suggests that the Roman lineage of Ambrosius was highlighted for a reason. Gildas was apparently intentionally connecting him with the legitimate authority and military virtues of the Romans. He was also contrasting him with the subsequent Briton rulers whose reigns lacked in such legitimacy.\nIdentifying historical figures.\nGildas is a primary source for the Battle of Badon, yet he never mentions the names of the combatants. Therefore, we cannot know if Ambrosius Aurelianus or his successors took part in the battle. The names of the Saxon leaders in the battle are also not recorded.\nThe identities of Ambrosius' descendants are unknown, since Gildas never identifies them by name. It is safe to assume that they were Gildas' contemporaries and known to the author. Higham suggests that they were prominent figures of the time. Their lineage and identities were probably sufficiently familiar to his intended audience that they did not have to be named. The work portrays Ambrosius' descendants as inferior to their ancestor as part of his criticism on rulers of his time, according to Higham. Those criticised were likely aware that the vitriol was intended for them, but probably would not challenge a work offering such a glowing report of their illustrious ancestor.\nMike Ashley suggests that the descendants of Ambrosius could include other people named by Gildas. He favours the inclusion in this category of one Aurelius Caninus (\"Aurelius the dog-like\"), whom Gildas accuses of parricide, fornication, adultery, and warmongering. His name \"Aurelius\" suggests Romano-British descent. The insulting nickname \"Caninus\" was probably invented by Gildas himself, who similarly insults other contemporary rulers. Due to the name used by Gildas, there are theories that this ruler was actually named Conan/Cynan/Kenan. Some identify him with Cynan Garwyn, a 6th-century King of Powys, though it is uncertain if he was a contemporary of Gildas or lived one or two generations following him. Another theory is that this ruler did not reign in Britain but in Brittany. Caninus, in this view, might be Conomor (\"Great Dog\"). Conomor is considered a likelier contemporary of Gildas. Conomor was likely from Domnon\u00e9e, an area of Brittany controlled by British immigrants from Dumnonia. He might be remembered in British legend as Mark of Cornwall.\nGildas primarily features the Saxons as barbarian raiders; their invasions involved a slow and difficult process of military conquest. By AD 500, possibly the time described by Gildas, Anglo-Saxons controlled the Isle of Wight, Kent, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, and coastal areas of Northumberland and Yorkshire. The rest of the former Roman Britain was still under the control of the local Britons or remnants of the Roman provincial administration. Gildas also mentions depopulation of cities and this probably reflects historical facts. Londinium, once a major city, was completely abandoned during the 5th century.\nAccording to Bede.\nBede follows Gildas' account of Ambrosius in his \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\", but in his \"Chronica Majora\" he dates Ambrosius' victory to the reign of the Emperor Zeno (474\u2013491).\nBede's treatment of the 5th century history of Great Britain is not particularly valuable as a source. Until about the year 418, Bede could choose between several historical sources and often followed the writings of Orosius. Following the end of Orosius' history, Bede apparently lacked other available sources and relied extensively on Gildas. Entries from this period tend to be close paraphrases of Gildas' account with mostly stylistic changes. Bede's account of Ambrosius Aurelianus has been translated as following:\nBede does not mention the descendants of Ambrosius Aurelianus, nor their supposed degeneracy.\nAccording to Nennius.\nThe \"Historia Brittonum\", attributed to Nennius, preserves several snippets of lore about Ambrosius. Despite the traditional attribution, the authorship of the work and the period of its writing are open questions for modern historians. There are several extant manuscript versions of the work, varying in details. The most important ones have been dated to between the 9th and the 11th century. Some modern scholars think it unlikely that the work was composed by a single writer or compiler, suggesting that it may have taken centuries to reach its final form, though this theory is not conclusive.\nIn Chapter 31, we are told that Vortigern ruled in fear of Ambrosius. This is the first mention of Ambrosius in the work. According to Frank D. Reno, this would indicate that Ambrosius' influence was formidable, since Vortigern considered him more of a threat than northern invaders and attempts to restore Roman rule in Britain. The chapter relates events following the end of Roman rule in Britain and preceding Vortigern's alliance with the Saxons.\nThe most significant appearance of Ambrosius is the story about Ambrosius, Vortigern, and the two dragons beneath Dinas Emrys, \"Fortress of Ambrosius\" in Chapters 40\u201342. In this account, Ambrosius is still an adolescent but has supernatural powers. He intimidates Vortigern and the royal magicians. When it is revealed that Ambrosius is the son of a Roman consul, Vortigern is convinced to cede to the younger man the castle of Dinas Emrys and all the kingdoms in the western part of Britain. Vortigern then retreats to the north, in an area called Gwynessi. This story was later retold with more detail by Geoffrey of Monmouth in his fictionalised \"Historia Regum Britanniae\", conflating the personage of Ambrosius with the Welsh tradition of Myrddin the visionary, known for oracular utterances that foretold the coming victories of the native Celtic inhabitants of Britain over the Saxons and the Normans. Geoffrey also introduces him into the \"Historia\" under the name Aurelius Ambrosius as one of three sons of Constantine III, along with Constans II and Uther Pendragon.\nIn Chapter 48, Ambrosius Aurelianus is described as \"king among all the kings of the British nation\". The chapter records that Pascent, the son of Vortigern, was granted rule over the regions of Buellt and Gwrtheyrnion by Ambrosius. Finally, in Chapter 66, various events are dated from a Battle of Guoloph (often identified with Wallop, ESE of Amesbury near Salisbury), which is said to have been between Ambrosius and Vitolinus. The author dates this battle as taking place 12 years from the reign of Vortigern.\nIt is not clear how these various traditions about Ambrosius relate to each other, or whether they come from the same tradition; it is very possible that these references are to different men with the same name. Frank D. Reno points out that the works call all these men \"Ambrosius\"/\"Emrys\". The cognomen \"Aurelianus\" is never used. The \"Historia Brittonum\" dates the battle of Guoloph to \"the twelfth year of Vortigern\", by which the year 437 seems to be meant. This is perhaps a generation before the battle that Gildas may imply was commanded by Ambrosius Aurelianus.\nThe text never identifies who Ambrosius's father is, just gives his title as a Roman consul. When an adolescent Ambrosius speaks of his father, there is no suggestion that this father is deceased. The boy is not identified as an orphan. The exact age of Ambrosius is not given in his one encounter with Vortigern. Frank D. Reno suggests that he might be as young as 13 years old, barely a teenager.\nIt is impossible to know to what degree Ambrosius actually wielded political power, and over what area. Ambrosius and Vortigern are shown as being in conflict in the \"Historia Brittonum\", and some historians have suspected that this preserves a historical core of the existence of two parties in opposition to one another, one headed by Ambrosius and the other by Vortigern. J. N. L. Myres built upon this suspicion and speculated that belief in Pelagianism reflected an actively provincial outlook in Britain and that Vortigern represented the Pelagian party, while Ambrosius led the Catholic one. Subsequent historians accepted Myers' speculation as fact, creating a narrative of events in 5th century Britain with various degrees of elaborate detail. Yet a simpler alternative interpretation of the conflict between these two figures is that the \"Historia Brittonum\" is preserving traditions hostile to the purported descendants of Vortigern, who at this time were a ruling house in Powys. This interpretation is supported by the negative character of all of the stories retold about Vortigern in the \"Historia Brittonum\", which include his alleged practice of incest.\nThe identity of Ambrosius' last mentioned enemy, Vitalinus, is somewhat obscure. Various manuscripts of the \"Historia\" and translations also render his name as \"Guitolin,\" \"Guitolini,\" and \"Guitholini.\" He is mentioned in chapter 49 as one of four sons of Gloiu and co-founder of the city of Gloucester. No other background information is given. There are theories that Gloiu is also the father of Vortigern, but the genealogy is obscure and no supporting primary text can be found. There have been further attempts to identify Vitalinus with a pro-Vortigern or anti-Roman faction in Britain, opposed to the rise of the Romano-British Ambrosius. However, this is rendered problematic since Vitalinus seems to also have a Romano-British name. The traditional view of pro-Roman and pro-Briton factions active in this period might oversimplify a more complex situation.\nAccording to William of Malmesbury.\nAmbrosius appears briefly in the \"Gesta Regum Anglorum\" (\"Deeds of the Kings of the English\") by William of Malmesbury. Despite its name, the work attempted to reconstruct British history in general by drawing together the varying accounts of Gildas, Bede, Nennius, and various chroniclers. The work features Ambrosius as the apparent employer of Arthur. The relevant passage has been translated as follows:\nWilliam swiftly shifts attention from Ambrosius to Arthur, and proceeds to narrate Arthur's supposed victory in the Battle of Badon. The narrative is probably the first to connect Ambrosius and Arthur. William had to reconcile the accounts of Gildas and Bede who implied that Ambrosius was connected to the battle, and that of Nennius which clearly stated that it was Arthur who was connected to the battle. He solved the apparent discrepancy by connecting both of them to it. Ambrosius as the king of the Britons and Arthur as his most prominent general and true victor of the battle.\nAccording to Geoffrey of Monmouth.\nAmbrosius Aurelianus appears in later pseudo-chronicle tradition beginning with Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" with the slightly garbled name \"Aurelius Ambrosius\", now presented as son of a King Constantine. King Constantine's eldest son Constans is murdered at Vortigern's instigation, and the two remaining sons (Ambrosius and Uther, still very young) are quickly hustled into exile in Brittany. (This does not fit with Gildas' account, in which Ambrosius' family perished in the turmoil of the Saxon uprisings.) Later, the two brothers return from exile with a large army when Vortigern's power has faded. They destroy Vortigern and become friends with Merlin. They go on to defeat the Saxon leader Hengist in two battles at Maisbeli (probably Ballifield, near Sheffield) and Cunengeburg. Hengist is executed and Ambrosius becomes king of Britain. However, he is poisoned by his enemies, and Uther succeeds him. The text identifies the poisoner as Eopa.\nJudgements tend to vary wildly of the value of Geoffrey as both a historian and a literary storyteller. He has been praised for giving us detailed information about an otherwise obscure period and possibly preserving information from lost sources, and condemned for an excessive use of artistic licence and possibly inventing stories wholecloth. \n According to Frank D. Reno, whenever Geoffrey uses extant sources, the details in the text tend to be accurate. Assuming that he was also using sources lost to us, it may be difficult to decide which details are truthful. Reno suggests that \"individual judgements\" have to be made about various elements of his narrative.\nGeoffrey changed the word \"Aurelianus\" to \"Aurelius\", which is the name of a Roman gens. Geoffrey retains the story of Emrys and the dragons from Nennius, but identifies the figure with Merlin. Merlin is Geoffrey's version of a historical figure known as Myrddin Wyllt. Myrddin is only mentioned once in the \"Annales Cambriae\", at an entry dated to 573. The name of Merlin is given in Latin as Ambrosius Merlinus. \"Merlinus\" may have been intended as the agnomen of a Roman or Romano-British individual like Ambrosius.\nElements of Ambrosius Aurelianus, the traditional warrior king, are used by Geoffrey for other characters. Ambrosius' supposed supernatural powers are passed to Merlin. Geoffrey's Aurelius Ambrosius rises to the throne but dies early, passing the throne to a previously unknown brother called Uther Pendragon. The role of warrior king is shared by Uther and his son Arthur.\nGeoffrey also uses the character Gloiu, father of Vitalinus/Vitolinus, derived from Nennius. He names this character as a son of Claudius and appointed by his father as Duke of the Welsh. His predecessor as Duke is called Arvirargus. Assuming that Claudius and Arvirargus are supposed to be contemporaries, then this Claudius is the Roman emperor Claudius I (reigned 41\u201354). It seems unlikely that Claudius would have living grandsons in the 5th century, four centuries following his death. Reno suggests that Claudius II (reigned 268\u2013270) would be a more likely \"Claudius\" to have living descendants in the 5th century.\nGeoffrey for the first time gives a genealogy of Ambrosius. He is supposedly a paternal nephew of , King of Brittany, son of Constantine and an unnamed Briton noblewoman, adoptive grandson (on his mother's side) of Guthelinus/Vitalinus, Bishop of London, younger brother of Constans and older brother of Uther Pendragon. Ambrosius and Uther are supposedly raised by their adoptive maternal grandfather Guthelinus/Vitalinus. It is not explicitly covered in Geoffrey's narrative, but this genealogy makes Constantine and his children descendants of Conan Meriadoc, legendary founder of the line of Kings of Brittany. Conan is also featured in the \"Historia Regum Britanniae\", where he is appointed king by Roman emperor Magnus Maximus (reigned 383\u2013388).\nConstantine's reign is placed by Geoffrey as following the Groans of the Britons mentioned by Gildas. Constantine is reported killed by a Pict and his reign is followed by a brief succession crisis. Candidates for the throne included all three sons of Constantine, but there were problems for their eventual rise to the throne. Constans was a monk, and Ambrosius and Uther were underage and still in their cradle. The crisis is resolved when Vortigern places Constans on the throne, and then serves as his chief adviser and power behind the throne. When Constans is killed by the Picts serving as bodyguards of Vortigern, Vortigern feigns anguish and has the killers executed. Ambrosius is still underage and Vortigern rises to the throne.\nThe chronology offered by Geoffrey for the early life of Ambrosius contradicts Gildas and Nennius, and is also internally inconsistent. The Groans of the Britons involves an appeal by the Britons to Roman consul \"Agitius\". This person has been identified with Flavius Aetius (d. 454), magister militum (\"master of soldiers\") of the Western Roman Empire and consul of the year 446. The Groans are generally dated to the 440s and 450s, preceding the death of Aetius. If Geoffrey's Constantine rose to the throne immediately following the Groans, this would place his reign in this period. Geoffrey gives a 10-year reign for Constantine and his marriage lasts just as long. However the eldest son Constans is clearly older than 10 years by the time his father dies. He is already an adult candidate of the throne and has had time to follow a monastic career. Even assuming there is a time gap between the death of Constantine and the adulthood of Constans, his younger brothers \nhave not aged at all in the narrative.\nGeoffrey's narrative has an underage Ambrosius, if not a literal infant, in the 460s. Accounts deriving from Gildas and Nennius place Ambrosius in the prime of his life in the same decade. Most telling is that Geoffrey has Vortigern rising to the throne in the 460s. Nennius places the rise of Vortigern in the year 425, and Vortigern is entirely absent in chronologies of the 460s. Suggesting that he was deceased by that time.\nGeoffrey's narrative includes as a major character Hengist, as leader of the Saxons. He is featured as the father of Queen Rowena and father-in-law of Vortigern. Other Saxon characters in the narrative tend to receive less attention by the writer, but their names tend to correspond to Anglo-Saxons known from other sources. Henginst's supposed son Octa is apparently Octa of Kent, a 6th-century ruler variously connected to Hengist as a son or descendant. The other son, Ebissa, is more difficult to identify. He might correspond to kinsmen of Hengist variously identified as \"Ossa\", \"Oisc\", and \"Aesc\". A minor Saxon character called \"Cherdic\" is probably Cerdic of Wessex, though elsewhere Geoffrey calls the same king \"Cheldric\". He actually may appear under three different names in the narrative, since Geoffrey elsewhere calls the interpreter of Hengist \"Ceretic\", a variant of the same name.\nGeoffrey, in the last chapters featuring Vortigern, has the king served by magicians. This detail derives from Nennius, though Nennius was talking about Vortigern's \"wise men\". They may not have been magic users but advisers. Vortigern's encounter with Emrys/Merlin takes place in this part of the narrative. Merlin warns Vortigern that Ambrosius and Uther have already sailed for Britain and are soon to arrive, apparently to claim his throne. Ambrosius soon arrives at the head of the army and is crowned king. He besieges Vortigern at the castle of \"Genoreu\", which is identified with Nennius' \"Cair Guorthigirn\" (\"Fort Vortigern\") and the hillfort at Little Doward. Ambrosius burns the castle down and Vortigern dies with it.\nHaving killed Vortigern, Ambrosius next turns his attention to Hengist. Despite the fact that no earlier military actions of Ambrosius are recorded, the Saxons have already heard of his bravery and battle prowess. They immediately retreat beyond the Humber. Hengist soon amasses a massive army to face Ambrosius. His army counts 200,000 men and Ambrosius' only 10,000 men. He marches south and the first battle between the two armies takes place in Maisbeli, where Ambrosius emerges the victor. It is unclear what location Geoffrey had in mind. Maisbeli translates to \"the field of Beli\", and could be related to the Beli Mawr of Welsh legend and/or the Celtic god Belenus. Alternatively it could be a field where the Beltane festival was celebrated. Geoffrey could derive the name from a similar-sounding toponym. For example, Meicen of the Hen Ogledd (\"Old North\"), traditionally identified with Hatfield.\nFollowing his defeat, Hengist retreats towards Cunungeburg. Geoffrey probably had in mind Conisbrough, not far from Hatfield. Ambrosius leads his army against the new position of the Saxons. The second battle is more evenly fought, and Hengist has a chance to achieve victory. However, Ambrosius receives reinforcements from Brittany and the tide of the battle turns in favour of the Britons. Hengist himself is captured by his old enemy Eldol, Consul of Gloucester and decapitated. Soon after the battle, the surviving Saxon leaders Octa and Eosa submit themselves to Ambrosius' rule. He pardons them and grants them an area near Scotland. The area is not named, but Geoffrey could be basing this on Bernicia, a real Ango-Saxon kingdom covering areas in the modern borders of Scotland and England.\nGeoffrey closely connects the deaths of Vortigern and Hengist, which are elsewhere poorly recorded. Vortigern historically died in the 450s, and various dates for the death of Hengist have been proposed, between the 450s and the 480s. Octa of Kent, the supposed son and heir of Hengist, was still alive in the 6th century and seems to belong to a later historical era than his father. The ruling family of the Kingdom of Kent were called the Oiscingas, a term identifying them as descendants of Oisc of Kent, not of Hengist. In effect, none of them was likely a literal son of Hengist and their relation to Hengist may have been a later invention. Geoffrey did not invent the connection, but his sources here were likely legendary in nature.\nFollowing his victories and the end of the wars, Ambrosius organises the burial of killed nobles at Kaercaradduc. Geoffrey identifies this otherwise unknown location with Caer-Caradog (Salisbury). Ambrosius wants a permanent memorial for the slain and assigns the task to Merlin. The result is the so-called Giants' Ring. Its location in the vicinity of Salisbury has led to its identification with Stonehenge, though Geoffrey never uses that term. Stonehenge is closer to Amesbury than Salisbury. The ring formation of the monument could equally apply to Avebury, the largest stone circle in Europe.\nIn other texts.\nIn Welsh legend and texts, Ambrosius appears as \"Emrys Wledig\" (Emperor Ambrose). The term \"Wledig\" is a title used by senior royal and military commanders who have achieved notable success. The term is mostly used for famous figures such as Cunedda, though a few obscure figures have been given the title.\nIn Robert de Boron's \"Merlin\" he is called simply \"Pendragon\" and his younger brother is named \"Uter\", which he changes to \"Uterpendragon\" after the death of the elder sibling. This is probably a confusion that entered oral tradition from Wace's \"Roman de Brut\". Wace usually only refers to \"li roi\" (\"the king\") without naming him, and someone has taken an early mention of Uther's epithet \"Pendragon\" as the name of his brother.\nPossible identification with other figures.\nRiothamus.\nL\u00e9on Fleuriot has suggested Ambrosius is identical to Riothamus, a Brythonic leader who fought a major battle against the Goths in France around the year 470. Fleuriot argues that Ambrosius led the Britons in the battle, in which he was defeated and forced to retreat to Burgundy. Fleuriot proposed that he then returned to Britain to continue the war against the Saxons.\nPlace-name evidence.\nIt has been suggested that the place-name Amesbury in Wiltshire might preserve the name of Ambrosius, and that perhaps Amesbury was the seat of his power base in the later fifth century. Scholars such as Shimon Applebaum have found a number of place names through the Midland dialect regions of Britain that incorporate the \"ambre-\" element; examples include Ombersley in Worcestershire, Ambrosden in Oxfordshire, Amberley in Herefordshire, Amberley in Gloucestershire, and Amberley in West Sussex. These scholars have claimed that this element represents an Old English word \"amor\", the name of a woodland bird. However, Amesbury in Wiltshire is in a different dialect region and does not easily fit into the pattern of the Midland dialect place names."}
{"id": "1722", "revid": "21479757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1722", "title": "Ammon", "text": "Ammon (; ) was an ancient Semitic-speaking nation occupying the east of the Jordan River, between the torrent valleys of Arnon and Jabbok, in present-day Jordan. The chief city of the country was \"Rabbah\" or \"Rabbath Ammon\", site of the modern city of Amman, Jordan's capital. Milcom and Molech are named in the Hebrew Bible as the gods of Ammon. The people of this kingdom are called \"Children of Ammon\" or \"Ammonites\".\nHistory.\nThe Ammonites occupied the northern Central Trans-Jordanian Plateau from the latter part of the second millennium BC to at least the second century CE.\nAmmon maintained its independence from the Neo-Assyrian Empire through tribute to the Assyrian king, at a time when nearby kingdoms were being raided or conquered. The Kurkh Monolith lists the Ammonite king Baasha ben Ruhubi's army as fighting alongside Ahab of Israel and Syrian allies against Shalmaneser III at the Battle of Qarqar in 853 BC, possibly as vassals of Hadadezer, the Aramaean king of Damascus. In 734 BC the Ammonite king Sanipu was a vassal of Tiglath-Pileser III, and Sanipu's successor Pudu-ilu held the same position under Sennacherib and Esarhaddon. An Assyrian tribute-list exists from this period, showing that Ammon paid one-fifth as much tribute as Judah did.\nSomewhat later, the Ammonite king Amminadab I was among the tributaries who suffered in the course of the great Arabian campaign of Assurbanipal. Other kings attested to in contemporary sources are Barachel (attested to in several contemporary seals) and Hissalel, the latter of whom reigned about 620 BCE. Hissalel is mentioned in an inscription on a bottle found at Tel Siran, Jordan along with his son, King Amminadab II, who reigned around 600 BCE.\nArchaeology and history indicate that Ammon flourished during the Neo-Babylonian Empire period. This contradicts the view, dominant for decades, that Transjordan was either destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar II, or suffered a rapid decline following Judah's destruction by that king. Newer evidence suggests that Ammon enjoyed continuity from the Neo-Babylonian to the Persian period.\nLittle mention is made of the Ammonites through the Persian and early Hellenistic periods. Their name appears, however, during the time of the Maccabees. The Ammonites, with some of the neighboring tribes, did their utmost to resist and check the revival of the Jewish power under Judas Maccabaeus. The dynast Hyrcanus founded Qasr Al Abd, and was a descendant of the Seleucid Tobiad dynasty of Tobiah, who is mentioned by Nehemiah as an Ammonite (ii. 19) from the east-Jordanian district.\nThe last notice of the Ammonites is in Justin Martyr's \"Dialogue with Trypho\" (\u00a7 119), in the second century, where it is affirmed that they were still a numerous people.\nBiblical account.\nThe first mention of the Ammonites in the Bible is in . It is stated there that they descended from Ben-Ammi, a son of Lot through with his younger daughter who plotted with her sister to intoxicate Lot and in his inebriated state, have relations to become pregnant. Ben-Ammi literally means \"son of my people\". After the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, the daughters of Lot wanted to have a child and carried out a plot to intoxicate him and had relations, resulting in Ammon and his half brother, Moab, being conceived and born. This narrative has traditionally been considered literal fact; but is now generally interpreted as recording a gross popular irony by which the Israelites expressed their loathing of the morality of the Moabites and Ammonites. It has been doubted, however, whether the Israelites would have directed such irony to Lot himself.\nThe Ammonites settled to the east of the Jordan, invading the Rephaim lands east of Jordan, between the Jabbok and Arnon, dispossessing them and dwelling in their place. Their territory originally comprising all from the Jordan to the wilderness, and from the River Jabbok south to the River Arnon. It was accounted a land of giants; and that giants formerly dwelt in it, whom the Ammonites called Zamzummim.\nShortly before the Israelite Exodus, the Amorites west of Jordan, under King Sihon, invaded and occupied a large portion of the territory of Moab and Ammon. The Ammonites were driven from the rich lands near the Jordan and retreated to the mountains and valleys to the east. The invasion of the Amorites created a wedge and separated the two kingdoms of Ammon and Moab.\nThroughout the Bible, the Ammonites and the Israelites are portrayed as mutual antagonists. During the Exodus, the Israelites were prohibited by the Ammonites from passing through their lands. The Ammonites soon allied themselves with Eglon of Moab in attacking Israel.\nThe Ammonites maintained their claim to part of Transjordan, after it was occupied by the Israelites who obtained it from Sihon. During the days of Jephthah, the Ammonites occupied the lands east of the River Jordan and started to invade Israelite lands west of the river. Jephthah became the leader in resisting these incursions.\nThe constant harassment of the Israelite communities east of the Jordan by the Ammonites was the impetus behind the unification of the tribes under Saul. King Nahash of Ammon (990 BC) lay siege to Jabesh-Gilead. This eventually led to an alliance with Saul. Under his command, the Israelites relieved the siege and defeated the Ammonite king, eventually resulting in the formation of the Israelite kingdom.\nDuring the reign of King David, the Ammonites humiliated David's messengers, and hired the Aramean armies to attack Israel. This eventually ended in a war and a year-long siege of Rabbah, the capital of Ammon. The war ended with all the Ammonite cities being conquered and plundered, and the inhabitants being killed or put to forced labor at David's command.\nAccording to both and , Naamah was an Ammonite. She was the only wife of King Solomon to be mentioned by name in the Tanakh as having borne a child. She was the mother of Solomon's successor, Rehoboam.\nWhen the Arameans of Damascus city-state deprived the Kingdom of Israel of their possessions east of the Jordan, the Ammonites became allies of Ben-hadad, and a contingent of 1,000 of them served as allies of Syria in the great battle of the Arameans and Assyrians at Qarqar in 854 BC in the reign of Shalmaneser III.\nThe Ammonites, Moabites and Meunim formed a coalition against Jehoshaphat of Judah. The coalition later was thrown to confusion, with the armies slaughtering one another. They were subdued and paid tribute to Jotham.\nAfter submitting to Tiglath-Pileser III they were generally tributary to the Neo-Assyrian Empire, but had joined in the general uprising that took place under Sennacherib; but they submitted and they became tributary in the reign of Esar-haddon. Their hostility to Judah is shown in their joining the Chaldeans to destroy it (). Their cruelty is denounced by the prophet Amos\n(), and their destruction (with their return in the future) by Jeremiah (); Ezekiel (); and Zephaniah (). Their murder of Gedaliah (; ) was a dastardly act. They may have regained their old territory when Tiglath-pileser carried off the Israelites East of the Jordan into captivity (; ).\nTobiah the Ammonite united with Sanballat to oppose Nehemiah (), and their opposition to the Jews did not cease with the establishment of the latter in Judea.\nThe Ammonites presented a serious problem to the Pharisees because many marriages between Israelite men and Ammonite (and Moabite) women had taken place in the days of Nehemiah. The men had married women of the various nations without conversion, which made the children not Jewish. They also joined the Syrians in their wars with the Maccabees and were defeated by Judas.\nRabbinic literature.\nThe Ammonites, still numerous in the south of Palestine in the second Christian century according to Justin Martyr (\"Dialogus cum Tryphone,\" ch. cxix.), presented a serious problem to the Pharisaic scribes because many marriages with Ammonite and Moabite wives had taken place in the days of Nehemiah (Neh. xiii. 23). Still later, it is not improbable that when Judas Maccabeus had inflicted a crushing defeat upon the Ammonites, Jewish warriors took Ammonite women as wives, and their sons, sword in hand, claimed recognition as Jews notwithstanding the law (Deut. xxiii. 4) that \"an Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord.\" Such a condition or a similar incident is reflected in the story told in the Talmud (Yeb. 76b, 77a; Ruth R. to ii. 5) that in the days of King Saul, the legitimacy of David's claim to royalty was disputed on account of his descent from Ruth, the Moabite; whereupon Ithra, the Israelite (II Sam. xvii. 25; compare I Chron. ii. 17), girt with his sword, strode like an Ishmaelite into the schoolhouse of Jesse, declaring upon the authority of Samuel, the prophet, and his bet din (court of justice), that the law excluding the Ammonite and Moabite from the Jewish congregation referred only to the men\u2014who alone had sinned in not meeting Israel with bread and water\u2014and not to the women. The story reflects actual conditions in pre-Talmudic times, conditions that led to the fixed rule stated in the Mishnah (Yeb. viii. 3): \"Ammonite and Moabite men are excluded from the Jewish community for all time; their women are admissible.\"\nThe fact that Rehoboam, the son of King Solomon, was born of an Ammonite woman (I Kings, xiv. 21-31) also made it difficult to maintain the Messianic claims of the house of David; but it was adduced as an illustration of divine Providence which selected the \"two doves,\" Ruth, the Moabite, and Naamah, the Ammonitess, for honorable distinction (B. \u1e32. 38b). Ruth's kindness as noted in the Book of Ruth by Boaz is seen in the Jewish Tradition as in rare contradistinction to the peoples of Moab (where Ruth comes from) and Amon in general, who were noted by the Torah for their distinct \"lack\" of kindness. Deut. 23:5: \"Because they [the peoples of Amon and Moab] did not greet you with bread and water on the way when you left Egypt, and because he [the people of Moab] hired Balaam the son of Beor from Pethor in Aram Naharaim against you, to curse you.\" Rashi notes regarding Israel's travels on the way: \"when you were in [a state of] extreme exhaustion.\"\nBaalis, king of the Ammonites, envious of the Jewish colony's prosperity, or jealous of the might of the Babylonian king, instigated Ishmael, son of Nathaniel, \"of the royal seed,\" to make an end of the Judean rule in Palestine, Ishmael, being an unscrupulous character, permitted himself to become the tool of the Ammonite king in order to realize his own ambition to become the ruler of the deserted land. Information of this conspiracy reached Gedaliah through Johanan, son of Kareah, and Johanan undertook to slay Ishmael before he had had time to carry out his evil design; but the governor disbelieved the report, and forbade Johanan to lay hands upon the conspirator. Ishmael and his ten companions were royally entertained at Gedaliah's table. In the midst of the festivities Ishmael slew the unsuspecting Gedaliah, the Chaldean garrison stationed in Mizpah, and all the Jews that were with him, casting their bodies into the pit of Asa (Josephus, \"Ant.\" x. 9, \u00a7 4). The Rabbis condemn the overconfidence of Gedaliah, holding him responsible for the death of his followers (Niddah 61a; comp. Jer. xli. 9). Ishmael captured many of the inhabitants of Mizpah, as well as \"the daughters of the king\" entrusted to Gedaliah's care by the Babylonian general, and fled to Ammon. Johanan and his followers, however, on receiving the sad tidings, immediately pursued the murderers, overtaking them at the lake of Gibeon. The captives were rescued, but Ishmael and eight of his men escaped to the land of Ammon. The plan of Baalis thus succeeded, for the Jewish refugees, fearing lest the Babylonian king should hold them responsible for the murder, never returned to their native land. In spite of the exhortations of Jeremiah they fled to Egypt, joined by the remnant of the Jews that had survived, together with Jeremiah and Baruch (Jer. xliii. 6). The rule of Gedaliah lasted, according to tradition, only two months, although Gr\u00e4tz argues that it continued more than four years.\nLanguage.\nThe few Ammonite names that have been preserved also include Nahash and Hanun, both from the Bible. The Ammonites' language is believed to be in the Canaanite family, closely related to Hebrew and Moabite. Ammonite may have incorporated certain Aramaic influences, including the use of \"\u2018bd\", instead of commoner Biblical Hebrew \"\u2018\u015bh\", for \"work\". The only other notable difference with Biblical Hebrew is the sporadic retention of feminine singular \"-t\" (e.g., \"\u2019\u0161\u0127t\" \"cistern\", but \"\u2018lyh\" \"high (fem.)\".)\nEconomy.\nThe economy, for the most part, was based on agriculture and herding. Most people lived in small villages surrounded by farms and pastures. Like its sister-kingdom of Moab, Ammon was the source of numerous natural resources, including sandstone and limestone. It had a productive agricultural sector and occupied a vital place along the King's Highway, the ancient trade route connecting Egypt with Mesopotamia, Syria, and Asia Minor. As with the Edomites and Moabites, trade along this route gave them considerable revenue. Circa 950 BCE Ammon showed rising prosperity, due to agriculture and trade, and built a series of fortresses. Its capital was located in what is now the Citadel of Amman.\nArchaeology.\nInscription.\nIn 1972, during the excavations of a site called Tell Siran in north-west Amman, an inscription on a bronze bottle of about 10\u00a0cm tall was found. Scientific investigation has showed that the inscription dates back to 600 BC, and later concluded that it was a lyric poem written in Ammonite language. The poem talks about a drinking song, roughly translated to:\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "1723", "revid": "3287151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1723", "title": "Ammonius Hermiae", "text": "Ammonius Hermiae (; ; \u2013) was a Greek philosopher from Alexandria in the eastern Roman empire during Late Antiquity. A Neoplatonist, he was the son of the philosophers Hermias and Aedesia, the brother of Heliodorus of Alexandria and the grandson of Syrianus. Ammonius was a pupil of Proclus in Roman Athens, and taught at Alexandria for most of his life, having obtained a public chair in the 470s.\nAccording to Olympiodorus of Thebes's \"Commentaries\" on Plato's \"Gorgias\" and \"Phaedo\" texts, Ammonius gave lectures on the works of Plato, Aristotle, and Porphyry of Tyre. According to Olympiodorus, Ammonius wrote commentaries on Aristotelian works, three lost commentaries on Platonic texts. He is also the author of a text on the astrolabe published in the \"Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum\", and lectured on astronomy and geometry. He taught numerous Neoplatonists, including Damascius, Olympiodorus of Thebes, John Philoponus, Simplicius of Cilicia, and Asclepius of Tralles. Besides them, he taught the physician Gessius of Petra and the ecclesiastical historian Zacharias Rhetor, who became the bishop of Mytilene.\nAs part of the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire, the Alexandrian school was investigated by the Roman imperial authorities; the Patriarch of Alexandria, Peter III () Ammonius would limit his teaching in return for keeping his own position. This alienated a number of his colleagues and pupils, including Damascius, who nonetheless called him \"the greatest commentator who ever lived\" in his own \"Life of Isidore of Alexandria\".\nLife.\nAmmonius' father Hermias died when he was a child, and his mother Aedesia raised him and his brother Heliodorus in Alexandria. When they reached adulthood, Aedesia accompanied her sons to Athens where they studied under Proclus. Eventually, they returned to Alexandria where Ammonius, as head of the Neoplatonist school in the city, lectured on Plato and Aristotle for the rest of his life. According to Damascius, during the persecution of the pagans at Alexandria in the late 480s, Ammonius made concessions to the Christian authorities so that he could continue his lectures. Damascius, who scolds Ammonius for the agreement that he made, does not say what the concessions were, but it may have involved limitations on the doctrines he could teach or promote. He was still teaching in 515; Olympiodorus heard him lecture on Plato's \"Gorgias\" in that year. He was also an accomplished astronomer; he lectured on Ptolemy and is known to have written a treatise on the astrolabe.\nWritings.\nOf his reputedly numerous writings, only his commentary on Aristotle's \"De Interpretatione\" survives intact. A commentary on Porphyry's \"Isagoge\" may also be his, but it is somewhat corrupt and contains later interpolations.\nIn \"De Interpretatione\", Ammonius contends that divine foreknowledge makes void the contingent. Like Bo\u00ebthius in his second \"Commentary\" and in \"The Consolation of Philosophy,\" this argument maintains the effectiveness of prayer. Ammonius cites Iamblichus, who said \"knowledge is intermediate between the knower and the known, since it is the activity of the knower concerning the known.\"\nIn addition, there are some notes of Ammonius' lectures written by various students which also survive:\nThere is Greek-language work called \"Life of Aristotle\", which is usually ascribed to Ammonius, but \"is more probable that it is the work of Joannes Philoponus, the pupil of Ammonius, to whom it is ascribed in some MSS.\""}
{"id": "1724", "revid": "496432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1724", "title": "Ammonius Saccas", "text": "Ammonius Saccas (; ; fl. 3rd century AD) was a philosopher from Alexandria who was often referred to as one of the founders of neoplatonism. He is mainly known as the teacher of Plotinus, whom he taught for eleven years from 232 to 243. He was undoubtedly the biggest influence on Plotinus in his development of neoplatonism, although little is known about his own philosophical views. Later Christian writers stated that Ammonius was a Christian, but it is now generally assumed that there was a different Ammonius of Alexandria who wrote biblical texts.\nLife.\nThe origins and meaning of Ammonius' cognomen, \"Sakkas,\" are disputed. Many scholars have interpreted it as indicating he was a porter in his youth. Others have asserted that this is a misreading of \"Sakkas\" for \"sakkophoros\" (porter), which is grammatically incorrect. Some have connected the cognomen with the \"\u015a\u0101kyas,\" an ancient ruling clan of India., claiming that Ammonius Saccas was of Indian origin. This view has both been subsequently contested and supported by more recent scholarship. Some scholars supporting Ammonius' Indian origins have also contended that this ancestry is consistent with the passion of his foremost student Plotinus for India, and helps to explain the philosophical similarities between Vedanta and neoplatonism, which many scholars attribute to Indian influence.\nHe was from the Brucheion quarter of Alexandria. This was the royal quarter of the city inhabited mostly by Greeks.\nMost details of Ammonius' life come from the fragments left from Porphyry's writings. The most famous pupil of Ammonius Saccas was Plotinus who studied under Ammonius for eleven years. According to Porphyry, in 232, at the age of 28, Plotinus went to Alexandria to study philosophy:\nIn his twenty-eighth year he [Plotinus] felt the impulse to study philosophy and was recommended to the teachers in Alexandria who then had the highest reputation; but he came away from their lectures so depressed and full of sadness that he told his trouble to one of his friends. The friend, understanding the desire of his heart, sent him to Ammonius, whom he had not so far tried. He went and heard him, and said to his friend, \"This is the man I was looking for.\" From that day he stayed continually with Ammonius and acquired so complete a training in philosophy that he became eager to make acquaintance with the Persian philosophical discipline and that prevailing among the Indians.\nAccording to Porphyry, the parents of Ammonius were Christians, but upon learning Greek philosophy, Ammonius rejected his parents' religion for paganism. This conversion is contested by the Christian writers Jerome and Eusebius, who state that Ammonius remained a Christian throughout his lifetime:\n[Porphyry] plainly utters a falsehood (for what will not an opposer of Christians do?) when he says that ... Ammonius fell from a life of piety into heathen customs. ... Ammonius held the divine philosophy unshaken and unadulterated to the end of his life. His works yet extant show this, as he is celebrated among many for the writings which he has left.\nHowever, we are told by Longinus that Ammonius wrote nothing, and if Ammonius was the principal influence on Plotinus, then it is unlikely that Ammonius would have been a Christian. One way to explain much of the confusion concerning Ammonius is to assume that there were two people called Ammonius: Ammonius Saccas who taught Plotinus, and an Ammonius the Christian who wrote biblical texts. Another explanation might be that there was only one Ammonius but that Origen, who found the Neo-Platonist views of his teacher essential to his own beliefs about the essential nature of Christianity, chose to suppress Ammonius' choice of Paganism over Christianity. The insistence of Eusebius, Origen's pupil, and Jerome, all of whom were recognized Fathers of the Christian Church, that Ammonius Saccas had not rejected his Christian roots would be easier for Christians to accept than the assertion of Prophyry, who was a Pagan, that Ammonius had chosen Paganism over Christianity.\nTo add to the confusion, it seems that Ammonius had two pupils called Origen: Origen the Christian, and Origen the Pagan. It is quite possible that Ammonius Saccas taught both Origens. And since there were two Origens who were accepted as contemporaries it was easy for later Christians to accept that there were two individuals named Ammonius, one a Christian and one a Pagan. Among Ammonius' other pupils there were Herennius and Cassius Longinus.\nPhilosophy.\nHierocles, writing in the 5th century, states that Ammonius' fundamental doctrine was that Plato and Aristotle were in full agreement with each other:\nHe was the first who had a godly zeal for the truth in philosophy and despised the views of the majority, which were a disgrace to philosophy. He apprehended well the views of each of the two philosophers [Plato and Aristotle] and brought them under one and the same \"nous\" and transmitted philosophy without conflicts to all of his disciples, and especially to the best of those acquainted with him, Plotinus, Origen, and their successors.\nAccording to Nemesius, a bishop and neoplatonist c. 400, Ammonius held that the soul was immaterial.\nLittle is known about Ammonius's role in the development of neoplatonism. Porphyry seems to suggest that Ammonius was instrumental in helping Plotinus think about philosophy in new ways:\nBut he [Plotinus] did not just speak straight out of these books but took a distinctive personal line in his consideration, and brought the mind of Ammonius' to bear on the investigation in hand.\nTwo of Ammonius's students \u2013 Origen the Pagan, and Longinus \u2013 seem to have held philosophical positions which were closer to middle Platonism than neoplatonism, which perhaps suggests that Ammonius's doctrines were also closer to those of middle Platonism than the neoplatonism developed by Plotinus (see the \"Enneads\"), but Plotinus does not seem to have thought that he was departing in any significant way from that of his master."}
{"id": "1726", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1726", "title": "Book of Amos", "text": "The Book of Amos is the third of the Twelve Minor Prophets in the Tanakh/Old Testament and the second in the Greek Septuagint tradition. Amos, an older contemporary of Hosea and Isaiah, was active c. 750 BC during the reign of Jeroboam II (788\u2013747 BC), making Amos the first prophetic book of the Bible to be written. Amos lived in the kingdom of Judah but preached in the northern kingdom of Israel. His major themes of social justice, God's omnipotence, and divine judgment became staples of prophecy.\nSummary.\nThe book opens with a historical note about the prophet, then a short oracle announcing Yahweh's judgment (repeated in the Book of Joel). The prophet denounces the crimes committed by the gentile (non-Jewish) nations, tells Israel that even they have sinned and are guilty of the same crimes, and report five symbolic visions prophesying the destruction of Israel. Included in this, with no apparent order, are an oracle on the nature of prophecy, snippets of hymns, oracles of woe, a third-person prose narrative concerning the prophet, and an oracle promising restoration of the House of David, which had not yet fallen in the lifetime of Amos.\nComposition.\nAmos prophesied during the reign of Jeroboam II, King of Israel, and of Uzziah of Judah, which places him in the first half of the 8th century BC. According to the book's superscription (Amos 1:1) he was from Tekoa, a town in Judah south of Jerusalem, but his prophetic mission was in the northern kingdom. He is called a \"shepherd\" and a \"dresser of sycamore trees\", but the book's literary qualities suggest a man of education rather than a poor farmer.\nScholars have long recognized that Amos utilized an ancient hymn within his prophecy, verses of which are found at 4.13; 5.8\u20139; 8.8; 9.5\u20136. This hymn is best understood as praising YHWH for his judgment, demonstrated in his destructive power, rather than praise for creation. Scholarship has also identified 'Sumerian City Lament' (SCL) motifs within Amos and particularly the hymn, offering the possibility that Amos used SCL as a literary template for his prophecy of Jerusalem's destruction. The Amos hymn has also been discussed in terms of a 'covenant curse' which was used to warn Israel of the consequences of breaking the covenant, and in particular a 'Flood covenant-curse' motif, first identified by D.R. Hillers. Recent scholarship has shown Amos's hymn is an ancient narrative text, has identified a new verse at 7.4; and has compared the hymn to the Genesis Flood account and Job 9:5\u201310.\nThemes.\nThe central idea of the book of Amos is that God puts his people on the same level as the surrounding nations \u2013 God expects the same purity of them all. As it is with all nations that rise up against the kingdom of God, even Israel and Judah will not be exempt from the judgment of God because of their idolatry and unjust ways. The nation that represents YHWH must be made pure of anything or anyone that profanes the name of God. God's name must be exalted.\nAmos is the first prophet to use the term \"the Day of the Lord. This phrase becomes important within future prophetic and apocalyptic literature. For the people of Israel \"The Day of the Lord\" is the day when God will fight against his and their enemies, and it will be a day of victory for Israel. However, Amos and other prophets include Israel as an enemy of God, as Israel is guilty of injustice toward the innocent, poor, and young women. To Amos \"The Day of the Lord\" will be a day of doom.\nOther major ideas proposed in the book of Amos include: justice and concern for the disadvantaged; that the Hebrew God is God of all nations; the Hebrew God is judge of all nations; the Hebrew God is God of moral righteousness; the Hebrew God made all people; the idea that Israel's covenant with God did not exempt them from accountability for sin; God elected Israel and then liberated Israel so that he would be known throughout the world; election by God means that those elected are responsible to live according to the purposes clearly outlined to them in the covenant; if God destroys the unjust, a remnant will remain; and God is free to judge whether to redeem Israel.\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of \"Book of Amos\":"}
{"id": "1727", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1727", "title": "Amphipolis", "text": "Amphipolis (; ) is a municipality in the Serres regional unit of Greece. The seat of the municipality is Rodolivos. It was an ancient Greek polis (city), and later a Roman city, whose large remains can still be seen.\nAmphipolis, an Athenian colony, was the seat of the battle between the Spartans and Athenians in 422\u00a0BC, and also the place where Alexander the Great prepared for campaigns leading to his invasion of Asia. Alexander's three finest admirals, Nearchus, Androsthenes and Laomedon, resided in Amphipolis, which is also the place where, after Alexander's death, his wife Roxana and their small son Alexander IV were exiled and later murdered.\nExcavations in and around the city have revealed important buildings, ancient walls and tombs. The finds are displayed at the archaeological museum of Amphipolis. At the nearby vast Kasta burial mound, an ancient Macedonian tomb has recently been revealed. The Lion of Amphipolis monument nearby is a popular destination for visitors.\nIt was located within the region of Edonis.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThroughout the 5th century BC, Athens sought to consolidate its control over Thrace, which was strategically important because of its primary materials (the gold and silver of the Pangaion hills and the dense forests essential for naval construction), and the sea routes vital for Athens' supply of grain from Scythia. After a first unsuccessful attempt at colonisation in 497\u00a0BC by the Milesian Tyrant Histiaeus, the Athenians founded a first colony at Ennea-Hodoi (\u2018Nine Ways\u2019) in 465\u00a0BC, but these first ten thousand colonists were massacred by the Thracians. A second attempt took place in 437\u00a0BC on the same site under the guidance of Hagnon, son of Nicias, which was successful. The city and its first walls date from this time.\nThe new settlement took the name of Amphipolis (literally, \"around the city\"), a name which is the subject of much debate about its etymology. Thucydides claims the name comes from the fact that the Strymon River flows \"around the city\" on two sides; however a note in the \"Suda\" (also given in the lexicon of Photius) offers a different explanation apparently given by Marsyas, son of Periander: that a large proportion of the population lived \"around the city\". However, a more probable explanation is the one given by Julius Pollux: that the name indicates the vicinity of an isthmus.\nAmphipolis became the main power base of the Athenians in Thrace and, consequently, a target of choice for their Spartan adversaries. The Athenian population remained very much in the minority in the city. For this reason Amphipolis remained an independent city and an ally of the Athenians, rather than a colony or member of the Athens-led Delian League. However, in 424\u00a0BC the Spartan general Brasidas easily took control of the city.\nA rescue expedition led by the Athenian general, and later historian, Thucydides had to settle for securing Eion and could not retake Amphipolis, a failure for which Thucydides was sentenced to exile. A new Athenian force under the command of Cleon failed once more in 422\u00a0BC during the Battle of Amphipolis at which both Cleon and Brasidas lost their lives. Brasidas survived long enough to hear of the defeat of the Athenians and was buried at Amphipolis with impressive pomp. From then on he was regarded as the founder of the city\nand honoured with yearly games and sacrifices.\nMacedonian rule.\nThe city itself kept its independence until the reign of king Philip II () despite several Athenian attacks, notably because of the government of Callistratus of Aphidnae. In 357\u00a0BC, Philip succeeded where the Athenians had failed and conquered the city, thereby removing the obstacle which Amphipolis presented to Macedonian control over Thrace. According to the historian Theopompus, this conquest came to be the object of a secret accord between Athens and Philip II, who would return the city in exchange for the fortified town of Pydna, but the Macedonian king betrayed the accord, refusing to cede Amphipolis and laying siege to Pydna as well.\nThe city was not immediately incorporated into the Macedonian kingdom, and for some time preserved its institutions and a certain degree of autonomy. The border of Macedonia was not moved further east; however, Philip sent a number of Macedonian governors to Amphipolis, and in many respects the city was effectively \"Macedonianized\". Nomenclature, the calendar and the currency (the gold stater, created by Philip to capitalise on the gold reserves of the Pangaion hills, replaced the Amphipolitan drachma) were all replaced by Macedonian equivalents. In the reign of Alexander the Great, Amphipolis was an important naval base, and the birthplace of three of the most famous Macedonian admirals: Nearchus, Androsthenes and Laomedon, whose burial place is most likely marked by the famous lion of Amphipolis.\nThe importance of the city in this period is shown by Alexander the Great's decision that it was one of the six cities at which large luxurious temples costing 1,500 talents were built. Alexander prepared for campaigns here against Thrace in 335\u00a0BC and his army and fleet assembled near the port before the invasion of Asia. The port was also used as naval base during his campaigns in Asia. After Alexander's death, his wife Roxana and their young son Alexander\u00a0IV were exiled by Cassander and later murdered here.\nThroughout Macedonian sovereignty Amphipolis was a strong fortress of great strategic and economic importance, as shown by inscriptions. Amphipolis became one of the main stops on the Macedonian royal road (as testified by a border stone found between Philippi and Amphipolis giving the distance to the latter), and later on the \"Via Egnatia\", the principal Roman road which crossed the southern Balkans. Apart from the ramparts of the lower town, the gymnasium and a set of well-preserved frescoes from a wealthy villa are the only artifacts from this period that remain visible. Though little is known of the layout of the town, modern knowledge of its institutions is in considerably better shape thanks to a rich epigraphic documentation, including a military ordinance of Philip V and an ephebarchic law from the gymnasium.\nConquest by the Romans.\nAfter the final victory of Rome over Macedonia in the Battle of Pydna in 168\u00a0BC, Amphipolis became the capital of one of the four mini-republics, or \"merides\", which were created by the Romans out of the kingdom of the Antigonids which succeeded Alexander's empire in Macedon. These \"merides\" were gradually incorporated into the Roman client state, and later province, of Thracia. According to the \"Acts of the Apostles\", the apostles Paul and Silas passed through Amphipolis in the early AD\u00a050s, on their journey between Philippi and Thessalonica; where hence they proselytized to the Greeks, including Epicurean and Stoic philosophers.\nRevival in Late Antiquity.\nDuring the period of Late Antiquity, Amphipolis benefited from the increasing economic prosperity of Macedonia, as is evidenced by the large number of Christian churches that were built. Significantly however, these churches were built within a restricted area of the town, sheltered by the walls of the acropolis. This has been taken as evidence that the large fortified perimeter of the ancient town was no longer defendable, and that the population of the city had considerably diminished.\nNevertheless, the number, size and quality of the churches constructed between the 5th and 6th centuries are impressive. Four basilicas adorned with rich mosaic floors and elaborate architectural sculptures (such as the ram-headed column capitals \u2013 see picture) have been excavated, as well as a church with a hexagonal central plan which evokes that of the basilica of St Vitalis in Ravenna. It is difficult to find reasons for such municipal extravagance in such a small town. One possible explanation provided by the historian Andr\u00e9 Boulanger is that an increasing \u2018willingness\u2019 on the part of the wealthy upper classes in the late Roman period to spend money on local gentrification projects (which he terms \"euergetism\", from the Greek verb ; meaning 'I do good') was exploited by the local church to its advantage, which led to a mass gentrification of the urban centre and of the agricultural riches of the city's territory. Amphipolis was also a diocese under the metropolitan see of Thessalonica \u2013 the Bishop of Amphipolis is first mentioned in 533. The bishopric is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.\nFinal decline of the city.\nThe Slavic invasions of the late 6th century gradually encroached on the back-country Amphipolitan lifestyle and led to the decline of the town, during which period its inhabitants retreated to the area around the acropolis. The ramparts were maintained to a certain extent, thanks to materials plundered from the monuments of the lower city, and the large unused cisterns of the upper city were occupied by small houses and the workshops of artisans. Around the middle of the 7th century, a further reduction of the inhabited area of the city was followed by an increase in the fortification of the town, with the construction of a new rampart with pentagonal towers cutting through the middle of the remaining monuments. The acropolis, the Roman baths, and especially the episcopal basilica were crossed by this wall.\nThe city was probably abandoned in the eighth century, as the last bishop was attested at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787. Its inhabitants probably moved to the neighbouring site of ancient Eion, port of Amphipolis, which had been rebuilt and refortified in the Byzantine period under the name \u201cChrysopolis\u201d. This small port continued to enjoy some prosperity, before being abandoned during the Ottoman period. The last recorded sign of activity in the region of Amphipolis was the construction of a fortified tower to the north in 1367 by the \"megas primikerios\" John and the \"stratopedarches\" Alexios to protect the land that they had given to the monastery of Pantokrator on Mount Athos.\nArchaeology.\nThe site was discovered and described by many travellers and archaeologists during the 19th century, including E. Cousin\u00e9ry (1831) (engraver), Leon Heuzey (1861), and P. Perdrizet (1894\u20131899). However, excavations did not truly begin until after the Second World War. The Greek Archaeological Society under D. Lazaridis excavated in 1972 and 1985, uncovering a necropolis, the city wall (see photograph), the basilicas, and the acropolis. Further excavations have since uncovered the river bridge, the gymnasium, Greek and Roman villas and numerous tombs etc.\nParts of the lion monument and tombs were discovered during World War I by Bulgarian and British troops whilst digging trenches in the area. In 1934, M. Feyel, of the \u00c9cole fran\u00e7aise d'Ath\u00e8nes (EfA), led an epigraphical mission to the site and uncovered further remains of the lion monument (a reconstruction was given in the \"Bulletin de Correspondance Hell\u00e9nique\", a publication of the EfA which is available on line).\nThe silver ossuary containing the cremated remains of Brasidas and a gold crown (see image) was found in a tomb in pride of place under the Agora.\nThe Tomb of Amphipolis.\nIn 2012 Greek archaeologists unearthed a large tomb within the Kasta Hill, the biggest burial mound in Greece, northeast of Amphipolis. The large size of the tumulus indicates the prominence of the burials made there. The perimeter wall of the tumulus is long, and is made of limestone covered with marble.\nThe tomb comprises three chambers separated by walls. There are two sphinxes just outside the entrance to the tomb. Two of the columns supporting the roof in the first section are in the form of Caryatids, in the 4th century BC style. The excavation revealed a pebble mosaic showing allegorically the abduction of Persephone by Hades, but the persons are Philip and Olympias of Macedon, directly behind the Caryatids and in front of the Macedonian marble door leading to the \"third\" chamber. Hades' chariot is drawn by two white horses and led to the underworld by Hermes. The mosaic verifies the Macedonian character of the tomb. As the head of one of the sphinxes was found inside the tomb behind the broken door, it is clear that there were intruders, probably in antiquity.\nThe identity of the burial remains unknown and the excavation is continuing. Dr. Katerina Peristeri, the archaeologist heading the excavation of the tomb, dates the tomb to the late 4th century BC, the period after the death of Alexander the Great (323\u00a0BC).\nIn November 2017, the Greek Minister of Culture, Lydia Koniordou, announced that the grave should be accessible to the public in about three years. The financing for the necessary construction project should amount to around \u20ac2.8\u00a0million. \u20ac1.5\u00a0million is to be spent by the Region of Central Macedonia, \u20ac1.3\u00a0million is to be taken from the INTERREG Fund of the European Union. In the course of this measure, building materials of the grave site, which were later used by the Romans elsewhere, will be rebuilt in their original location. The work should begin in 2018 or 2019 and last for around one year.\nMunicipality.\nThe municipality Amfipoli was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following four former municipalities, that became municipal units:\nThe municipality has an area of 411.773\u00a0km2, the municipal unit 152.088\u00a0km2."}
{"id": "1728", "revid": "40545834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1728", "title": "Amram", "text": "In the Book of Exodus, Amram () is the husband of Jochebed and father of Aaron, Moses and Miriam. \nAlternative spellings of the name include .\nIn the Bible.\nIn addition to being married to Jochebed, Amram is also described in the Bible as having been related to Jochebed prior to the marriage, although the exact relationship is uncertain; some Greek and Latin manuscripts of the Septuagint state that Jochebed was Amram's father's cousin, and others state that Amram was Jochebed's cousin, but the Masoretic Text states that she was his father's sister. He is praised for his faith in the Epistle to the Hebrews.\nTextual scholars attribute the biblical genealogy to the Book of Generations, a hypothetically reconstructed document theorized to originate from a similar religiopolitical group and date to the priestly source. According to critical scholars, the Torah's genealogy for Levi's descendants, is actually an aetiological myth reflecting the fact that there were four different groups among the Levites \u2013 the Gershonites, Kohathites, Merarites, and Aaronids; Aaron \u2013 the eponymous ancestor of the Aaronids \u2013 could not be portrayed as a brother to Gershon, Kohath, and Merari, as the narrative about the birth of Moses (brother of Aaron), which textual scholars attribute to the earlier Elohist source, mentions only that \"both\" his parents were Levites (without identifying their names). Critical scholars suspect that the Elohist account offers both matrilineal and patrilineal descent from Levites in order to magnify the religious credentials of Moses.\nArabic.\n\"Amram\" in Arabic is spelled (\"\u2018Emr\u0101n\" ), was the husband of Jochebed/Yukabid and father of Moses/Musa and Aaron/Harun. As mentioned by his given name, M\u00fbs\u00e2 bin Emran, which means Moses is a son of Emran. \nFamily tree.\nAccording to the Septuagint, Amram's family tree would be as follows:\nAccording to the Masoretic Text, Amram's family tree would be:\nAccording to The Book of Jasher, Amram's family tree would be:\n Amram married his aunt, Jochebed, the sister of his father Kehath.\nIn rabbinical and apocryphal literature.\nIn the Apocryphal \"Testament of Levi\", it is stated that Amram was born, as a grandson of Levi, when Levi was 64 years old. The Exodus Rabbah argues that when the Pharaoh instructed midwives to throw male children into the Nile, Amram divorced Jochebed, who was three months pregnant with Moses at the time, arguing that there was no justification for the Israelite men to father children if they were just to be killed; however, the text goes on to state that Miriam, his daughter, chided him for his lack of care for his wife's feelings, persuading him to recant and marry Jochebed again. According to the Talmud, Amram promulgated the laws of marriage and divorce amongst the Jews in Egypt; the Talmud also argues that Amram had extreme longevity, which he used to ensure that doctrines were preserved through several generations.\nDespite the legend of his divorce and remarriage, Amram was also held to have been entirely sinless throughout his life, and was rewarded for this by his corpse remaining without any signs of decay. The other three ancient Israelites who died without sin, being Benjamin, Jesse and Chileab.\nAccording to the Book of Jubilees, Amram was among the Israelites who took the bones of Jacob's sons (excluding those of Joseph (Genesis)) to Canaan for burial in the cave of Machpelah. Most of the Israelites then returned to Egypt but some remained in Canaan, including Amram who only returned somewhere up to forty years later.\nOne of the Dead Sea Scrolls (4Q535, Manuscript B) is written from Amram's point of view, and hence has been dubbed the \"Visions of Amram\". The document is dated to the 2nd century BC and, in the form of a vision, briefly discusses dualism and the Watchers:"}
{"id": "1729", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1729", "title": "Amyntas I of Macedon", "text": "Amyntas I (Greek: \u1f08\u03bc\u03cd\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03c2 A\u02b9; 498 BC) was king of the ancient kingdom of Macedon (540 \u2013 512 / 511 BC) and then a vassal of Darius I from 512/511 to his death 498 BC, at the time of Achaemenid Macedonia. He was a son of Alcetas I of Macedon. He married Eurydice and they had a son Alexander.\nAmyntas was a vassal of Darius I, king of the Persian Achaemenid Empire, since 512/511 BC. Amyntas gave the present of \"Earth and Water\" to Megabazus, which symbolized submission to the Achaemenid Emperor. One of the daughters of Amyntas, named Gygaea, was married to the Persian General, called Bubares, possibly as a way of reinforcing the alliance.\nThe history of Macedonia may be said to begin with Amyntas' reign. He was the first of its rulers to have diplomatic relations with other states. \nIn particular, he entered into an alliance with Hippias of Athens, and when Hippias was driven out of Athens he offered him the territory of Anthemus on the Thermaic Gulf with the object of taking advantage of the feuds between the Greeks. \nHippias refused the offer and also rejected the offer of Iolcos, as Amyntas probably did not control Anthemous at that time, but was merely suggesting a plan of joint occupation to Hippias.\nSources.\n "}
{"id": "1730", "revid": "40125090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1730", "title": "Amyntas III of Macedon", "text": "Amyntas III (died 370 BC) was king of the ancient kingdom of Macedon in 393 BC and again from 392 to 370 BC. He was the son of Arrhidaeus and grandson of Amyntas, one of the sons of Alexander I. His most famous son is Philip II, father of Alexander the Great. He is historically considered the founder of the unified Macedonian kingdom.\nReign.\nHe came to the throne after the ten years of confusion which followed the death of Archelaus I. But he had many enemies at home; in 393 he was driven out by the Illyrians, but in the following year, with the aid of the Thessalians, he recovered his kingdom. Medius, head of the house of the Aleuadae of Larissa, is believed to have provided aid to Amyntas in recovering his throne. The mutual relationship between the Argeadae and the Aleuadae dates to the time of Archelaus.\nTo shore up his country against the threat of the Illyrians, Amyntas established an alliance with the Chalkidian League led by Olynthus. In exchange for this support, Amyntas granted them rights to Macedonian timber, which was sent back to Athens to help fortify their fleet. With money flowing into Olynthus from these exports, their power grew. In response, Amyntas sought additional allies. He established connections with Kotys, chief of the Odrysians. Kotys had already married his daughter to the Athenian general Iphicrates. Prevented from marrying into Kotys' family, Amyntas soon adopted Iphicrates as his son.\nAfter the King's Peace of 387 BC, Sparta was anxious to re-establish its presence in northern Greece. In 385 BC, Bardylis and his Illyrians attacked Epirus instigated and aided by Dionysius I of Syracuse, in an attempt to restore the Molossian king Alcetas I of Epirus to the throne. When Amyntas sought Spartan aid against the growing threat of Olynthus, the Spartans eagerly responded. That Olynthus was backed by Athens and Thebes, rivals to Sparta for the control of Greece, provided them with an additional incentive to break up this growing power in the north. Amyntas thus concluded a treaty with the Spartans, who assisted him in a war against Olynthus. First it Spartan-Macedonian forces suffered two defeats but in 379 they managed to destroy Olynthus. He also entered into a league with Jason of Pherae, and assiduously cultivated the friendship of Athens. In 371 BC at a Panhellenic congress of the Lacedaemonian allies, he voted in support of the Athenians' claim and joined other Greeks in voting to help Athens to recover possession of Amphipolis.\nWith Olynthus defeated, Amyntas was now able to conclude a treaty with Athens and keep the timber revenues for himself. Amyntas shipped the timber to the house of the Athenian Timotheus, in Piraeus.\nFamily.\nAmyntas married Eurydice, daughter of Sirras of Lynkestis, circa 390. By her, Amyntas had three sons, all of whom became kings of Macedonia one after the other, and a daughter:\nJustin also mentions that Amyntas had three sons by another wife, Gygaea (probably an Argead): Archelaus, Arrhidaeus and Menelaus. The fact that they did not try to take the throne before the 350s suggests that they were younger than Amyntas' children by Eurydice. They were ultimately eliminated by their half-brother Philip II because they had a claim to the throne.\nAmyntas died at an advanced age, leaving his throne to his eldest son, Alexander II."}
{"id": "1732", "revid": "18206476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1732", "title": "Anacharsis", "text": "Anacharsis (; ) was a Scythian philosopher; he travelled from his homeland on the northern shores of the Black Sea, to Athens, in the early 6th century BC, and made a great impression as a forthright and outspoken barbarian, that is, a non-Greek speaker. He very well could have been a forerunner of the Cynics, in part because of his strong, but playful, \"parrhesia\". None of his works have survived.\nLife.\nAnacharsis the son of Gnurus, a Scythian chief, was half Greek and from a mixed Hellenic culture, apparently in the region of the Cimmerian Bosporus. He left his native country to travel in pursuit of knowledge, and came to Athens about 589 BC, at a time when Solon was occupied with his legislative measures.\nAccording to the story recounted by Hermippus, Anacharsis arrived at the house of Solon and said, \"I have traveled here from afar to make you my friend.\" Solon replied, \"It's better to make friends at home.\" Thereupon the Scythian replied, \"Then it is necessary for you, being at home, to make friends with me.\" Solon laughed and accepted him as his friend.\nAnacharsis cultivated the outsider's knack of seeing the illogic in familiar things. For example, Plutarch remarks that he \"expressed his wonder at the fact that in Greece wise men spoke and fools decided.\" His conversation was droll and frank, and Solon and the Athenians took to him as a sage and philosopher. His rough and free discourse became proverbial among Athenians as 'Scythian discourse'.\nAnacharsis was the first foreigner (metic) who received the privileges of Athenian citizenship. He was reckoned by some ancient authors as one of the Seven Sages of Greece, and it is said that he was initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries of the Great Goddess, a privilege denied to those who did not speak fluent Greek.\nAccording to Herodotus, when Anacharsis returned to the Scythians he was killed by his own brother for his Greek ways and especially for the impious attempt to sacrifice to the Mother Goddess Cybele, whose cult was unwelcome among the Scythians.\nIdeas.\nNone of the works ascribed to him in ancient times, if indeed they were written by him, have survived. He was said to have written a book comparing the laws of the Scythians with the laws of the Greeks, as well as work on the art of war. All that remains of his thought is what later tradition ascribes to him. He became famous for the simplicity of his way of living and his acute observations on the institutions and customs of the Greeks. He exhorted moderation in everything, saying that the vine bears three clusters of grapes: the first, pleasure; the second, drunkenness; the third, disgust. So he became a kind of emblem to the Athenians, who inscribed on his statues: 'Restrain your tongues, your appetites, your passions.'\nThere are ten extant letters ascribed to him, one of which is also quoted by Cicero:\nGreetings from Anacharsis to Hanno: My clothing is a Scythian cloak, my shoes are the hard soles of my feet, my bed is the earth, my food is only seasoned by hunger - and I eat nothing but milk and cheese and meat. Come and visit me, and you will find me at peace. You want to give me something. But give it to your fellow-citizens instead, or let the immortal gods have it.\nAll of the letters are spurious. The first nine probably date from the 3rd century BC, they are usually included among the \"Cynic epistles\", and reflect how the Cynic philosophers viewed him as prefiguring many of their ideas; the tenth letter is quoted by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, it is addressed to Croesus, the proverbially rich king of Lydia. It too is fictitious: \nAnacharsis to Croesus: O king of the Lydians, I am come to the country of the Greeks, in order to become acquainted with their customs and institutions; but I have no need of gold, and shall be quite contented if I return to Scythia a better man than I left it. However I will come to Sardis, as I think it very desirable to become a friend of yours.\nStrabo makes him the (probably legendary) inventor of the anchor with two flukes, and others made him the inventor of the potter's wheel.\nHaving been informed that Solon was employed to draw up a code of laws for the Athenians, Anacharsis described his occupation, saying:\n\"Solon showed Anacharsis some laws that he was drafting for the Athenians. Anacharsis laughed at Solon for imagining that the dishonesty and greed of the Athenians could be restrained by written laws. Such laws, said Anacharsis, are like spiderwebs: they catch the weak and poor, but the rich can rip right through them.\"\nRevival in the 18th century.\nIn 1788 Jean Jacques Barthelemy (1716\u201395), a highly esteemed classical scholar and Jesuit, published \"The Travels of Anacharsis the Younger in Greece\" about a young Scythian descended from Anacharsis. The 4-volume work was an imaginary travel journal, one of the first historical novels, which Klemperer called \"the encyclopedia of the new cult of the antique\" in the late 18th century. It affected the growth of philhellenism in France at the time. The book went through many editions, was reprinted in the United States and translated into German and other languages. It later inspired European sympathy for the Greek struggle for independence and spawned sequels and imitations through the 19th century.\nSir William Gell signed some of the letters he wrote to the diarist and author of \u2018Diary Of The Times of George IV\u2019 with the pseudonym \u2018Anacharsis\u2019 see page 263 volume 3."}
{"id": "1733", "revid": "53236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1733", "title": "Anacreon (poet)", "text": ""}
{"id": "1734", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1734", "title": "Anah", "text": "Anah or Ana (, \"\u02be\u0100na\"), formerly also known as Anna, is an Iraqi town on the Euphrates river, approximately midway between the Gulf of Alexandretta and the Persian Gulf. Anah lies from west to east on the right bank along a bend of the river just before it turns south towards Hit.\nName.\nThe town was called (d)Ha-na-at in cuneiform texts from the Old Babylonian period, A-na-at by the scribes of Tukulti-Ninurta \u00a0BC, and An-at by the scribes of Assur-nasir-pal II in 879\u00a0BC. The name has been connected with the widely worshipped war goddess Anat. It was known as \"Anath\u014d\" () to Isidore Charax and \"\" to Ammianus Marcellinus; early Arabic writers described it variously as \"\u02be\u0100na\" or (as if plural) \"\u02be\u0100n\u0101t\".\nHistory.\nAncient.\nThe earliest references to Anah are probably found in letters of the period of Zimri-Lim of Mari. Under Hammurapi of Babylon the town must have fallen under Babylonian control, being included in the governorate of S\u016b\u1e2bu. Later, the town was under Assyrian rule. At the beginning of the 8th century BC, \u0160ama\u0161-r\u0113\u0161a-u\u1e63ur and his son Ninurta-kudurr\u012b-u\u1e63ur succeeded in creating an independent political entity, and called themselves \"governors of S\u016b\u1e2bu and Mari\". The land of S\u016b\u1e2bu occupied a quite extensive region on the Middle Euphrates, approximately from the area near Falluja in the southeast to the area of \u1e2aindanu (modern Tell Jabiriyah, near Al-Qa'im) in the northwest. Important evidence for this period was recovered during English and Iraqi salvage excavation campaigns at Sur Jur\u02bfeh and on the island of \u02bfAna (Anah) in the early 1980s.\nXenophon recorded that the army of Cyrus the Younger resupplied during a campaign in 401\u00a0BC at \"Charmande\" near the end of a 90-parasang march between Korsote and Pylae, which likely intends Anah. It was the site where the Roman emperor Julian first met opposition in his AD\u00a0363 expedition against the Sassanid Empire. He got possession of the place and relocated its inhabitants.\nMedieval.\nIn 657, during the Muslim conquest of Iraq, Ali's lieutenants Ziyad and Shureih were refused passage across the Euphrates at Anah. Later, in 1058, Anah was the place of exile of the caliph Qaim when al-Basasiri was in power. In the 14th century, Anah was the seat of the catholicos who served as primate over the Persian Christians. Throughout early Islamic rule, it was a prosperous trade town, well known for its date palms and gardens; in the 14th century, Mustafi wrote of the fame of its palm groves. Medieval Arab poets celebrated Anah's wine;\nBetween the 14th and 17th centuries, Anah served as a headquarters for a host of regional Arab tribes. In 1574, Leonhart Rauwolff found the town divided into two parts, the Turkish \"so surrounded by the river that you cannot go into it but by boats\" and the larger Arabian section along one of the banks. In 1610, Texeira said Anah lay on both banks of the river, with which Pietro Della Valle agreed. In that year, Della Valle found the Scot George Strachan resident at Anah, working as the physician to the emir and studying Arabic; he also found some sun worshipers still living there. Della Valle and Texeira called Anah the principal Arab town on the Euphrates, controlling a major route west from Baghdad and territory reaching Palmyra.\nLate Ottoman era.\nAbout 1750, the Ottomans installed a rudimentary administration to run Anah and its district. After roughly a century, a more organized local government was put in place, whereby Anah became the center of a kaza belonging to the Baghdad Vilayet.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, G.A. Olivier found only 25 men in service of the local prince, with residents fleeing daily to escape from bedouin attacks against which he offered no protection. He described the city as a single long street of five or six miles along a narrow strip of land between the river and a ridge of rocky hills. W. F. Ainsworth, chronicling the British Euphrates expedition, reported that in 1835 the Arabs inhabited the northwest part of the town, the Christians the center, and the Jews the southeast. The same year, the steamer \"Tigris\" went down in a storm just above Anah, near where Julian's force had suffered from a similar storm.\nBy the mid-19th century, the houses were separated from one another by fruit gardens, which also filled the riverine islands near the town. The most easterly island contained a ruined castle, while the ruins of ancient Anatho extended a further two miles along the left bank. It marked the boundary between the olive (north) and date (south) growing regions in the area. With the positioning of Turkish troops in the town around 1890, the locals no longer had to pay blackmail (\"huwwa\") to the bedouins. Through the early 20th century, coarse cotton cloth was the only manufacture. In 1909 Anah had an estimated population of 15,000 and 2,000 houses. Most of the inhabitants were Sunni Muslim Arabs, though a small Jewish community lived on the town's southern edge.\nKingdom of Iraq.\nIn 1918, the town was captured by British forces and by 1921, became incorporated into the Kingdom of Iraq. It remained an administrative center of a qadaa, part of the larger Ramadi-based liwa of Dulaym. Anah's \"qadaa\" also included the subdistricts of H\u012bt, al-Qa'im and Jubba. The townspeople's long feud with the inhabitants of Rawa was settled diplomatically by 1921. Its territory to the west was dominated by the subtribes of Anizzah, while to the east the Jarba branch of the Shammar held sway.\nMost of Anah's building were located among a dense belt of date palms and was \"reckoned as healthy and picturesque\", according to historian S. H. Longrigg. The date palms were irrigated by water wheels. There were also more scattered dwelling in the mid-stream islands of the Euphrates near the town center. The women of the town were well known for their beauty and the weaving of cotton and wool textiles. The men, many of whom were compelled to emigrate to lack of living space, were largely engaged as boatmen and transporters of water to Baghdad. The town had relatively high educational standards, with eight schools built there by 1946.\nF. R. Chesney reported about 1800 houses, two mosques, and 16 waterwheels. One minaret is particularly old. Northedge reported the locals commonly attributed it to the 11th century but opined that it was more likely from about a century after that. It rose from one of the islands and belonged to the local mosque. Dr. Muayad Said described it as an octagonal body \"enhanced by alcoves, some of which are blind\" and noted earlier conservation work undertaken in 1935, 1963 and 1964. When the valley was flooded by the Haditha Dam in 1984/85, the Iraqi State Board of Antiquities cut it into sections and removed it to the new Anah, where it was re-erected to a height of at the end of the 1980s.\nISIS captured the town in 2014. On September 19, 2017, an offensive to retake the town from ISIS control began. After two days of fighting the town was recaptured by the Iraqi army.\nClimate.\nAnah has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BWh\"). Most rain falls in the winter. The average annual temperature in Anah is . About of precipitation falls annually.\nReferences.\nAttribution:\nExternal links.\n\u0628"}
{"id": "1735", "revid": "14200205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1735", "title": "\u0100nanda", "text": "\u0100nanda (5th4th century BCE) was the primary attendant of the Buddha and one of his ten principal disciples. Among the Buddha's many disciples, \u0100nanda stood out for having the best memory. Most of the texts of the early Buddhist \"Sutta-Pi\u1e6daka\" (P\u0101li; ) are attributed to his recollection of the Buddha's teachings during the First Buddhist Council. For that reason, he is known as the Treasurer of the Dhamma, with \"Dhamma\" () referring to the Buddha's teaching. In Early Buddhist Texts, \u0100nanda was the first cousin of the Buddha. Although the early texts do not agree on many parts of \u0100nanda's early life, they do agree that \u0100nanda was ordained as a monk and that Pu\u1e47\u1e47a Mant\u0101niputta () became his teacher. Twenty years in the Buddha's ministry, \u0100nanda became the attendant of the Buddha, when the Buddha selected him for this task. \u0100nanda performed his duties with great devotion and care, and acted as an intermediary between the Buddha and the laypeople, as well as the \"sa\u1e45gha\" (). He accompanied the Buddha for the rest of his life, acting not only as an assistant, but also a secretary and a mouthpiece.\nScholars are skeptical about the historicity of many events in \u0100nanda's life, especially the First Council, and consensus about this has yet to be established. A traditional account can be drawn from early texts, commentaries, and post-canonical chronicles. \u0100nanda had an important role in establishing the order of \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" (), when he requested the Buddha on behalf of the latter's foster-mother Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati Gotam\u012b () to allow her to be ordained. \u0100nanda also accompanied the Buddha in the last year of his life, and therefore was witness to many tenets and principles that the Buddha conveyed before his death, including the well-known principle that the Buddhist community should take his teaching and discipline as their refuge, and that he would not appoint a new leader. The final period of the Buddha's life also shows that \u0100nanda was very much attached to the Buddha's person, and he saw the Buddha's passing with great sorrow.\nShortly after the Buddha's death, the First Council was convened, and \u0100nanda managed to attain enlightenment just before the council started, which was a requirement. He had a historical role during the council as the living memory of the Buddha, reciting many of the Buddha's discourses and checking them for accuracy. During the same council, however, he was chastised by Mah\u0101kassapa () and the rest of the \"sa\u1e45gha\" for allowing women to be ordained and failing to understand or respect the Buddha at several crucial moments. \u0100nanda continued to teach until the end of his life, passing on his spiritual heritage to his pupils S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b () and Majjhantika (), among others, who later assumed leading roles in the Second and Third Councils. \u0100nanda died 20 years after the Buddha, and \"st\u016bpas\" (monuments) were erected at the river where he died.\n\u0100nanda is one of the most loved figures in Buddhism. He was known for his memory, erudition and compassion, and was often praised by the Buddha for these matters. He functioned as a foil to the Buddha, however, in that he still had worldly attachments and was not yet enlightened, as opposed to the Buddha. In the Sanskrit textual traditions, \u0100nanda is considered the patriarch of the Dhamma who stood in a spiritual lineage, receiving the teaching from Mah\u0101kassapa and passing them on to his own pupils. \u0100nanda has been honored by \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" since early medieval times for his merits in establishing the nun's order. In recent times, the composer Richard Wagner and Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore were inspired by stories about \u0100nanda in their work.\nName.\nThe word \"\u0101nanda\" means 'bliss, joy' in P\u0101li and in Sanskrit. P\u0101li commentaries explain that when \u0100nanda was born, his relatives were joyous about this. Texts from the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da tradition, however, state that since \u0100nanda was born on the day of the Buddha's enlightenment, there was great rejoicing in the cityhence the name.\nAccounts.\nPrevious lives.\nAccording to the texts, in a previous life, \u0100nanda made an aspiration to become a Buddha's attendant. He made this aspiration in the time of a previous Buddha called Padumuttara, many eons (, ) before the present age. He met the attendant of Padumuttara Buddha and aspired to be like him in a future life. After having done many good deeds, he made his resolution known to the Padumuttara Buddha, who confirmed that his wish will come true in a future life. After having been born and reborn throughout many lifetimes, and doing many good deeds, he was born as \u0100nanda in the time of the current Buddha Gotama.\nEarly life.\n\u0100nanda was born in the same time period as the Buddha (formerly Prince Siddhattha), which scholars place at 5th4th centuries BCE. Tradition says that \u0100nanda was the first cousin of the Buddha, his father being the brother of Suddhodana (), the Buddha's father. In the P\u0101li and M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da textual traditions, his father was Amitodana (), but the \"Mah\u0101vastu\" states that his father was \u015auklodanaboth are brothers of Suddhodana. The Mah\u0101vastu also mentions that \u0100nanda's mother's name was M\u1e5bg\u012b (Sanskrit; lit. 'little deer'; P\u0101li is unknown). The P\u0101li tradition has it that \u0100nanda was born on the same day as Prince Siddhatta (), but texts from the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da and subsequent Mah\u0101y\u0101na traditions state \u0100nanda was born at the same time the Buddha attained enlightenment (when Prince Siddhattha was 35 years old), and was therefore much younger than the Buddha. The latter tradition is corroborated by several instances in the Early Buddhist Texts, in which \u0100nanda appears younger than the Buddha, such as the passage in which the Buddha explained to \u0100nanda how old age was affecting him in body and mind. It is also corroborated by a verse in the P\u0101li text called \"Therag\u0101th\u0101\", in which \u0100nanda stated he was a \"learner\" for twenty-five years, after which he attended to the Buddha for another twenty-five years.Following the P\u0101li, Mah\u012b\u015basaka and Dharmaguptaka textual traditions, \u0100nanda became a monk in the second year of the Buddha's ministry, during the Buddha's visit to Kapilavatthu (). He was ordained by the Buddha himself, together with many other princes of the Buddha's clan (, ), in the mango grove called Anupiya, part of Malla territory. According to a text from the Mah\u0101sa\u1e45ghika tradition, King Suddhodana wanted the Buddha to have more followers of the \"khattiya\" caste (), and less from the brahmin (priest) caste. He therefore ordered that any \"khattiya\" who had a brother follow the Buddha as a monk, or had his brother do so. \u0100nanda used this opportunity, and asked his brother Devadatta to stay at home, so that he could leave for the monkhood. The later timeline from the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da texts and the P\u0101li \"Therag\u0101th\u0101\", however, have \u0100nanda ordain much later, about twenty-five years before the Buddha's deathin other words, twenty years in the Buddha's ministry. Some Sanskrit sources have him ordain even later. The M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da texts on monastic discipline (P\u0101li and ) relate that soothsayers predicted \u0100nanda would be the Buddha's attendant. In order to prevent \u0100nanda from leaving the palace to ordain, his father brought him to Ves\u0101l\u012b () during the Buddha's visit to Kapilavatthu, but later the Buddha met and taught \u0100nanda nonetheless. On a similar note, the Mah\u0101vastu relates, however, that M\u1e5bg\u012b was initially opposed to \u0100nanda joining the holy life, because his brother Devadatta had already ordained and left the palace. \u0100nanda responded to his mother's resistance by moving to Videha () and lived there, taking a vow of silence. This led him to gain the epithet Videhamuni (), meaning 'the silent wise one from Videha'. When \u0100nanda did become ordained, his father had him ordain in Kapilavatthu in the Nigrodh\u0101r\u0101ma monastery () with much ceremony, \u0100nanda's preceptor (; ) being a certain Da\u015bab\u0101la K\u0101\u015byapa.\nAccording to the P\u0101li tradition, \u0100nanda's first teachers were Bela\u1e6d\u1e6dhas\u012bsa and Pu\u1e47\u1e47a Mant\u0101niputta. It was Pu\u1e47\u1e47a's teaching that led \u0100nanda to attain the stage of \"sot\u0101panna\" (), an attainment preceding that of enlightenment. \u0100nanda later expressed his debt to Pu\u1e47\u1e47a. Another important figure in the life of \u0100nanda was S\u0101riputta (), one of the Buddha's main disciples. S\u0101riputta often taught \u0100nanda about the finer points of Buddhist doctrine; they were in the habit of sharing things with one another, and their relationship is described as a good friendship. In some M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da texts, an attendant of \u0100nanda is also mentioned who helped motivate \u0100nanda when he was banned from the First Buddhist Council. He was a \"Vajjiputta\" (), i.e. someone who originated from the Vajji confederacy. According to later texts, an enlightened monk also called Vajjiputta () had an important role in \u0100nanda's life. He listened to a teaching of \u0100nanda and realized that \u0100nanda was not enlightened yet. Vajjiputta encouraged \u0100nanda to talk less to laypeople and deepen his meditation practice by retreating in the forest, advice that very much affected \u0100nanda.\nAttending to the Buddha.\nIn the first twenty years of the Buddha's ministry, the Buddha had several personal attendants. However, after these twenty years, when the Buddha was aged 55, the Buddha announced that he had need for a permanent attendant. The Buddha had been growing older, and his previous attendants had not done their job very well. Initially, several of the Buddha's foremost disciples responded to his request, but the Buddha did not accept them. All the while \u0100nanda remained quiet. When he was asked why, he said that the Buddha would know best whom to choose, upon which the Buddha responded by choosing \u0100nanda. \u0100nanda agreed to take on the position, on the condition that he did not receive any material benefits from the Buddha. Accepting such benefits would open him up to criticism that he chose the position because of ulterior motives. He also requested that the Buddha allow him to accept invitations on his behalf, allow him to ask questions about his doctrine, and repeat any teaching that the Buddha had taught in \u0100nanda's absence. These requests would help people trust \u0100nanda and show that the Buddha was sympathetic to his attendant. Furthermore, \u0100nanda considered these the real advantages of being an attendant, which is why he requested them.\nThe Buddha agreed to \u0100nanda's conditions, and \u0100nanda became the Buddha's attendant, accompanying the Buddha on most of his wanderings. \u0100nanda took care of the Buddha's daily practical needs, by doing things such as bringing water and cleaning the Buddha's dwelling place. He is depicted as observant and devoted, even guarding the dwelling place at night. \u0100nanda takes the part of interlocutor in many of the recorded dialogues. He tended the Buddha for a total of 25 years, a duty which entailed much work. His relationship with the Buddha is depicted as warm and trusting: when the Buddha grew ill, \u0100nanda had a sympathetic illness; when the Buddha grew older, \u0100nanda kept taking care of him with devotion.\n\u0100nanda sometimes literally risked his life for his teacher. At one time, the rebellious monk Devadatta tried to kill the Buddha by having a drunk and wild elephant released in the Buddha's presence. \u0100nanda stepped in front of the Buddha to protect him. When the Buddha told him to move, he refused, although normally he always obeyed the Buddha. Through a supernatural accomplishment (; ) the Buddha then moved \u0100nanda aside and subdued the elephant, by touching it and speaking to it with loving-kindness.\n\u0100nanda often acted as an intermediary and secretary, passing on messages from the Buddha, informing the Buddha of news, invitations, or the needs of lay people, and advising lay people who wanted to provide gifts to the \"sa\u1e45gha\". At one time, Mah\u0101paj\u0101pat\u012b, the Buddha's foster-mother, requested to offer robes for personal use for the Buddha. She said that even though she had raised the Buddha in his youth, she never gave anything in person to the young prince; she now wished to do so. The Buddha initially insisted that she give the robe to the community as a whole rather than to be attached to his person. However, \u0100nanda interceded and mediated, suggesting that the Buddha had better accept the robe. Eventually the Buddha did, but not without pointing out to \u0100nanda that good deeds like giving should always be done for the sake of the action itself, not for the sake of the person.\nThe texts say that the Buddha sometimes asked \u0100nanda to substitute for him as teacher, and was often praised by the Buddha for his teachings. \u0100nanda was often given important teaching roles, such as regularly teaching Queen Mallik\u0101, Queen S\u0101m\u0101vat\u012b, () and other people from the ruling class. Once \u0100nanda taught a number of King Udena ()'s concubines. They were so impressed by \u0100nanda's teaching, that they gave him five hundred robes, which \u0100nanda accepted. Having heard about this, King Udena criticized \u0100nanda for being greedy; \u0100nanda responded by explaining how every single robe was carefully used, reused and recycled by the monastic community, prompting the king to offer another five hundred robes. \u0100nanda also had a role in the Buddha's visit to Ves\u0101l\u012b. In this story, the Buddha taught the well-known text \"Ratana Sutta\" to \u0100nanda, which \u0100nanda then recited in Ves\u0101l\u012b, ridding the city from illness, drought and evil spirits in the process. Another well-known passage in which the Buddha taught \u0100nanda is the passage about spiritual friendship (). In this passage, \u0100nanda stated that spiritual friendship is half of the holy life; the Buddha corrected \u0100nanda, stating that such friendship is the entire holy life. In summary, \u0100nanda worked as an assistant, intermediary and a mouthpiece, helping the Buddha in many ways, and learning his teachings in the process.\nResisting temptations.\n\u0100nanda was attractive in appearance. A P\u0101li account related that a \"bhikkhun\u012b\" (nun) became enamored with \u0100nanda, and pretended to be ill to have \u0100nanda visit her. When she realized the error of her ways, she confessed her mistakes to \u0100nanda. Other accounts relate that a low-caste woman called Prak\u1e5bti (also known in China as ) fell in love with \u0100nanda, and persuaded her mother M\u0101ta\u1e45g\u012b to use a black magic spell to enchant him. This succeeded, and \u0100nanda was lured into her house, but came to his senses and called upon the help of the Buddha. The Buddha then taught Prak\u1e5bti to reflect on the repulsive qualities of the human body, and eventually Prak\u1e5bti was ordained as a \"bhikkhun\u012b\", giving up her attachment for \u0100nanda. In an East Asian version of the story in the \"\u015a\u016bra\u1e43gamas\u016btra\", the Buddha sent Ma\u00f1ju\u015br\u012b to help \u0100nanda, who used recitation to counter the magic charm. The Buddha then continued by teaching \u0100nanda and other listeners about the Buddha nature.\nEstablishing the nun's order.\nIn the role of mediator between the Buddha and the lay communities, \u0100nanda sometimes made suggestions to the Buddha for amendments in the monastic discipline. Most importantly, the early texts attribute the inclusion of women in the early \"sa\u1e45gha\" (monastic order) to \u0100nanda. Fifteen years after the Buddha's enlightenment, his foster mother Mah\u0101paj\u0101pat\u012b came to see him to ask him to be ordained as the first Buddhist \"bhikkhun\u012b\". Initially, the Buddha refused this. Five years later, Mah\u0101paj\u0101pat\u012b came to request the Buddha again, this time with a following of other S\u0101kiya women, including the Buddha's former wife Yasodhar\u0101 (). They had walked , looked dirty, tired and depressed, and \u0100nanda felt pity for them. \u0100nanda therefore confirmed with the Buddha whether women could become enlightened as well. Although the Buddha conceded this, he did not allow the S\u0101kiya women to be ordained yet. \u0100nanda then discussed with the Buddha how Mah\u0101paj\u0101pat\u012b took care of him during his childhood, after the death of his real mother. \u0100nanda also mentioned that previous Buddhas had also ordained \"bhikkhun\u012bs\". In the end, the Buddha allowed the S\u0101kiya women to be ordained, being the start of the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order. \u0100nanda had Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati ordained by her acceptance of a set of rules, set by the Buddha. These came to be known as the \"garudhamma\", and they describe the subordinate relation of the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" community to that of the \"bhikkhus\" or monks. Scholar of Asian religions Reiko Ohnuma argues that the debt the Buddha had toward his foster-mother Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati may have been the main reason for his concessions with regard to the establishment of a \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order.\nMany scholars interpret this account to mean that the Buddha was reluctant in allowing women to be ordained, and that \u0100nanda successfully persuaded the Buddha to change his mind. For example, Indologist and translator I.B. Horner wrote that \"this is the only instance of his [the Buddha] being over-persuaded in argument\". However, some scholars interpret the Buddha's initial refusal rather as a test of resolve, following a widespread pattern in the P\u0101li Canon and in monastic procedure of repeating a request three times before final acceptance. Some also argue that the Buddha was believed by Buddhists to be omniscient, and therefore is unlikely to have been depicted as changing his mind. Other scholars argue that other passages in the texts indicate the Buddha intended all along to establish a \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order. Regardless, during the acceptance of women into the monastic order, the Buddha told \u0100nanda that the Buddha's Dispensation would last shorter because of this. At the time, the Buddhist monastic order consisted of wandering celibate males, without many monastic institutions. Allowing women to join the Buddhist celibate life might have led to dissension, as well as temptation between the sexes. The \"garudhamma\", however, were meant to fix these problems, and prevent the dispensation from being curtailed.\nThere are some chronological discrepancies in the traditional account of the setting up of the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order. According to the P\u0101li and Mah\u012b\u015basaka textual traditions, the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order was set up five years after the Buddha's enlightenment, but, according to most textual traditions, \u0100nanda only became attendant twenty years after the Buddha's enlightenment. Furthermore, Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati was the Buddha's foster mother, and must therefore have been considerably older than him. However, after the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order was established, Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati still had many audiences with the Buddha, as reported in P\u0101li and Chinese Early Buddhist Texts. Because of this and other reasons, it could be inferred that establishment of the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order actually took place \"early\" in the Buddha's ministry. If this is the case, \u0100nanda's role in establishing the order becomes less likely. Some scholars therefore interpret the names in the account, such as \"\u0100nanda\" and \"Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati\", as symbols, representing groups rather than specific individuals.\nAccording to the texts, \u0100nanda's role in founding the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order made him popular with the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" community. \u0100nanda often taught \"bhikkhun\u012bs\", often encouraged women to ordain, and when he was criticized by the monk Mah\u0101kassapa, several \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" tried to defend him. According to Indologist Oskar von Hin\u00fcber, \u0100nanda's pro-\"bhikkhun\u012b\" attitude may well be the reason why there was frequent discussion between \u0100nanda and Mah\u0101kassapa, eventually leading Mah\u0101kasapa to charge \u0100nanda with several offenses during the First Buddhist Council. Von Hin\u00fcber further argues that the establishment of the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order may have well been initiated by \u0100nanda the Buddha's death, and the introduction of Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati as the person requesting to do so is merely a literary device to connect the ordination of women with the person of the Buddha, through his foster mother. Von Hin\u00fcber concludes this based on several patterns in the early texts, including the apparent distance between the Buddha and the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" order, and the frequent discussions and differences of opinion that take place between \u0100nanda and Mah\u0101kassapa. Some scholars have seen merits in von Hin\u00fcber's argument with regard to the pro- and anti-factions, but as of 2017, no definitive evidence has been found for the theory of establishment of the \"bhikkhuni\" order after the Buddha's death. Buddhist studies scholar Bhikkhu An\u0101layo has responded to most of von Hinuber's arguments, writing: \"Besides requiring too many assumptions, this hypothesis conflicts with nearly 'all the evidence preserved in the texts together'\", arguing that it was monastic discipline that created a distance between the Buddha and the \"bhikkhun\u012bs\", and even so, there were many places in the early texts where the Buddha did address \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" directly.\nThe Buddha's death.\nDespite his long association with and close proximity to the Buddha, the texts describe that \u0100nanda had not become enlightened yet. Because of that, a fellow monk Ud\u0101y\u012b () ridiculed \u0100nanda. However, the Buddha reprimanded Ud\u0101y\u012b in response, saying that \u0100nanda would certainly be enlightened in this life.\nThe P\u0101li \"Mah\u0101-parinibb\u0101na Sutta\" related the last year-long trip the Buddha took with \u0100nanda from R\u0101jagaha () to the small town of Kusin\u0101ra () before the Buddha died there. Before reaching Kusin\u0101ra, the Buddha spent the retreat during the monsoon (, ) in Ve\u1e37ug\u0101ma (), getting out of the Ves\u0101l\u012b area which suffered from famine. Here, the eighty-year old Buddha expressed his wish to speak to the \"sa\u1e45gha\" once more. The Buddha had grown seriously ill in Ves\u0101l\u012b, much to the concern of some of his disciples. \u0100nanda understood that the Buddha wished to leave final instructions before his death. The Buddha stated, however, that he had already taught everything needed, without withholding anything secret as a teacher with a \"closed fist\" would. He also impressed upon \u0100nanda that he did not think the \"sa\u1e45gha\" should be reliant too much on a leader, not even himself. He then continued with the well-known statement to take his teaching as a refuge, and oneself as a refuge, without relying on any other refuge, also after he would be gone. Bareau argued that this is one of the most ancient parts of the text, found in slight variation in five early textual traditions:\nThe same text contains an account in which the Buddha, at numerous occasions, gave a hint that he could prolong his life to a full eon through a supernatural accomplishment, but this was a power that he would have to be to exercise. \u0100nanda was distracted, however, and did not take the hint. Later, \u0100nanda did make the request, but the Buddha replied that it was already too late, as he would die soon. M\u0101ra, the Buddhist personification of evil, had visited the Buddha, and the Buddha had decided to die in three months. When \u0100nanda heard this, he wept. The Buddha consoled him, however, pointing out that \u0100nanda had been a great attendant, being sensitive to the needs of different people. If he was earnest in his efforts, he would attain enlightenment soon. He then pointed out to \u0100nanda that all conditioned things are impermanent: all people must die.\nIn the final days of the Buddha's life, the Buddha traveled to Kusin\u0101ra. The Buddha had \u0100nanda prepare a place for lying down between two sal trees, the same type of tree under which the mother of the Buddha gave birth. The Buddha then had \u0100nanda invite the Malla clan from Kusin\u0101ra to pay their final respects. Having returned, \u0100nanda asked the Buddha what should be done with his body after his death, and he replied that it should be cremated, giving detailed instructions on how this should be done. Since the Buddha prohibited \u0100nanda from being involved himself, but rather had him instruct the Mallas to perform the rituals, these instructions have by many scholars been interpreted as a prohibition that monastics should not be involved in funerals or worship of \"st\u016bpas\" (structures with relics). Buddhist studies scholar Gregory Schopen has pointed out, however, that this prohibition only held for \u0100nanda, and only with regard to the Buddha's funeral ceremony. It has also been shown that the instructions on the funeral are quite late in origin, in both composition and insertion into the text, and are not found in parallel texts, apart from the \"Mah\u0101parinibb\u0101na Sutta\". \u0100nanda then continued by asking how devotees should honor the Buddha after his death. The Buddha responded by listing four important places in his life that people could pay their respects to, which later became the four main places of Buddhist pilgrimage. Before the Buddha died, \u0100nanda recommended the Buddha to move to a more meaningful city instead, but the Buddha pointed out that the town was once a great capital. \u0100nanda then asked who will be next teacher after the Buddha would be gone, but the Buddha replied that his teaching and discipline would be the teacher instead. This meant that decisions should be made by reaching consensus within the \"sa\u1e45gha\", and more generally, that now the time had come for the Buddhist monastics and devotees to take the Buddhist texts as authority, now that the Buddha was dying.\nThe Buddha gave several instructions before his death, including a directive that his former charioteer Channa () be shunned by his fellow monks, to humble his pride. In his final moments, the Buddha asked if anyone had any questions they wished to pose to him, as a final chance to allay any doubts. When no-one responded, \u0100nanda expressed joy that all of the Buddha's disciples present had attained a level beyond doubts about the Buddha's teaching. However, the Buddha pointed out that \u0100nanda spoke out of faith and not out of meditative insighta final reproach. The Buddha added that, of all the five hundred monks that are surrounding him now, even the \"latest\" or \"most backward\" () had attained the initial stage of \"sotapanna\". Meant as an encouragement, the Buddha was referring to \u0100nanda. During the Buddha's \"final Nirvana\", Anuruddha was able to use his meditative powers to understand which stages the Buddha underwent before attaining final Nirvana. However, \u0100nanda was unable to do so, indicating his lesser spiritual maturity. After the Buddha's death, \u0100nanda recited several verses, expressing a sense of urgency (), deeply moved by the events and their bearing: \"Terrible was the quaking, men's hair stood on end, / When the all-accomplished Buddha passed away.\"\nShortly after the council, \u0100nanda brought the message with regard to the Buddha's directive to Channa personally. Channa was humbled and changed his ways, attained enlightenment, and the penalty was withdrawn by the \"sa\u1e45gha\". \u0100nanda traveled to S\u0101vatth\u012b (), where he was met with a sad populace, who he consoled with teachings on impermanence. After that, \u0100nanda went to the quarters of the Buddha and went through the motions of the routine he formerly performed when the Buddha was still alive, such as preparing water and cleaning the quarters. He then saluted and talked to the quarters as though the Buddha was still there. The P\u0101li commentaries state that \u0100nanda did this out of devotion, but also because he was \"not yet free from the passions\".\nThe First Council.\nBan.\nAccording to the texts, the First Buddhist Council was held in R\u0101jagaha. In the first \"vassa\" after the Buddha had died, the presiding monk Mah\u0101kassapa () called upon \u0100nanda to recite the discourses he had heard, as a representative on this council. There was a rule issued that only enlightened disciples (\"arahants\") were allowed to attend the council, to prevent mental afflictions from clouding the disciples' memories. \u0100nanda had, however, not attained enlightenment yet, in contrast with the rest of the council, consisting of 499 \"arahants\". Mah\u0101kassapa therefore did not allow \u0100nanda to attend yet. Although he knew that \u0100nanda's presence in the council was required, he did not want to be biased by allowing an exception to the rule. The M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da tradition adds that Mah\u0101kassapa initially allowed \u0100nanda to join as a sort of servant assisting during the council, but then was forced to remove him when the disciple Anuruddha saw that \u0100nanda was not yet enlightened.\n\u0100nanda felt humiliated, but was prompted to focus his efforts to reach enlightenment before the council started. The M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da texts add that he felt motivated when he remembered the Buddha's words that he should be his own refuge, and when he was consoled and advised by Anuruddha and Vajjiputta, the latter being his attendant. On the night before the event, he tried hard to attain enlightenment. After a while, \u0100nanda took a break and decided to lie down for a rest. He then attained enlightenment right there, right then, halfway between standing and lying down. Thus, \u0100nanda was known as the disciple who attained awakening \"in none of the four traditional poses\" (walking, standing, sitting, or lying down). The next morning, to prove his enlightenment, \u0100nanda performed a supernatural accomplishment by diving into the earth and appearing on his seat at the council (or, according to some sources, by flying through the air). Scholars such as Buddhologist Andr\u00e9 Bareau and scholar of religion Ellison Banks Findly have been skeptical about many details in this account, including the number of participants on the council, and the account of \u0100nanda's enlightenment just before the council. Regardless, today, the story of \u0100nanda's struggle on the evening before the council is still told among Buddhists as a piece of advice in the practice of meditation: neither to give up, nor to interpret the practice too rigidly.\nRecitations.\nThe First Council began when \u0100nanda was consulted to recite the discourses and to determine which were authentic and which were not. Mah\u0101kassapa asked of each discourse that \u0100nanda listed where, when, and to whom it was given, and at the end of this, the assembly agreed that \u0100nanda's memories and recitations were correct, after which the discourse collection (, ) was considered finalized and closed. \u0100nanda therefore played a crucial role in this council, and texts claim he remembered 84,000 teaching topics, among which 82,000 taught by the Buddha and another 2,000 taught by disciples. Many early Buddhist discourses started with the words \"Thus have I heard\" (, ), which according to most Buddhist traditions, were \u0100nanda's words, indicating that he, as the person reporting the text (), had first-hand experience and did not add anything to it. Thus, the discourses \u0100nanda remembered later became the collection of discourses of the Canon, and according to the Haimav\u0101ta, Dharmaguptaka and Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da textual traditions (and implicitly, post-canonical P\u0101li chronicles), the collection of Abhidhamma (\"Abhidhamma Pi\u1e6daka\") as well. Scholar of religion Ronald Davidson notes, however, that this is not preceded by any account of \u0100nanda learning Abhidhamma. According to some later Mah\u0101y\u0101na accounts, \u0100nanda also assisted in reciting Mah\u0101y\u0101na texts, held in a different place in R\u0101jagaha, but in the same time period. The P\u0101li commentaries state that after the council, when the tasks for recitation and memorizing the texts were divided, \u0100nanda and his pupils were given the task to remember the D\u012bgha Nik\u0101ya.\nCharges.\nDuring the same council, \u0100nanda was charged for an offense by members of the \"sa\u1e45gha\" for having enabled women to join the monastic order. Besides this, he was charged for having forgotten to request the Buddha to specify which offenses of monastic discipline could be disregarded; for having stepped on the Buddha's robe; for having allowed women to honor the Buddha's body after his death, which was not properly dressed, and during which his body was sullied by their tears; and for having failed to ask the Buddha to continue to live on. \u0100nanda did not acknowledge these as offenses, but he conceded to do a formal confession anyway, \"... in faith of the opinion of the venerable elder monks\"\u0100nanda wanted to prevent disruption in the \"sa\u1e45gha\". With regard to having women ordained, \u0100nanda answered that he had done this with great effort, because Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati was the Buddha's foster-mother who had long provided for him. With regard to not requesting the Buddha to continue to live, many textual traditions have \u0100nanda respond by saying he was distracted by M\u0101ra, though one early Chinese text has \u0100nanda reply he did not request the Buddha to prolong his life, for fear that this would interfere with the next Buddha Maitreya's ministry.\nAccording to the P\u0101li tradition, the charges were laid after \u0100nanda had become enlightened and done all the recitations; but the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da tradition has it that the charges were laid before \u0100nanda became enlightened and started the recitations. In this version, when \u0100nanda heard that he was banned from the council, he objected that he had not done anything that went against the teaching and discipline of the Buddha. Mah\u0101kassapa then listed seven charges to counter \u0100nanda's objection. The charges were similar to the five given in P\u0101li. Other textual traditions list slightly different charges, amounting to a combined total of eleven charges, some of which are only mentioned in one or two textual traditions. Considering that an enlightened disciple was seen to have overcome all faults, it seems more likely that the charges were laid before \u0100nanda's attainment than after.\nIndologists von Hin\u00fcber and Jean Przyluski argue that the account of \u0100nanda being charged with offenses during the council indicate tensions between competing early Buddhist schools, i.e. schools that emphasized the discourses (, ) and schools that emphasized monastic discipline. These differences have affected the scriptures of each tradition: e.g. the P\u0101li and Mah\u012b\u015b\u0101saka textual traditions portray a Mah\u0101kassapa that is more critical of \u0100nanda than that the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da tradition depicts him, reflecting a preference for discipline above discourse on the part of the former traditions, and a preference for discourse for the latter. Another example is the recitations during the First Council. The P\u0101li texts state that Up\u0101li, the person who was responsible for the recitation of the monastic discipline, recited \u0100nanda does: again, monastic discipline above discourse. Analyzing six recensions of different textual traditions of the \"Mah\u0101parinibb\u0101na Sutta\" extensively, Bareau distinguished two layers in the text, an older and a newer one, the former belonging to the compilers that emphasized discourse, the latter to the ones that emphasized discipline; the former emphasizing the figure of \u0100nanda, the latter Mah\u0101kassapa. He further argued that the passage on M\u0101ra obstructing the Buddha was inserted in the fourth century BCE, and that \u0100nanda was blamed for M\u0101ra's doing by inserting the passage of \u0100nanda's forgetfulness in the third century BCE. The passage in which the Buddha was ill and reminded \u0100nanda to be his own refuge, on the other hand, Bareau regarded as very ancient, pre-dating the passages blaming M\u0101ra and \u0100nanda. In conclusion, Bareau, Przyluski and Horner argued that the offenses \u0100nanda were charged with were a later interpolation. Findly disagrees, however, because the account in the texts of monastic discipline fits in with the \"Mah\u0101parinibb\u0101na Sutta\" and with \u0100nanda's character as generally depicted in the texts.\nHistoricity.\nTradition states that the First Council lasted for seven months. Scholars doubt, however, whether the entire canon was really recited during the First Council, because the early texts contain different accounts on important subjects such as meditation. It may be, though, that early versions were recited of what is now known as the \"Vinaya-pi\u1e6daka\" and \"Sutta-pi\u1e6daka\". Nevertheless, many scholars, from the late 19th century onward, have considered the historicity of the First Council improbable. Some scholars, such as orientalists Louis de La Vall\u00e9e-Poussin and D.P. Minayeff, thought there must have been assemblies after the Buddha's death, but considered only the main characters and some events before or after the First Council historical. Other scholars, such as Bareau and Indologist Hermann Oldenberg, considered it likely that the account of the First Council was written after the Second Council, and based on that of the Second, since there were not any major problems to solve after the Buddha's death, or any other need to organize the First Council. Much material in the accounts, and even more so in the more developed later accounts, deal with \u0100nanda as the unsullied intermediary who passes on the legitimate teaching of the Buddha. On the other hand, archaeologist Louis Finot, Indologist E. E. Obermiller and to some extent Indologist Nalinaksha Dutt thought the account of the First Council was authentic, because of the correspondences between the P\u0101li texts and the Sanskrit traditions. Indologist Richard Gombrich, following Bhikkhu Sujato and Bhikkhu Brahmali's arguments, states that \"it makes good sense to believe ... that large parts of the Pali Canon do preserve for us the \"Buddha-vacana\", 'the Buddha's words', transmitted to us via his disciple \u0100nanda and the First Council\".\nRole and character.\n\u0100nanda was recognized as one of the most important disciples of the Buddha. In the lists of the disciples given in the \"A\u1e45guttara Nik\u0101ya\" and \"Sa\u1e43yutta Nik\u0101ya\", each of the disciples is declared to be foremost in some quality. \u0100nanda is mentioned more often than any other disciple: he is named foremost in conduct, in attention to others, in power of memory, in erudition and in resoluteness. \u0100nanda was the subject of a sermon of praise delivered by the Buddha just before the Buddha's death, as described in the \"Mah\u0101parinibb\u0101na Sutta\": it is a sermon about a man who is kindly, unselfish, popular, and thoughtful toward others. In the texts he is depicted as compassionate in his relations with lay people, a compassion he learnt from the Buddha. The Buddha relays that both monastics and lay people were pleased to see \u0100nanda, and were pleased to hear him recite and teach the Buddha's teaching. Moreover, \u0100nanda was known for his organizational skills, assisting the Buddha with secretary-like duties. In many ways, \u0100nanda did not only serve the personal needs of the Buddha, but also the needs of the still young, growing institute of the \"sa\u1e45gha\".\nMoreover, because of his ability to remember the many teachings of the Buddha, he is described as foremost in \"having heard much\" (, , ). \u0100nanda was known for his exceptional memory, which is essential in helping him to remember the Buddha's teachings. He also taught other disciples to memorize Buddhist doctrine. For these reasons, \u0100nanda became known as the \"Treasurer of the Dhamma\" (, ), \"Dhamma\" () referring to the doctrine of the Buddha. Being the person who had accompanied the Buddha throughout a great part of his life, \u0100nanda was in many ways the living memory of the Buddha, without which the \"sa\u1e45gha\" would be much worse off. Besides his memory skills, \u0100nanda also stood out in that, as the Buddha's cousin, he dared to ask the Buddha direct questions. For example, after the death of Mah\u0101vira and the depicted subsequent conflicts among the Jain community, \u0100nanda asked the Buddha how such problems could be prevented after the Buddha's death. However, Findly argues that \u0100nanda's duty to memorize the Buddha's teachings accurately and without distortion, was \"both a gift and a burden\". \u0100nanda was able to remember many discourses verbatim, but this also went hand-in-hand with a habit of not reflecting on those teachings, being afraid that reflection might distort the teachings as he heard them. At multiple occasions, \u0100nanda was warned by other disciples that he should spend less time on conversing to lay people, and more time on his own practice. Even though \u0100nanda regularly practiced meditation for long hours, he was less experienced in meditative concentration than other leading disciples. Thus, judgment of \u0100nanda's character depends on whether one judges his accomplishments as a monk or his accomplishments as an attendant, and person memorizing the discourses.\nFrom a literary and pedagogical point of view, \u0100nanda often functioned as a kind of foil in the texts, being an unenlightened disciple attending to an enlightened Buddha. Because the run-of the-mill person could identify with \u0100nanda, the Buddha could through \u0100nanda convey his teachings to the mass easily. \u0100nanda's character was in many ways a contradiction to that of the Buddha: being unenlightened and someone who made mistakes. At the same time, however, he was completely devoted to service to the Buddha. The Buddha is depicted in the early texts as both a father and a teacher to \u0100nanda, stern but compassionate. \u0100nanda was very fond of and attached to the Buddha, willing to give his life for him. He mourned the deaths of both the Buddha and S\u0101riputta, with whom he enjoyed a close friendship: in both cases \u0100nanda was very shocked. \u0100nanda's faith in the Buddha, however, constituted more of a faith in a person, especially the Buddha's person, as opposed to faith in the Buddha's teaching. This is a pattern which comes back in the accounts which lead to the offenses \u0100nanda was charged with during the First Council. Moreover, \u0100nanda's weaknesses described in the texts were that he was sometimes slow-witted and lacked mindfulness, which became noticeable because of his role as attendant to the Buddha: this involved minor matters like deportment, but also more important matters, such as ordaining a man with no future as a pupil, or disturbing the Buddha at the wrong time. For example, one time Mah\u0101kassapa chastised \u0100nanda in strong words, criticizing the fact that \u0100nanda was travelling with a large following of young monks who appeared untrained and who had built up a bad reputation. In another episode described in a Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da text, \u0100nanda is the only disciple who was willing to teach psychic powers to Devadatta, who later would use these in an attempt to destroy the Buddha. According to a Mah\u012b\u015b\u0101saka text, however, when Devadatta had turned against the Buddha, \u0100nanda was not persuaded by him, and voted against him in a formal meeting. \u0100nanda's late spiritual growth is much discussed in Buddhist texts, and the general conclusion is that \u0100nanda was slower than other disciples due to his worldly attachments and his attachment to the person of the Buddha, both of which were rooted in his mediating work between the Buddha and the lay communities.\nPassing on the teaching.\nAfter the Buddha's death, some sources say \u0100nanda stayed mostly in the West of India, in the area of Kosamb\u012b (), where he taught most of his pupils. Other sources say he stayed in the monastery at Ve\u1e37uvana (). Several pupils of \u0100nanda became well-known in their own right. According to post-canonical Sanskrit sources such as the Divyavad\u0101na and the A\u015bokavad\u0101na, before the Buddha's death, the Buddha confided to \u0100nanda that the latter's student Majjhantika () would travel to Udy\u0101na, Kashmir, to bring the teaching of the Buddha there. Mah\u0101kassapa made a prediction that later would come true that another of \u0100nanda's future pupils, S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b (), would make many gifts to the \"sa\u1e45gha\" at Mathur\u0101, during a feast held from profits of successful business. After this event, \u0100nanda would successfully persuade S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b to become ordained and be his pupil. \u0100nanda later persuaded S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b by pointing out that the latter had now made many material gifts, but had not given \"the gift of the Dhamma\". When asked for explanation, \u0100nanda replied that S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b would give the gift of Dhamma by becoming ordained as a monk, which was reason enough for S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b to make the decision to get ordained.\nDeath and relics.\nThough no Early Buddhist Text provides a date for \u0100nanda's death, according to the Chinese pilgrim monk Faxian (337422 CE), \u0100nanda went on to live 120 years. Following the later timeline, however, \u0100nanda may have lived to 7585 years. Buddhist studies scholar L. S. Cousins dated \u0100nanda's death twenty years after the Buddha's.\n\u0100nanda was teaching till the end of his life. According to M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da sources, \u0100nanda heard a young monk recite a verse incorrectly, and advised him. When the monk reported this to his teacher, the latter objected that \"\u0100nanda has grown old and his memory is impaired ...\" This prompted \u0100nanda to attain final Nirvana. He passed on the \"custody of the [Buddha's] doctrine\" to his pupil S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b and left for the river Ganges. However, according to P\u0101li sources, when \u0100nanda was about to die, he decided to spend his final moments in Ves\u0101l\u012b instead, and traveled to the river Roh\u012bni. The M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da version expands and says that before reaching the river, he met with a seer called Majjhantika (following the prediction earlier) and five hundred of his followers, who converted to Buddhism. Some sources add that \u0100nanda passed the Buddha's message on to him. When \u0100nanda was crossing the river, he was followed by King Aj\u0101sattu (), who wanted to witness his death and was interested in his remains as relics. \u0100nanda had once promised Aj\u0101sattu that he would let him know when he would die, and accordingly, \u0100nanda had informed him. On the other side of the river, however, a group of Licchavis from Ves\u0101l\u012b awaited him for the same reason. In the P\u0101li, there were also two parties interested, but the two parties were the S\u0101kiyan and the Koliyan clans instead. \u0100nanda realized that his death on either side of the river could anger one of the parties involved. Through a supernatural accomplishment, he therefore surged into the air to levitate and meditate in mid-air, making his body go up in fire, with his relics landing on both banks of the river, or in some versions of the account, splitting in four parts. In this way, \u0100nanda had pleased all the parties involved. In some other versions of the account, including the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da version, his death took place on a barge in the middle of the river, however, instead of in mid-air. The remains were divided in two, following the wishes of \u0100nanda.\nMajjhantika later successfully carried out the mission following the Buddha's prediction. The latter's pupil Upagupta was described to be the teacher of King A\u015boka (3rd century BCE). Together with four or five other pupils of \u0100nanda, S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b and Majjhantika formed the majority of the Second Council, with Majjhantika being \u0100nanda's last pupil. Post-canonical P\u0101li sources add that S\u0101\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b had a leading role in the Third Buddhist Council as well. Although little is historically certain, Cousins thought it likely at least one of the leading figures on the Second Council was a pupil of \u0100nanda, as nearly all the textual traditions mention a connection with \u0100nanda.\nAj\u0101sattu is said to have built a \"st\u016bpa\" on top of the \u0100nanda's relics, at the river Roh\u012bni, or according to some sources, the Ganges; the Licchavis had also built a \"st\u016bpa\" at their side of the river. The Chinese pilgrim Xuan Zang (60264 CE) later visited \"st\u016bpas\" on both sides of the river Roh\u012bni. Faxian also reported having visited \"st\u016bpas\" dedicated to \u0100nanda at the river Roh\u012bni, but also in Mathur\u0101. Moreover, according to the M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da version of the Sa\u1e43yukta \u0100gama, King A\u015boka visited and made the most lavish offerings he ever made to a \"st\u016bpa\": He explained to his ministers that he did this because \"[t]he body of the Tath\u0101gata is the body of dharma(s), pure in nature. He [\u0100nanda] was able to retain it/them all; for this reason the offerings [to him] surpass [all others]\"\"body of dharma\" here referred to the Buddha's teachings as a whole.\nIn Early Buddhist Texts, \u0100nanda had reached final Nirvana and would no longer be reborn. But, in contrast with the early texts, according to the Mah\u0101y\u0101na Lotus S\u016btra, \u0100nanda would be born as a Buddha in the future. He would accomplish this slower than the present Buddha, Gotama Buddha, had accomplished this, because \u0100nanda aspired to becoming a Buddha by applying \"great learning\". Because of this long trajectory and great efforts, however, his enlightenment would be extraordinary and with great splendor.\nLegacy.\n\u0100nanda is depicted as an eloquent speaker, who often taught about the self and about meditation. There are numerous Buddhist texts attributed to \u0100nanda, including the \"Atthakan\u0101gara Sutta\", about meditation methods to attain Nirvana; a version of the \"Bhaddekaratta Sutta\" (, ), about living in the present moment; the \"Sekha Sutta\", about the higher training of a disciple of the Buddha; the \"Subha Suttanta\", about the practices the Buddha inspired others to follow. In the \"Gopaka-Mogall\u0101nasutta\", a conversation took place between \u0100nanda, the brahmin Gopaka-Mogall\u0101na and the minister Vassakara, the latter being the highest official of the Magadha region. During this conversation, which occurred shortly after the Buddha's death, Vassakara asked whether it was decided yet who would succeed the Buddha. \u0100nanda replied that no such successor had been appointed, but that the Buddhist community took the Buddha's teaching and discipline as a refuge instead. Furthermore, the \"sa\u1e45gha\" did not have the Buddha as a master anymore, but they would honor those monks who were virtuous and trustworthy. Besides these \"suttas\", a section of the \"Therag\u0101th\u0101\" is attributed to \u0100nanda. Even in the texts attributed to the Buddha himself, \u0100nanda is sometimes depicted giving a name to a particular text, or suggesting a simile to the Buddha to use in his teachings.\nIn East Asian Buddhism, \u0100nanda is considered one of the ten principal disciples. In many Indian Sanskrit and East Asian texts, \u0100nanda is considered the second patriarch of the lineage which transmitted the teaching of the Buddha, with Mah\u0101kassapa being the first and Majjhantika or Sa\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b being the third. There is an account dating back from the Sarv\u0101stiv\u0101da and M\u016blasarv\u0101stiv\u0101da textual traditions which states that before Mah\u0101kassapa died, he bestowed the Buddha's teaching on \u0100nanda as a formal passing on of authority, telling \u0100nanda to pass the teaching on to \u0100nanda's pupil Sa\u1e47av\u0101s\u012b. Later, just before \u0100nanda died, he did as Mah\u0101kassapa had told him to. Buddhist studies scholars Akira Hirakawa and Bibhuti Baruah have expressed skepticism about the teacherstudent relationship between Mah\u0101kassapa and \u0100nanda, arguing that there was discord between the two, as indicated in the early texts. Regardless, it is clear from the texts that a relationship of transmission of teachings is meant, as opposed to an \"upajjh\u0101ya\"student relationship in a lineage of ordination: no source indicates Mah\u0101kassapa was \u0100nanda's \"upajjh\u0101ya\". In Mah\u0101y\u0101na iconography, \u0100nanda is often depicted flanking the Buddha at the right side, together with Mah\u0101kassapa at the left. In Therav\u0101da iconography, however, \u0100nanda is usually not depicted in this manner, and the motif of transmission of the Dhamma through a list of patriarchs is not found in P\u0101li sources.\nBecause \u0100nanda was instrumental in founding the \"bhikkhun\u012b\" community, he has been honored by \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" for this throughout Buddhist history. The earliest traces of this can be found in the writings of Faxian and Xuan Zang, who reported that \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" made offerings to a \"st\u016bpa\" in \u0100nanda's honor during celebrations and observance days. On a similar note, in 5th6th-century China and 10th-century Japan, Buddhist texts were composed recommending women to uphold the semi-monastic eight precepts in honor and gratitude of \u0100nanda. In Japan, this was done through the format of a penance ritual called \"keka\" (). By the 13th century, in Japan a cult-like interest for \u0100nanda had developed in a number of convents, in which images and \"st\u016bpas\" were used and ceremonies were held in his honor. Presently, opinion among scholars is divided as to whether \u0100nanda's cult among \"bhikkhun\u012bs\" was an expression of their dependence on male monastic tradition, or the opposite, an expression of their legitimacy and independence.\nP\u0101li Vinaya texts attribute the design of the Buddhist monk's robe to \u0100nanda. As Buddhism prospered, more laypeople started to donate expensive cloth for robes, which put the monks at risk for theft. To decrease its commercial value, monks therefore cut up the cloth offered, before they sew a robe from it. The Buddha asked \u0100nanda to think of a model for a Buddhist robe, made from small pieces of cloth. \u0100nanda designed a standard robe model, based on the rice fields of Magadha, which were divided in sections by banks of earth. Another tradition that is connected to \u0100nanda is \"paritta\" recitation. Therav\u0101da Buddhists explain that the custom of sprinkling water during \"paritta\" chanting originates in \u0100nanda's visit to Ves\u0101l\u012b, when he recited the \"Ratana Sutta\" and sprinkled water from his alms bowl. A third tradition sometimes attributed to \u0100nanda is the use of Bodhi trees in Buddhism. It is described in the text \"K\u0101li\u1e45gabodhi J\u0101taka\" that \u0100nanda planted a Bodhi tree as a symbol of the Buddha's enlightenment, to give people the chance to pay their respects to the Buddha. This tree and shrine came to be known as the \u0100nanda Bodhi Tree, said to have grown from a seed from the original Bodhi Tree under which the Buddha is depicted to have attained enlightenment. Many of this type of Bodhi Tree shrines in Southeast Asia were erected following this example. Presently, the \u0100nanda Bodhi Tree is sometimes identified with a tree at the ruins of Jetavana, S\u0101vatthi, based on the records of Faxian.\nIn art.\nBetween 1856 and 1858 Richard Wagner wrote a draft for an opera libretto based on the legend about \u0100nanda and the low-caste girl Prak\u1e5bti. He left only a fragmentary prose sketch of a work to be called \"Die Sieger\", but the topic inspired his later opera \"Parsifal\". Furthermore, the draft was used by composer Jonathan Harvey in his 2007 opera Wagner Dream. In Wagner's version of the legend, which he based on orientalist Eug\u00e8ne Burnouf's translations, the magical spell of Prak\u1e5bti's mother does not work on \u0100nanda, and Prak\u1e5bti turns to the Buddha to explain her desires for \u0100nanda. The Buddha replies that a union between Prak\u1e5bti and \u0100nanda is possible, but Prak\u1e5bti must agree to the Buddha's conditions. Prak\u1e5bti agrees, and it is revealed that the Buddha means something else than she does: he asks Prak\u1e5bti to ordain as a \"bhikkhun\u012b\", and live the celibate life as a kind of sister to \u0100nanda. At first, Prak\u1e5bti weeps in dismay, but after the Buddha explains that her current situation is a result of karma from her previous life, she understands and rejoices in the life of a \"bhikkhun\u012b\". Apart from the spiritual themes, Wagner also addresses the faults of the caste system by having the Buddha criticize it.\nDrawing from Schopenhauer's philosophy, Wagner contrasts desire-driven salvation and true spiritual salvation: by seeking deliverance through the person she loves, Prak\u1e5bti only affirms her \"will to live\" (), which is blocking her from attaining deliverance. By being ordained as a \"bhikkhun\u012b\" she strives for her spiritual salvation instead. Thus, the early Buddhist account of Mah\u0101paj\u0101pati's ordination is replaced by that of Prak\u1e5bti. According to Wagner, by allowing Prak\u1e5bti to become ordained, the Buddha also completes his own aim in life: \"[H]e regards his existence in the world, whose aim was to benefit all beings, as completed, since he had become able to offer deliverancewithout mediationalso to woman.\"\nThe same legend of \u0100nanda and Prak\u1e5bti was made into a short prose play by the Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore, called \"Chandalika\". \"Chandalika\" deals with the themes of spiritual conflict, caste and social equality, and contains a strong critique of Indian society. Just like in the traditional account, Prak\u1e5bti falls in love with \u0100nanda, after he gives her self-esteem by accepting a gift of water from her. Prak\u1e5bti's mother casts a spell to enchant \u0100nanda. In Tagore's play, however, Prak\u1e5bti later regrets what she has done and has the spell revoked."}
{"id": "1737", "revid": "36681297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1737", "title": "Anaxagoras", "text": "Anaxagoras (; , \"Anaxagoras\", \"lord of the assembly\"; \u00a0BC) was a Pre-Socratic Greek philosopher. Born in Clazomenae at a time when Asia Minor was under the control of the Persian Empire, Anaxagoras came to Athens. According to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius and Plutarch, in later life he was charged with impiety and went into exile in Lampsacus; the charges may have been political, owing to his association with Pericles, if they were not fabricated by later ancient biographers.\nResponding to the claims of Parmenides on the impossibility of change, Anaxagoras described the world as a mixture of primary imperishable ingredients, where material variation was never caused by an absolute presence of a particular ingredient, but rather by its relative preponderance over the other ingredients; in his words, \"each one is... most manifestly those things of which there are the most in it\". He introduced the concept of \"Nous\" (Cosmic Mind) as an ordering force, which moved and separated out the original mixture, which was homogeneous, or nearly so.\nHe also gave a number of novel scientific accounts of natural phenomena. He deduced a correct explanation for eclipses and described the Sun as a fiery mass larger than the Peloponnese, as well as attempting to explain rainbows and meteors.\nBiography.\nAnaxagoras is believed to have enjoyed some wealth and political influence in his native town of Clazomenae. However, he supposedly surrendered this out of a fear that they would hinder his search for knowledge. The Roman author Valerius Maximus preserves a different tradition: Anaxagoras, coming home from a long voyage, found his property in ruin, and said: \"If this had not perished, I would have\"\u2014a sentence described by Valerius as being \"possessed of sought-after wisdom!\"\nAnaxagoras was a Greek citizen of the Persian Empire and had served in the Persian army; he may have been a member of the Persian regiments that entered mainland Greece during the Greco-Persian Wars. Though this remains uncertain, \"it would certainly explain why he came to Athens in the year of Salamis, 480/79 B.C.\" Anaxagoras is said to have remained in Athens for thirty years. Pericles learned to love and admire him, and the poet Euripides derived from him an enthusiasm for science and humanity.\nAnaxagoras brought philosophy and the spirit of scientific inquiry from Ionia to Athens. His observations of the celestial bodies and the fall of meteorites led him to form new theories of the universal order, and to prediction of the impact of meteorites. Plutarch says \"Anaxagoras is said to have predicted that if the heavenly bodies should be loosened by some slip or shake, one of them might be torn away, and might plunge and fall down to earth\". According to Pliny he was credited with predicting the fall of the meteorite in 467. He attempted to give a scientific account of eclipses, meteors, rainbows, and the Sun, which he described as a mass of blazing metal, larger than the Peloponnese; his theories about eclipses, the Sun and Moon may well have been based on observations of the eclipse of 463 BCE, which was visible in Greece.He also said that the Moon had mountains and believed that it was inhabited. The heavenly bodies, he asserted, were masses of stone torn from the Earth and ignited by rapid rotation. He was the first to give a correct explanation of eclipses, and was both famous and notorious for his scientific theories, including the claims that the Sun is a mass of red-hot metal, that the Moon is earthy, and that the stars are fiery stones. He thought the Earth was flat and floated supported by 'strong' air under it and disturbances in this air sometimes caused earthquakes. These speculations made him vulnerable in Athens to a charge of asebeia (impiety). Diogenes La\u00ebrtius reports the story that he was prosecuted by Cleon for impiety, but Plutarch says that Pericles sent his former tutor, Anaxagoras, to Lampsacus for his own safety after the Athenians began to blame him for the Peloponnesian war.\nThe charges against Anaxagoras may have stemmed from his denial of the existence of a solar or lunar deity. According to La\u00ebrtius, Pericles spoke in defense of Anaxagoras at his trial, . Even so, Anaxagoras was forced to retire from Athens to Lampsacus in Troad (433). He died there in around the year 428. Citizens of Lampsacus erected an altar to Mind and Truth in his memory, and observed the anniversary of his death for many years. They placed over his grave the following inscription: Here Anaxagoras, who in his quest of truth scaled heaven itself, is laid to rest.\nAnaxagoras wrote a book of philosophy, but only fragments of the first part of this have survived, through preservation in work of Simplicius of Cilicia in the 6th century AD.\nPhilosophy.\nAccording to Anaxagoras all things have existed in some way from the beginning, but originally they existed in infinitesimally small fragments of themselves, endless in number and inextricably combined throughout the universe. All things existed in this mass, but in a confused and indistinguishable form. There was an infinite number of homogeneous parts () as well as heterogeneous ones.\nThe work of arrangement, the segregation of like from unlike and the summation of the whole into totals of the same name, was the work of Mind or Reason (). Mind is no less unlimited than the chaotic mass, but it stood pure and independent, a thing of finer texture, alike in all its manifestations and everywhere the same. This subtle agent, possessed of all knowledge and power, is especially seen ruling in all the forms of life. Its first appearance, and the only manifestation of it which Anaxagoras describes, is Motion. It gave distinctness and reality to the aggregates of like parts.\nDecrease and growth represent a new aggregation () and disruption (). However, the original intermixture of things is never wholly overcome. Each thing contains in itself parts of other things or heterogeneous elements, and is what it is, only on account of the preponderance of certain homogeneous parts which constitute its character. Out of this process arise the things we see in this world.\nLiterary references.\nAnaxagoras is mentioned by Socrates during his trial in Plato's \"Apology\". In the \"Phaedo\", Plato portrays Socrates saying of Anaxagoras that as a young man: 'I eagerly acquired his books and read them as quickly as I could'.\nIn a quote which begins Nathanael West's first book \"The Dream Life of Balso Snell\" (1931), Marcel Proust's character Bergotte says, \"After all, my dear fellow, life, Anaxagoras has said, is a journey.\"\nAnaxagoras appears as a character in \"Faust, Part II\" by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.\nAnaxagoras appears as a character in \"The Ionia Sanction\", by Gary Corby.\nAnaxagoras is referred to and admired by Cyrus Spitama, the hero and narrator of \"Creation\", by Gore Vidal. The book contains this passage, explaining how Anaxagoras became influential:\nWilliam H. Gass begins his novel, \"The Tunnel\" (1995), with a quote from Anaxagoras: \"The descent to hell is the same from every place.\"\nHe is also mentioned in Seneca's Natural Questions (Book 4B, originally Book 3: On Clouds, Hail, Snow) It reads: \"Why should I too allow myself the same liberty as Anaxagoras allowed himself?\"\nDante Alighieri places Anaxagoras in the First Circle of Hell (Limbo) in his \"Divine Comedy\" (\"Inferno\", Canto IV, line 137).\nChapter 5 in Book II of De Docta Ignorantia (1440) by Nicholas of Cusa is dedicated to the truth of the sentence \"Each thing is in each thing\" which he attributes to Anaxagoras."}
{"id": "1738", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1738", "title": "Anaxarchus", "text": "Anaxarchus (; ; ) was a Greek philosopher of the school of Democritus. Together with Pyrrho, he accompanied Alexander the Great into Asia. The reports of his philosophical views suggest that he was a forerunner of Pyrrhonism. Aelian writes that he was called Eudaemonicus or \"Happy Man\" ().\nLife.\nAnaxarchus was born at Abdera in Thrace. He was the companion and friend of Alexander the Great in his Asiatic campaigns. According to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, in response to Alexander's claim to have been the son of Zeus-Ammon, Anaxarchus pointed to his bleeding wound and remarked, \"See the blood of a mortal, not ichor, such as flows from the veins of the immortal gods.\" Aelian, writes that Anaxarchus laughed at Alexander for making himself a God and said, \"The hopes of our God are in a porringer of broth\", when the physician prescribed a broth to Alexander.\nPlutarch tells a story that at Bactra, in 327\u00a0BC in a debate with Callisthenes, he advised all to worship Alexander as a god even during his lifetime, as they would surely do it after he died.\nWhen Alexander was trying to show that he is divine so that the Macedonians would perform proskynesis to him, Anaxarchus said that Alexander could \"more justly be considered a god than Dionysus or Heracles\", as Dionysus was Theban while Heracles was Alexander's non-Macedonian ancestor. (Arrian, 104).\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius says that Nicocreon, the tyrant of Cyprus, commanded him to be pounded to death in a mortar, and that he endured this torture with fortitude. Cicero relates the same story.\nPhilosophy.\nVery little is known about his philosophical views. It is thought that he represents a link between the atomism of Democritus, and the skepticism of Pyrrho.\nAnaxarchus is said to have studied under Diogenes of Smyrna, whose teachings were said to be the same as those of Democritus' student Protagoras. Diogenes studied under Metrodorus of Chios, who used to declare that he knew nothing, not even the fact that he knew nothing. According to Sextus Empiricus, Anaxarchus \"compared existing things to a scene-painting and supposed them to resemble the impressions experienced in sleep or madness.\" Anaxarchus's student Pyrrho is said to have adopted \"a most noble philosophy, \u2026 taking the form of agnosticism and suspension of judgement.\" Anaxarchus is said to have praised Pyrrho's \"indifference and sang-froid.\" Anaxarchus is said to have possessed \"fortitude and contentment in life,\" which earned him the epithet \"eudaimonikos\" (\"fortunate\"), which may imply that he held the end of life to be \"eudaimonia.\"\nPlutarch reports that he told Alexander the Great that there were an infinite number of worlds, leading Alexander to weep, for he had not yet conquered even one."}
{"id": "1740", "revid": "40600116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1740", "title": "Ancyra (planthopper)", "text": "Ancyra is a small genus of planthoppers of the family Eurybrachidae and the only genus in the tribe Ancyrini. Species in this genus occur in southeast Asia.\nDescription.\nMembers of the genus are well known for having a pair of prolonged filaments at the tips of the forewings that arise near a pair of small glossy spots; this creates the impression of a pair of antennae, with corresponding \"eyes\" (a remarkable case of automimicry). The \"false head\" effect is further reinforced by the bugs' habit of walking backwards when it detects movement nearby, so as to misdirect predators to strike at its rear, rather than at its actual head.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Ancyra\" was first named in 1845 by Scottish zoologist Adam White. It is the only genus of the tribe Ancyrini (subfamily Platybrachinae, family Eurybrachidae). The type species is \"Ancyra appendiculata\", the species name meaning \"bearing appendages\".\nSpecies.\n, lists the following seven species in the genus \"Ancyra\":"}
{"id": "1742", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1742", "title": "Anastasius I", "text": "Anastasius I or Anastasios I may refer to:"}
{"id": "1743", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1743", "title": "Anastasius II", "text": "Anastasius II or Anastasios II could refer to:"}
{"id": "1744", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1744", "title": "Anastasius III", "text": ""}
{"id": "1745", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1745", "title": "Anastasius IV", "text": ""}
{"id": "1746", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1746", "title": "Anaximenes of Lampsacus", "text": "Anaximenes of Lampsacus (; ; 320 BC) was a Greek rhetorician and historian. He was one of the teachers of Alexander the Great and accompanied him on his campaigns.\nFamily.\nHis father was named Aristocles (). His nephew (son of his sister), was also named Anaximenes and was a historian.\nRhetorical works.\nAnaximenes was a pupil of Diogenes the Cynic and Zoilus and, like his teacher, wrote a work on Homer. As a rhetorician, he was a determined opponent of Isocrates and his school. He is generally regarded as the author of the \"Rhetoric to Alexander\", an \"Art of Rhetoric\" included in the traditional corpus of Aristotle's works. Quintilian seems to refer to this work under Anaximenes' name in \"Institutio Oratoria\" 3.4.9, as the Italian Renaissance philologist Piero Vettori first recognized. This attribution has, however, been disputed by some scholars.\nThe hypothesis to Isocrates' \"Helen\" mentions that Anaximenes, too, had written a \"Helen\", \"though it is more a defense speech (\"apologia\") than an encomium,\" and concludes that he was \"the man who has written about Helen\" to whom Isocrates refers (Isoc. \"Helen\" 14). Jebb entertained the possibility that this work survives in the form of the \"Encomium of Helen\" ascribed to Gorgias: \"It appears not improbable that Anaximenes may have been the real author of the work ascribed to Gorgias.\"\nAccording to Pausanias (6.18.6), Anaximenes was \"the first who practised the art of speaking extemporaneously.\" He also worked as a logographer, having written the speech prosecuting Phryne according to Diodorus Periegetes (quoted by Athenaeus XIII.591e). The \"ethical\" fragments preserved in Stobaeus' \"Florilegium\" may represent \"some philosophical book.\"\nAccording to Suda, no one before Anaximenes had invented improvised speeches.\nHistorical works.\nAnaximenes wrote a history of Greece in twelve books, stretching from the gods' origins to the death of Epaminondas at the Battle of Mantinea (\"Hellenica\", ), and a history of Philip of Macedon (\"Philippica\"). He was a favorite of Alexander the Great, whom he accompanied in his Persian campaigns, and wrote a third historical work on Alexander (however, Pausanias 6.18.6 expresses doubt about his authorship of an epic poem on Alexander). He was one of the eight exemplary historiographers included in the Alexandrian canon.\nDidymus reports that the work transmitted as speech 11 of Demosthenes (\"Against the Letter of Philip\") could be found in almost identical form in Book 7 of Anaximenes' \"Philippica\", and many scholars regard the work as a historiographic composition by Anaximenes. The \"Letter of Philip\" (speech 12) to which speech 11 seems to respond may also be by Anaximenes, or it may be an authentic letter by Philip, perhaps written with the aid of his advisers. The more ambitious theory of Wilhelm Nitsche, which assigned to Anaximenes a larger part of the Demosthenic corpus (speeches 10-13 and 25, letters 1\u20134, proems), can be rejected.\nAnaximenes was hostile to Theopompus, whom he sought to discredit with a libelous parody, \"Trikaranos\", published in Theopompus' style and under his name, attacking Athens, Sparta, and Thebes.\nPlutarch criticizes Anaximenes, together with Theopompus and Ephorus, for the \"rhetorical effects and grand periods\" these historians implausibly gave to men in the midst of urgent battlefield circumstances (\"Praecepta gerendae reipublicae\" 803b).\nSaving Lampsacus.\nThe people of Lampsacus were pro-Persian and Alexander was furiously angry, and threatened to do them massive harm. In order to save their women, children and homeland they asked from Anaximenes to intercede. Alexander knew why he had come, and swore by the gods that he would do the opposite of what he would ask, so Anaximenes said, 'Please do this for me, your majesty: enslave the women and children of Lampsacus, burn their temples, and raze the city to the ground.' Alexander had no way round this clever trick, and since he was bound by his oath he reluctantly pardoned the people of Lampsacus."}
{"id": "1747", "revid": "15244483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1747", "title": "Anastasius", "text": "Anastasius (Latinized) or Anastasios () is derived from the Greek (\"anastasis\") meaning \"resurrection\". Its female form is \"Anastasia\" (). A diminutive form of \"Anastasios\" is \"Tasos\" ()."}
{"id": "1748", "revid": "15484855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1748", "title": "Anaximenes of Miletus", "text": "Anaximenes of Miletus (; ; ) was an Ancient Greek, Ionian Pre-Socratic philosopher from Miletus in Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey), active in the latter half of the 6th century BC. The details of his life are obscure because none of his work has been preserved. Anaximenes' ideas are only known today because of comments about him made by later writers, such as Aristotle.\nAs the last of the three philosophers of the Milesian School, considered the first philosophers of the Western world, Anaximenes is best known and identified as a younger friend or student of Anaximander, who was himself taught by the first philosopher Thales. Each developed a distinct cosmology without completely rejecting their predecessors views. Each were material monists who sought to discover the \"arche;\" the one, underlying physical yet divine basis of everything. Thales proposed all was made of water; Anaximander proposed all was made of \"apeiron\" or something indefinite rather than something specific, and Anaximenes proposed all was made of air, or literally \"aer\" which may also include mist or vapor. More condensed air made for colder, denser objects and more rarefied air made for hotter, lighter objects. \nMuch of his astronomical thought was based on Anaximander's, though he altered Anaximander's astrological ideas to better fit his own philosophical views on physics and the natural world. Anaximenes believed the Earth was flat like a disc and rode on air like a frisbee. The Anaximenes crater on the Moon is named in his honor. \nSome of Anaximenes' writings are referenced during the Hellenistic Age, but no record of these documents currently exist. Apollodorus of Damascus estimated Anaximenes' lifespan as having flourished during the same time period in which Cyrus the Great defeated Croesus at the Battle of Thymbra in 546 BC. Philosophy may have spread elsewhere because Miletus was captured by the Persian army in 494 BC.\nAir as the Arche.\nAnaximenes thought air was the primary substance that held the universe together. He believed that air was infinite and divine. He was the first to use the word \"pneuma\" (\u201cbreath of life\u201d) as a synonym for air. One of the only surviving quotes by Anaximenes reads: \u201cJust as our soul...being air holds us together, so \"pneuma\" and air encompass [and guard] the whole world.\u201d The analogy compared atmospheric air as the divine and human air as souls that animate people. This relation of the macroscopic and microscopic suggested Anaximenes believed there was an overarching principle that regulated all life and behavior. Interestingly, the Old Testament features a similar analogy to the founding of the world and creation of man, but Anaximenes did not recognize a creator of the universe and did not think of the \"pneuma\" as a creator to guide man.\nCondensation and rarefaction.\nThe choice of air may seem arbitrary, but Anaximenes based his conclusion on naturally observable phenomena in the water cycle, and the processes of rarefaction and condensation. The primary difference in the forms of air as matter was the degree of condensation and density. When air condenses it becomes visible, and according to Anaximenes, the spread-out, invisible, infinite air was condensed to wind, then formed into clouds, which condensed further to produce mist, rain, and other forms of precipitation. As the condensed air cooled, Anaximenes supposed that Earth itself was an early condensate of air\u2014the process continued until the air was condensed enough to form solids like the Earth and ultimately stones. By contrast, Anaximenes was able to visually see how water evaporates into air and based his concept of rarefaction on this observation. According to him, any object that held light was made of fire, and fire was made from the rarefaction of air. This can be evidenced by blowing on one's hand with a wide open mouth creating warm air and with a narrowly open mouth creating cold air.\nWhile other philosophers also recognized such transitions in states of matter, Anaximenes was the first to associate the qualitative change in hot/dry and cold/wet pairings with the density of a single material, effectively adding a quantitative dimension to the Milesian monistic system. He attributed condensation to cold/wet air and rarefaction to the interaction of hot/dry air. This concept was the foundation for understanding the existence of different substances, materials, and elements due to their arrangement of atoms and number of subatomic particles.\nCosmology.\nHaving concluded that everything in the world is composed of air, Anaximenes used his theory to devise a scheme that explains the origins and nature of the earth and the surrounding celestial bodies. Air felted to create the flat disk of the earth, which he said was table-like and behaved like a leaf floating on air. Anaximenes did not think that stars were floating leaf-like bodies similar to the earth and sun; instead, he thought of stars being similar to nails that are stuck in a transparent shell. In keeping with the prevailing view of celestial bodies as balls of fire in the sky, Anaximenes proposed that the earth let out an exhalation of air that rarefied, ignited and became the stars. While the sun is similarly described as being aflame, it is not composed of rarefied air like the stars, but rather of earth like the moon; its burning comes not from its composition but rather from its rapid motion. Similarly, he considered the moon and sun to be flat and floating on streams of air. In his theory, when the sun sets it does not pass under the earth, but is merely obscured by higher parts of the earth as it circles around and becomes more distant. Anaximenes likens the motion of the sun and the other celestial bodies around the earth to the way that a cap may be turned around the head. Anaximenes believed that the sky was a dome, and day and night are caused by celestial bodies being carried North until they are no longer seen. There is evidence that suggests Anaximenes may have been the first person to distinguish between planets and fixed stars.\nOther phenomena.\nAnaximenes used his observations and reasoning to provide causes for other natural phenomena on the earth as well. Earthquakes, he asserted, were the result either of lack of moisture, which causes the earth to break apart because of how parched it is, or of superabundance of water, which also causes cracks in the earth. In either case the earth becomes weakened by its cracks, so that hills collapse and cause earthquakes. Lightning is similarly caused by the violent separation of clouds by the wind, creating a bright, fire-like flash. Rainbows, on the other hand, are formed when densely compressed air is touched by the rays of the sun. These examples show how Anaximenes, like the other Milesian philosophers, looked for the broader picture in nature. They sought unifying causes for diversely occurring events, rather than treating each one on a case-by-case basis, or attributing them to gods or to a personified nature.\nInfluence on philosophy.\nSince language and communication were very limited in his time, Anaximenes's analogies were key in explaining the uncertain through the certain. For example, he knew for certain that blowing air on his hand with his mouth wide open produced hot air, while blowing on his hand with half-closed lips produced cold air. These observations were key in his postulate that the hot air was due to rarefaction and expansion, whereas the cold air was due to condensation and compression. Although in modern times it is known that this is actually the opposite, Anaximenes was key in arriving at this conclusion. His analogies often connected parallels between man and the cosmos, insinuating that the same natural laws observable on earth applied to the heavens. Over 2000 years later, Isaac Newton proved this to be true. Throughout history, Anaximenes's observations proved helpful to uncover powerful theories, such as quantum physics and chemical properties. By the end of the Milesian philosophy era, there were many questions left unanswered; this sparked the stimulation of Pre-socratic thought to continue through many other notable philosophers such as Pythagoras, Parmenides, Heraclitus, and Democritus.\nAnaximenes greatest influence is not from his theories of matter, but instead it is from how he thought about these ideas. For instance, his theory of air being the underlying substance was disproved, but when looking at his idea from a fundamental aspect, in which a substance is capable of changing forms, his theory was the first of its kind. This concept of changing of forms is fundamental to scientific thought and shows how his ideas, although not correct, were helpful in the development of modern views. In the time of Anaximenes, phenomena were usually explained with reference to religion and mythology. Anaximenes explained events like rainbows with concrete ideas instead of saying they were the work of a goddess. The explanation Anaximenes gave helped in the transition of attributing the cause of phenomena to scientific events, rather than mythology.\nPlato and Aristotle.\nMany similarities to Anaximenes's theories are apparent in Plato\u2019s theory. So much so, that some scholars have said Plato has based his theory of matter on Anaximenes's theory. In Aristotle\u2019s view on Anaximenes, he interprets the theory as the one substance being air, and all other states of matter are different condensations of air. In Plato's interpretation of Anaximenes's theory, he considers the seven states of matter: fire, air, wind, clouds, earth and stone as different densities. Acknowledging that these seven states of matter are different densities shows how the intrinsic properties of the matter have changed, and they are actually different substances. Anaximenes supports this conclusion by his explanation using the concept of felting. Felting is a technological model used to explain condensation, in which wool turns into felt and has new properties. Just as how wind is compressed into clouds in Anaximenes's theory. Without recognizing Anaximenes's influence on Plato, and simply focusing on Anaximenes's influence on Aristotle, Anaximenes's contributions to scientific thought are not fully recognized. Aristotle interpreted Anaximenes's theory as all substance being different manifestations of air. It was Plato's interpretation of Anaximenes's theory that recognized the fundamental changes of air into other substances. And even though Anaximenes's theory was not correct, his influence is apparent in shaping Plato's theory, and it helped to shift the mindset of other thinkers into realizing that fundamental change of substances is possible.\nBecause Plato's theory does not recognize Anaximenes's by name, some scholars have doubted that Plato's theory was actually influenced by Anaximenes. The proponents of the influence have written that the uniqueness of Anaximenes's theory and obvious similarities to Plato's theory prove the connection. The opposing viewpoint attributes the similarities to mere coincidence. Because none of Anaximenes's work exists today, there is controversy over the amount of influence Anaximenes's had on Plato."}
{"id": "1749", "revid": "12923157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1749", "title": "Ancus Marcius", "text": "Ancus Marcius (\u2013617 BC; reigned 642\u2013617 BC) was the legendary fourth king of Rome.Upon the death of the previous king, Tullus Hostilius, the Roman Senate appointed an interrex, who in turn called a session of the assembly of the people who elected the new king. Ancus is said to have ruled by waging war as Romulus did, while also promoting peace and religion as Numa did. \nAncus Marcius was believed by the Romans to have been the namesake of the Marcii, a Plebeian family.\nBackground.\nAncus was the son of Marcius (whose father, also named Marcius, had been a close friend of Numa Pompilius, who may be identified with Numa Marcius, and Pompilia (daughter of Numa Pompilius). Ancus Marcius was also the grandson of Numa and therefore a Sabine. According to Festus, Marcius had the surname of Ancus from his crooked arm (\"ancus\" signifying \"bent\" in Latin).\nFirst acts as King.\nAccording to Livy, Ancus's first act as king was to order the Pontifex Maximus to copy the text concerning the performance of public ceremonies of religion from the commentaries of Numa Pompilius to be displayed to the public on wooden tablets, so that the rites of religion should no longer be neglected or improperly performed.He reinstated the religious edicts that were created by Numa that had been removed when Tullus was king.\nWar.\nAncus waged war successfully against the Latins, and a number of them were settled on the Aventine Hill. According to Livy the war was commenced by the Latins who anticipated Ancus would follow the pious pursuit of peace adopted by his grandfather, Numa Pompilius. The Latins initially made an incursion on Roman lands. When a Roman embassy sought restitution for the damage, the Latins gave a contemptuous reply. Ancus accordingly declared war on the Latins. The declaration is notable since, according to Livy, it was the first time that the Romans had declared war by means of the rites of the fetials.\nAncus Marcius marched from Rome with a newly levied army and took the Latin town of Politorium (situated near the town of Lanuvium) by storm. Its residents were removed to settle on the Aventine Hill in Rome as new citizens, following the Roman traditions from wars with the Sabines and Albans. When the other Latins subsequently occupied the empty town of Politorium, Ancus took the town again and demolished it. The Latin villages of Tellenae and Ficana were also sacked and demolished.\nThe war then focused on the Latin town of Medullia. The town had a strong garrison and was well fortified. Several engagements took place outside the town and the Romans were eventually victorious. Ancus returned to Rome with a large amount of loot. More Latins were brought to Rome as citizens and were settled at the foot of the Aventine near the Palatine Hill, by the temple of Murcia. \nAncus Marcius incorporated the Janiculum into the city, fortifying it with a wall and connecting it with the city by a wooden bridge across the Tiber, the Pons Sublicius. To protect the bridge from enemy attacks, Ancus had the end that was facing the Janiculum fortified. Ancus also took over Fidenea to expand Romes influence across the Tiber \nOn the land side of the city he constructed the Fossa Quiritium, a ditch fortification. He also built Rome's first prison, the Mamertine prison. \nHe extended Roman territory to the sea, founding the port of Ostia, establishing salt-works around the port, and taking the Silva Maesia, an area of coastal forest north of the Tiber, from the Veientes. \nHe expanded the temple of Jupiter Feretrius to reflect these territorial successes. \nAccording to a reconstruction of the Fasti Triumphales, Ancus Marcius celebrated at least one triumph, over the Sabines and Veientes.\nDeath and successor.\nAncus Marcius is reported to have died of natural causes in the 24th year of his reign, at the age of 60. He had two sons, one of which would likely take the throne. A member of Ancus' court, Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, ensured that Ancus' sons would be out of Rome so he could put together an election where he would gain the support of the Roman people\nAncus Marcius was succeeded by his friend Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, who was ultimately assassinated by the sons of Ancus Marcius. Later, during the Republic and the Empire, the prominent Gens Marcia claimed descent from Ancus Marcius."}
{"id": "1750", "revid": "40147850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1750", "title": "Andaman Islands", "text": "The Andaman Islands is an archipelago in the northeastern Indian Ocean about southwest off the coasts of Myanmar's Ayeyarwady Region. Together with the Nicobar Islands to their south, the Andamans serve as a maritime boundary between the Bay of Bengal to the west and the Andaman Sea to the east. Most of the islands are part of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a Union Territory of India, while the Coco Islands and Preparis Island in the archipelago's north belong to Myanmar.\nThe Andaman Islands are home to the Andamanese, a group of indigenous people that includes a number of tribes, including the Jarawa and Sentinelese tribes. While some of the islands can be visited with permits, entry to others, including North Sentinel Island, is banned by law. The Sentinelese are generally hostile to visitors and have had little contact with any other people. The government protects their right to privacy.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name Andaman is disputed and not well known.\nIn the 13th century, the name of Andaman appears in Chinese as \"Yen-to-man\" (\u664f\u9640\u883b) in the book \"Zhu Fan Zhi\" by Zhao Rugua. In Chapter 38 of the book, \"Countries in the Sea\", Zhao Rugua specifies that going from Lambri (Sumatra) to Ceylon, it is an unfavourable wind which makes ships drift towards Andaman Islands.\nIn the 15th century, Andaman was recorded as \"An-de-man mountain\" (\u5b89\u5f97\u86ee\u5c71) during the voyages of Zheng He in the Mao Kun map of the Wu Bei Zhi.\nEarly inhabitants.\nThe earliest archaeological evidence yet documented goes back some 2,200 years; however, the indications from genetic, cultural and isolation studies suggest that the islands may have been inhabited as early as the Middle Paleolithic ( around 60,000 years ago ). The indigenous Andamanese peoples appear to have lived on the islands in substantial isolation from that time until the late 18th century.\nChola empire.\nRajendra Chola (1014 to 1042 AD) took over the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.\nBritish colonisation.\nIn 1789, the Bengal Presidency established a naval base and penal colony on Chatham Island in the southeast bay of Great Andaman. The settlement is now known as Port Blair (after the Bombay Marine lieutenant Archibald Blair who founded it). After two years, the colony was moved to the northeast part of Great Andaman and was named Port Cornwallis after Admiral William Cornwallis. However, there was much disease and death in the penal colony and the government ceased operating it in May 1796.\nIn 1824, Port Cornwallis was the rendezvous of the fleet carrying the army to the First Burmese War. In the 1830s and 1840s, shipwrecked crews who landed on the Andamans were often attacked and killed by the natives and the islands had a reputation for cannibalism. The loss of the \"Runnymede\" and the \"Briton\" in 1844 during the same storm, while transporting goods and passengers between India and Australia, and the continuous attacks launched by the natives, which the survivors fought off, alarmed the British government. In 1855, the government proposed another settlement on the islands, including a convict establishment, but the Indian Rebellion of 1857 forced a delay in its construction. However, because the rebellion gave the British so many prisoners, it made the new Andaman settlement and prison urgently necessary. Construction began in November 1857 at Port Blair using inmates' labour, avoiding the vicinity of a salt swamp that seemed to have been the source of many of the earlier problems at Port Cornwallis.\n17 May 1859 was another major day for Andaman. The Battle of Aberdeen was fought between the Great Andamanese tribe and the British. Today, a memorial stands in Andaman water sports complex as a tribute to the people who lost their lives. Fearing foreign invasion and with help from an escaped convict from Cellular Jail, the Great Andamanese stormed the British post, but they were outnumbered and soon suffered heavy loss of life. Later, it was identified that an escaped convict named Dudhnath Tewari had changed sides and informed the British about the tribe's plans. Today, the tribe has been reduced to some 50 people, with less than 50% of them adults. The government of the Andaman Islands is making efforts to increase the headcount of this tribe.\nIn 1867, the ship \"Nineveh\" wrecked on the reef of North Sentinel Island. The 86 survivors reached the beach in the ship's boats. On the third day, they were attacked with iron-tipped spears by naked islanders. One person from the ship escaped in a boat and the others were later rescued by a British Royal Navy ship.\nFor some time, sickness and mortality were high, but swamp reclamation and extensive forest clearance continued. The Andaman colony became notorious with the murder of the Viceroy Richard Southwell Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo, on a visit to the settlement (8 February 1872), by a Pathan from Afghanistan, Sher Ali Afridi. In the same year, the two island groups Andaman and Nicobar, were united under a chief commissioner residing at Port Blair.\nFrom the time of its development in 1858 under the direction of James Pattison Walker, and in response to the mutiny and rebellion of the previous year, the settlement was first and foremost a repository for political prisoners. The Cellular Jail at Port Blair, when completed in 1910, included 698 cells designed for solitary confinement; each cell measured with a single ventilation window above the floor.\nThe Indians imprisoned here referred to the island and its prison as \"Kala Pani\" (\"black water\"); a 1996 film set on the island took that term as its title, \"Kaalapani\". The number of prisoners who died in this camp is estimated to be in the thousands. Many more died of harsh treatment and the harsh living and working conditions in this camp.\nThe Viper Chain Gang Jail on Viper Island was reserved for troublemakers, and was also the site of hangings. In the 20th century, it became a convenient place to house prominent members of India's independence movement.\nJapanese occupation.\nThe Andaman and Nicobar islands were occupied by Japan during World War II. The islands were nominally put under the authority of the Arzi Hukumat-e-Azad Hind (Provisional Government of Free India) headed by Subhas Chandra Bose, who visited the islands during the war, and renamed them as Shaheed (Martyr) &amp; Swaraj (Self-rule). On 30 December 1943, during the Japanese occupation, Bose, who was allied with the Japanese, first raised the flag of Indian independence. General Loganathan, of the Indian National Army, was Governor of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, which had been annexed to the Provisional Government. According to Werner Gruhl: \"Before leaving the islands, the Japanese rounded up and executed 750 innocents.\"\nSince World War II.\nAt the close of World War II, the British government announced its intention to abolish the penal settlement. The government proposed to employ former inmates in an initiative to develop the island's fisheries, timber, and agricultural resources. In exchange, inmates would be granted return passage to the Indian mainland, or the right to settle on the islands. J H Williams, one of the Bombay Burma Company's senior officials, was dispatched to perform a timber survey of the islands using convict labor. He recorded his findings in 'The Spotted Dear' (1957).\nThe penal colony was eventually closed on 15 August 1947 when India gained independence. It has since served as a museum to the independence movement.\nMost of the Andaman Islands became part of India in 1950 and was declared as a union territory of the nation in 1956, while the Preparis Island and Coco Islands became part of the Yangon Region of Myanmar in 1948.\nIn April 1998, American photographer John S Callahan organised the first surfing project in the Andamans, starting from Phuket in Thailand with the assistance of Southeast Asia Liveaboards (SEAL), a UK owned dive charter company. With a crew of international professional surfers, they crossed the Andaman Sea on the yacht \"Crescent\" and cleared formalities in Port Blair. The group proceeded to Little Andaman Island, where they spent ten days surfing several spots for the first time, including Jarawa Point near Hut Bay and the long right reef point at the southwest tip of the island, named Kumari Point. The resulting article in \"Surfer Magazine\", \"Quest for Fire\" by journalist Sam George, put the Andaman Islands on the surfing map for the first time. Footage of the waves of the Andaman Islands also appeared in the film \"Thicker than Water\", shot by documentary filmmaker Jack Johnson, who later achieved worldwide fame as a popular musician. Callahan went on to make several more surfing projects in the Andamans, including a trip to the Nicobar Islands in 1999.\nOn 26 December 2004, the coast of the Andaman Islands was devastated by a tsunami following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, which is the longest recorded earthquake, lasting for between 500 and 600 seconds. Strong oral traditions in the area warned of the importance of moving inland after a quake and is credited with saving many lives. In the aftermath, more than 2,000 people were confirmed dead and more than 4,000 children were orphaned or had lost one parent. At least 40,000 residents were rendered homeless and were moved to relief camps. On 11 August 2009, a magnitude 7 earthquake struck near the Andaman Islands, causing a tsunami warning to go into effect. On 30 March 2010, a magnitude 6.9 earthquake struck near the Andaman Islands.\nIn November 2018, John Allen Chau, an American missionary, traveled illegally with the help of local fishermen to the North Sentinel Island of the Andaman Islands chain group on several occasions, despite a travel ban to the island. He is reported to have been killed. A 2018 Restricted Area Permit (RAP) regime relaxed the prohibition on visiting islands in the area, but this plan was intended only to allow researchers and anthropologists, with pre-approved clearance, to visit the Sentinel islands. Chau had no such clearance and knew that his visit was illegal.\nAccording to the immigration officials at Port Blair airport, citizens of China, Pakistan and Afghanistan are not allowed into the Andaman Islands including USA passport holders who were born in those three countries. Dated 15 Jan 2020.\nGeography.\nThe Andaman Archipelago is an oceanic continuation of the Burmese Arakan Yoma range in the North and of the Indonesian Archipelago in the South. It has 325 islands which cover an area of , with the Andaman Sea to the east between the islands and the coast of Burma. North Andaman Island is south of Burma, although a few smaller Burmese islands are closer, including the three Coco Islands.\nThe Ten Degree Channel separates the Andamans from the Nicobar Islands to the south. The highest point is located in North Andaman Island (Saddle Peak at ).\nThe subsoil of the Andaman islands consists essentially of Late Jurassic to Early Eocene ophiolites and sedimentary rocks (argillaceous and algal limestones), deformed by numerous deep faults and thrusts with ultramafic igneous intrusions. There are at least 11 mud volcanoes on the islands.\nThe climate is typical of tropical islands of similar latitude. It is always warm, but with sea-breezes. Rainfall is irregular, usually dry during the north-east monsoons, and very wet during the south-west monsoons.\nFlora.\nThe Middle Andamans harbour mostly moist deciduous forests. North Andamans is characterised by the wet evergreen type, with plenty of woody climbers.\nThe natural vegetation of the Andamans is tropical forest, with mangroves on the coast. The rainforests are similar in composition to those of the west coast of Burma. Most of the forests are evergreen, but there are areas of deciduous forest on North Andaman, Middle Andaman, Baratang and parts of South Andaman Island. The South Andaman forests have a profuse growth of epiphytic vegetation, mostly ferns and orchids.\nThe Andaman forests are largely unspoiled, despite logging and the demands of the fast-growing population driven by immigration from the Indian mainland. There are protected areas on Little Andaman, Narcondam, North Andaman and South Andaman, but these are mainly aimed at preserving the coast and the marine wildlife rather than the rainforests. Threats to wildlife come from introduced species including rats, dogs, cats and the elephants of Interview Island and North Andaman.\nTimber.\nAndaman forests contain 200 or more timber producing species of trees, out of which about 30 varieties are considered to be commercial. Major commercial timber species are Gurjan (\"Dipterocarpus\" spp.) and Padauk (\"Pterocarpus dalbergioides\"). The following ornamental woods are noted for their pronounced grain formation:\nPadauk wood is sturdier than teak and is widely used for furniture making.\nThere are burr wood and buttress root formations in Andaman Padauk. The largest piece of buttress known from Andaman was a dining table of . The largest piece of burr wood was again a dining table for eight.\nThe Rudraksha (\"Elaeocarps sphaericus\") and aromatic Dhoop-resin trees also are found here.\nFauna.\nThe Andaman Islands are home to a number of animals, many of them endemic. Andaman &amp; Nicobar islands are home to 10% of all Indian fauna species. The islands by ratio is only 0.25% of country's geographical area, has 11,009 species, according to a publication by the Zoological Survey of India.\nMammals.\nThe island's endemic mammals include\nThe banded pig (\"Sus scrofa vittatus\"), also known as the Andaman wild boar and once thought to be an endemic subspecies, is protected by the Wildlife Protection Act 1972 (Sch I). The spotted deer (\"Axis axis\"), the Indian muntjac (\"Muntiacus muntjak\") and the sambar (\"Rusa unicolor\") were all introduced to the Andaman islands, though the sambar did not survive.\nInterview Island (the largest wildlife sanctuary in the territory) in Middle Andaman holds a population of feral elephants, which were brought in for forest work by a timber company and released when the company went bankrupt. This population has been subject to research studies.\nBirds.\nEndemic or near endemic birds include\nThe islands' many caves, such as those at Chalis Ek are nesting grounds for the edible-nest swiftlet, whose nests are prized in China for bird's nest soup.\nReptiles and amphibians.\nThe islands also have a number of endemic reptiles, toads and frogs, such as the Andaman cobra (\"Naja sagittifera\"), South Andaman krait (\"Bungarus andamanensis\") and Andaman water monitor (\"Varanus salvator andamanensis\").\nThere is a sanctuary from Havelock Island for saltwater crocodiles. Over the past 25 years there have been 24 crocodile attacks with four fatalities, including the death of American tourist Lauren Failla. The government has been criticised for failing to inform tourists of the crocodile sanctuary and danger, while simultaneously promoting tourism. Crocodiles are not only found within the sanctuary, but throughout the island chain in varying densities. They are habitat restricted, so the population is stable but not large. Populations occur throughout available mangrove habitat on all major islands, including a few creeks on Havelock. The species uses the ocean as a means of travel between different rivers and estuaries, thus they are not as commonly observed in open ocean. It is best to avoid swimming near mangrove areas or the mouths of creeks; swimming in the open ocean should be safe, but it is best to have a spotter around.\nReligion.\nMost of the tribal people in Andaman and Nicobar Islands believe in a religion that can be described as a form of monotheistic Animism. The tribal people of these islands believe that Paluga is the only deity and is responsible for everything happening on Earth. The faith of the Andamanese teaches that Paluga resides on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands' Saddle Peak. People try to avoid any action that might displease Paluga. People belonging to this religion believe in the presence of souls, ghosts, and spirits. People of this religion put a lot of emphasis on dreams. They let dreams decide different courses of action in their lives.\nOther religions practiced in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are, in order of size, Hinduism, Christianity, Islam, Sikhism, Buddhism, Jainism and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nDemographics.\n, the population of the Andaman was 343,125, having grown from 50,000 in 1960. The bulk of the population originates from immigrants who came to the island since the colonial times, mainly of Bengali, Hindustani and Tamil backgrounds.\nA small minority of the population are the Andamanese \u2014 the aboriginal inhabitants (adivasi) of the islands. When they first came into sustained contact with outside groups in the 1850s, there were an estimated 7,000 Andamanese, divided into the Great Andamanese, Jarawa, Jangil (or \"Rutland Jarawa\"), Onge, and the Sentinelese. The Great Andamanese formed 10 tribes of 5,000 people total.\nAs the numbers of settlers from the mainland increased (at first mostly prisoners and involuntary indentured labourers, later purposely recruited farmers), these indigenous people lost territory and numbers in the face of punitive expeditions by British troops, land encroachment and various epidemic diseases.\nPresently, there remain only approximately 400\u2013450 indigenous Andamanese. The Jangil are extinct. Most of the Great Andamanese tribes are extinct, and the survivors, now just 52, speak mostly Bengali. The Onge are reduced to less than 100 people. Only the Jarawa and Sentinelese still maintain a steadfast independence and refuse most attempts at contact; their numbers are uncertain but estimated to be in the low hundreds.\nGovernment.\nPort Blair is the chief community on the islands, and the administrative centre of the Union Territory. The Andaman Islands form a single administrative district within the Union Territory, the Andaman district (the Nicobar Islands were separated and established as the new Nicobar district in 1974).\nCultural references.\nThe islands are prominently featured in Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes 1890 mystery \"The Sign of the Four.\" The magistrate in Lady Gregory's play \"Spreading the News\" had formerly served in the islands.\nM. M. Kaye's 1985 novel \"Death in the Andamans\" and Marianne Wiggins' 1989 novel \"John Dollar\" are set in the islands. The latter begins with an expedition from Burma to celebrate King George's birthday, but turns into a grim survival story after an earthquake and tsunami. Priyadarshan's 1996 film \"Kaalapani\" (Malayalam; \"Sirai Chaalai\" in Tamil) depicts the Indian freedom struggle and the lives of prisoners in the Cellular Jail in Port Blair. \"Island's End\" is a 2011 novel by Padma Venkatraman about the training of an indigenous shaman. A principal character in the novel \"Six Suspects\" by Vikas Swarup is from the Andaman Islands.\nBrodie Moncur, the main protagonist of William Boyd's 2018 novel \"Love is Blind\", spends time in the Andaman Islands in the early years of the 20th century.\nTransportation.\nThe only commercial airport in the islands is Veer Savarkar International Airport in Port Blair, which has scheduled services to Kolkata, Chennai, New Delhi, Bengaluru and Visakhapatnam. The airport is under the control of the Indian Navy. Prior to 2016 only daylight operations were allowed; however, since 2016 night flights have also operated. A small airstrip, about long, is located near the eastern shore of North Andaman near Diglipur.\nDue to the length of the routes and the small number of airlines flying to the islands, fares have historically been relatively expensive, although cheaper for locals than visitors. Fares are high during the peak seasons of spring and winter, although fares have decreased over time due to the expansion of the civil aviation industry in India. Private flights are also allowed to land in Port Blair airport with prior permission.\nThere is also a ship service from Chennai, Visakhapatnam and Kolkata. The journey requires three days and two nights, and depends on weather.\nReferences.\nNotes\nSources"}
{"id": "1751", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1751", "title": "Alexander Anderson (mathematician)", "text": "Alexander Anderson ( in Aberdeen \u2013 in Paris) was a Scottish mathematician.\nLife.\nHe was born in Aberdeen, possibly in 1582, according to a print which suggests he was aged 35 in 1617. It is unknown where he was educated, but it is likely that he initially studied writing and philosophy (the \"belles lettres\") in his home city of Aberdeen.\nHe then went to the continent, and was a professor of mathematics in Paris by the start of the seventeenth century. There he published or edited, between the years 1612 and 1619, various geometric and algebraic tracts. He described himself as having \"more wisdom than riches\" in the dedication of \"Vindiciae Archimedis\" (1616).\nHe was first cousin of David Anderson of Finshaugh, a celebrated mathematician, and David Anderson's daughter was the mother of mathematician James Gregory.\nWork.\nHe was selected by the executors of Fran\u00e7ois Vi\u00e8te to revise and edit Vi\u00e8te's manuscript works. Vi\u00e8te died in 1603, and it is unclear if Anderson knew him, but his eminence was sufficient to attract the attention of the dead man's executors. Anderson corrected and expanded upon Vi\u00e8te's manuscripts, which extended known geometry to the new algebra, which used general symbols to represent quantities.\nPublications.\nThe known works of Anderson amount to six thin quarto volumes, and as the last of them was published in 1619, it is probable that the author died soon after that year, but the precise date is unknown. He wrote other works that have since been lost. From his last work it appears he wrote another piece, \"A Treatise on the Mensuration of Solids,\" and copies of two other works, \"Ex. Math.\" and \"Stereometria Triangulorum Sph\u00e6ricorum\", were in the possession of Sir Alexander Hume until the after the middle of the seventeenth century.\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "1752", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1752", "title": "Andocides", "text": "Andocides (; , \"Andokides\"; c. 440 \u2013 c. 390 BC) was a logographer (speech writer) in Ancient Greece. He was one of the ten Attic orators included in the \"Alexandrian Canon\" compiled by Aristophanes of Byzantium and Aristarchus of Samothrace in the third century BC.\nLife.\nAndocides was the son of Leogoras, and was born in Athens around 440 BC. He belonged to the ancient Eupatrid family of the Kerykes, who traced their lineage up to Odysseus and the god Hermes.\nDuring his youth, Andocides seems to have been employed on various occasions as ambassador to Thessaly, Macedonia, Molossia, Thesprotia, Italy, and Sicily. And although he was frequently attacked for his political opinions, he maintained his ground until, in 415, he became involved in the charge brought against Alcibiades for having profaned the mysteries and mutilated the Herms on the eve of the departure of the Athenian expedition against Sicily. It appeared particularly likely that Andocides was an accomplice in the latter of these crimes, which was believed to be a preliminary step towards overthrowing the democratic constitution, since the Herm standing close to his house in the phyle Aegeis was among the very few which had not been injured.\nAndocides was accordingly seized and thrown into prison, but after some time recovered his freedom by a promise that he would become an informer and reveal the names of the real perpetrators of the crime; and on the suggestion of one Charmides or Timaeus, he mentioned four, all of whom were put to death. He is also said to have denounced his own father on the charge of profaning the mysteries, but to have rescued him again in the hour of danger - a charge he strenuously denied. But as Andocides was unable to clear himself from the charge, he was deprived of his rights as a citizen, and left Athens.\nAndocides traveled about in various parts of Greece, and was chiefly engaged in commercial enterprise and in forming connections with powerful people. The means he employed to gain the friendship of powerful men were sometimes of the most disreputable kind; among which a service he rendered to a prince in Cyprus is mentioned in particular.\nIn 411, Andocides returned to Athens on the establishment of the oligarchic government of the Four Hundred, hoping that a certain service he had rendered the Athenian ships at Samos would secure him a welcome reception. But no sooner were the oligarchs informed of the return of Andocides, than that their leader Peisander had him seized, and accused him of having supported the party opposed to them at Samos. During his trial, Andocides, who perceived the exasperation prevailing against him, leaped to the altar which stood in the court, and there assumed the attitude of a supplicant. This saved his life, but he was imprisoned. Soon afterwards, however, he was set free, or escaped from prison.\nAndocides then went to Cyprus, where for a time he enjoyed the friendship of Evagoras; but, by some circumstance or other, he exasperated his friend, and was consigned to prison. Here again he escaped, and after the restoration of democracy in Athens and the abolition of the Four Hundred, he ventured once more to return to Athens; but as he was still suffering under a sentence of civil disenfranchisement, he endeavored by means of bribes to persuade the prytaneis to allow him to attend the assembly of the people. The latter, however, expelled him from the city. It was on this occasion, in 411, that Andocides delivered the speech still extant \"On his return\", on which he petitioned for permission to reside at Athens, but in vain. In his third exile, Andocides went to reside in Elis, and during the time of his absence from his native city, his house there was occupied by Cleophon, the leading demagogue.\nAndocides remained in exile until after the overthrow of the tyranny of the Thirty by Thrasybulus, when the general amnesty then proclaimed made him hope that its benefit would be extended to him also. He himself says that he returned to Athens from Cyprus, where he claimed to have great influence and considerable property. Because of the general amnesty, he was allowed to remain at Athens, enjoyed peace for the next three years, and soon recovered an influential position. According to Lysias, it was scarcely ten days after his return that he brought an accusation against Archippus or Aristippus, which, however, he dropped on receiving a sum of money. During this period Andocides became a member of the boule, in which he appears to have possessed a great influence, as well as in the popular assembly. He was gymnasiarch at the Hephaestaea, was sent as architheorus to the Isthmian Games and Olympic Games, and was even entrusted with the office of keeper of the sacred treasury.\nBut in 400, Callias, supported by Cephisius, Agyrrhius, Meletus, and Epichares, urged the necessity of preventing Andocides from attending the assembly, as he had never been formally freed from the civil disenfranchisement. Callias also charged him with violating the laws respecting the temple at Eleusis. The orator pleaded his case in the oration still extant \"on the Mysteries\" (\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u03bc\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03b7\u03c1\u03af\u03c9\u03bd), in which he argued that he had not been involved in the profanation of the mysteries or the mutilation of the herms, that he had not violated the laws of the temple at Eleusis, that anyway he had received his citizenship back as a result of the amnesty, and that Callias was really motivated by a private dispute with Andocides over inheritance. He was acquitted. After this, he again enjoyed peace until 394, he was sent as ambassador to Sparta respecting the peace to be concluded in consequence of Conon's victory off Cnidus. On his return he was accused of illegal conduct during his embassy. The speech \"On the peace with the Lacedaemons\" (\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u03c4\u1fc6\u03c2 \u03c0\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u039b\u03b1\u03ba\u03b5\u03b4\u03b1\u03b9\u03bc\u03bf\u03bd\u03af\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03b5\u1f30\u03c1\u03ae\u03bd\u03b7\u03c2), which is still extant, refers to this affair. It was delivered in 393 (though some scholars place it in 391). Andocides was found guilty, and sent into exile for the fourth time. He never returned afterwards, and seems to have died soon after this blow.\nAndocides appears to have fathered no children, since he is described at the age of 70 as being childless, although the scholiast on Aristophanes mentions Antiphon as a son of Andocides. The large fortune which he had inherited from his father, or acquired in his commercial undertakings, was greatly diminished in the latter years of his life.\nOratory.\nAs an orator Andocides does not appear to have been held in very high esteem by the ancients, as he is seldom mentioned, though Valerius Theon is said to have written a commentary on his orations. We do not hear of his having been trained in any of the sophistical schools of the time, and he had probably developed his talents in the practical school of the popular assembly. Hence his orations have no mannerism in them, and are really, as Plutarch says, simple and free from all rhetorical pomp and ornament.\nSometimes, however, his style is diffuse, and becomes tedious and obscure. The best among his orations is that \"on the Mysteries\"; but, for the history of the time, all are of the highest importance.\nBesides the three orations already mentioned, which are undoubtedly genuine, there is a fourth against Alcibiades (\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u1f70 \u1f08\u03bb\u03ba\u03b9\u03b2\u03b9\u03ac\u03b4\u03bf\u03c5), said to have been delivered by Andocides during the ostracism of 415; but it is probably spurious, though it appears to contain genuine historical matter. Some scholars ascribed it to Phaeax, who took part in the ostracism, according to Plutarch. But it is more likely that it is a rhetorical exercise from the early fourth century BC, since formal speeches were not delivered during ostracisms and the accusation or defence of Alcibiades was a standing rhetorical theme. Besides these four orations we possess only a few fragments and some very vague allusions to other orations."}
{"id": "1754", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1754", "title": "Andrea Andreani", "text": "Andrea Andreani (1540\u20131623) was an Italian engraver on wood, who was among the first printmakers in Italy to use chiaroscuro, which required multiple colours.\nAndreani was born and generally active in Mantua about 1540 (Brulliot says 1560) and died at Rome in 1623. His engravings are scarce and valuable, and are chiefly copies of Mantegna, Albrecht D\u00fcrer, Parmigianino and Titian. The most remarkable of his works are \"Mercury and Ignorance\", the \"Deluge\", \"Pharaoh's Host Drowned in the Red Sea\" (after Titian), the \"Triumph of Caesar\" (after Mantegna), and \"Christ retiring from the judgment-seat of Pilate\" after a relief by Giambologna. He was active 1584\u20131610 in Florence.\nAndreani's work is held in several museums worldwide, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, the Ackland Art Museum, the Clark Art Institute, the Harvard Art Museums, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Albright\u2013Knox Art Gallery, the National Gallery of Canada, the Davis Museum at Wellesley College, the Cooper Hewitt, the University of Michigan Museum of Art, the Bowdoin College Museum of Art, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Princeton University Art Museum, and the British Museum."}
{"id": "1755", "revid": "1005608703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1755", "title": "Andrew II of Hungary", "text": "Andrew II (, , , ; 117721 September 1235), also known as Andrew of Jerusalem, was King of Hungary and Croatia between 1205 and 1235. He ruled the Principality of Halych from 1188 until 1189/1190, and again between 1208/1209 and 1210. He was the younger son of B\u00e9la III of Hungary, who entrusted him with the administration of the newly conquered Principality of Halych in 1188. Andrew's rule was unpopular, and the boyars (or noblemen) expelled him. B\u00e9la III willed property and money to Andrew, obliging him to lead a crusade to the Holy Land. Instead, Andrew forced his elder brother, King Emeric of Hungary, to cede Croatia and Dalmatia as an appanage to him in 1197. The following year, Andrew occupied Hum.\nDespite the fact that Andrew did not stop conspiring against Emeric, the dying king made Andrew guardian of his son, Ladislaus III, in 1204. After the premature death of Ladislaus, Andrew ascended the throne in 1205. According to historian L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Kontler, \"[i]t was amidst the socio-political turmoil during [Andrew's] reign that the relations, arrangements, institutional framework and social categories that arose under Stephen I, started to disintegrate in the higher echelons of society\" in Hungary. Andrew introduced a new grants policy, the so-called \"new institutions\", giving away money and royal estates to his partisans despite the loss of royal revenues. He was the first Hungarian monarch to adopt the title of \"King of Halych and Lodomeria\". He waged at least a dozen wars to seize the two Rus' principalities, but the local boyars and neighboring princes prevented him from conquering the principalities. He participated in the Fifth Crusade to the Holy Land in 1217\u20131218, but the crusade was a failure.\nWhen the \"servientes regis\", or \"royal servants\", rose up, Andrew was forced to issue the Golden Bull of 1222, confirming their privileges. This led to the rise of the nobility in the Kingdom of Hungary. His \"Diploma Andreanum\" of 1224 listed the liberties of the Transylvanian Saxon community. The employment of Jews and Muslims to administer the royal revenues led him into conflict with the Holy See and the Hungarian prelates. Andrew pledged to respect the privileges of the clergymen and to dismiss his non-Christian officials in 1233, but he never fulfilled the latter promise.\nAndrew's first wife, Gertrude of Merania, was murdered in 1213 because her blatant favoritism towards her German kinsmen and courtiers stirred up discontent among the native lords. The veneration of their daughter, Elizabeth of Hungary, was confirmed by the Holy See during Andrew's lifetime. After Andrew's death, his sons, B\u00e9la and Coloman, accused his third wife, Beatrice d'Este, of adultery and never considered her son, Stephen, to be a legitimate son of Andrew.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and youth ( 1177\u20131197).\nAndrew was the second son of King B\u00e9la III and B\u00e9la's first wife, Agnes of Antioch. The year of Andrew's birth is not known, but modern historians agree that he was born around 1177. Andrew was first mentioned in connection to his father's invasion of the Principality of Halych in 1188. That year, B\u00e9la III invaded Halych upon the request of its former prince, Vladimir II Yaroslavich, who had been expelled by his subjects. B\u00e9la forced the new prince, Roman Mstislavich, to flee. After conquering Halych, he granted it to Andrew. B\u00e9la also captured Vladimir Yaroslavich and imprisoned him in Hungary.\nAfter B\u00e9la's withdrawal from Halych, Roman Mstislavich returned with the assistance of Rurik Rostislavich, Prince of Belgorod Kievsky. They tried to expel Andrew and his Hungarian retinue, but the Hungarians routed the united forces of Mstislavich and Rostislavich. A group of local boyars offered the throne to Rostislav Ivanovich, a distant cousin of the imprisoned Vladimir Yaroslavich. B\u00e9la III sent reinforcements to Halych, enabling Andrew's troops to repel the attacks. Andrew's reign remained unpopular in Halych, because the Hungarian soldiers insulted local women and did not respect Orthodox churches. Consequently, the local boyars allied themselves with their former prince, Vladimir Yaroslavich, who had escaped from captivity and returned to Halych. Duke Casimir II of Poland also supported Vladimir Yaroslavich, and they expelled Andrew and his retinue from the principality in August 1189 or 1190. Andrew returned to Hungary after his defeat. He did not receive a separate duchy from his father, who only gave him estates and money. On his deathbed, B\u00e9la III, who had pledged to lead a crusade to the Holy Land, ordered Andrew to fulfill his vow. Andrew's father died on 23 April 1196, and Andrew's older brother, Emeric, succeeded him.\nDuke of Croatia and Dalmatia (1197\u20131204).\nAndrew used the funds that he inherited from his father to recruit supporters among the Hungarian lords. He also formed an alliance with Leopold VI, Duke of Austria, and they plotted against Emeric. Their united troops routed the royal army at Ma\u010dki, Slavonia, in December 1197. Under duress, King Emeric gave Croatia and Dalmatia to Andrew as an appanage. In practice, Andrew administered Croatia and Dalmatia as an independent monarch. He minted coins, granted land and confirmed privileges. He cooperated with the Frankopans, Baboni\u0107i, and other local lords. The Canons Regular of the Holy Sepulchre settled in the province during his rule. Taking advantage of Miroslav of Hum's death, Andrew invaded Hum and occupied at least the land between the Cetina and Neretva rivers. He styled himself, \"By the grace of God, Duke of Zadar and of all Dalmatia, Croatia and Hum\" in his charters.\nPope Innocent III urged Andrew to lead a crusade to the Holy Land, but Andrew hatched a new conspiracy against Emeric with the help of John, Abbot of Pannonhalma, Boleslaus, Bishop of V\u00e1c, and many other prelates and lords. The Pope threatened him with excommunication if he failed to fulfill his father's vow, but Andrew did not yield. The conspiracy was uncovered on 10 March 1199, when King Emeric seized letters written by Andrew's partisans to Bishop Boleslaus. That summer, royal troops routed Andrew's army near Lake Balaton, and Andrew fled to Austria. A papal legate mediated a reconciliation between Andrew and Emeric, who allowed Andrew to return to Croatia and Dalmatia in 1200. Andrew married Gertrude of Merania; her father, Berthold, Duke of Merania, owned extensive domains in the Holy Roman Empire along the borders of Andrew's duchy.\nWhen Emeric's son, Ladislaus, was born around 1200, Andrew's hopes to succeed his brother as king were shattered. Pope Innocent confirmed the child's position as heir to the crown, declaring that Andrew's future sons would only inherit Andrew's duchy. Andrew planned a new rebellion against his brother, but King Emeric captured him without resistance near Vara\u017edin in October 1203.\nAndrew was first imprisoned in the fort of Gornji Kneginec, then in Esztergom. Alexander of the Hont-P\u00e1zm\u00e1ny clan freed him in early 1204. Having fallen ill, King Emeric had his son, Ladislaus, crowned king on 26 August. Andrew reconciled with his dying brother, who entrusted him with \"the guardianship of his son and the administration of the entire kingdom until the ward should reach the age of majority\", according to the nearly contemporaneous Thomas the Archdeacon.\nHis nephew's guardian (1204\u20131205).\nKing Emeric died on 30 November 1204. Andrew governed the kingdom as Ladislaus's regent, but he counted his regnal years from the time of his brother's death, showing that he already regarded himself as the lawful monarch during Ladislaus III's reign. Pope Innocent told Andrew that he should remain loyal to Ladislaus. Instead, Andrew seized the money that Emeric had deposited for Ladislaus in Pilis Abbey. Ladislaus's mother, Constance of Aragon, fled from Hungary, taking her son to Austria. Andrew prepared for a war against Leopold VI, Duke of Austria, but Ladislaus suddenly died in Vienna on 7 May 1205.\nReign.\n\"New institutions\" and campaigns in Halych (1205\u20131217).\nJohn, Archbishop of Kalocsa, crowned Andrew king in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r on 29 May 1205. Andrew introduced a new policy for royal grants, which he called \"new institutions\" in one of his charters. He distributed large portions of the royal domainroyal castles and all estates attached to themas inheritable grants to his supporters, declaring that \"the best measure of a royal grant is its being immeasurable.\" His \"new institutions\" altered the relations between the monarchs and the Hungarian lords. During the previous two centuries, a lord's status primarily depended on the income he received for his services to the monarch; after the introduction of the \"new institutions\", their inheritable estates yielded sufficient revenues. This policy also diminished the funds upon which the authority of the \"isp\u00e1ns\", or heads, of the countieswho were appointed by the monarchshad been based.\nDuring his reign, Andrew was intensely interested in the internal affairs of his former principality of Halych. He launched his first campaign to recapture Halych in 1205 or 1206. Upon the boyars' request, he intervened against Vsevolod Svyatoslavich, Prince of Chernigov, and his allies on behalf of Daniel Romanovich, the child-prince of Halych, and Lodomeria. Svyatoslavich and his allies were forced to withdraw. Andrew adopted the title of \"King of Galicia and Lodomeria\", demonstrating his claim to suzerainty in the two principalities. \nAfter Andrew returned to Hungary, Vsevolod Svyatoslavich's distant cousin, Vladimir Igorevich, seized both Halych and Lodomeria, expelling Daniel Romanovich and his mother. They fled to Leszek I of Poland, who suggested that they visit Andrew. However, Vladimir Igorevich \"sent many gifts\" to both Andrew and Leszek, dissuading \"them from attacking him\" on behalf of Romanovich, according to the \"Galician\u2013Volhynian Chronicle\". Vladimir Igorevich's rebellious brother, Roman Igorevich, soon came to Hungary, seeking Andrew's assistance. Roman returned to Halych and expelled Vladimir Igorevich with the help of Hungarian auxiliary troops.\nAndrew confirmed the liberties of two Dalmatian townsSplit and Omi\u0161and issued a new charter listing the privileges of the archbishops of Split in 1207. Taking advantage of a conflict between Roman Igorevich and his boyars, Andrew sent troops to Halych under the command of Benedict, son of Korl\u00e1t. Benedict captured Roman Igorevich and occupied the principality in 1208 or 1209. Instead of appointing a new prince, Andrew made Benedict governor of Halych. Benedict \"tortured boyars and was addicted to lechery\", according to the \"Galician\u2013Volhynian Chronicle\". The boyars offered the throne to Mstislav Mstislavich, Prince of Zvenigorod, if he could overthrow Benedict. Mstislav Mstislavich invaded Halych, but he could not defeat Benedict.\nQueen Gertrude's two brothers, Ekbert, Bishop of Bamberg, and Henry II, Margrave of Istria, fled to Hungary in 1208 after they were accused of participating in the murder of Philip, King of the Germans. Andrew granted large domains to Bishop Ekbert in the Szepess\u00e9g region (now Spi\u0161, Slovakia). Gertrude's youngest brother, Berthold, had been Archbishop of Kalocsa since 1206; he was made Ban of Croatia and Dalmatia in 1209. Andrew's generosity towards his wife's German relatives and courtiers discontented the local lords. According to historian Gyula Krist\u00f3, the anonymous author of \"The Deeds of the Hungarians\" referred to the Germans from the Holy Roman Empire when he sarcastically mentioned that \" the Romans graze on the goods of Hungary.\" In 1209, Zadar, which had been lost to the Venetians, was liberated by one of Andrew's Dalmatian vassals, Domald of Sidraga, but the Venetians recaptured the town a year later.\nRoman Igorevich reconciled with his brother, Vladimir Igorevich, in early 1209 or 1210. Their united forces vanquished Benedict's army, expelling the Hungarians from Halych. Vladimir Igorevich sent one of his sons, Vsevolod Vladimirovich, \"bearing gifts to the king in Hungary\" to appease Andrew, according to the \"Galician\u2013Volhynian Chronicle\". A group of discontented Hungarian lords offered the crown to Andrew's cousins, the sons of Andrew's uncle, G\u00e9za; they lived in \"Greek land\". However, the cousins' envoys were captured in Split in 1210. In the early 1210s, Andrew sent \"an army of Saxons, Vlachs, Sz\u00e9kelys and Pechenegs\" commanded by Joachim, Count of Hermannstadt, (now Sibiu, Romania) to assist Boril of Bulgaria's fight against three rebellious Cuman chieftains. Around the same time, Hungarian troops occupied Belgrade and Barancs (now Brani\u010devo, Serbia), which had been lost to Bulgaria under Emeric. Andrew's army defeated the Cumans at Vidin. Andrew granted the Barcas\u00e1g (now \u021aara B\u00e2rsei, Romania) to the Teutonic Knights. The Knights were to defend the easternmost regions of the Kingdom of Hungary against the Cumans and encourage their conversion to Catholicism.\nA group of boyars, who were alarmed by the despotic acts of Vladimir Igorevich, asked Andrew to restore Daniel Romanovich as ruler of Halych in 1210 or 1211. Andrew and his alliesLeszek I of Poland and at least five Rus' princessent their armies to Halych and restored Daniel Romanovich. Local boyars expelled Daniel Romanovich's mother in 1212. She persuaded Andrew to personally lead his army to Halych. He captured Volodislav Kormilchich, the most influential boyar, and took him to Hungary. After Andrew withdrew from Halych, the boyars again offered the throne to Mstislav Mstislavich, who expelled Daniel Romanovich and his mother from the principality. Andrew departed for a new campaign against Halych in summer 1213. During his absence, Hungarian lords who were aggrieved at Queen Gertrude's favoritism towards her German entourage captured and murdered her and many of her courtiers in the Pilis Hills on 28 September. When he heard of her murder, Andrew returned to Hungary and ordered the execution of the murderer, Peter, son of T\u00f6re. However, Peter's accomplices, including Palatine B\u00e1nk B\u00e1r-Kal\u00e1n, did not receive severe punishments. A group of Hungarian lords, whom Andrew called \"perverts\" in one of his letters, was plotting to dethrone Andrew and crown his eldest son, the eight-year-old B\u00e9la, but they failed to dethrone him and could only force Andrew to consent to B\u00e9la's coronation in 1214.\nAndrew and Leszek of Poland signed a treaty of alliance, which obliged Andrew's second son, Coloman, to marry Leszek of Poland's daughter, Salomea. Andrew and Leszek jointly invaded Halych in 1214, and Coloman was made prince. He agreed to cede Przemy\u015bl to Leszek of Poland. The following year, Andrew returned to Halych and captured Przemy\u015bl. Leszek of Poland soon reconciled with Mstislav Mstislavich; they jointly invaded Halych and forced Coloman to flee to Hungary. A new officer of state, the treasurer, was responsible for the administration of the royal chamber from around 1214 onwards. However, royal revenues had significantly diminished. Upon the advice of the treasurer, Denis, son of Ampud, Andrew imposed new taxes and farmed out royal income from minting, salt trade and custom duties. The yearly exchange of coins also produced more revenue for the royal chamber. However, these measures provoked discontent in Hungary.\nAndrew signed a new treaty of alliance with Leszek of Poland in the summer of 1216. Leszek and Andrew's son, Coloman, invaded Halych and expelled Mstislav Mstislavich and Daniel Romanovich, after which Coloman was restored. That same year, Andrew met Stephen Nemanji\u0107, Grand Prince of Serbia, in Ravno (now \u0106uprija, Serbia). He persuaded Stephen Nemanji\u0107 to negotiate with Henry, Latin Emperor of Constantinople, who was the uncle of Andrew's second wife, Yolanda de Courtenay. Stephen Nemanji\u0107 was crowned king of Serbia in 1217. Andrew planned to invade Serbia, but Stephen Nemanji\u0107's brother, Sava, dissuaded him, according to both versions of the \"Life of Sava\".\nAndrew's crusade (1217\u20131218).\nIn July 1216, the newly elected Pope Honorius III once again called upon Andrew to fulfill his father's vow to lead a crusade. Andrew, who had postponed the crusade at least three times (in 1201, 1209 and 1213), finally agreed. Steven Runciman, Tibor Alm\u00e1si and other modern historians say that Andrew hoped that his decision would increase his likelihood of being elected as Latin Emperor of Constantinople, because his wife's uncle, Emperor Henry, had died in June. According to a letter written by Pope Honorius in 1217, envoys from the Latin Empire had actually informed Andrew that they planned to elect either him or his father-in-law, Peter of Courtenay, as emperor. The barons of the Latin Empire elected Peter of Courtenay in the summer of 1216.\nAndrew sold and mortgaged royal estates to finance his campaign, which became part of the wider Fifth Crusade. He renounced his claim to Zadar in favor of the Republic of Venice so that he could secure shipping for his army. He entrusted Hungary to Archbishop John of Esztergom, and gave Croatia and Dalmatia to Pontius de Cruce, the Templar Prior of Vrana. In July 1217, Andrew departed from Zagreb, accompanied by Leopold VI of Austria and Otto I, Duke of Merania. His army was so largeat least 10,000 mounted soldiers and uncountable infantrymenthat most of it stayed behind when Andrew and his men embarked in Split two months later. The ships transported them to Acre, where they landed in October.\nThe leaders of the crusade included John of Brienne, King of Jerusalem, Leopold of Austria, the Grand Masters of the Hospitallers, the Templars and the Teutonic Knights. They held a war council in Acre, with Andrew leading the meeting. In early November, the Crusaders launched a campaign for the Jordan River, forcing Al-Adil I, Sultan of Egypt, to withdraw without fighting; the crusaders then pillaged Beisan. After the crusaders returned to Acre, Andrew did not participate in any other military actions. Instead, he was collecting relics, including a water jug allegedly used at the marriage at Cana, the heads of Saint Stephen and Margaret the Virgin, the right hands of the Apostles Thomas and Bartholomew and a part of Aaron's rod. If Thomas the Archdeacon's report of certain \"evil and audacious men\" in Acre who \"treacherously passed him a poisoned drink\" is reliable, Andrew's inactivity was because of illness.\nAndrew decided to return home at the very beginning of 1218, even though Raoul of Merencourt, Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, threatened him with excommunication. Andrew first visited Tripoli and participated in the marriage of Bohemond IV of Antioch and Melisende of Lusignan on 10 January. From Tripoli, he travelled to Cilicia, where he and Leo I of Armenia betrothed Andrew's youngest son, Andrew, and Leo's daughter, Isabella. Andrew proceeded through the Seldjuk Sultanate of Rum before arriving in Nicaea (now \u0130znik, Turkey). His cousins (the sons of his uncle, G\u00e9za) attacked him when he was in Nicaea. He arranged the marriage of his oldest son, B\u00e9la, to Maria Laskarina, a daughter of Emperor Theodore I Laskaris. When he arrived in Bulgaria, Andrew was detained until he \"gave full surety that his daughter would be united in marriage\" to Ivan Asen II of Bulgaria, according to Thomas the Archdeacon. Andrew returned to Hungary in late 1218. Andrew's \"crusade had achieved nothing and brought him no honor\", according to historian Thomas C. Van Cleve. Oliver of Padernborn, James of Vitry and other 13th-century authors blamed Andrew for the failure of the crusade. Dr. Stephen Donnachie of Swansea University says that \"...from examining Honorius\u2019s registers and the diplomatic communications between Andrew and the papal curia, Andrew\u2019s genuine commitment to the crusade should not be doubted nor his extensive preparations for the campaign dismissed, even if he did ultimately bungle his opportunity.\"\nGolden Bull (1218\u20131222).\nWhen he returned to Hungary, Andrew complained to Pope Honorius that his kingdom was \"in a miserable and destroyed state, deprived of all of its revenues.\" A group of barons had even expelled Archbishop John from Hungary. Andrew was in massive debt because of his crusade, which forced him to impose extraordinarily high taxes and debase coinage. In 1218 or 1219, Mstislav Mstislavich invaded Halych and captured Andrew's son, Coloman. Andrew compromised with Mstislavich. Coloman was released, and Andrew's youngest son and namesake was betrothed to Mstislavich's daughter. In 1220, a group of lords persuaded Andrew to make his eldest son, B\u00e9la, the Duke of Croatia, Dalmatia and Slavonia.\nAndrew employed Jews and Muslims to administer royal revenues, which caused a discord between Andrew and the Holy See starting in the early 1220s. Pope Honorius urged Andrew and Queen Yolanda to prohibit Muslims from employing Christians. Andrew confirmed the privileges of clergymen, including their exemption from taxes and their right to be exclusively judged by church courts, but also prohibited the consecration of \"udvornici\", castle folk and other serfs in early 1222. However, a new conflict emerged between Andrew and the Holy See after he persuaded B\u00e9la to separate from his wife, Maria Laskarina. An \"immense crowd\" approached Andrew around June 1222, demanding \"grave and unjust things\", according to a letter of Pope Honorius. Actually, the royal servantswho were landowners directly subject to the monarch's power and obliged to fight in the royal armyassembled, forcing Andrew to dismiss Julius K\u00e1n and his other officials. Andrew was also forced to issue a royal charter, the Golden Bull of 1222. The charter summarized the liberties of the royal servants, including their exemption from taxes and the jurisdiction of the \"isp\u00e1ns\". The last clause of the Golden Bull authorized \"the bishops as well as the other barons and nobles of the realm, singularly and in common\" to resist the monarch if he did not honor the provisions of the charter. The Golden Bull clearly distinguished the royal servants from the king's other subjects, which led to the rise of the Hungarian nobility. The Golden Bull is commonly compared with England's \"Magna Carta\" \u2013 a similar charter which was sealed a few years earlier in 1215. A significant difference between them is that, in England, the settlement strengthened the position of all the royal subjects but, in Hungary, the aristocracy came to dominate both the crown and the lower orders.\nConflicts with son and the Church (1222\u20131234).\nAndrew discharged Palatine Theodore Csan\u00e1d and restored Julius K\u00e1n in the second half of 1222. The following year, Pope Honorius urged Andrew to launch a new crusade. If the report of the \"Continuatio Claustroneuburgensis\" is reliable, Andrew took the cross to show that he intended to launch a new crusade, but no other sources mention this event. Andrew planned to arrange a new marriage for his eldest son, B\u00e9la, but Pope Honorius mediated a reconciliation between B\u00e9la and his wife in the autumn of 1223. This angered Andrew, and B\u00e9la fled to Austria. He returned in 1224 after the bishops persuaded Andrew to forgive him.\nIn his \"Diploma Andreanum\" of 1224, Andrew confirmed the privileges of the \"Saxons\" who inhabited the region of Hermannstadt in southern Transylvania (now Sibiu, Romania). The following year, he launched a campaign against the Teutonic Knights, who had attempted to eliminate his suzerainty. The Knights were forced to leave Barcas\u00e1g and the neighboring lands. Andrew's envoys and Leopold VI of Austria signed a treaty on 6 June, which ended the armed conflicts along the Hungarian-Austrian border. As part of the treaty, Leopold VI paid an indemnification for the damages that his troops had caused in Hungary. Andrew made his oldest son, B\u00e9la, Duke of Transylvania. B\u00e9la's former duchy was given to Andrew's second son, Coloman, in 1226. Duke B\u00e9la started expanding his suzerainty over the Cumans, who inhabited the lands east of the Carpathian Mountains. Andrew launched a campaign against Mstislav Mstislavich in 1226 because the latter refused to grant Halych to Andrew's youngest son despite a previous compromise. Andrew besieged and captured Przemy\u015bl, Terebovl, and other fortresses in Halych. However, his troops were routed at Kremenets and Zvenigorod, forcing him to withdraw. Despite his victories, Mstislavich ceded Halych to Andrew's son in early 1227.\nIn 1228, Andrew authorized his son, B\u00e9la, to revise his previous land grants. Pope Honorius also supported B\u00e9la's efforts. B\u00e9la confiscated the domains of two noblemen, Simon Kacsics and B\u00e1nk B\u00e1r-Kal\u00e1n, who had taken part in the conspiracy to murder Queen Gertrude. In 1229, upon B\u00e9la's proposal, Andrew confirmed the privileges of the Cuman chieftains who had subjected themselves to B\u00e9la. Robert, Archbishop of Esztergom, made a complaint about Andrew to the Holy See, because Andrew continued to employ Jews and Muslims. Pope Gregory IX authorized the archbishop to perform acts of religious censure to persuade Andrew to dismiss his non-Christian officials. Under duress, Andrew issued a new Golden Bull in 1231, which confirmed that Muslims were banned from employment, and empowered the Archbishop of Esztergom to excommunicate the king if he failed to honor the provisions of the new Golden Bull. In the second half of the year, Andrew invaded Halych and restored his youngest son, Andrew, to the throne.\nArchbishop Robert excommunicated Palatine Denis and put Hungary under an interdict on 25 February 1232, because the employment of Jews and Muslims continued despite the Golden Bull of 1231. Since the archbishop accused the Muslims of persuading Andrew to seize church property, Andrew restored properties to the archbishop, who soon suspended the interdict. Upon Andrew's demand, Pope Gregory sent Cardinal Giacomo di Pecorari as his legate to Hungary and promised that nobody would be excommunicated without the pope's special authorization. Although Andrew departed for Halych to support his youngest son in a fight against Daniel Romanivich, he continued his negotiations with the papal legate. On 20 August 1233, in the forests of Bereg, he vowed that he would not employ Jews and Muslims to administrate royal revenues, and would pay 10,000 marks as compensation for usurped Church revenues. Andrew repeated his oath in Esztergom in September.\nAndrew and Frederick II, Duke of Austria, signed a peace treaty in late 1233. Andrew, who had been widowed, married the 23-year-old Beatrice D'Este on 14 May 1234, even though his sons were sharply opposed to his third marriage. John, Bishop of Bosnia, put Hungary under a new interdict in the first half of 1234, because Andrew had not dismissed his non-Christian officials despite his oath of Bereg. Andrew and Archbishop Robert of Esztergom protested against the bishop's act at the Holy See.\nLast years (1234\u20131235).\nDanilo Romanovich laid siege to Halych, and Andrew's youngest son died during the siege in the autumn of 1234. However, Andrew stormed Austria in the summer of 1235, forcing Duke Frederick to pay an indemnification for damages that his troops had caused while raiding Hungary. Upon Andrew's demand, Pope Gregory declared on 31 August that Andrew and his sons could only be excommunicated by the authorization of the Holy See. Andrew died on 21 September, and was buried in Egres Abbey.\nFamily.\nAndrew's first wife, Gertrude of Merania, was born around 1185, according to historian Gyula Krist\u00f3. Their first child, Mary, was born in 1203 or 1204. She became the wife of Ivan Asen II of Bulgaria. Andrew's eldest son, B\u00e9la, was born in 1206. He later succeeded his father as king. B\u00e9la's younger sister, Elisabeth, was born in 1207. She married Louis IV, Landgrave of Thuringia. She died in 1231 and was canonized during Andrew's life. Andrew's second son, Coloman, was born in 1208. His third son, Andrew, was born around 1210. Coloman and Andrew each ruled the Principality of Halych for a short period.\nTwo years after his first wife was murdered, Andrew married Yolanda de Courtenay, who was born around 1198. Their only child, Yolanda, was born around 1219 and married James I of Aragon. Andrew's third wife, Beatrice D'Este, was about twenty-three when they married in 1234. She gave birth to a son, Stephen, after Andrew's death. However, Andrew's two older sons, B\u00e9la and Coloman, accused her of adultery and considered her child to be a bastard. Her grandson, Andrew, became the last monarch of the House of \u00c1rp\u00e1d."}
{"id": "1756", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1756", "title": "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding", "text": "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding is a book by the Scottish empiricist philosopher David Hume, published in English in 1748. It was a revision of an earlier effort, Hume's \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", published anonymously in London in 1739\u201340. Hume was disappointed with the reception of the \"Treatise\", which \"fell dead-born from the press,\" as he put it, and so tried again to disseminate his more developed ideas to the public by writing a shorter and more polemical work.\nThe end product of his labours was the \"Enquiry\". The \"Enquiry\" dispensed with much of the material from the \"Treatise\", in favor of clarifying and emphasizing its most important aspects. For example, Hume's views on personal identity do not appear. However, more vital propositions, such as Hume's argument for the role of habit in a theory of knowledge, are retained.\nThis book has proven highly influential, both in the years that would immediately follow and today. Immanuel Kant points to it as the book which woke him from his self-described \"dogmatic slumber.\" The \"Enquiry\" is widely regarded as a classic in modern philosophical literature.\nContent.\nThe argument of the \"Enquiry\" proceeds by a series of incremental steps, separated into chapters which logically succeed one another. After expounding his epistemology, Hume explains how to apply his principles to specific topics.\n1. Of the different species of philosophy.\nIn the first section of the Enquiry, Hume provides a rough introduction to philosophy as a whole. For Hume, philosophy can be split into two general parts: natural philosophy and the philosophy of human nature (or, as he calls it, \"moral philosophy\"). The latter investigates both actions and thoughts. He emphasizes in this section, by way of warning, that philosophers with nuanced thoughts will likely be cast aside in favor of those whose conclusions more intuitively match popular opinion. However, he insists, precision helps art and craft of all kinds, including the craft of philosophy.\n2. Of the origin of ideas.\nNext, Hume discusses the distinction between impressions and ideas. By \"impressions\", he means sensations, while by \"ideas\", he means memories and imaginings. According to Hume, the difference between the two is that ideas are less \"vivacious\" than impressions. For example, the idea of the taste of an orange is far inferior to the impression (or sensation) of actually eating one. Writing within the tradition of empiricism, he argues that impressions are the source of all ideas.\nHume accepts that ideas may be either the product of mere sensation or of the imagination working in conjunction with sensation. According to Hume, the creative faculty makes use of (at least) four mental operations that produce imaginings out of sense-impressions. These operations are \"compounding\" (or the addition of one idea onto another, such as a horn on a horse to create a unicorn); \"transposing\" (or the substitution of one part of a thing with the part from another, such as with the body of a man upon a horse to make a centaur); \"augmenting\" (as with the case of a giant, whose size has been augmented); and \"diminishing\" (as with Lilliputians, whose size has been diminished). (Hume 1974:317) In a later chapter, he also mentions the operations of \"mixing\", \"separating\", and \"dividing\". (Hume 1974:340) \nHowever, Hume admits that there is one objection to his account: the problem of \"The Missing Shade of Blue\". In this thought-experiment, he asks us to imagine a man who has experienced every shade of blue except for one (see Fig. 1). He predicts that this man will be able to divine the color of this particular shade of blue, despite the fact that he has never experienced it. This seems to pose a serious problem for the empirical account, though Hume brushes it aside as an exceptional case by stating that one may experience a novel idea that itself is derived from combinations of previous impressions. (Hume 1974:319)\n3. Of the association of ideas.\nIn this chapter, Hume discusses how thoughts tend to come in sequences, as in trains of thought. He explains that there are at least three kinds of associations between ideas: \"resemblance\", \"contiguity\" in space-time, and \"cause-and-effect\". He argues that there must be some \"universal principle\" that must account for the various sorts of connections that exist between ideas. However, he does not immediately show what this principle might be. (Hume 1974:320-321)\n4. Sceptical doubts concerning the operations of the understanding (in two parts).\nIn the first part, Hume discusses how the objects of inquiry are either \"relations of ideas\" or \"matters of fact\", which is roughly the distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions. The former, he tells the reader, are proved by demonstration, while the latter are given through experience. (Hume 1974:322) In explaining how matters of fact are entirely a product of experience, he dismisses the notion that they may be arrived at through \"a priori\" reasoning. For Hume, every effect only follows its cause arbitrarily\u2014they are entirely distinct from one another. (Hume 1974:324)\nIn part two, Hume inquires into how anyone can justifiably believe that experience yields any conclusions about the world:\nHe shows how a satisfying argument for the validity of experience can be based neither on demonstration (since \"it implies no contradiction that the course of nature may change\") nor experience (since that would be a circular argument). (Hume 1974:330-332) Here he is describing what would become known as the problem of induction.\n5. Sceptical solution of these doubts (in two parts).\nFor Hume, we assume that experience tells us something about the world because of \"habit or custom\", which human nature forces us to take seriously. This is also, presumably, the \"principle\" that organizes the connections between ideas. Indeed, one of the many famous passages of the \"Enquiry\" is on the topic of the incorrigibility of human custom. In Section XII, \"Of the academical or sceptical philosophy\", Hume will argue, \nIn the second part, he provides an account of beliefs. He explains that the difference between belief and fiction is that the former produces a certain feeling of confidence which the latter doesn't. (Hume 1974:340)\n6. Of probability.\nThis short chapter begins with the notions of probability and chance. For him, \"probability\" means a \"higher chance\" of occurring, and brings about a higher degree of subjective expectation in the viewer. By \"chance\", he means all those particular comprehensible events which the viewer considers possible in accord with the viewer's experience. However, further experience takes these equal chances, and forces the imagination to observe that certain chances arise more frequently than others. These gentle forces upon the imagination cause the viewer to have strong beliefs in outcomes. This effect may be understood as another case of \"custom or habit\" taking past experience and using it to predict the future. (Hume 1974:346-348)\n7. Of the idea of necessary connection (in two parts).\nBy \"necessary connection\", Hume means the power or force which necessarily ties one idea to another. He rejects the notion that any sensible qualities are necessarily conjoined, since that would mean we could know something prior to experience. Unlike his predecessors, Berkeley and Locke, Hume rejects the idea that volitions or impulses of the will may be inferred to necessarily connect to the actions they produce by way of some sense of the power of the will. He reasons that, 1. if we knew the nature of this power, then the mind-body divide would seem totally unmysterious to us; 2. if we had immediate knowledge of this mysterious power, then we would be able to intuitively explain why it is that we can control some parts of our bodies (e.g., our hands or tongues), and not others (e.g., the liver or heart); 3. we have no immediate knowledge of the powers which allow an impulse of volition to create an action (e.g., of the \"muscles, and nerves, and animal spirits\" which are the immediate cause of an action). (Hume 1974:353-354) He produces like arguments against the notion that we have knowledge of these powers as they affect the mind alone. (Hume 1974:355-356) He also argues in brief against the idea that causes are mere occasions of the will of some god(s), a view associated with the philosopher Nicolas Malebranche. (Hume 1974:356-359)\nHaving dispensed with these alternative explanations, he identifies the source of our knowledge of necessary connections as arising out of \"observation of constant conjunction of certain impressions across many instances\". In this way, people know of necessity through rigorous custom or habit, and not from any immediate knowledge of the powers of the will. (Hume 1974:361)\n8. Of liberty and necessity (in two parts).\nHere Hume tackles the problem of how liberty may be reconciled with metaphysical necessity (otherwise known as a compatibilist formulation of free will). Hume believes that all disputes on the subject have been merely verbal arguments\u2014that is to say, arguments which are based on a lack of prior agreement on definitions. He first shows that it is clear that most events are deterministic, but human actions are more controversial. However, he thinks that these too occur out of necessity since an outside observer can see the same regularity that he would in a purely physical system. To show the compatibility of necessity and liberty, Hume defines liberty as the ability to act on the basis of one's will e.g. the capacity to will one's actions but not to will one's will. He then shows (quite briefly) how determinism and free will are compatible notions, and have no bad consequences on ethics or moral life.\n9. Of the reason of animals.\nHume insists that the conclusions of the Enquiry will be very powerful if they can be shown to apply to animals and not just humans. He believed that animals were able to infer the relation between cause and effect in the same way that humans do: through learned expectations. (Hume 1974:384) He also notes that this \"inferential\" ability that animals have is not through reason, but custom alone. Hume concludes that there is an innate faculty of instincts which both beasts and humans share, namely, the ability to reason experimentally (through custom). Nevertheless, he admits, humans and animals differ in mental faculties in a number of ways, including: differences in memory and attention, inferential abilities, ability to make deductions in a long chain, ability to grasp ideas more or less clearly, the human capacity to worry about conflating unrelated circumstances, a sagely prudence which arrests generalizations, a capacity for a greater inner library of analogies to reason with, an ability to detach oneself and scrap one's own biases, and an ability to converse through language (and thus gain from the experience of others' testimonies). (Hume 1974:385, footnote 17.)\n10. Of miracles (in two parts).\nThe next topic which Hume strives to give treatment is that of the reliability of human testimony, and of the role that testimony plays a part in epistemology. This was not an idle concern for Hume. Depending on its outcome, the entire treatment would give the epistemologist a degree of certitude in the treatment of miracles.\nTrue to his empirical thesis, Hume tells the reader that, though testimony does have some force, it is never quite as powerful as the direct evidence of the senses. That said, he provides some reasons why we may have a basis for trust in the testimony of persons: because a) human memory can be relatively tenacious; and b) because people are inclined to tell the truth, and ashamed of telling falsities. Needless to say, these reasons are only to be trusted to the extent that they conform to experience. (Hume 1974:389)\nAnd there are a number of reasons to be skeptical of human testimony, also based on experience. If a) testimonies conflict one another, b) there are a small number of witnesses, c) the speaker has no integrity, d) the speaker is overly hesitant or bold, or e) the speaker is known to have motives for lying, then the epistemologist has reason to be skeptical of the speaker's claims. (Hume 1974:390)\nThere is one final criterion that Hume thinks gives us warrant to doubt any given testimony, and that is f) if the propositions being communicated are miraculous. Hume understands a miracle to be any event which contradicts the laws of nature. He argues that the laws of nature have an overwhelming body of evidence behind them, and are so well demonstrated to everyone's experience, that any deviation from those laws necessarily flies in the face of all evidence. (Hume 1974:391-392)\nMoreover, he stresses that talk of the miraculous has no surface validity, for four reasons. First, he explains that in all of history there has never been a miracle which was attested to by a wide body of disinterested experts. Second, he notes that human beings delight in a sense of wonder, and this provides a villain with an opportunity to manipulate others. Third, he thinks that those who hold onto the miraculous have tended towards barbarism. Finally, since testimonies tend to conflict with one another when it comes to the miraculous\u2014that is, one man's religious miracle may be contradicted by another man's miracle\u2014any testimony relating to the fantastic is self-denunciating. (Hume 1974:393-398)\nStill, Hume takes care to warn that historians are generally to be trusted with confidence, so long as their reports on facts are extensive and uniform. However, he seems to suggest that historians are as fallible at interpreting the facts as the rest of humanity. Thus, if every historian were to claim that there was a solar eclipse in the year 1600, then though we might at first naively regard that as in violation of natural laws, we'd come to accept it as a fact. But if every historian were to assert that Queen Elizabeth was observed walking around happy and healthy after her funeral, and then interpreted that to mean that they had risen from the dead, then we'd have reason to appeal to natural laws in order to dispute their interpretation. (Hume 1974:400-402)\n11. Of a particular providence and of a future state.\nHume continues his application of epistemology to theology by an extended discussion on heaven and hell. The brunt of this chapter allegedly narrates the opinions, not of Hume, but of one of Hume's anonymous friends, who again presents them in an imagined speech by the philosopher Epicurus. His friend argues that, though it is possible to trace a cause from an effect, it is not possible to infer unseen effects from a cause thus traced. The friend insists, then, that even though we might postulate that there is a first cause behind all things\u2014God\u2014we can't infer anything about the afterlife, because we don't know anything of the afterlife from experience, and we can't infer it from the existence of God. (Hume 1974:408)\nHume offers his friend an objection: if we see an unfinished building, then can't we infer that it has been created by humans with certain intentions, and that it will be finished in the future? His friend concurs, but indicates that there is a relevant disanalogy that we can't pretend to know the contents of the mind of God, while we can know the designs of other humans. Hume seems essentially persuaded by his friend's reasoning. (Hume 1974:412-414)\n12. Of the academical or skeptical philosophy (in three parts).\nThe first section of the last chapter is well organized as an outline of various skeptical arguments. The treatment includes the arguments of atheism, Cartesian skepticism, \"light\" skepticism, and rationalist critiques of empiricism. Hume shows that even light skepticism leads to crushing doubts about the world which - while they ultimately are philosophically justifiable - may only be combated through the non-philosophical adherence to custom or habit. He ends the section with his own reservations towards Cartesian and Lockean epistemologies.\nIn the second section he returns to the topic of hard skepticism by sharply denouncing it.\nHe concludes the volume by setting out the limits of knowledge once and for all. \"\"When we run over libraries, persuaded of these principles, what havoc must we make? If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, \"Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?\" No. \"Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?\" No. Commit it then to the flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.\"\"\nCritiques and rejoinders.\nThe criteria Hume lists in his examination of the validity of human testimony are roughly upheld in modern social psychology, under the rubric of the communication-persuasion paradigm. Supporting literature includes: the work of social impact theory, which discusses persuasion in part through the number of persons engaging in influence; as well as studies made on the relative influence of communicator credibility in different kinds of persuasion; and examinations of the trustworthiness of the speaker.\nThe \"custom\" view of learning can in many ways be likened to associationist psychology. This point of view has been subject to severe criticism in the research of the 20th century. Still, testing on the subject has been somewhat divided. Testing on certain animals like cats have concluded that they do not possess any faculty which allow their minds to grasp an insight into cause and effect. However, it has been shown that some animals, like chimpanzees, were able to generate creative plans of action to achieve their goals, and thus would seem to have a causal insight which transcends mere custom."}
{"id": "1758", "revid": "1010522567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1758", "title": "Andr\u00e9 de Longjumeau", "text": "Andr\u00e9 de Longjumeau (also known as Andrew of Longjumeau in English) was a 13th-century Dominican missionary and diplomat and one of the most active Occidental diplomats in the East in the 13th century. He led two embassies to the Mongols: the first carried letters from Pope Innocent IV and the second bore gifts and letters from Louis IX of France to G\u00fcy\u00fck Khan. Well acquainted with the Middle-East, he spoke Arabic and \"Chaldean\" (thought to be either Syriac or Persian).\nMission for the holy Crown of Thorns.\nAndr\u00e9's first mission to the East was when he was asked by the French king Louis IX to go to Constantinople to obtain the Crown of Thorns which had been sold to him by the Latin Emperor Baldwin II in 1238, who was anxious to obtain support for his empire. Andr\u00e9 was accompanied on this mission by a Dominican friar, brother Jacques.\nPapal mission to the Mongols (1245\u20131247).\nAndr\u00e9 of Longjumeau led one of four missions dispatched to the Mongols by Pope Innocent IV. He left Lyon in the spring of 1245 for the Levant. \nHe visited Muslim principalities in Syria and representatives of the Nestorian and Jacobite churches in Persia, finally delivering the papal correspondence to a Mongol general near Tabriz. In Tabriz, Andr\u00e9 de Longjumeau met with a monk from the Far East, named Simeon Rabban Ata, who had been put in charge by the Khan of protecting the Christians in the Middle-East.\nSecond mission to the Mongols (1249\u20131251).\nAt the Mongol camp near Kars, Andr\u00e9 had met a certain David, who in December 1248 appeared at the court of King Louis IX of France in Cyprus. Andr\u00e9, who was now with the French King, interpreted David's, a real or pretended offer of alliance from the Mongol general Eljigidei, and a proposal of a joint attack upon the Islamic powers of Syria. In reply to this the French sovereign dispatched Andr\u00e9 as his ambassador to G\u00fcy\u00fck Khan. Longjumeau went with his brother Jacques (also a Dominican) and several others \u2013 John Goderiche, John of Carcassonne, Herbert \"Le Sommelier\", Gerbert of Sens, Robert (a clerk), a certain William, and an unnamed clerk of Poissy.\nThe party set out on 16 February 1249, with letters from King Louis and the papal legate, and rich presents, including a chapel-tent lined with scarlet cloth and embroidered with sacred pictures. From Cyprus they went to the port of Antioch in Syria, and thence traveled for a year to the Khan's court, going ten leagues (55.56 kilometers) per day. Their route led them through Persia, along the southern and eastern shores of the Caspian Sea, and certainly through Talas, north-east of Tashkent.\nOn arrival at the supreme Mongol court \u2013 either that on the Imyl river (near Lake Alakol and the present Russo-Chinese frontier in the Altai), or more probably at or near Karakorum itself, south-west of Lake Baikal \u2013 Andr\u00e9 found G\u00fcy\u00fck Khan dead, poisoned, as the envoy supposed, by Batu Khan's agents. The regent-mother Oghul Qaimish (the \"Camus\" of William of Rubruck) seems to have received and dismissed him with presents and a dismissive letter for Louis IX. But it is certain that before the friar had left \"Tartary\", M\u00f6ngke, G\u00fcy\u00fck's successor, had been elected.\nAndr\u00e9's report to his sovereign, whom he rejoined in 1251 at Caesarea in Palestine, appears to have been a mixture of history and fable; the latter affects his narrative of the Mongols' rise to greatness, and the struggles of their leader Genghis Khan with the mythical Prester John, and in the supposed location of the Mongols' homeland, close to the prison of Gog and Magog. On the other hand, the envoy's account of Mongol customs is fairly accurate, and his statements about Mongol Christianity and its prosperity, though perhaps exaggerated (e.g. as to the 800 chapels on wheels in the nomadic host) are likely factual.\nMounds of bones marked his road, witnesses of devastations which other historians record in detail. He found Christian prisoners from Germany in the heart of \"Tartary\" (at Talas), and was compelled to observe the ceremony of passing between two fires, as a bringer of gifts to a dead Khan, gifts which were treated by the Mongols as evidence of submission. This insulting behaviour, and the language of the letter with which Andr\u00e9 reappeared, marked the mission a failure: King Louis, says Joinville, \"se repenti fort\" (\"felt very sorry\").\nDeath.\nThe date and location of Andr\u00e9's death is unknown.\nWe only know of Andr\u00e9 through references in other writers: see especially William of Rubruck's in \"Recueil de voyages\", iv. (Paris, 1839), pp.\u00a0261, 265, 279, 296, 310, 353, 363, 370; Joinville, ed. Francisque Michel (1858, etc.), pp.\u00a0142, etc.; Jean Pierre Sarrasin, in same vol., pp.\u00a0254\u2013235; William of Nangis in \"Recueil des historiens des Gaules\", xx. 359\u2013367; R\u00e9musat, \"M\u00e9moires sur les relations politiques des princes chr\u00e9tiens\u2026 avec les\u2026 Mongols\" (1822, etc.), p.\u00a052."}
{"id": "1759", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1759", "title": "Andriscus", "text": "Andriscus (, \"Andr\u00edskos\"), also often referenced as Pseudo-Philip, was the last king of Macedon (\u00a0149\u2013148\u00a0BC). A pretender, who claimed to be the son of Perseus of Macedon, he was a fuller from Adramyttium in Aeolis in western Anatolia. His reign lasted just one year and was toppled by the Roman Republic during the Fourth Macedonian War.\nLife.\nIn 168 BC, the Romans invaded Macedonia and overthrew King Perseus in the First Battle of Pydna.\nIn 150 BC, Andriscus, claiming to be Perseus' son, announced his intention to retake Macedonia from the Romans. Livy gives his claim as follows:\n \nAndriscus travelled to Syria to request military help from the Seleucid monarch, Demetrius I Soter. Instead he was handed over to the Romans, but Andriscus managed to escape from Roman captivity and raised a Thracian army. With this army, he invaded Macedonia and defeated the Roman praetor Publius Juventius. Andriscus then declared himself King Philip VI of Macedonia.\nIn 148 BC, Andriscus conquered Thessaly and made an alliance with Carthage, which angered the Romans who declared war (Fourth Macedonian War) on Macedonia. He was defeated by the Roman praetor Quintus Caecilius Metellus Macedonicus in the Battle of Pydna. Following the battle, he fled to Thrace, whose prince gave him up to Rome, thus marking the end to Andriscus' reign of Macedonia. Macedonia was then formally reduced to a Roman province.\nIt was said that Andriscus' brief reign over Macedonia was marked by cruelty and extortion."}
{"id": "1760", "revid": "1012813140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1760", "title": "Andronikos III Palaiologos", "text": "Andronikos III Palaiologos (; 25 March 1297\u00a0\u2013 15 June 1341), commonly Latinized as Andronicus III Palaeologus, was the Byzantine emperor from 1328 to 1341. Born Andronikos Doukas Angelos Komnenos Palaiologos (), he was the son of Michael IX Palaiologos and Rita of Armenia. He was proclaimed co-emperor in his youth, before 1313, and in April 1321 he rebelled in opposition to his grandfather, Andronikos II Palaiologos. He was formally crowned co-emperor in February 1325, before ousting his grandfather outright and becoming sole emperor on 24 May 1328.\nHis reign included the last failed attempts to hold back the Ottoman Turks in Bithynia and the defeat at Rusokastro against the Bulgarians, but also the successful recovery of Chios, Lesbos, Phocaea, Thessaly, and Epirus. His early death left a power vacuum that resulted in the disastrous civil war between his Empress-dowager, Anna of Savoy, and his closest friend and supporter, John VI Kantakouzenos.\nLife.\nAndronikos was born in Constantinople on 25 March 1297. His father, Michael IX Palaiologos, began reigning in full imperial style as co-emperor circa 1295.\nIn March 1318, Andronikos married Irene of Brunswick, daughter of Henry I, Duke of Brunswick-Grubenhagen. In circa 1321 she gave birth to a son, who died in infancy.\nIn 1320, Andronikos accidentally caused the death of his brother Manuel, after which their father, co-emperor Michael IX Palaiologos, died in his grief. The homicide and the general dissolute behavior of Andronikos III and his coterie, mostly the young scions of the great aristocratic clans of the Empire, resulted in a deep rift in the relations between young Andronikos and his grandfather, still reigning as Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos.\nEmperor Andronikos II disowned his grandson Andronikos, who then fled the capital and rallied his supporters in Thrace and began to reign as rival emperor in 1321. Andronikos then waged the intermittent Byzantine civil war of 1321\u201328 against his reigning grandfather, who granted him to reign as co-emperor Andronikos III.\nEmpress Irene died on 16/17 August 1324 with no surviving child. Theodora Palaiologina, sister of Andronikos III, married the new tsar Michael Shishman of Bulgaria in 1324. Andronikos III, then a widower, married Anna of Savoy in October 1326. In 1327 she gave birth to Maria (renamed Irene) Palaiologina.\nAndronikos III concluded the Treaty of Chernomen of 1327, an alliance with tsar Michael Shishman of Bulgaria against Stephen Uro\u0161 III De\u010danski of Serbia. The Byzantine civil war flared again and ultimately led to the deposition in 1328 of Emperor Andronikos II, who retired to a monastery.\nReign.\nMilitary history.\nOttoman Turks besieged Nicaea in Asia Minor, historically the provisional capital of the Byzantine Empire from the Fourth Crusade until the Byzantine recapture of Constantinople. Andronikos III launched a relief attempt, which Ottoman sultan Orhan defeated at the Battle of Pelekanon on 10 or 15 June 1329. Nevertheless, Andronikos III effected the recovery of Lordship of Chios (including Lesbos) from Martino Zaccaria in a naval battle, also in 1329.\nAn alliance with Bulgaria failed to secure any gains for the Byzantine empire. On 28 July 1330, the Serbians decisively defeated the Bulgarians in the Battle of Velbazhd (modern Kyustendil, Bulgaria) without significant Byzantine participation. The Ottomans continued to advance in 1331, finally taking Nicaea (\u0130znik). Andronikos III wanted Nicomedia and the other few Byzantine forts in Anatolia not to suffer the same fate and sought to pay off the Ottomans with tribute.\nAndronikos III reorganized and attempted to strengthen the weakened Byzantine navy, which comprised only 10 ships by 1332; in emergencies, he still could muster a hundred extra merchant ships.\nTo overcome his failure to secure gains against the Serbians, Andronikos III attempted to annex Bulgarian Thrace, but the new tsar Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria defeated Byzantine forces at Battle of Rusokastro on 18 July 1332. Territorial concessions and a diplomatic marriage between the son of the Bulgarian emperor, the future Michael Asen IV of Bulgaria, and Maria (renamed Irene) Palaiologina, daughter of Andronikos III Palaiologos, secured peace with Bulgaria.\nThe Muslim traveler Ibn Battuta visited Constantinople towards the end of 1332 and mentions meeting Andronikos III in his memoirs. Byzantine sources do not attest to the meeting.\nStephen Gabrielopoulos, ruler over Thessaly, died circa 1333; taking advantage of the secession crisis, Andronikos III extended Byzantine control over the region.\nSyrgiannes Palaiologos, entrusted with the governorship of Thessalonica, deserted to the side of king Stephen Uro\u0161 IV Du\u0161an of Serbia and aided their advance in Macedonia. He led the Serbians to take Kastoria, Ohrid, Prilep, Strumica, and possibly Edessa circa 1334 and advanced as far as Thessalonica. Byzantine general Sphrantzes Palaiologos, posing as a deserter, entered the Serbian camp and killed Syrgiannes Palaiologos, ending his advance and bringing the Serbian army into disarray. In August 1334, the king of Serbia made peace with Andronikos III and allowed his forces to retake control of captured parts of Macedonia.\nAndronikos III meanwhile effected the recovery of Phocaea in 1334 from the last Genoese governor, Domenico Cattaneo. However, this victory failed to stem significantly the Ottoman advance in Asia Minor. Byzantine rule gradually vanished from Anatolia as tribute failed to appease Ottoman sultan Orhan, who took Nicomedia (renamed \u0130zmit) in 1337, leaving only Philadelpheia and a handful of ports under Byzantine control.\nDespite these troubles, Andronikos III took advantage of a secession crisis in Despotate of Epirus to seize Byzantine control from Nikephoros II Orsini in 1337.\nDomestic policy.\nJohn Kantakouzenos, \"megas domestikos\" of Andronikos III and later emperor, wielded effective administrative authority during the reign, while the Emperor personally enjoyed hunting and waging war.\nAndronikos III also reformed the judiciary through his creation of a panel of four judges, designated \"Universal Justices of the Romans\".\nFamily.\nAndronikos III was first married in 1318 with Irene of Brunswick, daughter of Henry I, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg; she died in 1324. They had an unnamed son, who died shortly after birth in 1321.\nIn 1326, Andronikos III married as his second wife Anna of Savoy, daughter of Amadeus V, Count of Savoy and of his second wife Marie of Brabant, Countess of Savoy. Their marriage produced several children, including:\nAccording to Byzantine historian Nicephorus Gregoras, Andronikos also had an illegitimate daughter, Irene Palaiologina of Trebizond, who married emperor Basil of Trebizond and took over the throne of the Empire of Trebizond from 1340 to 1341.\nIn his \"Dictionnaire historique et G\u00e9n\u00e9alogique des grandes familles de Gr\u00e8ce, d'Albanie et de Constantinople\" (1983), Mihail-Dimitri Sturdza mentions a second illegitimate daughter of Andronikos, who converted (likely under duress) to Islam under the name Bayalun as one among several wives of \u00d6z Beg Khan of the Golden Horde. This daughter is also earlier mentioned in the 14th century traveller Ibn Battuta's work \"The Travels\", in which Ibn Battuta claimed that he had accompanied Bayalun traveling from Khan's court to Constantinople. Detlev Schwennicke does not include this daughter in \"Europ\u00e4ische Stammtafeln: Stammtafeln zur Geschichte der Europ\u00e4ischen Staaten\" (1978), and the theory of her existence may reflect theories of Sturdza.\nSuccession and legacy.\nAndronikos III died at Constantinople, aged 44, on 15 June 1341, possibly due to chronic malaria. Historians contend that his reign ended with the Byzantine Empire in a still-tenable situation and generally do not implicate deficiencies in his leadership in its later demise. John V Palaiologos succeeded his father as Byzantine emperor, but at only 9 years of age, he required a regent.\nThe energetic campaigns of emperor Andronikos III simply lacked sufficient strength to defeat the imperial enemies and led to several significant Byzantine reverses at the hands of Bulgarians, Serbians, and Ottomans. Andronikos III nevertheless provided active leadership and cooperated with able administrators. Under him, the empire came closest to regaining a position of power in the Balkans and Greek peninsula after the Fourth Crusade. The loss of a few imperial territories in Anatolia, however, left the Ottoman Turks poised to expand into Europe.\nWithin a few months after the death of Andronikos III, controversy over the right to exercise the regency over the new emperor John V Palaiologos and the position of John Kantakouzenos as all-powerful chief minister and friend of Andronikos led to the outbreak of the destructive Byzantine civil war of 1341\u201347, which consumed the resources of the empire and left it in an untenable position. The weakened Byzantine Empire failed to prevent the formation of the Serbian Empire or, more ominously, the Ottoman invasion of Europe."}
{"id": "1761", "revid": "613068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1761", "title": "Andronikos II Palaiologos", "text": "Andronikos\u00a0II Palaiologos (; Summer 1258\u00a0\u2013 13 February 1332), usually Latinized as Andronicus\u00a0II Palaeologus, reigned as Byzantine Emperor from 1282 to 1328. Andronikos' reign was marked by the beginning of the decline of the Byzantine Empire. During his reign, the Turks conquered most of the Western Anatolian territories of the Empire and, during the last years of his reign, he also had to fight his grandson Andronikos in the First Palaiologan Civil War. The civil war ended in Andronikos\u00a0II's forced abdication in 1328 after which he retired to a monastery, where he spent the last four years of his life.\nLife.\nAndronikos II was born Andronikos Doukas Angelos Komnenos Palaiologos () at Nicaea. He was the eldest surviving son of Michael VIII Palaiologos and Theodora Palaiologina, grandniece of John III Doukas Vatatzes.\nAndronikos was acclaimed co-emperor in 1261, after his father Michael VIII recovered Constantinople from the Latin Empire, but he was not crowned until 1272. Sole emperor from 1282, Andronikos II immediately repudiated his father's unpopular Church union with the Papacy, which he had been forced to support while his father was still alive, but he was unable to resolve the related schism within the Orthodox clergy until 1310.\nAndronikos II was also plagued by economic difficulties. During his reign the value of the Byzantine \"hyperpyron\" depreciated precipitously, while the state treasury accumulated less than one seventh the revenue (in nominal coins) that it had previously. Seeking to increase revenue and reduce expenses, Andronikos II raised taxes, reduced tax exemptions, and dismantled the Byzantine fleet (80 ships) in 1285, thereby making the Empire increasingly dependent on the rival republics of Venice and Genoa. In 1291, he hired 50\u201360 Genoese ships, but the Byzantine weakness resulting from the lack of a navy became painfully apparent in the two wars with Venice in 1296\u20131302 and 1306\u201310. Later, in 1320, he tried to resurrect the navy by constructing 20 galleys, but failed.\nAndronikos II Palaiologos sought to resolve some of the problems facing the Byzantine Empire through diplomacy. After the death of his first wife Anne of Hungary, he married Yolanda (renamed Irene) of Montferrat, putting an end to the Montferrat claim to the Kingdom of Thessalonica. Andronikos II also attempted to marry off his son and co-emperor Michael IX Palaiologos to the Latin Empress Catherine I of Courtenay, thus seeking to eliminate Western agitation for a restoration of the Latin Empire. Another marriage alliance attempted to resolve the potential conflict with Serbia in Macedonia, as Andronikos II married off his five-year-old daughter Simonis to King Stefan Milutin in 1298.\nIn spite of the resolution of problems in Europe, Andronikos II was faced with the collapse of the Byzantine frontier in Asia Minor, despite the successful, but short, governorships of Alexios Philanthropenos and John Tarchaneiotes. The successful military victories in Asia Minor by Alexios Philanthropenos and John Tarchaneiotes against the Turks were largely dependent on a considerable military contingent of Cretan escapees, or exiles from Venetian-occupied Crete, headed by Hortatzis, whom Michael VIII had repatriated to Byzantium through a treaty agreement with the Venetians ratified in 1277. Andronikos II had resettled those Cretans in the region of Meander river, the southeastern Asia Minor frontier of Byzantium with the Turks.\nAfter the failure of the co-emperor Michael IX to stem the Turkish advance in Asia Minor in 1302 and the disastrous Battle of Bapheus, the Byzantine government hired the Catalan Company of Almogavars (adventurers from Catalonia) led by Roger de Flor to clear Byzantine Asia Minor of the enemy. In spite of some successes, the Catalans were unable to secure lasting gains. Being more ruthless and savage than the enemy they intended to subdue they quarreled with Michael IX, and eventually openly turned on their Byzantine employers after the murder of Roger de Flor in 1305; together with a party of willing Turks they devastated Thrace, Macedonia, and Thessaly on their road to Latin occupied southern Greece. There they conquered the Duchy of Athens and Thebes. The Turks continued to penetrate the Byzantine possessions, and Prusa fell in 1326. By the end of Andronikos II's reign, much of Bithynia was in the hands of the Ottoman Turks of Osman I and his son and heir Orhan. Also, Karasids conquered Mysia-region with Paleokastron after 1296, Germiyan conquered Simav in 1328, Saruhan captured Magnesia in 1313, and Aydinids captured Smyrna in 1310.\nThe Empire's problems were exploited by Theodore Svetoslav of Bulgaria, who defeated Michael IX and conquered much of northeastern Thrace in . The conflict ended with yet another dynastic marriage, between Michael IX's daughter Theodora and the Bulgarian emperor. The dissolute behavior of Michael IX's son Andronikos III Palaiologos led to a rift in the family, and after Michael IX's death in 1320, Andronikos II disowned his grandson, prompting a civil war that raged, with interruptions, until 1328. The conflict precipitated Bulgarian involvement, and Michael Asen III of Bulgaria attempted to capture Andronikos II under the guise of sending him military support. In 1328 Andronikos III entered Constantinople in triumph and Andronikos II was forced to abdicate.\nAndronikos II died as a monk at Constantinople in 1332.\nFamily.\nOn 8 November 1272 Andronikos II married as his first wife Anna of Hungary, daughter of Stephen V of Hungary and Elizabeth the Cuman, with whom he had two sons:\nAnna died in 1281, and in 1284 Andronikos married Yolanda (renamed Irene), a daughter of William VII of Montferrat, with whom he had:\nAndronikos II also had at least three illegitimate daughters:"}
{"id": "1762", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1762", "title": "Andronikos I Komnenos", "text": "Andronikos I Komnenos (; \u00a0\u2013 12 September 1185), usually Latinized as Andronicus I Comnenus, was Byzantine Emperor from 1183 to 1185. He was the son of Isaac Komnenos and the grandson of the emperor Alexios I.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nAndronikos Komnenos was born around 1118. He was handsome and eloquent, active, hardy, courageous, a great general and an able politician, but also licentious. His early years were spent alternately in pleasure and in military service.\nIn 1141, he was taken captive by the Seljuq Turks and remained in their hands for a year. On being ransomed, he went to Constantinople, where he was held at the court of his first cousin, the Emperor Manuel I Komnenos, to whom he was a great favourite. Here the charms of his niece, Eudoxia, attracted him and she became his mistress. In 1152, accompanied by Eudoxia, he set out for an important command in Cilicia. After his defeat at the Battle of Mamistra, an attack upon Mopsuestia, he returned but was again appointed to the command of a province. This second post he seems also to have left after a short interval, for he appeared again in Constantinople and narrowly escaped death at the hands of the brothers of Eudoxia.\nExile.\nAbout 1153, a conspiracy against the Emperor in which Andronikos participated was discovered, and he was imprisoned. After repeated unsuccessful attempts, he escaped in 1165. After passing through many dangers, including captivity in Vlach territory, he reached Kyiv, where his cousin Yaroslav Osmomysl of Galicia held court. While under the protection of Yaroslav, Andronikos formed an alliance with the Emperor Manuel I, and with a Galician army he joined Manuel in the invasion of Hungary, assisting at the siege of Semlin. The campaign was successful, and Andronikos returned to Constantinople with Manuel I in 1168; a year later, however, Andronikos refused to take the oath of allegiance to the future king B\u00e9la III of Hungary, whom Manuel desired to become his successor. Andronikos was removed from court but received the province of Cilicia.\nStill under the displeasure of the Emperor, Andronikos fled to the court of Raymond, Prince of Antioch. While residing here he captivated and seduced the beautiful daughter of the Prince, Philippa, sister of the Empress Maria. The Emperor was again angered by this dishonour, and Andronikos was compelled to flee. He took refuge with King Amalric I of Jerusalem, whose favour he gained, and who invested him with the Lordship of Beirut. In Jerusalem he saw Theodora Komnene, the beautiful widow of King Baldwin III and niece of the Emperor Manuel. Although Andronikos was at that time fifty-six years old, age had not diminished his charms, and Theodora became the next victim of his artful seduction. To avoid the vengeance of the Emperor, she fled with Andronikos to the court of Nur ad-Din, the Sultan of Damascus. Feeling unsafe there, they continued their perilous journey through the Caucasus and Anatolia. They were well received by King George III of Georgia, whose anonymous sister had probably been the first wife of Andronikos.\nAndronikos was granted estates in Kakhetia, in the east of Georgia. In 1173 or 1174, he accompanied the Georgian army on an expedition to Shirvan up to the Caspian shores, where George recaptured the fortress of Shabaran from the invaders from Darband for his cousin, the Shirvanshah Akhsitan I. Finally, Andronikos and Theodora settled in the ancestral lands of the Komnenoi at Oinaion, on the shores of the Black Sea, between Trebizond and Sinope. While Andronikos was on one of his incursions into Trebizond, his castle was surprised by the governor of that province, and Theodora and her two children were captured and sent to Constantinople. To obtain their release Andronikos in early 1180 made abject submission to the Emperor and, appearing in chains before him, besought pardon. This he obtained, and he was allowed to retire with Theodora into banishment at Oinaion.\nEmperor.\nIn 1180 the Emperor Manuel died and was succeeded by his ten-year-old son Alexios II, who was under the guardianship of his mother, Empress Maria of Antioch. Her Latin origins and culture led to creeping resentment from her Greek subjects. They had felt insulted by the Western tastes of Manuel, and being ruled by his Western wife built tensions to an explosion of rioting that almost became a full civil war. This gave Andronikos the opportunity to seize the crown for himself, leaving his retirement in 1182 and marching to Constantinople with an army that (according to non-Byzantine sources) included Muslim contingents. The defection of the commander of the Byzantine navy, \"megas doux\" Andronikos Kontostephanos, and the general Andronikos Angelos, played a key role in allowing the rebellious forces to enter Constantinople.\nThe arrival of Andronikos Komnenos was soon followed by a massacre of the city's Latin inhabitants, who virtually controlled its economy, resulting in the deaths of thousands of Westerners. He was believed to have arranged the poisoning of Alexios II's elder sister Maria the Porphyrogenita and her husband Renier of Montferrat, although Maria herself had encouraged him to intervene; the poisoner was said to be the eunuch Pterygeonites. Soon afterwards Andronikos had the Empress Maria imprisoned and then killed \u2013 forcing a signature from the child Emperor Alexios to put his mother to death \u2013 by Pterygeonites and the \"hetaireiarches\" Constantine Tripsychos. Alexios II was compelled to acknowledge Andronikos as colleague in the empire in front of the crowd on the terrace of the Church of Christ of the Chalk\u00e8 and was then quickly put to death in turn; the killing was carried out by Tripsychos, Theodore Dadibrenos, and Stephen Hagiochristophorites.\nIn 1183, sixty-five-year old Andronikos married twelve-year-old Agnes of France, daughter of King Louis VII of France and his third wife Ad\u00e8le of Champagne \u2013 Agnes had been betrothed to Alexios II. By November 1183, Andronikos had associated his younger legitimate son John Komnenos on the throne. In 1184, a Venetian embassy visited Constantinople, and an agreement was reached that compensation of 1,500 gold pieces would be paid for the losses incurred in 1171.\nThe reign of Andronikos was characterized by his harsh measures. He resolved to suppress many abuses but above all things to check feudalism and limit the power of the nobles, who were rivals for his throne. He attempted to reform the decaying political system by forbidding the sale of offices, punishing corrupt officials (often brutally) but above all, he moved to check the power of the feudal landowners. The people, who felt the severity of his laws, at the same time acknowledged their justice and found themselves protected from the rapacity of their superiors, who had grown corrupt under the safety and opulence of Manuel I's rule. Andronikos became increasingly paranoid and violent, however, and the Empire descended into a terror state.. In September 1185, he ordered the execution of all prisoners, exiles, and their families for collusion with the invaders. The aristocrats, in turn, were infuriated against him, and there were several revolts.\nThe stories of chaos led to an invasion by William II of the Kingdom of Sicily. William landed in Epirus with a strong force of 200 ships and 80,000 men, including 5,000 knights, and marched as far as Thessalonica, which he took and pillaged ruthlessly (7,000 Greeks died). Andronikos hastily assembled five different armies to stop the Sicilian army from reaching Constantinople, but his forces failed to stand and retreated to the outlying hills. Andronikos also assembled a fleet of 100 ships to stop the Norman fleet from entering the Sea of Marmara. The invaders were finally driven out in 1186 by his successor, Isaac Angelos.\nDeath.\nAndronikos seems then to have resolved to exterminate the aristocracy, and his plans were nearly successful. But on 11 September 1185, during his absence from the capital Stephen Hagiochristophorites, his lieutenant, moved to arrest Isaac Angelos, whose loyalty was suspect. Angelos killed Hagiochristophorites and took refuge in the church of Hagia Sophia. He appealed to the populace, and a tumult arose that spread rapidly over the whole city.\nWhen Andronikos arrived he found that Isaac had been proclaimed emperor. The deposed emperor attempted to escape in a boat with his wife Agnes and his mistress, but they were captured (though some claim that Andronikos survived and managed to escape to the self-proclaimed kingdom of Cyprus). Angelos handed him over to the city mob and for three days he was exposed to their fury and resentment, remaining for that period tied to a post and beaten. His right hand was cut off, his teeth and hair were pulled out, one of his eyes was gouged out, and, among many other sufferings, boiling water was thrown in his face, punishment probably associated with his handsomeness and life of licentiousness. At last he was led to the Hippodrome of Constantinople and hung by his feet between two pillars. Two Latin soldiers competed as to whose sword would penetrate his body more deeply, and he was, according to the representation of his death, torn apart. He died on 12 September 1185. At the news of the Emperor's death, his son and co-emperor, John, was murdered by his own troops in Thrace.\nAndronikos I was the last of the Komnenoi to rule Constantinople, although his grandsons Alexios and David founded the Empire of Trebizond in 1204. Their branch of the dynasty was known as the \"Great Komnenoi\" (\"Megalokomnenoi\").\nFamily.\nAndronikos I Komnenos was married twice and had numerous mistresses. By his first wife, whose name is not known, he had three children:\nBy his niece and mistress Theodora Komnene, Andronikos I had the following children:\nHis second marriage to Anna of France, and his liaisons with his other mistresses, remained childless.\nIn popular culture.\nAndronikos is the main protagonist in Michael Arnold's \"Against the Fall of Night\" (Garden City, New York: Doubleday 1975), as well as Ange Vlachos' \"Their Most Serene Majesties\" (Vanguard Press, 1964).\nHe is mentioned in the Louis L'Amour medieval historical novel, \"The Walking Drum\", with his gruesome death foreseen by the protagonist in a vision.\nHe is among the main characters of the historical novel \"Agnes of France\" (1980) by Greek writer Kostas Kyriazis (b. 1920). The novel describes the events of the reigns of Manuel I, Alexios II and Andronikos I through the eyes of Agnes. The novel ends with the death of Andronikos.\nAndronikos was portrayed in the novel \"Baudolino\" by Umberto Eco, with much detail being given to his grisly end."}
{"id": "1763", "revid": "37521541", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1763", "title": "Andronicus of Cyrrhus", "text": "Andronicus of Cyrrhus or Andronicus Cyrrhestes (, \"Andr\u00f3nikos Kyrrh\u0113stou\"), son of Hermias, was a Macedonian astronomer who flourished about 100 BC.\nLife.\nHe built a \"horologion\" at Athens, the so-called Tower of the Winds, a considerable portion of which still exists. It is octagonal, with figures carved on each side, representing the eight principal winds. In antiquity a bronze figure of Triton on the summit, with a rod in his hand, turned round by the wind, pointed to the quarter from which it blew. From this model is derived the custom of placing weather cocks on steeples."}
{"id": "1764", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1764", "title": "Andronicus of Rhodes", "text": "Andronicus of Rhodes (; ; ) was a Greek philosopher from Rhodes who was also the scholarch (head) of the Peripatetic school. He is most famous for publishing a new edition of the works of Aristotle that forms the basis of the texts that survive today.\nLife.\nLittle is known about Andronicus' life. He is reported to have been the eleventh scholarch of the Peripatetic school. He taught in Rome, about 58\u00a0BC, and was the teacher of Boethus of Sidon, with whom Strabo studied.\nWorks of Aristotle.\nAndronicus is of special interest in the history of philosophy, from the statement of Plutarch, that he published a new edition of the works of Aristotle and Theophrastus, which formerly belonged to the library of Apellicon, and were brought to Rome by Sulla with the rest of Apellicon's library in 84. Tyrannion commenced this task, but apparently did not do much towards it. The arrangement which Andronicus made of Aristotle's writings seems to be the one which forms the basis of our present editions and we are probably indebted to him for the preservation of a large number of Aristotle's works.\nWritings.\nAndronicus wrote a work upon Aristotle, the fifth book of which contained a complete list of the philosopher's writings, and he also wrote commentaries upon the \"Physics\", \"Ethics\", and \"Categories\". None of these works is extant. Two treatises are sometimes erroneously attributed to him, one \"On Emotions\", the other a commentary on Aristotle's \"Ethics\" (really by Constantine Paleocappa in the 16th century, or by John Callistus of Thessalonica)."}
{"id": "1765", "revid": "949532528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1765", "title": "Andronicus", "text": "Andronicus or Andronikos () is a classical Greek name. The name has the sense of \"male victor, warrior\". Its female counterpart is Andronik\u00e8 (\u1f08\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd\u03af\u03ba\u03b7). Notable bearers of the name include:"}
{"id": "1766", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1766", "title": "Asteroid Belt", "text": ""}
{"id": "1767", "revid": "84755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1767", "title": "Ammianus Marcellinus", "text": "Ammianus Marcellinus (born , died 400) was a Roman soldier and historian who wrote the penultimate major historical account surviving from antiquity (preceding Procopius). His work, known as the \"Res Gestae\", chronicled in Latin the history of Rome from the accession of the Emperor Nerva in 96 to the death of Valens at the Battle of Adrianople in 378, although only the sections covering the period 353 to 378 survive.\nBiography.\nAmmianus was born in the Greek-speaking East, possibly in Syria or Phoenicia in 330. His native language was most likely Greek. The surviving books of his history cover the years 353 to 378.\nAmmianus served as an officer in the army of the emperors Constantius II and Julian, he served in Gaul (Julian) and in the east (twice for Constantius, once under Julian). He professes to have been \"a former soldier and a Greek\" (\"miles quondam et graecus\"), and his enrollment among the elite \"protectores domestici\" (household guards) shows that he was of middle class or higher birth. Consensus is that Ammianus probably came from a curial family, but it is also possible that he was the son of a \"comes Orientis\" of the same family name. He entered the army at an early age, when Constantius II was emperor of the East, and was sent to serve under Ursicinus, governor of Nisibis in Mesopotamia, and \"magister militum\". Ammianus campaigned in the East twice under Ursicinus.\nHe travelled with Ursicinus to Italy when Ursicinus was called on by Constantius to begin an expedition against Claudius Silvanus. Silvanus had been forced by the allegedly false accusations of his enemies into proclaiming himself emperor in Gaul. Ursicinus had one of his men assassinate Silvanus, restoring Gaul to Constantius. He then stayed in Gaul to help install Julian as Caesar of Gaul, Spain and Britain. Ammianus probably met Julian for the first time while serving on Ursicinus' staff in Gaul.\nIn 359 Constantius sent Ursicinus back to the east to help in the defence against a Persian invasion led by king Shapur II himself. Ammianus returned with his commander to the East and again served Ursicinus as a staff officer. Ursicinus, although he was the more experienced commander, was placed under the command of Sabinianus, the \"Magister Peditum\" of the east. The two did not get along, resulting in a lack of cooperation between the Limitanei (border regiments) of Mesopotamia and Osrhoene under Ursicinus' command and the Comitatus (Field Army) of Sabinianus. While on a mission near Nisibis, Ammianus spotted a Persian patrol which was about to try and capture Ursicinus, he was able to warn his commander in time. In an attempt to locate the Persian Royal Army Ursicinus sent Ammianus to Jovinianus, the semi-independent governor of Corduene, and a friend of Ursicinus. Ammianus successfully located the Persian main body and reported his findings to Ursicinus.\nAfter his mission in Corduene Amminianus accompanied his commander when the latter rode out from his headquarters at Amida on a mission to make sure the bridges across the Euphrates were demolished. They were attacked by the Persian vanguard who had made a night march in an attempt to catch the Romans at Amida off guard. After a protracted cavalry battle the Romans were scattered, Ursicinus evaded capture and fled to Melitene while Ammianus barely made it back to Amida with a wounded comrade. The Persians started to besiege the city. When it fell Ammianus barely escaped with his life.\nWhen Ursicinus was dismissed from his military post by Constantius, Ammianus too seems to have retired from the military; however, reevaluation of his participation in Julian's Persian campaigns has led modern scholarship to suggest that he continued his service but did not for some reason include the period in his history.\nHe accompanied Julian, for whom he expresses enthusiastic admiration, in his campaigns against the Alamanni and the Sassanids.\nAfter Julian's death, Ammianus accompanied the retreat of the new emperor, Jovian, as far as Antioch. \nHe was residing in Antioch in 372 when a certain Theodorus was thought to have been identified the successor to the emperor Valens by divination. \nSpeaking as an alleged eyewitness, Marcellinus recounts how Theodorus and several others were made to confess their deceit through the use of torture, and cruelly punished.\nHe eventually settled in Rome and began the \"Res Gestae\". The precise year of his death is unknown, but scholarly consensus places it somewhere between 392 and 400 at the latest.\nModern scholarship generally describes Ammianus as a pagan who was tolerant of Christianity. Marcellinus writes of Christianity as being a pure and simple religion that demands only what is just and mild, and when he condemns the actions of Christians, he does not do so on the basis of their Christianity as such. His lifetime was marked by lengthy outbreaks of sectarian and dogmatic strife within the new state-backed faith, often with violent consequences (especially the Arian controversy) and these conflicts sometimes appeared unworthy to him, though it was territory where he could not risk going very far in criticism, due to the growing and volatile political connections between the church and imperial power.\nHe was not blind to the faults of Christians or of pagans; he observed in his \"Res Gestae\" that \"no wild beasts are so hostile to men as Christian sects in general are to one another\" and he condemns his hero Julian for excessive attachment to (pagan) sacrifice, and for his edict effectively barring Christians from teaching posts.\nWork.\nWhile living in Rome in the 380s, Ammianus wrote a Latin history of the Roman empire from the accession of Nerva (96) to the death of Valens at the Battle of Adrianople (378), in effect writing a continuation of the history of Tacitus. He presumably completed the work before 391, as at 22.16.12 he praises the Serapeum in Egypt as the glory of the empire; it was in that same year the Emperor granted the temple grounds to a Christian bishop, provoking pagans into barricading themselves in the temple, plundering its contents, and torturing Christians, ultimately destroying the temple. \nThe \"Res Gestae\" (\"Rerum gestarum Libri XXXI\") was originally composed of thirty-one books, but the first thirteen have been lost. The surviving eighteen books cover the period from 353 to 378. It constitutes the foundation of modern understanding of the history of the fourth century Roman Empire. It is lauded as a clear, comprehensive, and generally impartial account of events by a contemporary; like many ancient historians, however, Ammianus was in fact not impartial, although he expresses an intention to be so, and had strong moral and religious prejudices. Although criticised as lacking literary merit by his early biographers, he was in fact quite skilled in rhetoric, which significantly has brought the veracity of some of the \"Res Gestae\" into question.\nHis work has suffered substantially from manuscript transmission. Aside from the loss of the first thirteen books, the remaining eighteen are in many places corrupt and lacunose. The sole surviving manuscript from which almost every other is derived is a ninth-century Carolingian text, Vatican lat. 1873 (\"V\"), produced in Fulda from an insular exemplar. The only independent textual source for Ammianus lies in Fragmenta Marbugensia (\"M\"), another ninth-century Frankish codex which was taken apart to provide covers for account-books during the fifteenth century. Only six leaves of \"M\" survive; however, before this manuscript was dismantled the Abbot of Hersfeld lent the manuscript to Sigismund Gelenius, who used it in preparing the text of the second Froben edition (\"G\"). The dates and relationship of V and M were long disputed until 1936 when R. P. Robinson demonstrated persuasively that V was copied from M. As L. D. Reynolds summarizes, \"M is thus a fragment of the archetype; symptoms of an insular pre-archetype are evident.\"\nHis handling from his earliest printers was little better. The \"editio princeps\" was printed in 1474 in Rome by Georg Sachsel and Bartholomaeus Golsch, which broke off at the end of Book 26. The next edition (Bologna, 1517) suffered from its editor's conjectures upon the poor text of the 1474 edition; the 1474 edition was pirated for the first Froben edition (Basle, 1518). It was not until 1533 that the last five books of Ammianus' history were put into print by Silvanus Otmar and edited by Mariangelus Accursius. The first modern edition was produced by C.U. Clark (Berlin, 1910\u20131913). The first English translations were by Philemon Holland in 1609, and later by C.D. Yonge in 1862.\nReception.\nEdward Gibbon judged Ammianus \"an accurate and faithful guide, who composed the history of his own times without indulging the prejudices and passions which usually affect the mind of a contemporary.\" But he also condemned Ammianus for lack of literary flair: \"The coarse and undistinguishing pencil of Ammianus has delineated his bloody figures with tedious and disgusting accuracy.\" Austrian historian praised Ammianus as \"the greatest literary genius that the world produced between Tacitus and Dante\".\nAccording to Kimberly Kagan, his accounts of battles emphasize the experience of the soldiers but at the cost of ignoring the bigger picture. As a result, it is difficult for the reader to understand why the battles he describes had the outcome they did.\nAmmianus' work contains a detailed description of the tsunami in Alexandria, which devastated the metropolis and the shores of the eastern Mediterranean on 21 July 365. His report describes accurately the characteristic sequence of earthquake, retreat of the sea, and sudden incoming giant wave."}
{"id": "1768", "revid": "28898368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1768", "title": "ALICE", "text": ""}
{"id": "1769", "revid": "665998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1769", "title": "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding/Text", "text": ""}
{"id": "1770", "revid": "11561890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1770", "title": "Apollo 13", "text": "Apollo 13 was the seventh crewed mission in the Apollo space program and the third meant to land on the Moon. The craft was launched from Kennedy Space Center on April 11, 1970, but the lunar landing was aborted after an oxygen tank in the service module (SM) failed two days into the mission. The crew instead looped around the Moon, and returned safely to Earth on April 17. The mission was commanded by Jim Lovell with Jack Swigert as command module (CM) pilot and Fred Haise as Apollo Lunar Module (LM) pilot. Swigert was a late replacement for Ken Mattingly, who was grounded after exposure to rubella.\nA routine stir of an oxygen tank ignited damaged wire insulation inside it, causing an explosion that vented the contents of both of the SM's oxygen tanks to space. Without oxygen, needed for breathing and for generating electric power, the SM's propulsion and life support systems could not operate. The CM's systems had to be shut down to conserve its remaining resources for reentry, forcing the crew to transfer to the LM as a lifeboat. With the lunar landing canceled, mission controllers worked to bring the crew home alive.\nAlthough the LM was designed to support two men on the lunar surface for two days, Mission Control in Houston improvised new procedures so it could support three men for four days. The crew experienced great hardship caused by limited power, a chilly and wet cabin and a shortage of potable water. There was a critical need to adapt the CM's cartridges for the carbon dioxide scrubber system to work in the LM; the crew and mission controllers were successful in improvising a solution. The astronauts' peril briefly renewed public interest in the Apollo program; tens of millions watched the splashdown in the South Pacific Ocean on television.\nAn investigative review board found fault with preflight testing of the oxygen tank and the fact that Teflon was placed inside it. The board recommended changes, including minimizing the use of potentially combustible items inside the tank; this was done for Apollo 14. The story of Apollo\u00a013 has been dramatized several times, most notably in the 1995 film \"Apollo\u00a013\" \u2013 based on the 1994 memoir co-authored by Lovell \"Lost Moon\" - and an episode of the 1998 miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\".\nBackground.\nIn 1961, U.S. President John F. Kennedy challenged his nation to land an astronaut on the Moon by the end of the decade, with a safe return to Earth. NASA worked towards this goal incrementally, sending astronauts into space during Project Mercury and Project Gemini, leading up to the Apollo program. The goal was achieved with Apollo 11, which landed on the Moon on July 20, 1969. Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the lunar surface while Michael Collins orbited the Moon in Command Module \"Columbia\". The mission returned to Earth on July 24, 1969, fulfilling Kennedy's challenge.\nNASA had contracted for fifteen Saturn\u00a0V rockets to achieve the goal; at the time no one knew how many missions this would require. Since success was obtained in 1969 with the sixth SaturnV on Apollo\u00a011, nine rockets remained available for a hoped-for total of ten landings. After the excitement of Apollo 11, the general public grew apathetic towards the space program and Congress continued to cut NASA's budget; Apollo 20 was canceled. Despite the successful lunar landing, the missions were considered so risky that astronauts could not afford life insurance to provide for their families if they died in space.\nEven before the first U.S. astronaut entered space in 1961, planning for a centralized facility to communicate with the spacecraft and monitor its performance had begun, for the most part the brainchild of Christopher C. Kraft Jr., who became NASA's first flight director. During John Glenn's Mercury \"Friendship 7\" flight in February 1962 (the first crewed orbital flight by the U.S.), one of Kraft's decisions was overruled by NASA managers. He was vindicated by post-mission analysis, and implemented a rule that during the mission, the flight director's word was absolute\u2014to overrule him, NASA would have to fire him on the spot. Flight directors during Apollo had a one-sentence job description, \"The flight director may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success.\"\nIn 1965, Houston's Mission Control Center opened, in part designed by Kraft and now named for him. In Mission Control, each flight controller, in addition to monitoring telemetry from the spacecraft, was in communication via voice loop to specialists in a Staff Support Room (or \"back room\"), who focused on specific spacecraft systems.\nApollo 13 was to be the second H mission, meant to demonstrate precision lunar landings and explore specific sites on the Moon. With Kennedy's goal accomplished by Apollo 11, and Apollo 12 demonstrating that the astronauts could perform a precision landing, mission planners were able to focus on more than just landing safely and having astronauts minimally trained in geology gather lunar samples to take home to Earth. There was a greater role for science on Apollo\u00a013, especially for geology, something emphasized by the mission's motto, \"Ex luna, scientia\" (From the Moon, knowledge).\nAstronauts and key Mission Control personnel.\nApollo\u00a013's mission commander, Jim Lovell, was 42 years old at the time of the spaceflight, which was his fourth and last. He was a graduate of the United States Naval Academy and had been a naval aviator and test pilot before being selected for the second group of astronauts in 1962; he flew with Frank Borman in Gemini\u00a07 in 1965 and Buzz Aldrin in Gemini\u00a012 the following year before flying in Apollo 8 in 1968, the first spacecraft to orbit the Moon. At the time of Apollo 13, Lovell was the NASA astronaut with the most time in space, with 572 hours over the three missions.\nJack Swigert, the command module pilot (CMP), was 38\u00a0years old and held a B.S. in mechanical engineering and an M.S. in aerospace science; he had served in the Air Force and in state Air National Guards, and was an engineering test pilot before being selected for the fifth group of astronauts in 1966. Fred Haise, the lunar module pilot (LMP), was 35 years old. He held a B.S. in aeronautical engineering, had been a Marine Corps fighter pilot, and was a civilian research pilot for NASA when he was selected as a Group5 astronaut. Apollo\u00a013 was Swigert's and Haise's only spaceflight.\nAccording to the standard Apollo crew rotation, the prime crew for Apollo\u00a013 would have been the backup crew for Apollo 10 with Mercury and Gemini veteran Gordon Cooper in command, Donn F. Eisele as CMP and Edgar Mitchell as LMP. Deke Slayton, NASA's Director of Flight Crew Operations, never intended to rotate Cooper and Eisele to a prime crew assignment, as both were out of favorCooper for his lax attitude towards training, and Eisele for incidents aboard Apollo7 and an extramarital affair. He assigned them to the backup crew because no other veteran astronauts were available. Slayton's original choices for Apollo\u00a013 were Alan Shepard as commander, Stuart Roosa as CMP, and Mitchell as LMP. However, management felt Shepard needed more training time, as he had only recently resumed active status after surgery for an inner ear disorder, and had not flown since 1961. Thus Lovell's crew (himself, Haise and Ken Mattingly) having all backed up Apollo 11 and slated for Apollo 14, was swapped with Shepard's.\nSwigert was originally CMP of Apollo\u00a013's backup crew, with John Young as commander and Charles Duke as lunar module pilot. Seven days before launch, Duke contracted rubella from a friend of his son. This exposed both the prime and backup crews, who trained together. Of the five, only Mattingly was not immune through prior exposure. Normally, if any member of the prime crew had to be grounded, the remaining crew would be replaced as well, and the backup crew substituted, but Duke's illness ruled this out, so two days before launch, Mattingly was replaced by Swigert. Mattingly never developed rubella and later flew on Apollo 16.\nFor Apollo, a third crew of astronauts, known as the support crew, was designated in addition to the prime and backup crews used on projects Mercury and Gemini. Slayton created the support crews because James McDivitt, who would command Apollo 9, believed that, with preparation going on in facilities across the US, meetings that needed a member of the flight crew would be missed. Support crew members were to assist as directed by the mission commander. Usually low in seniority, they assembled the mission's rules, flight plan, and checklists, and kept them updated; for Apollo\u00a013, they were Vance D. Brand, Jack Lousma and either William Pogue or Joseph Kerwin.\nFor Apollo\u00a013, flight directors were: Gene Kranz, White team, (the lead flight director); Glynn Lunney, Black team; Milton Windler, Maroon team and Gerry Griffin, Gold team. The CAPCOMs (the person in Mission Control, during the Apollo program an astronaut, who was responsible for voice communications with the crew) for Apollo\u00a013 were Kerwin, Brand, Lousma, Young and Mattingly.\nMission insignia and call signs.\nThe Apollo\u00a013 mission insignia depicts the Greek god of the Sun, Apollo, with three horses pulling his chariot across the face of the Moon, and the Earth seen in the distance. This is meant to symbolize the Apollo flights bringing the light of knowledge to all people. The mission motto, \"Ex luna, scientia\" (From the Moon, knowledge), appears. In choosing it, Lovell adapted the motto of his alma mater, the Naval Academy, \"Ex scientia, tridens\" (From knowledge, sea power).\nOn the patch, the mission number appeared in Roman numerals as Apollo XIII. It did not have to be modified after Swigert replaced Mattingly as it is one of only two Apollo mission insignia\u2014the other being Apollo 11\u2014not to include the names of the crew. It was designed by artist Lumen Martin Winter, who based it on a mural he had painted for the St. Regis Hotel in New York City. The mural was later purchased by actor Tom Hanks, who portrayed Lovell in the movie \"Apollo\u00a013\", and is now in the Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center in Illinois.\nThe mission's motto was in Lovell's mind when he chose the call sign \"Aquarius\" for the lunar module, taken from Aquarius, the bringer of water. Some in the media erroneously reported that the call sign was taken from a song by that name from the musical \"Hair\". The command module's call sign, \"Odyssey\", was chosen not only for its Homeric association but to refer to the recent movie, \"\", based on a short story by science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke. In his book, Lovell indicated he chose the name \"Odyssey\" because he liked the word and its definition: a long voyage with many changes of fortune.\nSpace vehicle.\nThe Saturn V rocket used to carry Apollo\u00a013 to the Moon was numbered SA-508, and was almost identical to those used on Apollo8 through 12. Including the spacecraft, the rocket weighed in at . The S-IC stage's engines were rated to generate less total thrust than Apollo 12's, though they remained within specifications. Extra propellant was carried as a test since future J missions to the Moon would require more propellant for their heavier payloads. This made the vehicle the heaviest yet flown by NASA and Apollo\u00a013 was visibly slower to clear the launch tower than earlier missions.\nThe Apollo\u00a013 spacecraft consisted of Command Module\u00a0109 and Service Module\u00a0109 (together CSM-109), called \"Odyssey\", and Lunar Module7 (LM-7), called \"Aquarius\". Also considered part of the spacecraft was the launch escape system which would propel the command module (CM) to safety in the event of a problem during liftoff, and the Spacecraft\u2013LM Adapter, numbered as SLA-16, which housed the lunar module (LM) during the first hours of the mission.\nThe LM stages, CM and service module (SM) were received at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in June 1969; the portions of the Saturn\u00a0V were received in June and July. Thereafter, testing and assembly proceeded, culminating with the rollout of the launch vehicle, with the spacecraft atop it, on December 15, 1969. Apollo\u00a013 was originally scheduled for launch on March 12, 1970; in January of that year NASA announced the mission would be postponed until April 11, both to allow more time for planning and to spread the Apollo missions over a longer period of time. The plan was to have two Apollo flights per year, and was in response to budgetary constraints that had recently seen the cancellation of Apollo 20.\nTraining and preparation.\nThe Apollo\u00a013 prime crew undertook over 1,000 hours of mission-specific training, more than five hours for every hour of the mission's ten-day planned duration. Each member of the prime crew spent over 400 hours in simulators of the CM and (for Lovell and Haise) of the LM at KSC and at Houston, some of which involved the flight controllers at Mission Control. Flight controllers participated in many simulations of problems with the spacecraft in flight, which taught them how to react in an emergency. Specialized simulators at other locations were also used by the crew members.\nThe astronauts of Apollo 11 had minimal time for geology training, with only six months between crew assignment and launch; higher priorities took much of their time. Apollo 12 saw more such training, including practice in the field, using a CAPCOM and a simulated backroom of scientists, to whom the astronauts had to describe what they saw. Scientist-astronaut Harrison Schmitt saw that there was limited enthusiasm for geology field trips. Believing an inspirational teacher was needed, Schmitt arranged for Lovell and Haise to meet his old professor, Caltech's Lee Silver. The two astronauts, and backups Young and Duke, went on a field trip with Silver at their own time and expense. At the end of their week together, Lovell made Silver their geology mentor, who would be extensively involved in the geology planning for Apollo\u00a013. Farouk El-Baz oversaw the training of Mattingly and his backup, Swigert, which involved describing and photographing simulated lunar landmarks from airplanes. El-Baz had all three prime crew astronauts describe geologic features they saw during their flights between Houston and KSC; Mattingly's enthusiasm caused other astronauts, such as Apollo 14's CMP, Roosa, to seek out El-Baz as a teacher.\nConcerned about how close Apollo 11's LM, \"Eagle\", had come to running out of propellant during its lunar descent, mission planners decided that beginning with Apollo\u00a013, the CSM would bring the LM to the low orbit from which the landing attempt would commence. This was a change from Apollo 11 and 12, on which the LM made the burn to bring it to the lower orbit. The change was part of an effort to increase the amount of hover time available to the astronauts as the missions headed into rougher terrain.\nThe plan was to devote the first of the two four-hour lunar surface extravehicular activities (EVAs) to setting up the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP) group of scientific instruments; during the second, Lovell and Haise would investigate Cone crater, near the planned landing site. The two astronauts wore their spacesuits for some 20 walk-throughs of EVA procedures, including sample gathering and use of tools and other equipment. They flew in the \"Vomit Comet\" in simulated microgravity or lunar gravity, including practice in donning and doffing spacesuits. To prepare for the descent to the Moon's surface, Lovell flew the Lunar Landing Training Vehicle (LLTV). Despite the fact that four of the five LLTVs and similar Lunar Landing Research Vehicles crashed during the course of the Apollo program, mission commanders considered flying them invaluable experience.\nExperiments and scientific objectives.\nApollo\u00a013's designated landing site was near Fra Mauro crater; the Fra Mauro formation was believed to contain much material spattered by the impact that had filled the Imbrium basin early in the Moon's history. Dating it would provide information not only about the Moon, but about the Earth's early history. Such material was likely to be available at Cone crater, a site where an impact was believed to have drilled deep into the lunar regolith.\nApollo 11 had left a seismometer on the Moon, but the solar-powered unit did not survive its first two-week-long lunar night. The Apollo 12 astronauts also left one as part of its ALSEP, which was nuclear-powered. Apollo\u00a013 also carried a seismometer (known as the Passive Seismic Experiment, or PSE), similar to Apollo 12's, as part of its ALSEP, to be left on the Moon by the astronauts. That seismometer was to be calibrated by the impact, after jettison, of the ascent stage of Apollo\u00a013's LM, an object of known mass and velocity impacting at a known location.\nOther ALSEP experiments on Apollo\u00a013 included a Heat Flow Experiment (HFE), which would involve drilling two holes deep. This was Haise's responsibility; he was also to drill a third hole of that depth for a core sample. A Charged Particle Lunar Environment Experiment (CPLEE) measured the protons and electrons of solar origin reaching the Moon. The package also included a Lunar Atmosphere Detector (LAD) and a Dust Detector, to measure the accumulation of debris. The Heat Flow Experiment and the CPLEE were flown for the first time on Apollo\u00a013; the other experiments had been flown before.\nTo power the ALSEP, the SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) was flown. Developed by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, SNAP-27 was first flown on Apollo 12. The fuel capsule contained about of plutonium oxide. The cask placed around the capsule for transport to the Moon was built with heat shields of graphite and of beryllium, and with structural parts of titanium and of Inconel materials. Thus, it was built to withstand the heat of reentry into the Earth's atmosphere rather than pollute the air with plutonium in the event of an aborted mission.\nA United States flag was also taken, to be erected on the Moon's surface. For Apollo 11 and 12, the flag had been placed in a heat-resistant tube on the front landing leg; it was moved for Apollo\u00a013 to the Modularized Equipment Stowage Assembly (MESA) in the LM descent stage. The structure to fly the flag on the airless Moon was improved from Apollo 12's.\nFor the first time, red stripes were placed on the helmet, arms and legs of the commander's A7L spacesuit. This was done as after Apollo 11, those reviewing the images taken had trouble distinguishing Armstrong from Aldrin, but the change was approved too late for Apollo 12. New drink bags that attached inside the helmets and were to be sipped from as the astronauts walked on the Moon were demonstrated by Haise during Apollo\u00a013's final television broadcast before the accident.\nApollo\u00a013's primary mission objectives were to: \"Perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in a preselected region of the Fra Mauro Formation. Deploy and activate an Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package. Develop man's capability to work in the lunar environment. Obtain photographs of candidate exploration sites.\" The astronauts were also to accomplish other photographic objectives, including of the Gegenschein from lunar orbit, and of the Moon itself on the journey back to Earth. Some of this photography was to be performed by Swigert as Lovell and Haise walked on the Moon. Swigert was also to take photographs of the Lagrangian points of the Earth-Moon system. Apollo\u00a013 had twelve cameras on board, including those for television and moving pictures. The crew was also to downlink bistatic radar observations of the Moon. None of these was attempted because of the accident.\nFlight of Apollo 13.\nLaunch and translunar injection.\nThe mission was launched at the planned time, 2:13:00\u00a0pm EST (19:13:00\u00a0UTC) on April 11. An anomaly occurred when the second-stage, center (inboard) engine shut down about two minutes early. This was caused by severe pogo oscillations. Starting with Apollo 10, the vehicle's guidance system was designed to shut the engine down in response to chamber pressure excursions. Pogo oscillations had occurred on Titan rockets (used during the Gemini program) and on previous Apollo missions, but on Apollo\u00a013 they were amplified by an interaction with turbopump cavitation. A fix to prevent pogo was ready for the mission, but schedule pressure did not permit the hardware's integration into the Apollo\u00a013 vehicle. A post-flight investigation revealed the engine was one cycle away from catastrophic failure.\nIn spite of the shutdown, the four outboard engines and the S-IVB third stage burned longer to compensate, and the vehicle achieved very close to the planned circular parking orbit, followed by a translunar injection (TLI) about two hours later, setting the mission on course for the Moon.\nAfter TLI, Swigert performed the separation and transposition maneuvers before docking the CSM \"Odyssey\" to the LM \"Aquarius\", and the spacecraft pulled away from the third stage. Ground controllers then sent the third stage on a course to impact the Moon in range of the Apollo 12 seismometer, which it did just over three days into the mission.\nThe crew settled in for the three-day trip to Fra Mauro. At 30:40:50 into the mission, with the TV camera running, the crew performed a burn to place Apollo\u00a013 on a hybrid trajectory. The departure from a free-return trajectory meant that if no further burns were performed, Apollo\u00a013 would miss Earth on its return trajectory, rather than intercept it, as with a free return. A free return trajectory could only reach sites near the lunar equator; a hybrid trajectory, which could be started at any point after TLI, allowed sites with higher latitudes, such as Fra Mauro, to be reached. Communications were enlivened when Swigert realized that in the last-minute rush, he had omitted to file his federal income tax return (due April 15), and amid laughter from mission controllers, asked how he could get an extension. He was found to be entitled to a 60-day extension for being out of the country at the deadline.\nEntry into the LM to test its systems had been scheduled for 58:00:00; when the crew awoke on the third day of the mission, they were informed it had been moved up three hours and was later moved up again by another hour. A television broadcast was scheduled for 55:00:00; Lovell, acting as emcee, showed the audience the interiors of \"Odyssey\" and \"Aquarius\". The audience was limited by the fact that none of the television networks were carrying the broadcast, forcing Marilyn Lovell (Jim Lovell's wife) to go to the VIP room at Mission Control if she wanted to watch her husband and his crewmates.\nAccident.\nApproximately six and a half minutes after the TV broadcastapproaching 56:00:00Apollo\u00a013 was about from Earth. Haise was completing the shutdown of the LM after testing its systems while Lovell stowed the TV camera. Jack Lousma, the CAPCOM, sent minor instructions to Swigert, including changing the attitude of the craft to facilitate photography of Comet Bennett.\nThe pressure sensor in one of the SM's oxygen tanks had earlier appeared to be malfunctioning, so Sy Liebergot (the EECOM, in charge of monitoring the CSM's electrical system) requested that the stirring fans in the tanks be activated. Normally this was done once daily; a stir would destratify the contents of the tanks, making the pressure readings more accurate. The Flight Director, Kranz, had Liebergot wait a few minutes for the crew to settle down after the telecast, then Lousma relayed the request to Swigert, who activated the switches controlling the fans, and after a few seconds turned them off again.\nNinety-five seconds after Swigert activated those switches, the astronauts heard a \"pretty large bang\", accompanied by fluctuations in electrical power and the firing of the attitude control thrusters. Communications and telemetry to Earth were lost for 1.8\u00a0seconds, until the system automatically corrected by switching the high-gain S-band antenna, used for translunar communications, from narrow-beam to wide-beam mode. The accident happened at 55:54:53 (03:08 UTC on April 14, 10:08 PM EST, April 13). Swigert reported 26\u00a0seconds later, \"Okay, Houston, we've had a problem here,\" echoed at 55:55:42 by Lovell, \"Houston, we've had a problem. We've had a Main\u00a0B Bus undervolt.\"\nLovell's initial thought on hearing the noise was that Haise had activated the LM's cabin-repressurization valve, which also produced a bang (Haise enjoyed doing so to startle his crewmates) but Lovell could see that Haise had no idea what had happened. Swigert initially thought that a meteoroid might have struck the LM, but he and Lovell quickly realized there was no leak. The \"Main Bus\u00a0B undervolt\" meant that there was insufficient voltage produced by the SM's three fuel cells (fueled by hydrogen and oxygen piped from their respective tanks) to the second of the SM's two electric power distribution systems. Almost everything in the CSM required power. Although the bus momentarily returned to normal status, soon both buses A and B were short on voltage. Haise checked the status of the fuel cells, and found that two of them were dead. Mission rules forbade entering lunar orbit unless all fuel cells were operational.\nIn the minutes after the accident, there were several unusual readings, showing that tank2 was empty and tank1's pressure slowly falling, that the computer on the spacecraft had reset and that the high-gain antenna was not working. Liebergot initially missed the worrying signs from tank2 following the stir, as he was focusing on tank1, believing that its reading would be a good guide to what was present in tank2; so did controllers supporting him in the \"back room\". When Kranz questioned Liebergot on this he initially responded that there might be false readings due to an instrumentation problem; he was often teased about that in the years to come. Lovell, looking out the window, reported \"a gas of some sort\" venting into space, making it clear that there was a serious problem.\nSince the fuel cells needed oxygen to operate, when Oxygen Tank1 ran dry, the remaining fuel cell would shut down, meaning the CSM's only significant sources of power and oxygen would be the CM's batteries and its oxygen \"surge tank\". These would be needed for the final hours of the mission, but the remaining fuel cell, already starved for oxygen, was drawing from the surge tank. Kranz ordered the surge tank isolated, saving its oxygen, but this meant that the remaining fuel cell would die within two hours, as the oxygen in tank1 was consumed or leaked away. The volume surrounding the spacecraft was filled with myriad small bits of debris from the accident, complicating any efforts to use the stars for navigation. The mission's goal became simply getting the astronauts back to Earth alive.\nLooping around the Moon.\nThe lunar module had charged batteries and full oxygen tanks for use on the lunar surface, so Kranz directed that the astronauts power up the LM and use it as a \"lifeboat\"a scenario anticipated but considered unlikely. Procedures for using the LM in this way had been developed by LM flight controllers after a training simulation for Apollo 10 in which the LM was needed for survival, but could not be powered up in time. Had Apollo\u00a013's accident occurred on the return voyage, with the LM already jettisoned, the astronauts would have died, as they would have following an explosion in lunar orbit, including one while Lovell and Haise walked on the Moon.\nA key decision was the choice of return path. A \"direct abort\" would use the SM's main engine (the Service Propulsion System or SPS) to return before reaching the Moon. But the accident could have damaged the SPS, and the fuel cells would have to last at least another hour to meet its power requirements, so Kranz instead decided on a longer route: the spacecraft would swing around the Moon before heading back to Earth. Apollo\u00a013 was on the hybrid trajectory which was to take it to Fra Mauro; it now needed to be brought back to a free return. The LM's Descent Propulsion System (DPS), although not as powerful as the SPS, could do this, but new software for Mission Control's computers needed to be written by technicians as it had never been contemplated that the CSM/LM spacecraft would have to be maneuvered from the LM. As the CM was being shut down, Lovell copied down its guidance system's orientation information and performed hand calculations to transfer it to the LM's guidance system, which had been turned off; at his request Mission Control checked his figures. At 61:29:43.49 the DPS burn of 34.23\u00a0seconds took Apollo\u00a013 back to a free return trajectory.\nThe change would get Apollo\u00a013 back to Earth in about four days' timethough with splashdown in the Indian Ocean, where NASA had few recovery forces. Jerry Bostick and other Flight Dynamics Officers (FIDOs) were anxious both to shorten the travel time and to move splashdown to the Pacific Ocean, where the main recovery forces were located. One option would shave 36 hours off the return time, but required jettisoning the SM; this would expose the CM's heat shield to space during the return journey, something for which it had not been designed. The FIDOs also proposed other solutions. After a meeting involving NASA officials and engineers, the senior individual present, Manned Spaceflight Center director Robert R. Gilruth, decided on a burn using the DPS, that would save 12\u00a0hours and land Apollo\u00a013 in the Pacific. This \"PC+2\" burn would take place two hours after pericynthion, the closest approach to the Moon. At pericynthion, Apollo\u00a013 set the record (per the \"Guinness Book of World Records\"), which still stands, for the highest absolute altitude attained by a crewed spacecraft: from Earth at 7:21\u00a0pm EST, April 14 (00:21:00\u00a0UTC April 15).\nWhile preparing for the burn the crew was told that the S-IVB had impacted the Moon as planned, leading Lovell to quip, \"Well, at least something worked on this flight.\" Kranz's White team of mission controllers, who had spent most of their time supporting other teams and developing the procedures urgently needed to get the astronauts home, took their consoles for the PC+2 procedure. Normally, the accuracy of such a burn could be assured by checking the alignment Lovell had transferred to the LM's computer against the position of one of the stars astronauts used for navigation, but the light glinting off the many pieces of debris accompanying the spacecraft made that impractical. The astronauts used the one star available whose position could not be obscured \u2013 the Sun. Houston also informed them that the Moon would be centered in the commander's window of the LM as they made the burn, which was almost perfectless than 0.3 meters (a foot) per second off. The burn, at 79:27:38.95, lasted four minutes, 23\u00a0seconds. The crew then shut down most LM systems to conserve consumables.\nReturn to Earth.\nThe LM carried enough oxygen, but that still left the problem of removing carbon dioxide, which was absorbed by canisters of lithium hydroxide pellets. \nThe LM's stock of canisters, meant to accommodate two astronauts for 45 hours on the Moon, was not enough to support three astronauts for the return journey to Earth. The CM had enough canisters, but they were the wrong shape and size to work in the LM's equipment. Engineers on the ground devised a way to bridge the gap, using plastic, covers ripped from procedures manuals, duct tape, and other items. NASA engineers referred to the improvised device as \"the mailbox\". The procedure for building the device was read to the crew by CAPCOM Joseph Kerwin over the course of an hour, and it was built by Swigert and Haise; carbon dioxide levels began dropping immediately. Lovell later described this improvisation as \"a fine example of cooperation between ground and space\".\nThe CSM's electricity came from fuel cells that produced water as a byproduct, but the LM was powered by silver-zinc batteries which did not, so both electrical power and water (needed for equipment cooling as well as drinking) would be critical. LM power consumption was reduced to the lowest level possible; Swigert was able to fill some drinking bags with water from the CM's water tap, but even assuming rationing of personal consumption, Haise initially calculated they would run out of water for cooling about five hours before reentry. This seemed acceptable because the systems of Apollo 11's LM, once jettisoned in lunar orbit, had continued to operate for seven to eight hours even with the water cut off. In the end, Apollo\u00a013 returned to Earth with of water remaining. The crew's ration was 0.2\u00a0liters (6.8\u00a0fl\u00a0oz) of water per person per day; the three astronauts lost a total of among them, and Haise developed a urinary tract infection. This infection was probably caused by the reduced water intake, but microgravity and effects of cosmic radiation might have impaired his immune system's reaction to the pathogen.\nInside the darkened spacecraft, the temperature dropped as low as . Lovell considered having the crew don their spacesuits, but decided this would be too hot. Instead, Lovell and Haise wore their lunar EVA boots and Swigert put on an extra coverall. All three astronauts were cold, especially Swigert, who had got his feet wet while filling the water bags and had no lunar overshoes (since he had not been scheduled to walk on the Moon). As they had been told not to discharge their urine to space to avoid disturbing the trajectory, they had to store it in bags. Water condensed on the walls, though any condensation that may have been behind equipment panels caused no problems, partly because of the extensive electrical insulation improvements instituted after the Apollo 1 fire. Despite all this, the crew voiced few complaints.\nFlight controller John Aaron, along with Mattingly and several engineers and designers, devised a procedure for powering up the command module from full shutdownsomething never intended to be done in flight, much less under Apollo\u00a013's severe power and time constraints. The astronauts implemented the procedure without apparent difficulty: Kranz later credited the fact that all three astronauts had been test pilots, accustomed to having to work in critical situations with their lives on the line, for their survival.\nReentry and splashdown.\nDespite the accuracy of the transearth injection, the spacecraft slowly drifted off course, necessitating a correction. As the LM's guidance system had been shut down following the PC+2 burn, the crew was told to use the line between night and day on the Earth to guide them, a technique used on NASA's Earth-orbit missions but never on the way back from the Moon. This DPS burn, at 105:18:42 for 14\u00a0seconds, brought the projected entry flight path angle back within safe limits. Nevertheless, yet another burn was needed at 137:40:13, using the LM's reaction control system (RCS) thrusters, for 21.5\u00a0seconds. The SM was jettisoned less than half an hour later, allowing the crew to see the damage for the first time, and photograph it. They reported that an entire panel was missing from the SM's exterior, the fuel cells above the oxygen tank shelf were tilted, that the high-gain antenna was damaged, and there was a considerable amount of debris elsewhere. Haise could see possible damage to the SM's engine bell, validating Kranz's decision not to use the SPS.\nThe last problem to be solved was how to separate the lunar module a safe distance away from the command module just before reentry. The normal procedure, in lunar orbit, was to release the LM and then use the service module's RCS to pull the CSM away, but by this point, the SM had already been released. Grumman, manufacturer of the LM, assigned a team of University of Toronto engineers, led by senior scientist Bernard Etkin, to solve the problem of how much air pressure to use to push the modules apart. The astronauts applied the solution, which was successful. The LM reentered Earth's atmosphere and was destroyed, the remaining pieces falling in the deep ocean. Apollo\u00a013's final midcourse correction had addressed the concerns of the Atomic Energy Commission, which wanted the cask containing the plutonium oxide intended for the SNAP-27 RTG to land in a safe place. The impact point was over the Tonga Trench in the Pacific, one of its deepest points, and the cask sank to the bottom. Later helicopter surveys found no radioactive leakage.\nIonization of the air around the command module during reentry would typically cause a four-minute communications blackout. Apollo\u00a013's shallow reentry path lengthened this to six minutes, longer than had been expected; controllers feared that the CM's heat shield had failed. \"Odyssey\" regained radio contact and splashed down safely in the South Pacific Ocean, , southeast of American Samoa and from the recovery ship, USS \"Iwo Jima\". Although fatigued, the crew was in good condition except for Haise, who was suffering from a serious urinary tract infection because of insufficient water intake. The crew stayed overnight on the ship and flew to Pago Pago, American Samoa, the next day. They flew to Hawaii, where President Richard Nixon awarded them the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor. They stayed overnight, and then were flown back to Houston.\nEn route to Honolulu, President Nixon stopped at Houston to award the Presidential Medal of Freedom to the Apollo\u00a013 Mission Operations Team. He originally planned to give the award to NASA administrator Thomas O. Paine, but Paine recommended the mission operations team.\nPublic and media reaction.\nWorldwide interest in the Apollo program was reawakened by the incident; television coverage was seen by millions. Four Soviet ships headed toward the landing area to assist if needed, and other nations offered assistance should the craft have to splash down elsewhere. President Nixon canceled appointments, phoned the astronauts' families, and drove to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, where Apollo's tracking and communications were coordinated.\nThe rescue received more public attention than any spaceflight to that point, other than the first Moon landing on Apollo 11. There were worldwide headlines, and people surrounded television sets to get the latest developments, offered by networks who interrupted their regular programming for bulletins. Pope Paul VI led a congregation of 10,000 people in praying for the astronauts' safe return; ten times that number offered prayers at a religious festival in India. The United States Senate on April 14 passed a resolution urging businesses to pause at 9:00pm local time that evening to allow for employee prayer.\nAn estimated 40\u00a0million Americans watched Apollo\u00a013's splashdown, carried live on all three networks, with another 30\u00a0million watching some portion of the six and one-half hour telecast. Even more outside the U.S. watched. Jack Gould of \"The New York Times\" stated that Apollo\u00a013, \"which came so close to tragic disaster, in all probability united the world in mutual concern more fully than another successful landing on the Moon would have\".\nInvestigation and response.\nReview board.\nImmediately upon the crew's return, NASA Administrator Paine and Deputy Administrator George Low appointed a review boardchaired by NASA Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright and including Neil Armstrong and six othersto investigate the accident.\nThe board's final report, sent to Paine on June 15,\nfound that the failure began in the service module's number2 oxygen tank. Damaged Teflon insulation on the wires to the stirring fan inside Oxygen Tank2 allowed the wires to short-circuit and ignite this insulation. The resulting fire quickly increased pressure inside the tank and the tank dome failed, filling the fuel cell bay (SM Sector4) with rapidly expanding gaseous oxygen and combustion products. The escaping gas was probably enough by itself to blow out the aluminum exterior panel to Sector4, but combustion products generated as nearby insulation ignited would have added to the pressure. The panel's departure exposed the sector to space, snuffing out the fire, and it probably hit the nearby high-gain antenna, disrupting communications to Earth for 1.8\u00a0seconds. The sectors of the SM were not airtight from each other, and had there been time for the entire SM to become as pressurized as Sector4, the force on the CM's heat shield would have separated the two modules. The report questioned the use of Teflon and other materials shown to be flammable in supercritical oxygen, such as aluminum, within the tank. The board found no evidence pointing to any other theory of the accident.\nMechanical shock forced the oxygen valves closed on the number1 and number3 fuel cells, putting them out of commission. The sudden failure of Oxygen Tank2 compromised Oxygen Tank1, causing its contents to leak out, possibly through a damaged line or valve, over the next 130\u00a0minutes, entirely depleting the SM's oxygen supply. With both SM oxygen tanks emptying, and with other damage to the SM, the mission had to be aborted. The board praised the response to the emergency, \"The imperfection in Apollo\u00a013 constituted a near disaster, averted only by outstanding performance on the part of the crew and the ground control team which supported them.\"\nOxygen Tank\u00a02 was manufactured by the Beech Aircraft Company of Boulder, Colorado, as subcontractor to North American Rockwell (NAR) of Downey, California, prime contractor for the CSM. It contained two thermostatic switches, originally designed for the command module's 28-volt DC power, but which could fail if subjected to the 65 volts used during ground testing at KSC. Under the original 1962 specifications, the switches would be rated for 28 volts, but revised specifications issued in 1965 called for 65 volts to allow for quicker tank pressurization at KSC. Nonetheless, the switches Beech used were not rated for 65 volts.\nAt NAR's facility, Oxygen Tank\u00a02 had been originally installed in an oxygen shelf placed in the Apollo 10 service module, SM-106, but which was removed to fix a potential electromagnetic interference problem and another shelf substituted. During removal, the shelf was accidentally dropped at least because a retaining bolt had not been removed. The probability of damage from this was low, but it is possible that the fill line assembly was loose and made worse by the fall. After some retesting (which did not include filling the tank with liquid oxygen), in November 1968 the shelf was re-installed in SM-109, intended for Apollo\u00a013, which was shipped to KSC in June 1969.\nThe Countdown Demonstration Test took place with SM-109 in its place near the top of the Saturn\u00a0V and began on March 16, 1970. During the test, the cryogenic tanks were filled, but Oxygen Tank\u00a02 could not be emptied through the normal drain line, and a report was written documenting the problem. After discussion among NASA and the contractors, attempts to empty the tank resumed on March 27. When it would not empty normally, the heaters in the tank were turned on to boil off the oxygen. The thermostatic switches were designed to prevent the heaters from raising the temperature higher than , but they failed under the 65-volt power supply applied. Temperatures on the heater tube within the tank may have reached , most likely damaging the Teflon insulation. The temperature gauge was not designed to read higher than , so the technician monitoring the procedure detected nothing unusual. This heating had been approved by Lovell and Mattingly of the prime crew, as well as by NASA managers and engineers. Replacement of the tank would have delayed the mission by at least a month. The tank was filled with liquid oxygen again before launch; once electric power was connected, it was in a hazardous condition. The board found that Swigert's activation of the Oxygen Tank2 fan at the request of Mission Control caused an electric arc that set the tank on fire.\nThe board conducted a test of an oxygen tank rigged with hot-wire ignitors that caused a rapid rise in temperature within the tank, after which it failed, producing telemetry similar to that seen with the Apollo\u00a013 Oxygen Tank\u00a02. Tests with panels similar to the one that was seen to be missing on SM Sector4 caused separation of the panel in the test apparatus.\nChanges in response.\nFor Apollo 14 and subsequent missions, the oxygen tank was redesigned, the thermostats being upgraded to handle the proper voltage. The heaters were retained since they were necessary to maintain oxygen pressure. The stirring fans, with their unsealed motors, were removed, which meant the oxygen quantity gauge was no longer accurate. This required adding a third tank so that no tank would go below half full. The third tank was placed in Bay1 of the SM, on the side opposite the other two, and was given an isolation valve that could isolate it from the fuel cells and from the other two oxygen tanks in an emergency, and allow it to feed the CM's environmental system only. The quantity probe was upgraded from aluminum to stainless steel.\nAll electrical wiring in Bay4 was sheathed in stainless steel. The fuel cell oxygen supply valves were redesigned to isolate the Teflon-coated wiring from the oxygen. The spacecraft and Mission Control monitoring systems were modified to give more immediate and visible warnings of anomalies. An emergency supply of of water was stored in the CM, and an emergency battery, identical to those that powered the LM's descent stage, was placed in the SM. The LM was modified to make transfer of power from LM to CM easier. Devices were placed in the S-II second stage to counteract pogo oscillations.\nAftermath.\nOn February 5, 1971, Apollo\u00a014's LM, \"Antares\", landed on the Moon with astronauts Alan Shepard and Edgar Mitchell aboard, near Fra Mauro, the site Apollo\u00a013 had been intended to explore. Haise served as CAPCOM during the descent to the Moon, and during the second EVA, during which Shepard and Mitchell explored near Cone crater.\nNone of the Apollo\u00a013 astronauts flew in space again. Lovell retired from NASA and the Navy in 1973, entering the private sector. Swigert was to have flown on the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (the first joint mission with the Soviet Union) but was removed as part of the fallout from the Apollo 15 postal covers incident. He took a leave of absence from NASA in 1973 and left the agency to enter politics, being elected to the House of Representatives in 1982, but died of cancer before he could be sworn in. Haise was slated to have been the commander of the canceled Apollo 19 mission, and flew the Space Shuttle Approach and Landing Tests before retiring from NASA in 1979.\nSeveral experiments were completed even though the mission did not land on the Moon. One involved the launch vehicle's S-IVB (the Saturn\u00a0V's third stage) which on prior missions had been sent into solar orbit once detached. The seismometer left by Apollo 12 had detected frequent impacts of small objects onto the Moon, but larger impacts would yield more information about the Moon's crust, so it was decided that beginning with Apollo\u00a013, the S-IVB would be crashed into the Moon. The impact occurred at 77:56:40 into the mission and produced enough energy that the gain on the seismometer, from the impact, had to be reduced. An experiment to measure the amount of atmospheric electrical phenomena during the ascent to orbitadded after Apollo 12 was struck by lightningreturned data indicating a heightened risk during marginal weather. A series of photographs of Earth, taken to test whether cloud height could be determined from synchronous satellites, achieved the desired results.\nAs a joke, Grumman issued an invoice to North American Rockwell, prime contractor for the CSM, for \"towing\" the CSM most of the way to the Moon and back. Line items included 400001 miles at $1 each (plus $4 for the first mile); $536.05 for battery charging; oxygen; and four nights at $8 per night for an \"additional guest in room\" (Swigert). After a 20% \"commercial discount\", and a 2% discount for timely payment, the final total was $312,421.24. North American declined payment, noting that it had ferried three previous Grumman LMs to the Moon without compensation.\nThe CM was disassembled for testing and parts remained in storage for years; some were used for a trainer for the Skylab Rescue Mission. That trainer was subsequently displayed at the Kentucky Science Center. Max Ary of the Cosmosphere made it a project to restore \"Odyssey\"; it is on display there, in Hutchinson, Kansas.\nApollo\u00a013 was called a \"successful failure\" by Lovell. Mike Massimino, a Space Shuttle astronaut, stated that Apollo 13 \"showed teamwork, camaraderie and what NASA was really made of\". The response to the accident has been repeatedly called, \"NASA's finest hour\"; it is still viewed that way. Author Colin Burgess wrote, \"the life-or-death flight of Apollo\u00a013 dramatically evinced the colossal risks inherent in manned spaceflight. Then, with the crew safely back on Earth, public apathy set in once again.\"\nWilliam R. Compton, in his book about the Apollo Program, said of Apollo\u00a013, \"Only a heroic effort of real-time improvisation by mission operations teams saved the crew.\" Rick Houston and Milt Heflin, in their history of Mission Control, stated, \"Apollo\u00a013 proved mission control could bring those space voyagers back home again when their lives were on the line.\" Former NASA chief historian Roger D. Launius wrote, \"More than any other incident in the history of spaceflight, recovery from this accident solidified the world's belief in NASA's capabilities\". Nevertheless, the accident convinced some officials, such as Manned Spaceflight Center director Gilruth, that if NASA kept sending astronauts on Apollo missions, some would inevitably be killed, and they called for as quick an end as possible to the program. Nixon's advisers recommended canceling the remaining lunar missions, saying that a disaster in space would cost him political capital. Budget cuts made such a decision easier, and during the pause after Apollo\u00a013, two missions were canceled, meaning that the program ended with Apollo 17 in December 1972.\nPopular culture, media and 50th anniversary.\nThe 1974 movie \"Houston, We've Got a Problem\", while set around the Apollo\u00a013 incident, is a fictional drama about the crises faced by ground personnel when the emergency disrupts their work schedules and places further stress on their lives. Lovell publicly complained about the movie, saying it was \"fictitious and in poor taste\".\n\"Houston... We've Got a Problem\" was the title of an episode of the BBC documentary series \"A Life At Stake\", broadcast in March 1978. This was an accurate, if simplified, reconstruction of the events. In 1994, during the 25th anniversary of Apollo 11, PBS released a 90-minute documentary titled \"Apollo\u00a013: To the Edge and Back\".\nFollowing the flight, the crew planned to write a book, but they all left NASA without starting it. After Lovell retired in 1991, he was approached by journalist Jeffrey Kluger about writing a non-fiction account of the mission. Swigert died in 1982 and Haise was no longer interested in such a project. The resultant book, \"Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo\u00a013\", was published in 1994.\nThe next year, in 1995, a film adaptation of the book, \"Apollo\u00a013\", was released, directed by Ron Howard and starring Tom Hanks as Lovell, Bill Paxton as Haise, Kevin Bacon as Swigert, Gary Sinise as Mattingly, Ed Harris as Kranz, and Kathleen Quinlan as Marilyn Lovell. James Lovell, Kranz, and other principals have stated that this film depicted the events of the mission with reasonable accuracy, given that some dramatic license was taken. For example, the film changes the tense of Lovell's famous follow-up to Swigert's original words from, \"Houston, we've had a problem\" to \"Houston, we have a problem\". The film also invented the phrase \"Failure is not an option\", uttered by Harris as Kranz in the film; the phrase became so closely associated with Kranz that he used it for the title of his 2000 autobiography. The film won two of the nine Academy Awards it was nominated for, Best Film Editing and Best Sound.\nIn the 1998 miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\", co-produced by Hanks and Howard, the mission is dramatized in the episode \"We Interrupt This Program\". Rather than showing the incident from the crew's perspective as in the \"Apollo\u00a013\" feature film, it is instead presented from an Earth-bound perspective of television reporters competing for coverage of the event.\nIn 2020, the BBC World Service began airing \"13 Minutes to the Moon\", radio programs which draws on NASA audio from the mission, as well as archival and recent interviews with participants. Episodes began airing for Season 2, starting on March 8, 2020, with episode 1, \"Time bomb: Apollo 13\", explaining the launch and the explosion. Episode 2 details the denial and disbelief of Mission Control to the accident, with other episodes covering other aspects of the mission. The seventh and final episode was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In \"Delay to Episode 7\", the BBC explained that the presenter of the series, medical doctor Kevin Fong, had been called into service.\nIn advance of the 50th anniversary of the mission in 2020, an Apollo in Real Time site for the mission went online, allowing viewers to follow along as the mission unfolds, view photographs and video, and listen to the conversations, not only between Houston and the astronauts, but between mission controllers on the audio loops. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, NASA did not hold any in-person events during April 2020 for the flight's 50th anniversary, but premiered a new documentary, \"Apollo 13: Home Safe\" on April 10, 2020. A number of events were rescheduled for later in 2020.\nExternal links.\nNASA reports\nMultimedia"}
{"id": "1771", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1771", "title": "Apollo Program", "text": ""}
{"id": "1772", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1772", "title": "Arthritus", "text": ""}
{"id": "1773", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1773", "title": "Apollo 7", "text": "Apollo 7 was an October 1968 space mission carried out by the United States. It was the first crewed flight in NASA's Apollo program, and saw the resumption of human spaceflight by the agency after the fire that killed the three Apollo\u00a01 astronauts in January 1967. The Apollo7 crew was commanded by Walter M. Schirra, with command module pilot Donn F. Eisele and lunar module pilot R. Walter Cunningham (so designated even though Apollo7 did not carry a lunar module).\nThe three astronauts were originally designated for the second crewed Apollo flight, and then as backups for Apollo1. After the fire, crewed flights were suspended while the cause of the accident was investigated and improvements made to the spacecraft and safety procedures, and uncrewed test flights made. Determined to prevent a repetition of the fire, the crew spent long periods of time monitoring the construction of their Apollo command and service modules (CSM). Training continued over much of the 21-month pause that followed the Apollo1 disaster.\nApollo 7 was launched on October 11, 1968, from Cape Kennedy Air Force Station, Florida, and splashed down in the Atlantic Ocean eleven days later. Extensive testing of the CSM took place, and also the first live television broadcast from an American spacecraft. Despite tension between the crew and ground controllers, the mission was a complete technical success, giving NASA the confidence to send Apollo\u00a08 into orbit around the Moon two months later. In part because of these tensions, none of the crew flew in space again, though Schirra had already announced he would retire from NASA after the flight. Apollo7 fulfilled Apollo1's mission of testing the CSM in low Earth orbit, and was a significant step forward towards NASA's goal of landing astronauts on the Moon.\nBackground and personnel.\nSchirra, one of the original \"Mercury Seven\" astronauts, graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1945. He flew Mercury-Atlas 8 in 1962, the fifth crewed flight of Project Mercury (the third to reach orbit) and was the command pilot for Gemini 6A. He was a 45-year-old captain in the Navy at the time of Apollo7. Eisele graduated from the Naval Academy in 1952 with a B.S. in aeronautics. He elected to be commissioned in the Air Force, and was a 38-year-old major at the time of Apollo7. Cunningham joined the U.S. Navy in 1951, began flight training the following year, and served in a Marine flight squadron from 1953 to 1956, and was a civilian, aged 36, serving in the Marine Corps reserves with a rank of major, at the time of Apollo7. He received degrees in physics from UCLA, a B.A. in 1960 and an M.A. in 1961. Both Eisele and Cunningham were selected as part of the third group of astronauts in 1963.\nEisele was originally slotted for a position on Gus Grissom's Apollo\u00a01 crew along with Ed White, but days prior to the official announcement on March 25, 1966, Eisele sustained a shoulder injury that would require surgery. Instead, Roger Chaffee was given the position and Eisele was reassigned to Schirra's crew.\nSchirra, Eisele, and Cunningham were first named as an Apollo crew on September 29, 1966. They were to fly a second Earth orbital test of the Apollo Command Module (CM). Although delighted as a rookie to be assigned to a prime crew without having served as a backup, Cunningham was troubled by the fact that Apollo2 seemed unnecessary if Apollo1 was successful. He learned later that Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton, another of the Mercury Seven who had been grounded for medical reasons and supervised the astronauts, planned, with Schirra's support, to command the mission if he gained medical clearance. When this was not forthcoming, Schirra remained in command of the crew, and in November 1966, Apollo2 was cancelled and Schirra's crew assigned as backup to Grissom's. Apollo 2 backup commander Thomas P. Stafford stated that the cancellation followed Schirra and his crew submitting a list of demands to NASA management (Schirra wanted the mission to include a lunar module and a CM capable of docking with it), and that the assignment as backups left Schirra complaining that Slayton and Chief Astronaut Alan Shepard had destroyed his career.\nOn January 27, 1967, Grissom's crew was conducting a launch-pad test for their planned February 21 mission, when a fire broke out in the cabin, killing all three men. A complete safety review of the Apollo program followed. Soon after the fire, Slayton asked Schirra, Eisele and Cunningham to fly the first mission after the pause. Apollo 7 would use the BlockII spacecraft designed for the lunar missions, as opposed to the Block I CSM used for Apollo 1, which was intended only to be used for the early Earth-orbit missions, as it lacked the capability of docking with a lunar module. The CM and astronauts' spacesuits had been extensively redesigned, to reduce any chance of a repeat of the accident which killed the first crew. Schirra's crew would test the life support, propulsion, guidance and control systems during this \"open-ended\" mission (meaning it would be extended as it passed each test). The duration was limited to 11 days, reduced from the original 14-day limit for Apollo1.\nThe backup crew consisted of Stafford as commander, John W. Young as command module pilot, and Eugene A. Cernan as lunar module pilot. They became the prime crew of Apollo\u00a010. Ronald E. Evans, John L. 'Jack' Swigert, and Edward G. Givens were assigned to the support crew for the mission. Givens died in a car accident on June 6, 1967, and William R. Pogue was assigned as his replacement. Evans was involved in hardware testing at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Swigert was the launch capsule communicator (CAPCOM) and worked on the mission's operational aspects. Pogue spent time modifying procedures. The support crew also filled in when the primary and backup crews were unavailable.\nCAPCOMs, the person in Mission Control responsible for communicating with the spacecraft (then always an astronaut) were Evans, Pogue, Stafford, Swigert, Young and Cernan. Flight directors were Glynn Lunney, Gene Kranz and Gerry Griffin.\nPreparation.\nAccording to Cunningham, Schirra originally had limited interest in making a third spaceflight, beginning to focus on his post-NASA career. Flying the first mission after the fire changed things, \"Wally Schirra was being pictured as the man chosen to rescue the manned space program. And that was a task worthy of Wally's interest.\" Eisele noted, \"coming on the heels of the fire, we knew the fate and future of the entire manned space program\u2014not to mention our own skins\u2014was riding on the success or failure of Apollo7.\"\nGiven the circumstances of the fire, the crew initially had little confidence in those at North American Aviation's plant at Downey, California who built the Apollo command modules, and they were determined to follow their craft every step of the way through construction and testing. This interfered with training, but the simulators of the CM were not yet ready, and they knew it would be a long time until they launched. They spent long periods of time at Downey. Simulators were constructed at Houston's Manned Spacecraft Center and at KSC in Florida. Once these were available for use, the crew had difficulty finding enough time to do everything, even with the help of the backup and support crews; the crew often worked 12 or 14 hours per day. After the CM was completed and shipped to KSC, the focus of the crew's training shifted to Florida, though they went to Houston for planning and technical meetings. Rather than return to their Houston homes for the weekend, they often had to remain at KSC in order to participate in training or spacecraft testing. According to former astronaut Tom Jones in a 2018 article, Schirra, \"with indisputable evidence of the risks his crew would be taking, now had immense leverage with management at NASA and North American, and he used it. In conference rooms or on the spacecraft assembly line, Schirra got his way.\"\nThe Apollo 7 crew spent five hours in training for every hour they could expect to remain aboard if the mission went its full eleven days. In addition, they attended technical briefings, pilots' meetings, and studied on their own. They undertook launch pad evacuation training, water egress training to exit the vehicle following splashdown, and learned to use fire suppression equipment. They trained on the Apollo Guidance Computer at MIT. Each crew member spent 160 hours in CM simulations, in some of which Mission Control in Houston participated live. The \"plugs out\" test\u2014the test that had killed the Apollo1 crew\u2014was conducted with the prime crew in the spacecraft, but with the hatch open. One reason the Apollo1 crew had died was because it was impossible to open the inward-opening hatch before the fire raced through the cabin; this was changed for Apollo7.\nCommand modules similar to that used on Apollo7 were subjected to tests in the run-up to the mission. A three-astronaut crew (Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand and Joe H. Engle) was inside a CM that was placed in a vacuum chamber at the Manned Spaceflight Center in Houston for eight days in June 1968 to test spacecraft systems. Another crew, (James Lovell, Stuart Roosa and Charles M. Duke) spent 48 hours at sea aboard a CM lowered into the Gulf of Mexico from a naval vessel in April 1968, to test how systems would respond to seawater. Further tests were conducted the following month in a tank at Houston. Fires were set aboard a boilerplate CM using various atmospheric compositions and pressures. The results led to the decision to use 60 percent oxygen and 40 percent nitrogen within the CM at launch, which would be replaced with a lower pressure of pure oxygen within four hours, as providing adequate fire protection. Other boilerplate spacecraft were subjected to drops to test parachutes, and to simulate the likely damage if a CM came down on land. All results were satisfactory.\nDuring the run-up to the mission, the Soviets sent uncrewed probes Zond\u00a04 and Zond\u00a05 around the Moon, seeming to foreshadow a circumlunar crewed mission. NASA's Lunar Module (LM) was suffering delays, and Apollo Program Spacecraft Manager George Low proposed that if Apollo7 was a success, that Apollo\u00a08 go to lunar orbit without a LM. The acceptance of Low's proposal raised the stakes for Apollo7. According to Stafford, Schirra \"clearly felt the full weight of the program riding on a successful mission and as a result became more openly critical and more sarcastic.\"\nThroughout the Mercury and Gemini programs, McDonnell Aircraft engineer Guenter Wendt led the spacecraft launch pad teams, with ultimate responsibility for condition of the spacecraft at launch. He earned the astronauts' respect and admiration, including Schirra's. However, the spacecraft contractor had changed from McDonnell (Mercury and Gemini) to North American (Apollo), so Wendt was not the pad leader for Apollo1. So adamant was Schirra in his desire to have Wendt back as pad leader for his Apollo flight, that he got his boss Slayton to persuade North American management to hire Wendt away from McDonnell, and Schirra personally lobbied North American's launch operations manager to change Wendt's shift from midnight to day so he could be pad leader for Apollo7. Wendt remained as pad leader for the entire Apollo program. When he departed the spacecraft area as the pad was evacuated prior to launch, after Cunningham said, \"I think Guenter's going,\" Eisele responded \"Yes, I think Guenter went.\"\nHardware.\nSpacecraft.\nThe Apollo 7 spacecraft included Command and Service Module 101 (CSM-101) the first BlockII CSM to be flown. The BlockII craft had the capability of docking with a LM, though none was flown on Apollo7. The spacecraft also included the launch escape system and a spacecraft-lunar module adapter (SLA), though the latter included no LM and instead provided a mating structure between the SM and the S-IVB's Instrument Unit, with a structural stiffener substituted for the LM. The launch escape system was jettisoned after S-IVB ignition, while the SLA was left behind on the spent S-IVB when the CSM separated from it in orbit.\nFollowing the Apollo 1 fire, the BlockII CSM was extensively redesigned\u2014more than 1,800 changes were recommended, of which 1,300 were implemented for Apollo7. Prominent among these was the new aluminum and fiberglass outward-opening hatch, which the crew could open in seven seconds from within, and the pad crew in ten seconds from outside. Other changes included replacement of aluminum tubing in the high-pressure oxygen system with stainless steel, replacement of flammable materials with non-flammable (including changing plastic switches for metal ones) and, for crew protection in the event of a fire, an emergency oxygen system to shield them from toxic fumes, as well as firefighting equipment.\nAfter the Gemini 3 craft was dubbed \"Molly Brown\" by Grissom, NASA forbade naming spacecraft. Despite this prohibition, Schirra wanted to name his ship \"Phoenix\", but NASA refused him permission. The first CM to be given a call sign other than the mission designation would be that of Apollo 9, which carried an LM that would separate from it and then re-dock, necessitating distinct call signs for the two vehicles.\nLaunch vehicle.\nSince it flew in low Earth orbit and did not include a LM, Apollo7 was launched with the Saturn IB booster rather than the much larger and more powerful Saturn V. That Saturn IB was designated SA-205, and was the fifth Saturn IB to be flown\u2014the earlier ones did not carry crews into space. It differed from its predecessors in that stronger propellent lines to the augmented spark igniter in the J-2 engines had been installed, so as to prevent a repetition of the early shutdown that had occurred on the uncrewed Apollo\u00a06 flight; postflight analysis had shown that the propellent lines to the J-2 engines, also used in the Saturn V tested on Apollo6, had leaked.\nThe Saturn IB was a two-stage rocket, with the second stage an S-IVB similar to the third stage of the Saturn V, the rocket used by all later Apollo missions. The Saturn IB was used after the close of the Apollo Program to bring crews in Apollo CSMs to Skylab, and for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.\nApollo 7 was the only crewed Apollo mission to launch from Cape Kennedy Air Force Station's Launch Complex 34. All subsequent Apollo and Skylab spacecraft flights (including Apollo\u2013Soyuz) were launched from Launch Complex 39 at the nearby Kennedy Space Center. Launch Complex 34 was declared redundant and decommissioned in 1969, making Apollo7 the last human spaceflight mission to launch from the Cape Air Force Station in the 20th century.\nMission highlights.\nThe main purposes of the Apollo7 flight were to show that the Block II CM would be habitable and reliable over the length of time required for a lunar mission, to show that the service propulsion system (SPS, the spacecraft's main engine) and the CM's guidance systems could perform a rendezvous in orbit, and to make a precision reentry and splashdown. In addition, there were a number of specific objectives, including evaluating the communications systems and the accuracy of onboard systems such as the propellant tank gauges. Many of the activities aimed at gathering these data were scheduled for early in the mission, so that if the mission was terminated prematurely, they would already have been completed, allowing for fixes to be made prior to the next Apollo flight.\nLaunch and testing.\nApollo 7, the first crewed American space flight in 22 months, launched from Launch Complex 34 at 11:02:45am EDT (15:02:45UTC) on Friday, October 11, 1968.\nDuring the countdown, the wind was blowing in from the east. Launching under these weather conditions was in violation of safety rules, since in the event of a launch vehicle malfunction and abort, the CM might be blown back over land instead of making the usual water landing. Apollo7 was equipped with the old Apollo1-style crew couches, which provided less protection than later ones. Schirra later related that he felt the launch should have been scrubbed, but managers waived the rule and he yielded under pressure.\nLiftoff proceeded flawlessly; the Saturn IB performed well on its first crewed launch and there were no significant anomalies during the boost phase. The astronauts described it as very smooth. The ascent made the 45-year-old Schirra the oldest person to that point to enter space, and, as it proved, the only astronaut to fly Mercury, Gemini and Apollo missions.\nWithin the first three hours of flight, the astronauts performed two actions which simulated what would be required on a lunar mission. First, they maneuvered the craft with the S-IVB still attached, as would be required for the burn that would take lunar missions to the Moon. Then, after separation from the S-IVB, Schirra turned the CSM around and approached a docking target painted on the S-IVB, simulating the docking maneuver with the lunar module on Moon-bound missions prior to extracting the combined craft. \nAfter station keeping with the S-IVB for 20 minutes, Schirra let it drift away, putting between the CSM and it in preparation for the following day's rendezvous attempt. \nThe astronauts also enjoyed a hot lunch, the first hot meal prepared on an American spacecraft. Schirra had brought instant coffee along over the opposition of NASA doctors, who argued it added nothing nutritionally. Five hours after launch, he reported having, and enjoying, his first plastic bag full of coffee.\nThe purpose of the rendezvous was to demonstrate the CSM's ability to match orbits with and rescue a LM after an aborted lunar landing attempt, or following liftoff from the lunar surface. This was to occur on the second day; but by the end of the first, Schirra had reported he had a cold, and, despite Slayton coming on the loop to argue in favor, declined Mission Control's request that the crew power up and test the onboard television camera prior to the rendezvous, citing the cold, that the crew had not eaten, and that there was already a very full schedule.\nThe rendezvous was complicated by the fact that the Apollo7 spacecraft lacked a rendezvous radar, something the Moon-bound missions would have. The SPS, the engine that would be needed to send later Apollo CSMs into and out of lunar orbit, had been fired only on a test stand. Although the astronauts were confident it would work, they were concerned it might fire in an unexpected manner, necessitating an early end to the mission. The burns would be computed from the ground but the final work in maneuvering up to the S-IVB would require Eisele to use the telescope and sextant to compute the final burns, with Schirra applying the ship's reaction control system (RCS) thrusters. Eisele remembered being startled by the sudden violent jolt they received upon first activating the SPS. The thrust caused Schirra to yell, \"Yabba dabba doo!\" in reference to \"The Flintstones\" cartoon. Schirra eased the craft close to the S-IVB, which was tumbling out of control, successfully completing the rendezvous.\nThe first television broadcast took place on October 14. It began with a view of a card reading \"Hello from the Apollo Room high atop everything\", recalling tag lines used by band leaders on 1930s radio broadcasts. Cunningham served as camera operator with Eisele as emcee. During the seven-minute broadcast, the crew showed off the spacecraft and gave the audience views of the southern United States. Before the close, Schirra held another sign, \"Keep those cards and letters coming in folks\", another old-time radio tag line that had been used recently by Dean Martin. This was the first live television broadcast from an American spacecraft (Gordon Cooper had transmitted slow scan television pictures from \"Faith7\" in 1963, but the pictures were of poor quality and were never broadcast). According to Jones, \"these apparently amiable astronauts delivered to NASA a solid public relations coup.\" Daily television broadcasts of about 10 minutes each followed, during which the crew held up more signs and educated their audience about spaceflight; after the return to Earth, they were awarded a special Emmy for the telecasts.\nLater on October 14, the craft's onboard radar receiver was able to lock onto a ground-based transmitter, again showing a CSM in lunar orbit could keep contact with a LM returning from the surface. Throughout the remainder of the mission, the crew continued to run tests on the CSM, including of the propulsion, navigation, environmental, electrical and thermal control systems. All checked out well; according to authors Francis French and Colin Burgess, \"The redesigned Apollo spacecraft was better than anyone had dared to hope.\" Eisele found that navigation was not as easy as anticipated; he found it difficult to use Earth's horizon in sighting stars due to the fuzziness of the atmosphere, and water dumps made it difficult to discern which glistening points were stars and which ice particles. By the end of the mission, the SPS engine had been fired eight times without any problems.\nOne difficulty that was encountered was with the sleep schedule, which called for one crew member to remain awake at all times; Eisele was to remain awake while the others slept, and sleep during part of the time the others were awake. This did not work well, as it was hard for crew members to work without making a disturbance. Cunningham later remembered waking up to find Eisele dozing.\nConflict and splashdown.\nSchirra remembered in his memoirs that because of NASA managers allowing the launch to proceed despite the winds, \"I was angry, and with good reason. The mission pushed us to the wall in terms of risk.\" Jones noted, \"This prelaunch dispute was the prelude to a tug of war over command decisions for the rest of the mission.\" Lack of sleep and Schirra's cold probably contributed to the conflict between the astronauts and Mission Control that surfaced from time to time during the flight.\nThe testing of the television resulted in a disagreement between the crew and Houston. Schirra stated at the time, \"You've added two burns to this flight schedule, and you've added a urine water dump; and we have a new vehicle up here, and I can tell you at this point TV will be delayed without any further discussion until after the rendezvous.\" Schirra later wrote, \"we'd resist anything that interfered with our main mission objectives. On this particular Saturday morning a TV program clearly interfered.\" Eisele agreed in his memoirs, \"We were preoccupied with preparations for that critical exercise and didn't want to divert our attention with what seemed to be trivialities at the time... Evidently the earth people felt differently; there was a real stink about the hotheaded, recalcitrant Apollo7 crew who wouldn't take orders.\" French and Burgess wrote, \"When this point is considered objectively\u2014that in a front-loaded mission the rendezvous, alignment, and engine tests should be done before television shows\u2014it is hard to argue with him.\" Although Slayton gave in to Schirra, the commander's attitude surprised flight controllers.\nOn Day 8, after being asked to follow a new procedure passed up from the ground that caused the computer to freeze, Eisele radioed, \"We didn't get the results that you were after. We didn't get a damn thing, in fact... you bet your ass... as far as we're concerned, somebody down there screwed up royally when he laid that one on us.\" Schirra later stated his belief that this was the one main occasion when Eisele upset Mission Control. The next day saw more conflict, with Schirra telling Mission Control after having to make repeated firings of the RCS system to keep the spacecraft stable during a test, \"I wish you would find out the idiot's name who thought up this test. I want to find out, and I want to talk to him personally when I get back down.\" Eisele joined in, \"While you are at it, find out who dreamed up 'P22 horizon test'; that is a beauty also.\"\nA further source of tension between Mission Control and the crew was that Schirra repeatedly expressed the view that the reentry should be conducted with their helmets off. He perceived a risk that their eardrums might burst due to the sinus pressure from their colds, and they wanted to be able to pinch their noses and blow to equalize the pressure as it increased during reentry. This would have been impossible wearing the helmets. Over several days, Schirra refused advice from the ground that the helmets should be worn, stating it was his prerogative as commander to decide this, though Slayton warned him he would have to answer for it after the flight. Schirra stated in 1994, \"In this case I had a cold, and I'd had enough discussion with the ground, and I didn't have much more time to talk about whether we would put the helmet on or off. I said, essentially, I'm on board, I'm commanding. They could wear all the black armbands they wanted if I was lost or if I lost my hearing. But I had the responsibility for getting through the mission.\" No helmets were worn during the entry; Director of Flight Operations Christopher C. Kraft, who had demanded explanations for what he believed was Schirra's insubordination from the CAPCOM, Stafford, conceded in his memoirs, \"Schirra was exercising his commander\u2019s right to have the last word, and that was that.\"\nApollo 7 splashed down without incident at 11:11:48 UTC on October 22, 1968, SSW of Bermuda and north of the recovery ship USS \"Essex\". Duration of the mission was 10days, 20hours, 9minutes and 3seconds.\nAssessment and aftermath.\nAfter the mission, NASA awarded Schirra, Eisele and Cunningham its Exceptional Service Medal in recognition of their success. On November 2, 1968, President Lyndon Johnson held a ceremony at the LBJ Ranch in Johnson City, Texas, to present the astronauts with the medals. He also presented NASA's highest honor, the Distinguished Service Medal, to recently retired NASA administrator James E. Webb, for his \"outstanding leadership of America's space program\" since the beginning of Apollo. Johnson also invited the crew to the White House, and they went there in December 1968.\nDespite the difficulties between the crew and Mission Control, the mission successfully met its objectives to verify the Apollo command and service module's flightworthiness, allowing Apollo8's flight to the Moon to proceed just two months later. John T. McQuiston wrote in \"The New York Times\" after Eisele's death in 1987 that Apollo7's success brought renewed confidence to NASA's space program. According to Jones, \"Three weeks after the Apollo7 crew returned, NASA administrator Thomas Paine green-lighted Apollo8 to launch in late December and orbit the moon. Apollo7 had delivered NASA from its trial by fire\u2014it was the first small step down a path that would lead another crew, nine months later, to the Sea of Tranquility.\"\nGeneral Sam Phillips, the Apollo Program Manager, said at the time, \"Apollo7 goes into my book as a perfect mission. We accomplished 101 percent of our objectives.\" Kraft wrote, \"Schirra and his crew did it all\u2014or at least all of it that counted... [T]hey proved to everyone's satisfaction that the SPS engine was one of the most reliable we'd ever sent into space. They operated the Command and Service Modules with true professionalism.\" Eisele wrote, \"We were insolent, high-handed, and Machiavellian at times. Call it paranoia, call it smart\u2014it got the job done. We had a great flight.\"\nKranz stated in 1998, \"we all look back now with a longer perspective. Schirra really wasn't on us as bad as it seemed at the time... Bottom line was, even with a grumpy commander, we got the job done as a team.\"\nNone of the Apollo 7 crew members flew in space again. According to Jim Lovell, \"Apollo7 was a very successful flight\u2014they did an excellent job\u2014but it was a very contentious flight. They all teed off the ground people quite considerably, and I think that kind of put a stop on future flights [for them].\" Schirra had before the flight announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy, effective July 1, 1969. The other two crew members had their spaceflight careers stunted by their involvement in Apollo7; by some accounts, Kraft told Slayton he was unwilling to work in future with any member of the crew. Cunningham heard the rumors that Kraft had said this and confronted him in early 1969; Kraft denied making the statement \"but his reaction wasn't exactly outraged innocence.\" Eisele's career may also have been affected by becoming the first active astronaut to divorce, followed by a quick remarriage, and an indifferent performance as backup CMP for Apollo10. He resigned from the Astronaut Office in 1970 though he remained with NASA at the Langley Research Center in Virginia until 1972, when he was eligible for retirement. Cunningham was made the leader of the Astronaut Office's Skylab division. He related that he was informally offered command of the first Skylab crew, but when this instead went to Apollo\u00a012 commander Pete Conrad, with Cunningham offered the position of backup commander, he resigned as an astronaut in 1971.\nSchirra, Eisele and Cunningham were the only crew, of all the Apollo, Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions who had not been awarded the Distinguished Service Medal immediately following their missions (though Schirra had received the medal twice before, for his Mercury and Gemini missions). Therefore, NASA administrator Michael D. Griffin decided to belatedly award the medals to the crew in October 2008, \"[f]or exemplary performance in meeting all the Apollo7 mission objectives and more on the first crewed Apollo mission, paving the way for the first flight to the Moon on Apollo8 and the first crewed lunar landing on Apollo11.\" Only Cunningham was still alive at the time as Eisele had died in 1987 and Schirra in 2007. Eisele's widow accepted his medal, and Apollo\u00a08 crew member Bill Anders accepted Schirra's. Other Apollo astronauts, including Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Alan Bean, were present at the award ceremony. Kraft, who had been in conflict with the crew during the mission, sent a conciliatory video message of congratulations, saying: \"We gave you a hard time once but you certainly survived that and have done extremely well since... I am frankly, very proud to call you a friend.\"\nMission insignia.\nThe insignia for the flight shows a command and service module with its SPS engine firing, the trail from that fire encircling a globe and extending past the edges of the patch symbolizing the Earth-orbital nature of the mission. The Roman numeralVII appears in the South Pacific Ocean and the crew's names appear on a wide black arc at the bottom. The patch was designed by Allen Stevens of Rockwell International.\nSpacecraft location.\nIn January 1969, the Apollo7 command module was displayed on a NASA float in the inauguration parade of President Richard M. Nixon, as were the Apollo7 astronauts. After being transferred to the Smithsonian Institution in 1970, the spacecraft was loaned to the National Museum of Science and Technology, in Ottawa, Ontario. It was returned to the United States in 2004. Currently, the Apollo7 CM is on loan to the Frontiers of Flight Museum located at Love Field in Dallas, Texas.\nDepiction in media.\nOn November 6, 1968, comedian Bob Hope broadcast one of his variety television specials from NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston to honor the Apollo7 crew. Barbara Eden, star of the popular comedy series \"I Dream of Jeannie\", which featured fictional astronauts among its regular characters, appeared with Schirra, Eisele and Cunningham.\nSchirra parlayed the head cold he contracted during Apollo7 into a television advertising contract as a spokesman for Actifed, an over-the-counter version of the medicine he took in space.\nThe Apollo 7 mission is dramatized in the 1998 miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\" episode \"We Have Cleared the Tower\", with Mark Harmon as Schirra, John Mese as Eisele, Fredric Lehne as Cunningham and Nick Searcy as Slayton."}
{"id": "1774", "revid": "17114440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1774", "title": "Apollo 9", "text": "Apollo 9 was a March 1969 human spaceflight, the third in NASA's Apollo program. Flown in low Earth orbit, it was the second crewed Apollo mission that the United States launched via a Saturn V rocket, and was the first flight of the full Apollo spacecraft: the command and service module (CSM) with the Lunar Module (LM). The mission was flown to qualify the LM for lunar orbit operations in preparation for the first Moon landing by demonstrating its descent and ascent propulsion systems, showing that its crew could fly it independently, then rendezvous and dock with the CSM again, as would be required for the first crewed lunar landing. Other objectives of the flight included firing the LM descent engine to propel the spacecraft stack as a backup mode (as would be required on the Apollo 13 mission), and use of the portable life support system backpack outside the LM cabin.\nThe three-man crew consisted of Commander James McDivitt, Command Module Pilot David Scott, and Lunar Module Pilot Rusty Schweickart. During the ten-day mission, they tested systems and procedures critical to landing on the Moon, including the LM engines, backpack life support systems, navigation systems and docking maneuvers.\nAfter launching on March 3, 1969, the crew performed the first crewed flight of a lunar module, the first docking and extraction of the same, one two-person spacewalk (EVA), and the second docking of two crewed spacecraft\u2014two months after the Soviets performed a spacewalk crew transfer between and . The mission concluded on March 13 and was a complete success. It proved the LM worthy of crewed spaceflight, setting the stage for the dress rehearsal for the lunar landing, Apollo 10, before the ultimate goal, landing on the Moon.\nMission background.\nIn April 1966, McDivitt, Scott and Schweickart were selected by Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton as the second Apollo crew. Their initial job was as backup to the first Apollo crew to be chosen, Gus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger Chaffee, for the first crewed Earth orbital test flight of the block I command and service module, designated AS-204. Delays in the block I CSM development pushed AS-204 into 1967. The revised plan had the McDivitt crew scheduled for the second crewed CSM, which was to rendezvous in Earth orbit with an uncrewed LM, launched separately. The third crewed mission, to be commanded by Frank Borman, was to be the first launch of a SaturnV with a crew.\nOn January 27, 1967, Grissom's crew was conducting a launch-pad test for their planned February 21 mission, which they named Apollo 1, when a fire broke out in the cabin, killing all three men. A complete safety review of the Apollo program followed. During this time Apollo 5 took place, an uncrewed launch to test the first lunar module (LM-1).\nUnder the new schedule, the first Apollo crewed mission to go into space would be Apollo 7, planned for October 1968. This mission, which was to test the block II command module, did not include a lunar module. In 1967, NASA had adopted a series of lettered missions leading up to the crewed lunar landing, the \"G mission\", completion of one being a prerequisite to the next. Apollo7 would be the \"Cmission\", but the \"Dmission\" required testing of the crewed lunar module, which was running well behind schedule and endangering John F. Kennedy's goal of Americans walking on the Moon and returning safely to Earth by the end of the 1960s. McDivitt's crew had been announced by NASA in November 1967 as prime crew for the Dmission, lengthy testing of the command and lunar modules in Earth orbit.\nSeeking to keep Kennedy's goal on schedule, in August 1968, Apollo Program Manager George M. Low proposed that if Apollo7 in October went well, Apollo8 would go to lunar orbit without a LM. Until then, Apollo8 was the Dmission with Apollo9 the \"E mission\", testing in medium Earth orbit. After NASA approved sending Apollo8 to the Moon, while making Apollo9 the Dmission, Slayton offered McDivitt the opportunity to stay with Apollo8 and thus go to lunar orbit. McDivitt turned it down on behalf of his crew, preferring to stay with the Dmission, now Apollo9.\nApollo7 went well, and the crews were switched. The crew swap also affected who would be the first astronauts to land on the Moon, for when the crews for Apollo8 and9 were swapped, so were the backup crews. Since the rule of thumb was for backup crews to fly as prime crew three missions later, this put Neil Armstrong's crew (Borman's backup) in position to make the first landing attempt on Apollo 11 instead of Pete Conrad's crew, who made the second landing on Apollo 12.\nFramework.\nCrew and key Mission Control personnel.\nMcDivitt was in the Air Force; selected as a member of the second group of astronauts in 1962, he was command pilot of Gemini 4 (1965). Scott, also Air Force, was selected in the third astronaut group in 1963 and flew alongside Neil Armstrong in Gemini 8, on which the first spacecraft docking was performed. Schweickart, a civilian who had served in the Air Force and Massachusetts Air National Guard, was selected as a Group3 astronaut but was not assigned to a Gemini mission and had no spaceflight experience.\nThe backup crew consisted of Pete Conrad as commander, Command Module Pilot Richard F. Gordon Jr. and Lunar Module Pilot Alan L. Bean. This crew flew as prime on Apollo 12 in November 1969. The support crew for Apollo9 consisted of Stuart A. Roosa, Jack R. Lousma, Edgar D. Mitchell and Alfred M. Worden. Lousma was not an original member of the Apollo9 support crew, but was assigned after Fred W. Haise Jr. was moved to the position of backup lunar module pilot on Apollo 8\u2014several astronauts were shifted in the wake of Michael Collins being removed from the Apollo8 prime crew because of treatment for bone spurs.\nThe flight directors were Gene Kranz, first shift, Gerry Griffin, second shift and Pete Frank, third shift. Capsule communicators were Conrad, Gordon, Bean, Worden, Roosa and Ronald Evans.\nMission insignia.\nThe circular patch shows a drawing of a Saturn|Saturn V rocket with the letters USA on it. To its right, an Apollo CSM is shown next to an LM, with the CSM's nose pointed at the \"front door\" of the LM rather than at its top docking port. The CSM is trailing rocket fire in a circle. The crew's names are along the top edge of the circle, with APOLLO IX at the bottom. The \"D\" in McDivitt's name is filled with red to mark that this was the \"Dmission\" in the alphabetic sequence of Apollo missions. The patch was designed by Allen Stevens of Rockwell International.\nPlanning and training.\nApollo 9's main purpose was to qualify the LM for crewed lunar flight, demonstrating, among other things, that it could perform the maneuvers in space that would be needed for a lunar landing, including docking with the CSM. Colin Burgess and Francis French, in their book about the Apollo Program, deemed McDivitt's crew among the best trained ever\u2014they had worked together since January 1966, at first as backups for Apollo 1, and they always had the assignment of being the first to fly the LM. Flight Director Gene Kranz deemed the Apollo9 crew the best prepared for their mission, and felt Scott was an extremely knowledgeable CMP. Crew members underwent some 1,800 hours of mission-specific training, about seven hours for every hour they would spend in flight. Their training even started on the day before the Apollo1 fire, in the very first Block II spacecraft in which they were originally intended to fly. They took part in the vehicle checkouts for the CSM at North American Rockwell's facility in Downey, California, and for the LM at Grumman's plant in Bethpage, New York. They also participated in testing of the modules at the launch site.\nAmong the types of the training which the crew underwent were simulations of zero-G, both underwater and in the Vomit Comet. During these exercises, they practiced for the planned extravehicular activities (EVAs). They traveled to Cambridge, Massachusetts, for training on the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) at MIT. The crew studied the sky at the Morehead Planetarium and at the Griffith Planetarium, especially focusing on the 37 stars used by the AGC. They each spent more than 300 hours in the CM and LM simulators at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) and at Houston, some involving live participation by Mission Control. Additional time was spent in simulators in other locations.\nThe first mission to use the CSM, the LM and a SaturnV, Apollo9 allowed the launch preparations team at KSC its first opportunity to simulate the launch of a lunar landing mission. The LM arrived from Grumman in June 1968 and was subjected to extensive testing including in the altitude chamber, simulating space conditions. As this occurred, other technicians assembled the SaturnV inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB). The CM and SM arrived in October, but even the experienced KSC team from North American had trouble joining them together. When the lander was done with the altitude chamber, the CSM took its place, letting the LM be available for installation of equipment such as rendezvous radar and antennas. There were no lengthy delays, and on January 3, 1969, the launch vehicle was taken out of the VAB and moved to Launch Complex 39A by crawler. Flight readiness reviews for the CM, the LM, and the SaturnV were held and passed in the following weeks.\nHardware.\nLaunch vehicle.\nThe Saturn V (AS-504) used on Apollo9 was the fourth to be flown, the second to carry astronauts to space, and the first to bear a lunar module. Although similar in configuration to the SaturnV used on Apollo 8, several changes were made. The inner core of the F-1 engine chamber in the first (S-IC) stage was removed, thus saving weight and allowing for a slight increase in specific impulse. Weight was also saved by replacing the skins of the liquid oxygen tanks with lighter ones, and by providing lighter versions of other components. Efficiency was increased in the S-II second stage with uprated J-2 engines, and through a closed-loop propellant utilization system rather than Apollo 8's open-loop system. Of the weight reduction in the second stage, about half came from a 16 percent reduction in the thickness of the tank side walls.\nSpacecraft, equipment and call signs.\nApollo9 used CSM-104, the third block II CSM to be flown with astronauts aboard. Apollo 8, lacking a lunar module, did not have docking equipment; Apollo9 flew the probe-and-drogue assembly used for docking along with other equipment added near the forward hatch of the CM; this allowed for rigid docking of the two craft, and for internal transfer between CM and LM. Had the switch in missions between Apollo8 and9 not occurred, the Earth-orbit mission would have flown CSM-103, which flew on Apollo 8.\nThe Earth-orbit mission was originally supposed to use LM-2 as its lunar module, but the crew found numerous flaws in it, many associated with it being the first flight-ready lunar module off Grumman's production line. The delay occasioned by the switch in missions allowed LM-3 to be available, a machine the crew found far superior. Neither LM-2 nor LM-3 could have been sent to the Moon as both were too heavy; Grumman's weight reduction program for the LMs only became fully effective with LM-5, designated for Apollo 11. Small cracks in LM-3's aluminum alloy structure due to stresses such as the insertion of a rivet proved an ongoing issue; Grumman's engineers continued working to fix them until the LM had to be mounted on the SaturnV in December 1968. LM-2 never flew in space and is in the National Air and Space Museum.\nThe Apollo astronauts were provided with early versions of the Sony Walkman, portable cassette recorders intended to allow them to make observations during the mission. The Apollo9 crew was the first to be allowed to bring music mixtapes, one each, that could be played in that device. McDivitt and Scott preferred easy listening and country music; Schweickart's cassette tape of classical music went missing until the ninth day of the ten-day mission, when it was presented to him by Scott.\nAfter the Gemini 3 craft was dubbed \"Molly Brown\" by Grissom, NASA forbade naming spacecraft. The fact that during the Apollo9 mission, the CSM and LM would separate and need different call signs caused the Apollo9 astronauts to push for a change. In simulations, they began to refer to the CSM as \"Gumdrop\", a name inspired by the CM's appearance while in the blue protective wrapping in which it was transported from the manufacturer, and the LM as \"Spider\", inspired by the LM's appearance with landing legs deployed. Personnel in NASA public relations thought the names were too informal, but the call signs ultimately gained official sanction. NASA required more formal call signs for future missions, starting with Apollo 11.\nLife Support System backpack.\nThe Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) backpack flew for the first time on Apollo9, used by Schweickart during his EVA. This included the Portable Life Support System (PLSS), providing oxygen to the astronaut and water for the Liquid Cooling Garment (LCG), which helped prevent overheating during extravehicular activity. Also present was the Oxygen Purge System (OPS), the \"bedroll\" atop the backpack, which could provide oxygen for up to roughly an hour if the PLSS failed. A more advanced version of the EMU was used for the lunar landing on Apollo 11.\nDuring his stand-up EVA, Scott did not wear a PLSS, but was connected to the CM's life support systems through an umbilical, utilizing a Pressure Control Valve (PCV). This device had been created in 1967 to allow for stand-up EVAs from the hatches of the LM or CM, or for brief ventures outside. It was later used by Scott for his lunar surface stand-up EVA on Apollo 15, and for the deep-space EVAs by the command module pilots of the final three Apollo flights.\nMission highlights.\nFirst through fifth days (March 3\u20137).\nOriginally scheduled to launch on February 28, 1969, the liftoff of Apollo9 was postponed because all three astronauts had colds, and NASA did not want to risk that the mission might be affected. Around-the-clock labor shifts were required to keep the spacecraft in readiness; the delay cost $500,000. The rocket launched from KSC at 11:00:00 EST (16:00:00 GMT) on March 3. This was well within the launch window, which would have remained open for another three and a quarter hours. Present in the firing control room was Vice President Spiro Agnew on behalf of the new Nixon administration.\nMcDivitt reported a smooth ride during the launch, although there was some vibration and the astronauts were surprised to be pushed forward when the Saturn V's first stage stopped firing, before its second stage took over, when they were pushed back into their couches. Each of the first two stages slightly underperformed; a deficiency made up, more or less, by the S-IVB third stage. Once the third stage cut out at 00:11:04.7 into the mission, Apollo9 had entered a parking orbit of .\nThe crew began their first major orbital task with the separation of the CSM from the S-IVB at 02:41:16 into the mission, seeking to turn around and then dock with the LM, which was on the end of the S-IVB, after which the combined spacecraft would separate from the rocket. If it was not possible to make such a docking, the lunar landing could not take place. It was Scott's responsibility to fly the CSM, which he did to a successful docking, as the probe-and-drogue docking assembly worked properly. After McDivitt and Schweickart inspected the tunnel connecting the CM and LM, the assembled spacecraft separated from the S-IVB. The next task was to demonstrate that two docked spacecraft could be maneuvered by one engine. The five-second burn took place at 05:59.01.1 into the mission, accomplished with the SM's Service Propulsion System (SPS), after which Scott excitedly reported the LM was still in place. Thereafter, the S-IVB was fired again, and the stage was sent into solar orbit.\nFrom 09:00:00 to 19:30:00, a sleep period was scheduled. The astronauts slept well, but complained of being woken by non-English transmissions. Scott theorized that they were possibly in Chinese. The highlight of the second day in orbit (March 4) was three SPS burns. The initial burn, at 22:12:04.1, lasted 110 seconds, and including swiveling or \"gimbaling\" the engine to test whether the autopilot could dampen the induced oscillations, which it did within five seconds. Two more SPS burns followed, lightening the SM's fuel load. The spacecraft and engine passed every test, sometimes proving more robust than expected. The performance of the CSM in remaining stable while the engine was being gimbaled would in 1972 help cause McDivitt, by then manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program, to approve the continuation of Apollo 16 when its CSM was experiencing an unstable gimbal after separation from its LM in lunar orbit.\nThe flight plan for the third day in space was to have the commander and lunar module pilot enter the LM to check out its systems and use its descent engine to move the entire spacecraft. The descent engine was the backup to the SPS; the ability to use it in this manner would prove critical on Apollo 13. The flight plan was thrown into question when Schweickart, suffering from space adaptation sickness, vomited, while McDivitt felt queasy as well. They had been avoiding sudden physical motions, but the contortion-like maneuvers to don their space suits for the LM checkout caused them to feel ill. The experience would teach the doctors enough about the sickness to have the astronauts avoid it on the lunar landings, but at the time Schweickart feared his vomiting might endanger Kennedy's goal. They were well enough to continue with the day's plan, and entered the LM, thus transferring between vehicles for the first time in the US space program, and making the first ever transfer without needing to spacewalk, as Soviet cosmonauts had. The hatches were then closed, though the modules remained docked, showing that \"Spider\" communications and life support systems would work in isolation from those of \"Gumdrop\". On command, the landing legs sprang into the position they would assume for landing on the Moon.\nIn the LM, Schweickart vomited again, causing McDivitt to request a private channel to the doctors in Houston. The first episode had not been reported to the ground because of its brief nature, and when the media learned what had happened to Schweickart, there were \"repercussions and a spate of unfriendly stories\". They finished the LM checkout, including the successful firing of the descent engine, and returned to Scott in \"Gumdrop\". The burn lasted 367 seconds and simulated the throttle pattern to be used during the landing on the Moon. After they returned, a fifth firing of the SPS was made, designed to circularize Apollo9's orbit in preparation for the rendezvous. This took place at 54:26:12.3, raising the craft's orbit to .\nThe fourth day's program (March 6) was for Schweickart to exit the hatch on the LM and make his way along the outside of the spacecraft to the CM's hatch, where Scott would stand by to assist, demonstrating that this could be done in the event of an emergency. Schweickart was to wear the life support backpack, or PLSS, to be worn on the lunar surface EVAs. This was the only EVA scheduled before the lunar landing, and thus the only opportunity to test the PLSS in space. McDivitt initially canceled the EVA due to Schweickart's condition, but with the lunar module pilot feeling better, decided to allow him to exit the LM, and once he was there, to move around the LM's exterior using handholds. Scott stood in the CM's hatch; both men photographed each other and retrieved experiments from the exterior of their vehicles. Schweickart found moving around easier than it had been in simulations; both he and Scott were confident that Schweickart could have completed the exterior transfer if called upon to do so, but considered it unnecessary. During the EVA, Schweickart used the call sign \"Red Rover\", a nod to the color of his hair.\nOn March 7, the fifth day, came \"the key event of the entire mission: the separation and rendezvous of the lunar module and the command module\". The lunar module lacked the capability to return the astronauts to Earth; this was the first time space travelers had flown in a vehicle that could not take them home. McDivitt and Schweickart entered the LM early, having obtained permission to do so without wearing their helmets and gloves, making it easier to set up the LM. When Scott in \"Gumdrop\" pushed the button to release the LM, it initially hung on the latches at the end of the docking probe, but he hit the button again and \"Spider\" was released. After spending about 45 minutes near \"Gumdrop\", \"Spider\" went into a slightly higher orbit, meaning that over time, the two craft would separate, with \"Gumdrop\" ahead. Over the next hours, McDivitt fired the LM's descent engine at several throttle settings; by the end of the day the LM was thoroughly test-flown. At a distance of , \"Spider\" fired to lower its orbit and thus begin to catch up with \"Gumdrop\", a process that would take over two hours, and the descent stage was jettisoned.\nThe approach and rendezvous were conducted as near as possible to what was planned for the lunar missions. To demonstrate that rendezvous could be performed by either craft, \"Spider\" was the active party during the maneuver. McDivitt brought \"Spider\" close to \"Gumdrop\", then maneuvered the LM to show each side to Scott, allowing him to inspect for any damage. Then, McDivitt docked the craft. Due to glare from the Sun, he had trouble doing this and Scott guided him in. During the later missions, the job of docking the two spacecraft in lunar orbit would fall to the command module pilot. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to \"Gumdrop\", \"Spider\" was jettisoned, its engine fired to fuel depletion remotely by Mission Control as part of further testing of the engine, simulating an ascent stage's climb from the lunar surface. This raised \"Spider\" to an orbit with apogee of over . The only major lunar module system not fully tested was the landing radar, as this could not be done in Earth orbit.\nSixth through eleventh days (March 8\u201313).\nApollo 9 was to remain in space for about ten days to check how the CSM would perform over the period of time required for a lunar mission. Most major events had been scheduled for the first days so that they would be accomplished if the flight needed to be ended early. The remaining days in orbit were to be conducted at a more leisurely pace. With the main goals of the mission accomplished, the hatch window was used for special photography of Earth, using four identical Hasselblad cameras, coupled together and using film sensitive to different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Such photography allowed different features of the Earth's surface to appear, for example, tracking of water pollution as it exits mouths of rivers into the sea, and the highlighting of agricultural areas using infrared. The camera system was a prototype, and would pave the way for the Earth Resources Technology Satellite, predecessor to the Landsat series. The photography was successful, as the ample time in orbit meant the crew could wait to allow cloud cover to pass, and would inform Skylab's mission planning.\nScott used a sextant to track landmarks on the Earth, and turned the instrument to the skies to observe the planet Jupiter, practicing navigation techniques that were to be used on later missions. The crew was able to track the Pegasus 3 satellite (launched in 1965) as well as the ascent stage of \"Spider\". The sixth burn of the SPS engine took place on the sixth day, though it was postponed one orbit as the reaction control system (RCS) thruster burn needed to settle the reactants in their tanks was not properly programmed. The SPS burn lowered the perigee of Apollo9's orbit, allowing for improved RCS thruster deorbit capability as a backup to the SPS.\nConsiderable testing of the CSM took place, but this was principally Scott's responsibility, allowing McDivitt and Schweickart leisure to observe the Earth; they alerted Scott if anything particularly noteworthy was upcoming, letting him leave his work for a moment to look at Earth too. The seventh burn of the SPS system took place on the eighth day, March 10; its purpose was again to aid RCS deorbit capability, as well as extending \"Gumdrop\" orbital lifetime. It shifted the apogee of the orbit to the Southern Hemisphere, allowing for a longer free-fall time to entry when Apollo9 returned to Earth. The burn was extended to allow for testing of the propellent gaging system, which had been behaving anomalously during earlier SPS burns. Once it was accomplished, Apollo9's RCS thrusters could have returned it to Earth and still allowed it to land in the primary recovery zone had the SPS engine failed. The eighth and final SPS burn, to return the vehicle to Earth, was accomplished on March 13, less than an hour after the ten-day mark of the mission, after which the service module was jettisoned. The landing was delayed one orbit because of unfavorable weather in the primary landing zone some ESE of Bermuda. Instead, Apollo9 splashed down east of the Bahamas, about from the recovery carrier, the USS \"Guadalcanal\", after a mission lasting 10 days, 1hour, 54 seconds. Apollo9 was the last spacecraft to splash down in the Atlantic Ocean until the Crew Dragon Demo-1 mission in 2019.\nHardware disposition.\nThe Apollo9 Command Module \"Gumdrop\" (1969-018A) is on display at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum. \"Gumdrop\" was formerly displayed at the Michigan Space and Science Center, Jackson, Michigan, until April 2004 when the center closed. The service module, jettisoned shortly after the deorbit burn, reentered the atmosphere and disintegrated.\nThe ascent stage of LM-3 \"Spider\" (1969-018C) reentered on October 23, 1981. The descent stage of LM-3 \"Spider\" (1969-018D) reentered on March 22, 1969, landing in the Indian Ocean near North Africa.\nThe S-IVB (1969-018B) was sent into solar orbit, with initial aphelion of , perihelion of and orbital period of 245 days. It remains in solar orbit .\nAppraisal and aftermath.\nAs NASA Associate Administrator George Mueller put it, \"Apollo9 was as successful a flight as any of us could ever wish for, as well as being as successful as any of us have ever seen.\" Gene Kranz called Apollo9 \"sheer exhilaration\". Apollo Program Director Samuel C. Phillips stated, \"in every way, it has exceeded even our most optimistic expectations.\" Apollo11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin stood in Mission Control as \"Spider\" and \"Gumdrop\" docked after their separate flights, and with the docking, according to Andrew Chaikin, \"Apollo9 had fulfilled all its major objectives. At that moment, Aldrin knew Apollo10 would also succeed, and that he and Armstrong would attempt to land on the Moon. On March 24, NASA made it official.\"\nAlthough he might have been offered command of an Apollo lunar landing mission, McDivitt chose to leave the Astronaut Corps after Apollo9, becoming manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program later in 1969. Scott was soon given another spaceflight assignment as backup commander of Apollo 12, and then was made mission commander of Apollo 15, landing on the Moon in 1971. Schweickart volunteered for medical investigation of his spacesickness, but was unable to shake its stigma, and was never again assigned to a prime crew. He took a leave of absence from NASA in 1977 that eventually became permanent. Eugene Cernan, commander of Apollo 17, stated that when it came to understanding spacesickness, Schweickart \"paid the price for them all\".\nFollowing the success of Apollo 9, NASA did not conduct the \"E mission\" (further testing in medium Earth orbit), and even considered skipping the \"F mission\", the dress rehearsal for the lunar landing, going straight to the landing attempt. As the spacecraft designated for the first landing attempt were still being assembled, this was not done. NASA officials also felt that given the past difficulties with the LM, there was a need for a further test flight before the actual landing attempt, and that orbiting the Moon would give them the opportunity to study mass concentrations there, which had affected Apollo8's orbit. According to French and Burgess in their study of the Apollo Program, \"In any event... Apollo9's success had ensured that the next Apollo mission would go back to the moon.\"\nExternal links.\nNASA reports\nMultimedia"}
{"id": "1775", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1775", "title": "Applied discrete math", "text": ""}
{"id": "1776", "revid": "6163802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1776", "title": "Arthritis", "text": "Arthritis is a term often used to mean any disorder that affects joints. Symptoms generally include joint pain and stiffness. Other symptoms may include redness, warmth, swelling, and decreased range of motion of the affected joints. In some types of arthritis, other organs are also affected. Onset can be gradual or sudden.\nThere are over 100 types of arthritis. The most common forms are osteoarthritis (degenerative joint disease) and rheumatoid arthritis. Osteoarthritis usually occurs with age and affects the fingers, knees, and hips. Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder that often affects the hands and feet. Other types include gout, lupus, fibromyalgia, and septic arthritis. They are all types of rheumatic disease.\nTreatment may include resting the joint and alternating between applying ice and heat. Weight loss and exercise may also be useful. Recommended medications may depend on the form of arthritis. These may include pain medications such as ibuprofen and paracetamol (acetaminophen). In some circumstances, a joint replacement may be useful.\nOsteoarthritis affects more than 3.8% of people, while rheumatoid arthritis affects about 0.24% of people. Gout affects about 1\u20132% of the Western population at some point in their lives. In Australia about 15% of people are affected by arthritis, while in the United States more than 20% have a type of arthritis. Overall the disease becomes more common with age. Arthritis is a common reason that people miss work and can result in a decreased quality of life. The term is derived from \"arthr-\" (meaning 'joint') and \"-itis\" (meaning 'inflammation').\nClassification.\nThere are several diseases where joint pain is primary, and is considered the main feature. Generally when a person has \"arthritis\" it means that they have one of these diseases, which include:\nJoint pain can also be a symptom of other diseases. In this case, the arthritis is considered to be secondary to the main disease; these include:\nAn \"undifferentiated arthritis\" is an arthritis that does not fit into well-known clinical disease categories, possibly being an early stage of a definite rheumatic disease.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPain, which can vary in severity, is a common symptom in virtually all types of arthritis. Other symptoms include swelling, joint stiffness and aching around the joint(s). Arthritic disorders like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis can affect other organs in the body, leading to a variety of symptoms. Symptoms may include:\nIt is common in advanced arthritis for significant secondary changes to occur. For example, arthritic symptoms might make it difficult for a person to move around and/or exercise, which can lead to secondary effects, such as:\nThese changes, in addition to the primary symptoms, can have a huge impact on quality of life.\nDisability.\nArthritis is the most common cause of disability in the United States. More than 20 million individuals with arthritis have severe limitations in function on a daily basis. Absenteeism and frequent visits to the physician are common in individuals who have arthritis. Arthritis can make it very difficult for individuals to be physically active and some become home bound.\nIt is estimated that the total cost of arthritis cases is close to $100 billion of which almost 50% is from lost earnings. Each year, arthritis results in nearly 1 million hospitalizations and close to 45 million outpatient visits to health care centers.\nDecreased mobility, in combination with the above symptoms, can make it difficult for an individual to remain physically active, contributing to an increased risk of obesity, high cholesterol or vulnerability to heart disease. People with arthritis are also at increased risk of depression, which may be a response to numerous factors, including fear of worsening symptoms.\nRisk factors.\nThere are common risk factors that increase a person's chance of developing arthritis later in adulthood. Some of these are modifiable while others are not. Smoking has been linked to an increased susceptibility of developing arthritis, particularly rheumatoid arthritis.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis is made by clinical examination from an appropriate health professional, and may be supported by other tests such as radiology and blood tests, depending on the type of suspected arthritis. All arthritides potentially feature pain. Pain patterns may differ depending on the arthritides and the location. Rheumatoid arthritis is generally worse in the morning and associated with stiffness lasting over 30 minutes. However, in the early stages, patients may have no symptoms after a warm shower. Osteoarthritis, on the other hand, tends to be associated with morning stiffness which eases relatively quickly with movement and exercise. In the aged and children, pain might not be the main presenting feature; the aged patient simply moves less, the infantile patient refuses to use the affected limb.\nElements of the history of the disorder guide diagnosis. Important features are speed and time of onset, pattern of joint involvement, symmetry of symptoms, early morning stiffness, tenderness, gelling or locking with inactivity, aggravating and relieving factors, and other systemic symptoms. Physical examination may confirm the diagnosis, or may indicate systemic disease. Radiographs are often used to follow progression or help assess severity.\nBlood tests and X-rays of the affected joints often are performed to make the diagnosis. Screening blood tests are indicated if certain arthritides are suspected. These might include: rheumatoid factor, antinuclear factor (ANF), extractable nuclear antigen, and specific antibodies.\nOsteoarthritis.\nOsteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis. It can affect both the larger and the smaller joints of the body, including the hands, wrists, feet, back, hip, and knee. The disease is essentially one acquired from daily wear and tear of the joint; however, osteoarthritis can also occur as a result of injury. In recent years, some joint or limb deformities, such as knock-knee or acetabular overcoverage or dysplasia, have also been considered as a predisposing factor for knee or hip osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis begins in the cartilage and eventually causes the two opposing bones to erode into each other. The condition starts with minor pain during physical activity, but soon the pain can be continuous and even occur while in a state of rest. The pain can be debilitating and prevent one from doing some activities. Osteoarthritis typically affects the weight-bearing joints, such as the back, knee and hip. Unlike rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis is most commonly a disease of the elderly. The strongest predictor of osteoarthritis is increased age, likely due to the declining ability of chondrocytes to maintain the structural integrity of cartilage. More than 30 percent of women have some degree of osteoarthritis by age 65. Other risk factors for osteoarthritis include prior joint trauma, obesity, and a sedentary lifestyle.\nRheumatoid arthritis.\nRheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a disorder in which the body's own immune system starts to attack body tissues. The attack is not only directed at the joint but to many other parts of the body. In rheumatoid arthritis, most damage occurs to the joint lining and cartilage which eventually results in erosion of two opposing bones. RA often affects joints in the fingers, wrists, knees and elbows, is symmetrical (appears on both sides of the body), and can lead to severe deformity in a few years if not treated. RA occurs mostly in people aged 20 and above. In children, the disorder can present with a skin rash, fever, pain, disability, and limitations in daily activities. With earlier diagnosis and aggressive treatment, many individuals can lead a better quality of life than if going undiagnosed for long after RA's onset. The risk factors with the strongest association for developing rheumatoid arthritis are female sex, family history of rheumatoid arthritis, and exposure to tobacco smoke.\nBone erosion is a central feature of rheumatoid arthritis. Bone continuously undergoes remodeling by actions of bone resorbing osteoclasts and bone forming osteoblasts. One of the main triggers of bone erosion in the joints in rheumatoid arthritis is inflammation of the synovium, caused in part by the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), a cell surface protein present in Th17 cells and osteoblasts. Osteoclast activity can be directly induced by osteoblasts through the RANK/RANKL mechanism.\nLupus.\nLupus is a common collagen vascular disorder that can be present with severe arthritis. Other features of lupus include a skin rash, extreme photosensitivity, hair loss, kidney problems, lung fibrosis and constant joint pain.\nGout.\nGout is caused by deposition of uric acid crystals in the joint, causing inflammation. There is also an uncommon form of gouty arthritis caused by the formation of rhomboid crystals of calcium pyrophosphate known as pseudogout. In the early stages, the gouty arthritis usually occurs in one joint, but with time, it can occur in many joints and be quite crippling. The joints in gout can often become swollen and lose function. Gouty arthritis can become particularly painful and potentially debilitating when gout cannot successfully be treated. When uric acid levels and gout symptoms cannot be controlled with standard gout medicines that decrease the production of uric acid (e.g., allopurinol) or increase uric acid elimination from the body through the kidneys (e.g., probenecid), this can be referred to as refractory chronic gout.\nOther.\nInfectious arthritis is another severe form of arthritis. It presents with sudden onset of chills, fever and joint pain. The condition is caused by bacteria elsewhere in the body. Infectious arthritis must be rapidly diagnosed and treated promptly to prevent irreversible joint damage.\nPsoriasis can develop into psoriatic arthritis. With psoriatic arthritis, most individuals develop the skin problem first and then the arthritis. The typical features are of continuous joint pains, stiffness and swelling. The disease does recur with periods of remission but there is no cure for the disorder. A small percentage develop a severe painful and destructive form of arthritis which destroys the small joints in the hands and can lead to permanent disability and loss of hand function.\nTreatment.\nThere is no known cure for either rheumatoid or osteoarthritis. Treatment options vary depending on the type of arthritis and include physical therapy, lifestyle changes (including exercise and weight control), orthopedic bracing, and medications. Joint replacement surgery may be required in eroding forms of arthritis. Medications can help reduce inflammation in the joint which decreases pain. Moreover, by decreasing inflammation, the joint damage may be slowed.\nPhysical therapy.\nIn general, studies have shown that physical exercise of the affected joint can noticeably improve long-term pain relief. Furthermore, exercise of the arthritic joint is encouraged to maintain the health of the particular joint and the overall body of the person.\nIndividuals with arthritis can benefit from both physical and occupational therapy. In arthritis the joints become stiff and the range of movement can be limited. Physical therapy has been shown to significantly improve function, decrease pain, and delay need for surgical intervention in advanced cases. Exercise prescribed by a physical therapist has been shown to be more effective than medications in treating osteoarthritis of the knee. Exercise often focuses on improving muscle strength, endurance and flexibility. In some cases, exercises may be designed to train balance. Occupational therapy can provide assistance with activities. Assistive technology is a tool used to aid a person's disability by reducing their physical barriers by improving the use of their damaged body part, typically after an amputation. Assistive technology devices can be customized to the patient or bought commercially.\nMedications.\nThere are several types of medications that are used for the treatment of arthritis. Treatment typically begins with medications that have the fewest side effects with further medications being added if insufficiently effective.\nDepending on the type of arthritis, the medications that are given may be different. For example, the first-line treatment for osteoarthritis is acetaminophen (paracetamol) while for inflammatory arthritis it involves non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen. Opioids and NSAIDs may be less well tolerated. However, topical NSAIDs may have better safety profiles than oral NSAIDs. For more severe cases of osteoarthritis, intra-articular corticosteroid injections may also be considered.\nThe drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA) range from corticosteroids to monoclonal antibodies given intravenously. Due to the autoimmune nature of RA, treatments may include not only pain medications and anti-inflammatory drugs, but also another category of drugs called disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). Treatment with DMARDs is designed to slow down the progression of RA by initiating an adaptive immune response, in part by CD4+ T helper (Th) cells, specifically Th17 cells. Th17 cells are present in higher quantities at the site of bone destruction in joints and produce inflammatory cytokines associated with inflammation, such as interleukin-17 (IL-17).\nSurgery.\nA number of rheumasurgical interventions have been incorporated in the treatment of arthritis since the 1950s. Arthroscopic surgery for osteoarthritis of the knee provides no additional benefit to optimized physical and medical therapy.\nAdaptive aids.\nPeople with hand arthritis can have trouble with simple activities of daily living tasks (ADLs), such as turning a key in a lock or opening jars, as these activities can be cumbersome and painful. There are adaptive aids or (assistive devices (ADs)) available to help with these tasks, but they are generally more costly than conventional products with the same function. It is now possible to 3-D print adaptive aids, which have been released as open source hardware to reduce patient costs. Adaptive aids can significantly help arthritis patients and the vast majority of those with arthritis need and use them.\nAlternative medicine.\nFurther research is required to determine if transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) for knee osteoarthritis is effective for controlling pain.\nLow level laser therapy may be considered for relief of pain and stiffness associated with arthritis. Evidence of benefit is tentative.\nPulsed electromagnetic field therapy (PEMFT) has tentative evidence supporting improved functioning but no evidence of improved pain in osteoarthritis. The FDA has not approved PEMFT for the treatment of arthritis. In Canada, PEMF devices are legally licensed by Health Canada for the treatment of pain associated with arthritic conditions.\nEpidemiology.\nArthritis is predominantly a disease of the elderly, but children can also be affected by the disease. Arthritis is more common in women than men at all ages and affects all races, ethnic groups and cultures. In the United States a CDC survey based on data from 2013 to 2015 showed 54.4 million (22.7%) adults had self-reported doctor-diagnosed arthritis, and 23.7 million (43.5% of those with arthritis) had arthritis-attributable activity limitation (AAAL). With an aging population, this number is expected to increase. Adults with co-morbid conditions, such as heart disease, diabetes, and obesity, were seen to have a higher than average prevalence of doctor-diagnosed arthritis (49.3%, 47.1%, and 30.6% respectively).\nDisability due to musculoskeletal disorders increased by 45% from 1990 to 2010. Of these, osteoarthritis is the fastest increasing major health condition. Among the many reports on the increased prevalence of musculoskeletal conditions, data from Africa are lacking and underestimated. A systematic review assessed the prevalence of arthritis in Africa and included twenty population-based and seven hospital-based studies. The majority of studies, twelve, were from South Africa. Nine studies were well-conducted, eleven studies were of moderate quality, and seven studies were conducted poorly. The results of the systematic review were as follows:\nHistory.\nEvidence of osteoarthritis and potentially inflammatory arthritis has been discovered in dinosaurs. The first known traces of human arthritis date back as far as 4500 BC. In early reports, arthritis was frequently referred to as the most common ailment of prehistoric peoples. It was noted in skeletal remains of Native Americans found in Tennessee and parts of what is now Olathe, Kansas. Evidence of arthritis has been found throughout history, from \u00d6tzi, a mummy (circa 3000 BC) found along the border of modern Italy and Austria, to the Egyptian mummies circa 2590 BC.\nIn 1715, William Musgrave published the second edition of his most important medical work, \"De arthritide symptomatica\", which concerned arthritis and its effects. Augustin Jacob Landr\u00e9-Beauvais, a 28-year-old resident physician at Saltp\u00eatri\u00e8re Asylum in France was the first person to describe the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. Though Landr\u00e9-Beauvais' classification of rheumatoid arthritis as a relative of gout was inaccurate, his dissertation encouraged others to further study the disease.\nTerminology.\nThe term is derived from \"arthr-\" (from ) and \"-itis\" (from , , ), the latter suffix having come to be associated with inflammation.\nThe word \"arthritides\" is the plural form of arthritis, and denotes the collective group of arthritis-like conditions."}
{"id": "1777", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1777", "title": "April 2", "text": ""}
{"id": "1778", "revid": "2038644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1778", "title": "Acetylene", "text": "Acetylene (systematic name: ethyne) is the chemical compound with the formula C2H2. It is a hydrocarbon and the simplest alkyne. This colorless gas (lower hydrocarbons are generally gaseous in nature) is widely used as a fuel and a chemical building block. It is unstable in its pure form and thus is usually handled as a solution. Pure acetylene is odorless, but commercial grades usually have a marked odor due to impurities.\nAs an alkyne, acetylene is unsaturated because its two carbon atoms are bonded together in a triple bond. The carbon\u2013carbon triple bond places all four atoms in the same straight line, with CCH bond angles of 180\u00b0.\nDiscovery.\nAcetylene was discovered in 1836 by Edmund Davy, who identified it as a \"new carburet of hydrogen\". It was an accidental discovery while attempting to isolate potassium metal. By heating potassium carbonate with carbon at very high temperatures, he produced a residue of what is now known as potassium carbide, (K2C2), which reacted with water to release the new gas. It was rediscovered in 1860 by French chemist Marcellin Berthelot, who coined the name \"ac\u00e9tyl\u00e8ne\".\nBerthelot's empirical formula for acetylene (C4H2), as well as the alternative name \"quadricarbure d'hydrog\u00e8ne\" (\"hydrogen quadricarbide\"), were incorrect because chemists at that time used the wrong atomic mass for carbon (6 instead of 12).\nBerthelot was able to prepare this gas by passing vapours of organic compounds (methanol, ethanol, etc.) through a red hot tube and collecting the effluent. He also found that acetylene was formed by sparking electricity through mixed cyanogen and hydrogen gases. Berthelot later obtained acetylene directly by passing hydrogen between the poles of a carbon arc. Commercially available acetylene gas may carry the odors from impurities divinyl sulfide and phosphine.\nPreparation.\nSince the 1950s, acetylene has mainly been manufactured by the partial combustion of methane. It is a recovered side product in production of ethylene by cracking of hydrocarbons. Approximately 400,000 tonnes were produced by this method in 1983. Its presence in ethylene is usually undesirable because of its explosive character and its ability to poison Ziegler\u2013Natta catalysts. It is selectively hydrogenated into ethylene, usually using Pd\u2013Ag catalysts.\nUntil the 1950s, when oil supplanted coal as the chief source of reduced carbon, acetylene (and the aromatic fraction from coal tar) was the main source of organic chemicals in the chemical industry. It was prepared by the hydrolysis of calcium carbide, a reaction discovered by Friedrich W\u00f6hler in 1862 and still familiar to students:\nCalcium carbide production requires extremely high temperatures, ~2000\u00a0\u00b0C, necessitating the use of an electric arc furnace. In the US, this process was an important part of the late-19th century revolution in chemistry enabled by the massive hydroelectric power project at Niagara Falls.\n\"FROM CALCIUM CARBIDE. Place some small lumps of calcium carbide (about 15 g.) in a 150 ml. distilling-flask (or in a Buchner flask of similar capacity), and fit into the neck of the flask a tall dropping-funnel the stem of which has been drawn off to a fine point: the stem should pass well down below the side arm of the flask. Connect this side arm to a wash-bottle containing 10% aqueous copper sulphate solution: the tall dropping funnel is thus required in order to give a sufficient \"head\" of water in the funnel to force the acetylene through the wash-bottle. Then fit to the wash-bottle a delivery-tube which passes into a pneumatic trough precisely.Fill the dropping-funnel with water, and allow the latter to fall drop by drop on to the calcium carbide: acetylene is at once generated, and on passing through the copper sulphate solution is freed from hydrogen sulphide, etc. Allow the gas to escape from the delivery-tube in the pneumatic trough until the issuing gas smells markedly of acetylene. Then collect a sample of the gas in a small test-tube precisely as described for ethylene. Ignite the sample at a burner placed as before at a safe distance from the apparatus. If the air in the apparatus has not yet been completely displaced, the sample of gas will explode with a sharp report: if, however, the acetylene is free from air, it will burn quietly with a very smoky flame depositing carbon in the tube, in marked contrast to the clear flame of burning ethylene.\" \nBonding.\nIn terms of valence bond theory, in each carbon atom the 2s orbital hybridizes with one 2p orbital thus forming an sp hybrid. The other two 2p orbitals remain unhybridized. The two ends of the two sp hybrid orbital overlap to form a strong \u03c3 valence bond between the carbons, while on each of the other two ends hydrogen atoms attach also by \u03c3 bonds. The two unchanged 2p orbitals form a pair of weaker \u03c0 bonds.\nSince acetylene is a linear symmetrical molecule, it possesses the D\u221eh point group.\nPhysical properties.\nChanges of state.\nAt atmospheric pressure, acetylene cannot exist as a liquid and does not have a melting point. The triple point on the phase diagram corresponds to the melting point (\u221280.8\u00a0\u00b0C) at the minimal pressure at which liquid acetylene can exist (1.27 atm). At temperatures below the triple point, solid acetylene can change directly to the vapour (gas) by sublimation. The sublimation point at atmospheric pressure is \u221284.0\u00a0\u00b0C.\nOther.\nAt room temperature, the solubility of acetylene in acetone is 27.9 g per kg. For the same amount of dimethylformamide (DMF), the solubility is 51 g. At\n20.26 bar, the solubility increases to 689.0 and 628.0 g for acetone and DMF, respectively. These solvents are used in pressurized gas cylinders.\nApplications.\nWelding.\nApproximately 20% of acetylene is supplied by the industrial gases industry for oxyacetylene gas welding and cutting due to the high temperature of the flame. Combustion of acetylene with oxygen produces a flame of over , releasing 11.8\u00a0kJ/g. Oxyacetylene is the hottest burning common fuel gas. Acetylene is the third-hottest natural chemical flame after dicyanoacetylene's and cyanogen at . Oxy-acetylene welding was a popular welding process in previous decades. The development and advantages of arc-based welding processes have made oxy-fuel welding nearly extinct for many applications. Acetylene usage for welding has dropped significantly. On the other hand, oxy-acetylene welding \"equipment\" is quite versatile \u2013 not only because the torch is preferred for some sorts of iron or steel welding (as in certain artistic applications), but also because it lends itself easily to brazing, braze-welding, metal heating (for annealing or tempering, bending or forming), the loosening of corroded nuts and bolts, and other applications. Bell Canada cable-repair technicians still use portable acetylene-fuelled torch kits as a soldering tool for sealing lead sleeve splices in manholes and in some aerial locations. Oxyacetylene welding may also be used in areas where electricity is not readily accessible. Oxy-acetylene cutting is used in many metal fabrication shops. For use in welding and cutting, the working pressures must be controlled by a regulator, since above , if subjected to a shockwave (caused, for example, by a flashback), acetylene decomposes explosively into hydrogen and carbon.\nPortable lighting.\nCalcium carbide was used to generate acetylene used in the lamps for portable or remote applications. It was used for miners and cavers before the widespread use of incandescent lighting; or many years later low-power/high-lumen LED lighting; and is still used by mining industries in some nations without workplace safety laws. Carbide lamps were also used extensively as headlights in early motor vehicles and as an early light source for lighthouses.\nPlastics and acrylic acid derivatives.\nExcept in China, use of acetylene as a chemical feedstock has declined by 70% from 1965 to 2007 owing to cost and environmental considerations.\nAcetylene can be semihydrogenated to ethylene, providing a feedstock for a variety of polyethylene plastics. Another major application of acetylene, especially in China is its conversion to acrylic acid derivatives. These derivatives form products such as acrylic fibers, glasses, paints, resins, and polymers.\nNiche applications.\nIn 1881, the Russian chemist Mikhail Kucherov described the hydration of acetylene to acetaldehyde using catalysts such as mercury(II) bromide. Before the advent of the Wacker process, this reaction was conducted on an industrial scale.\nThe polymerization of acetylene with Ziegler\u2013Natta catalysts produces polyacetylene films. Polyacetylene, a chain of CH centres with alternating single and double bonds, was one of the first discovered organic semiconductors. Its reaction with iodine produces a highly electrically conducting material. Although such materials are not useful, these discoveries led to the developments of organic semiconductors, as recognized by the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2000 to Alan J. Heeger, Alan G MacDiarmid, and Hideki Shirakawa.\nIn the early 20th century acetylene was widely used for illumination, including street lighting in some towns. Most early automobiles used carbide lamps before the adoption of electric headlights.\nIn the 1920s, pure acetylene was experimentally used as an inhalation anesthetic.\nAcetylene is sometimes used for carburization (that is, hardening) of steel when the object is too large to fit into a furnace.\nAcetylene is used to volatilize carbon in radiocarbon dating. The carbonaceous material in an archeological sample is treated with lithium metal in a small specialized research furnace to form lithium carbide (also known as lithium acetylide). The carbide can then be reacted with water, as usual, to form acetylene gas to feed into a mass spectrometer to measure the isotopic ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12.\nNatural occurrence.\nThe energy richness of the C\u2261C triple bond and the rather high solubility of acetylene in water make it a suitable substrate for bacteria, provided an adequate source is available. A number of bacteria living on acetylene have been identified. The enzyme acetylene hydratase catalyzes the hydration of acetylene to give acetaldehyde:\nAcetylene is a moderately common chemical in the universe, often associated with the atmospheres of gas giants. One curious discovery of acetylene is on Enceladus, a moon of Saturn. Natural acetylene is believed to form from catalytic decomposition of long-chain hydrocarbons at temperatures of and above. Since such temperatures are highly unlikely on such a small distant body, this discovery is potentially suggestive of catalytic reactions within that moon, making it a promising site to search for prebiotic chemistry.\nReactions.\nVinylation: hydration, hydrohalogenation, and related reactions.\nIn vinylation reactions, H-X compounds add across the triple bond. Alcohols and phenols add to acetylene to give vinyl ethers. Thiols give vinyl thioethers. Similarly, vinylpyrrolidone and vinylcarbazole are produced industrially by vinylation of 2-pyrrolidone and carbazole.\nThe hydration of acetylene is a vinylation reaction, but the resulting vinyl alcohol isomerizes to acetaldehyde. The reaction is catalyzed by mercury salts. This reaction once was the dominant technology for acetaldehyde production, but it has been displaced by the Wacker process, which affords acetaldehyde by oxidation of ethylene, a cheaper feedstock. A similar situation applies to the conversion of acetylene to the valuable vinyl chloride by hydrochlorination vs the oxychlorination of ethylene.\nAddition to formaldehyde.\nAcetylene adds to ketones and aldehydes in the presence of base catalysts. With carbonyl groups to give \u03b1-ethynyl alcohols in ethynylation reactions: Formaldehyde gives sequentially propargyl alcohol and butynediol.\n1,4-Butynediol is produced industrially in this way from formaldehyde and acetylene.\nCarbonylation.\nWalter Reppe discovered that in the presence of catalysts, acetylene react to give a wide range of industrially significant chemicals.\nWith carbon monoxide, acetylene reacts to give acrylic acid, or acrylic esters, which can be used to produce acrylic glass:\nOrganometallic chemistry.\nAcetylene and its derivatives (2-butyne, diphenylacetylene, etc.) form complexes with transition metals. Its bonding to the metal is somewhat similar to that of ethylene complexes. These complexes are intermediates in many catalytic reactions such as alkyne trimerisation to benzene, tetramerization to cyclooctatetraene, and carbonylation to hydroquinone:\nIn the presence of certain transition metals, alkynes undergo alkyne metathesis.\nMetal acetylides, species of the formula LnM-C2R, are also common. Copper(I) acetylide and silver acetylide can be formed in aqueous solutions with ease due to a poor solubility equilibrium.\nAcid-base reactions.\nAcetylene has a p\"K\"a of 25, acetylene can be deprotonated by a superbase to form an acetylide:\nVarious organometallic and inorganic reagents are effective.\nSafety and handling.\nAcetylene is not especially toxic, but when generated from calcium carbide, it can contain toxic impurities such as traces of phosphine and arsine, which give it a distinct garlic-like smell. It is also highly flammable, as are most light hydrocarbons, hence its use in welding. Its most singular hazard is associated with its intrinsic instability, especially when it is pressurized: under certain conditions acetylene can react in an exothermic addition-type reaction to form a number of products, typically benzene and/or vinylacetylene, possibly in addition to carbon and hydrogen. Consequently, acetylene, if initiated by intense heat or a shockwave, can decompose explosively if the absolute pressure of the gas exceeds about . Most regulators and pressure gauges on equipment report gauge pressure, and the safe limit for acetylene therefore is 101\u00a0kPagage, or 15\u00a0psig. It is therefore supplied and stored dissolved in acetone or dimethylformamide (DMF), contained in a gas cylinder with a porous filling (Agamassan), which renders it safe to transport and use, given proper handling. Acetylene cylinders should be used in the upright position to avoid withdrawing acetone during use.\nInformation on safe storage of acetylene in upright cylinders is provided by the OSHA, Compressed Gas Association, United States Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), EIGA, and other agencies.\nCopper catalyses the decomposition of acetylene, and as a result acetylene should not be transported in copper pipes.\nCylinders should be stored in an area segregated from oxidizers to avoid exacerbated reaction in case of fire/leakage. Acetylene cylinders should not be stored in confined spaces, enclosed vehicles, garages, and buildings, to avoid unintended leakage leading to explosive atmosphere. In the US, National Electric Code (NEC) requires consideration for hazardous areas including those where acetylene may be released during accidents or leaks. Consideration may include electrical classification and use of listed Group A electrical components in USA. Further information on determining the areas requiring special consideration is in NFPA 497. In Europe, ATEX also requires consideration for hazardous areas where flammable gases may be released during accidents or leaks."}
{"id": "1779", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1779", "title": "Alfred", "text": "Alfred may refer to:"}
{"id": "1781", "revid": "27089876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1781", "title": "August 28", "text": ""}
{"id": "1786", "revid": "6036800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1786", "title": "Arabic numerals", "text": "Arabic numerals are the ten digits: 0,\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a03,\u00a04,\u00a05,\u00a06,\u00a07,\u00a08 and\u00a09. The term often implies a decimal number written using these digits (in particular when contrasted with \"Roman numerals\"). However the term can mean the digits themselves, such as in the statement \"octal numbers are written using Arabic numerals.\"\nAlthough the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system (i.e. decimal) was developed by Indian mathematicians around AD 500, quite different forms for the digits were used initially. They were modified into Arabic numerals later in North Africa. It was in the Algerian city of Bejaia that the Italian scholar Fibonacci first encountered the numerals; his work was crucial in making them known throughout Europe. European trade, books, and colonialism helped popularize the adoption of Arabic numerals around the world. The numerals have found worldwide use significantly beyond the contemporary spread of the Latin alphabet, intruding into the writing systems in regions where other variants of the Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals had been in use, such as Chinese and Japanese writing.\nThe term \"Arabic numerals\" may be intended to mean the numerals used in Arabic writing, such as the Eastern Arabic numerals. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" uses lowercase \"Arabic numerals\" to refer to Western digits, and capitalized \"Arabic Numerals\" to refer to the Eastern digits.\nOther alternative names are \"Western Arabic numerals\", \"Western numerals\", \"Hindu-Arabic numerals\", and Unicode just uses the unadorned term \"digits\".\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe decimal Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system was developed in India by around 700. The development was gradual, spanning several centuries, but the decisive step was probably provided by Brahmagupta's formulation of zero as a numeral in 628.\nThe numeral system came to be known to the court of Baghdad, where mathematicians such as the Persian Al-Khwarizmi, whose book \"On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals\" ( \"Al-Jam` wal-Tafr\u012bq bil-\u1e24is\u0101b al-Hind\u012b\") was written about 825 in Arabic, and then the Arab mathematician Al-Kindi, who wrote four volumes, \"On the Use of the Indian Numerals\" ( \"Kit\u0101b f\u012b Isti`m\u0101l al-'A`d\u0101d al-Hind\u012byyah\") in about 830. Their work was principally responsible for the diffusion of the Indian system of numeration in the Middle East and the West.\nMiddle-Eastern mathematicians extended the decimal numeral system to include fractions, as recorded in a treatise by the Arab mathematician Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi in 952\u2013953. The decimal point notation was introduced by Sind ibn Ali, who also wrote the earliest treatise on Arabic numerals.\nOrigin of the Arabic numeral symbols.\nAccording to Al-Biruni, there were multiple forms of numerals in use in India, and \"Arabs chose among them what appeared to them most useful\". Al-Nasawi wrote in the early eleventh century that the mathematicians had not agreed on the form of numerals, but most of them had agreed to train themselves with the forms now known as Eastern Arabic numerals. The oldest specimens of the written numerals available from Egypt in 873\u2013874 show three forms of the numeral \"2\" and two forms of the numeral \"3\", and these variations indicate the divergence between what later became known as the Eastern Arabic numerals and the (Western) Arabic numerals.\nThe western Arabic variants of the symbols came to be used in Maghreb and Al-Andalus, which are the direct ancestor of the modern Arabic numerals.\nCalculations were originally performed using a dust board (\"takht\", Latin: \"tabula\") which involved writing symbols with a stylus and erasing them as part of calculations. Al-Uqlidisi then invented a system of calculations with ink and paper \"without board and erasing\" (\"bi-ghayr takht wa-l\u0101 ma\u1e25w bal bi-daw\u0101t wa-qir\u1e6d\u0101s\"). The use of the dust board appears to have introduced a divergence in terminology as well: whereas the Hindu reckoning was called \"\u1e25is\u0101b al-hind\u012b\" in the east, it was called \"\u1e25is\u0101b al-ghub\u0101r\" in the west (literally, \"calculation with dust\"). The numerals themselves were referred to in the west as \"ashk\u0101l al\u2010ghub\u0101r\" (dust figures, in Ibn al-Y\u0101samin) or \"qalam al-ghub\u00e5r\" (dust letters). The divergence in the terminology has led some scholars to propose that the Western Arabic numerals had a separate origin in the so-called \"\"ghub\u0101r\" numerals\" but the available evidence indicates no separate origin.\nWoepecke has also proposed that the Western Arabic numerals were already in use in Spain before the arrival of the Moors, purportedly received via Alexandria, but this theory is not accepted by scholars.\nSome popular myths argue that the original forms of these symbols indicated their numeric value through the number of angles they contained, but no evidence exists of any such origin.\nAdoption in Europe.\nThe reason the digits are more commonly known as \"Arabic numerals\" in Europe and the Americas is that they were introduced to Europe in the 10th century by Arabic-speakers of North Africa, who were then using the digits from Libya to Morocco. Arabs were also using the Eastern Arabic numerals (\u0660\u0661\u0662\u0663\u0664\u0665\u0666\u0667\u0668\u0669) in other areas.\nIn 825 Al-Khw\u0101rizm\u012b wrote a treatise in Arabic, \"On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals\", which survives only as the 12th-century Latin translation, \"Algoritmi de numero Indorum\". \"Algoritmi\", the translator's rendition of the author's name, gave rise to the word \"algorithm\".\nThe first mentions of the numerals in the West are found in the \"Codex Vigilanus\" of 976.\nFrom the 980s, Gerbert of Aurillac (later, Pope Sylvester II) used his position to spread knowledge of the numerals in Europe. Gerbert studied in Barcelona in his youth. He was known to have requested mathematical treatises concerning the astrolabe from Lupitus of Barcelona after he had returned to France.\nLeonardo Fibonacci (Leonardo of Pisa), a mathematician born in the Republic of Pisa who had studied in B\u00e9ja\u00efa (Bougie), Algeria, promoted the Indian numeral system in Europe with his 1202 book \"Liber Abaci\":\nWhen my father, who had been appointed by his country as public notary in the customs at Bugia acting for the Pisan merchants going there, was in charge, he summoned me to him while I was still a child, and having an eye to usefulness and future convenience, desired me to stay there and receive instruction in the school of accounting. There, when I had been introduced to the art of the Indians' nine symbols through remarkable teaching, knowledge of the art very soon pleased me above all else and I came to understand it.\nThe European acceptance of the numerals was accelerated by the invention of the printing press, and they became widely known during the 15th century. Early evidence of their use in Britain includes: an equal hour horary quadrant from 1396, in England, a 1445 inscription on the tower of Heathfield Church, Sussex; a 1448 inscription on a wooden lych-gate of Bray Church, Berkshire; and a 1487 inscription on the belfry door at Piddletrenthide church, Dorset; and in Scotland a 1470 inscription on the tomb of the first Earl of Huntly in Elgin Cathedral. (See G.F. Hill, \"The Development of Arabic Numerals in Europe\" for more examples.) In central Europe, the King of Hungary Ladislaus the Posthumous, started the use of Arabic numerals, which appear for the first time in a royal document of 1456. By the mid-16th century, they were in common use in most of Europe. Roman numerals remained in use mostly for the notation of anno Domini years, and for numbers on clockfaces.\nThe evolution of the numerals in early Europe is shown here in a table created by the French scholar Jean-\u00c9tienne Montucla in his \"Histoire de la Mathematique\", which was published in 1757:\nToday, Roman numerals are still used for enumeration of lists (as an alternative to alphabetical enumeration), for sequential volumes, to differentiate monarchs or family members with the same first names, and (in lower case) to number pages in prefatory material in books.\nAdoption in Russia.\nCyrillic numerals were a numbering system derived from the Cyrillic alphabet, used by South and East Slavic peoples. The system was used in Russia as late as the early 18th century when Peter the Great replaced it with Arabic numerals.\nAdoption in China.\nPositional notation was introduced to China during the Yuan Dynasty (1271\u20131368) by the Muslim Hui people. In the early 17th century, European-style Arabic numerals were introduced by Spanish and Portuguese Jesuits.\nEncoding.\nThe ten Arabic numerals are encoded in virtually every character set designed for electric, radio, and digital communication, such as Morse code.\nThey are encoded in ASCII at positions 0x30 to 0x39. Masking to the lower 4 binary bits (or taking the last hexadecimal digit) gives the value of the digit, a great help in converting text to numbers on early computers. These positions were inherited in Unicode. EBCDIC used different values, but also had the lower 4 bits equal to the digit value."}
{"id": "1787", "revid": "27089876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1787", "title": "April 9", "text": ""}
{"id": "1788", "revid": "1004876222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1788", "title": "ABM", "text": "ABM or Abm may refer to:"}
{"id": "1789", "revid": "290314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1789", "title": "Apuleius", "text": "Apuleius (; also called Lucius Apuleius Madaurensis; c. 124 \u2013 c. 170 AD) was a Latin-language prose writer, Platonist philosopher and rhetorician. He was a Numidian who lived under the Roman Empire and was from Madauros (now M'Daourouch, Algeria). He studied Platonism in Athens, travelled to Italy, Asia Minor, and Egypt, and was an initiate in several cults or mysteries. The most famous incident in his life was when he was accused of using magic to gain the attentions (and fortune) of a wealthy widow. He declaimed and then distributed a witty \"tour de force\" in his own defense before the proconsul and a court of magistrates convened in Sabratha, near ancient Tripoli, Libya. This is known as the \"Apologia\".\nHis most famous work is his bawdy picaresque novel, the \"Metamorphoses\", otherwise known as \"The Golden Ass\". It is the only Latin novel that has survived in its entirety. Being an immensely sophisticated narrative that opens up various perspectives onto a rich cultural and social life, \"Metamorphoses\" was underappreciated until recent decades. It relates the ludicrous adventures of one Lucius, who experiments with magic and is accidentally turned into a donkey. Lucius goes through various adventures before he is turned back into a human being by the goddess Isis.\nLife.\nApuleius was born in Madauros, a \"colonia\" in Numidia on the North African coast bordering Gaetulia, and he described himself as \"half-Numidian half-Gaetulian.\" Madaurus was the same \"colonia\" where Augustine of Hippo later received part of his early education, and, though located well away from the Romanized coast, is today the site of some pristine Roman ruins. As to his first name, no \"praenomen\" is given in any ancient source; late-medieval manuscripts began the tradition of calling him \"Lucius\" from the name of the hero of his novel. Details regarding his life come mostly from his defense speech (\"Apology\") and his work \"Florida\", which consists of snippets taken from some of his best speeches.\nHis father was a provincial magistrate (\"duumvir\") who bequeathed at his death the sum of nearly two million sesterces to his two sons. Apuleius studied with a master at Carthage (where he later settled) and later at Athens, where he studied Platonist philosophy among other subjects. He subsequently went to Rome to study Latin rhetoric and, most likely, to speak in the law courts for a time before returning to his native North Africa. He also travelled extensively in Asia Minor and Egypt, studying philosophy and religion, burning up his inheritance while doing so.\nApuleius was an initiate in several Greco-Roman mysteries, including the Dionysian Mysteries. He was a priest of Asclepius and, according to Augustine, \"sacerdos provinciae Africae\" (i.e., priest of the province of Carthage).\nNot long after his return home he set out upon a new journey to Alexandria. On his way there he was taken ill at the town of Oea (modern-day Tripoli) and was hospitably received into the house of Sicinius Pontianus, with whom he had been friends when he had studied in Athens. The mother of Pontianus, Pudentilla, was a very rich widow. With her son's consent\u00a0\u2013 indeed encouragement\u00a0\u2013 Apuleius agreed to marry her. Meanwhile, Pontianus himself married the daughter of one Herennius Rufinus; he, indignant that Pudentilla's wealth should pass out of the family, instigated his son-in-law, together with a younger brother, Sicinius Pudens, a mere boy, and their paternal uncle, Sicinius Aemilianus, to join him in impeaching Apuleius upon the charge that he had gained the affections of Pudentilla by charms and magic spells. The case was heard at Sabratha, near Tripoli, c.\u00a0158\u00a0AD, before Claudius Maximus, proconsul of Africa. The accusation itself seems to have been ridiculous, and the spirited and triumphant defence spoken by Apuleius is still extant. This is known as the \"Apologia (A Discourse on Magic)\".\nApuleius accused an extravagant personal enemy of turning his house into a brothel and prostituting his own wife.\nOf his subsequent career we know little. Judging from the many works of which he was author, he must have devoted himself diligently to literature. He occasionally gave speeches in public to great reception; he had the charge of exhibiting gladiatorial shows and wild beast events in the province, and statues were erected in his honor by the senate of Carthage and of other senates.\nThe date, place and circumstances of Apuleius' death are not known. There is no record of his activities after 170, a fact which has led some people to believe that he must have died about then (say in 171), although other scholars feel that he may still have been alive in 180 or even 190.\nWorks.\n\"The Golden Ass\".\n\"The Golden Ass\" (\"Asinus Aureus\") or \"Metamorphoses\" is the only Latin novel that has survived in its entirety. It is an imaginative, irreverent, and amusing work that relates the ludicrous adventures of one Lucius, who introduces himself as related to the famous philosophers Plutarch and Sextus of Chaeronea. Lucius experiments with magic and is accidentally turned into an ass. In this guise he hears and sees many unusual things, until escaping from his predicament in a rather unexpected way. Within this frame story are found many digressions, the longest among them being the well-known tale of Cupid and Psyche. This story is a rare instance of a fairy tale preserved in an ancient literary text.\nThe \"Metamorphoses\" ends with the (once again human) hero, Lucius, eager to be initiated into the mystery cult of Isis; he abstains from forbidden foods, bathes, and purifies himself. He is introduced to the \"Navigium Isidis\". Then the secrets of the cult's books are explained to him, and further secrets are revealed before he goes through the process of initiation, which involves a trial by the elements in a journey to the underworld. Lucius is then asked to seek initiation into the cult of Osiris in Rome, and eventually is initiated into the \"pastophoroi\"\u00a0\u2013 a group of priests that serves Isis and Osiris.\nThe Apologia.\nApologia (\"Apulei Platonici pro Se de Magia\") is the version of the defense presented in Sabratha, in 158\u2013159, before the proconsul Claudius Maximus, by Apuleius accused of the crime of magic. Between the traditional exordium and peroratio, the argumentation is divided into three sections:\nThe main interest of the Apology is historical, as he offers substantial information about its author, magic and life in Africa in the second century.\nOther works.\nHis other works are:\nApuleius wrote many other works which have not survived. He wrote works of poetry and fiction, as well as technical treatises on politics, dendrology, agriculture, medicine, natural history, astronomy, music, and arithmetic, and he translated Plato's \"Phaedo\".\nSpurious works.\nThe extant works wrongly attributed to Apuleius are:\nApuleian Sphere.\nThe Apuleian Sphere described in \"Petosiris to Nechepso\", also known as \"Columcille's Circle\" or \"Petosiris' Circle\", is a magical prognosticating device for predicting the survival of a patient."}
{"id": "1790", "revid": "5406562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1790", "title": "Alexander Selkirk", "text": "Alexander Selkirk (167613 December 1721) was a Scottish privateer and Royal Navy officer who spent four years and four months as a castaway (1704\u20131709) after being marooned by his captain on an uninhabited island in the South Pacific Ocean. He survived that ordeal, but succumbed to tropical illness years later while serving aboard off West Africa.\nSelkirk was an unruly youth, and joined buccaneering voyages to the South Pacific during the War of the Spanish Succession. One such expedition was on \"Cinque Ports\", captained by Thomas Stradling under the overall command of William Dampier. Stradling's ship stopped to resupply at the uninhabited Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands, west of South America, and Selkirk judged correctly that the craft was unseaworthy and asked to be left there.\nBy the time he was eventually rescued by English privateer Woodes Rogers, in company with Dampier, Selkirk had become adept at hunting and making use of the resources that he found on the island. His story of survival was widely publicised after his return to England, becoming a source of inspiration for writer Daniel Defoe's fictional character Robinson Crusoe.\nEarly life and privateering.\nAlexander Selkirk was the son of a shoemaker and tanner in Lower Largo, Fife, Scotland, born in 1676. In his youth he displayed a quarrelsome and unruly disposition. He was summoned before the Kirk Session in August 1693 for his \"indecent conduct in church\", but he \"did not appear, being gone to sea\". He was back at Largo in 1701 when he again came to the attention of church authorities for assaulting his brothers.\nEarly on, he was engaged in buccaneering. In 1703 he joined an expedition of English privateer and explorer William Dampier to the South Pacific Ocean, setting sail from Kinsale in Ireland on 11 September. They carried letters of marque from the Lord High Admiral authorising their armed merchant ships to attack foreign enemies as the War of the Spanish Succession was then going on between England and Spain. Dampier was captain of \"St George\" and Selkirk served on \"Cinque Ports\", \"St George\"s companion ship, as sailing master under Captain Thomas Stradling. By this time, Selkirk must have had considerable experience at sea.\nIn February 1704, following a stormy passage around Cape Horn, the privateers fought a long battle with a well-armed French vessel, \"St Joseph\", only to have it escape to warn its Spanish allies of their arrival in the Pacific. A raid on the Panamanian gold mining town of Santa Mar\u00eda failed when their landing party was ambushed. The easy capture of \"Asunci\u00f3n\", a heavily laden merchantman, revived the men's hopes of plunder, and Selkirk was put in charge of the prize ship. Dampier took off some much-needed provisions of wine, brandy, sugar and flour; then abruptly set the ship free, arguing that the gain was not worth the effort. In May 1704 Stradling decided to abandon Dampier and strike out on his own.\nCastaway.\nIn September 1704, after parting ways with Dampier, Captain Stradling brought \"Cinque Ports\" to an island known to the Spanish as M\u00e1s a Tierra located in the uninhabited Juan Fern\u00e1ndez archipelago off the coast of Chile for a mid-expedition restocking of fresh water and supplies.\nSelkirk had grave concerns about the seaworthiness of their vessel, and wanted to make the necessary repairs before going any farther. He declared that he would rather stay on Juan Fern\u00e1ndez than continue in a dangerously leaky ship. Stradling took him up on the offer and landed Selkirk on the island with a musket, a hatchet, a knife, a cooking pot, a Bible, bedding and some clothes. Selkirk immediately regretted his rashness, but Stradling refused to let him back on board.\n\"Cinque Ports\" did indeed later founder off the coast of what is now Colombia. Stradling and some of his crew survived the loss of their ship but were forced to surrender to the Spanish. The survivors were taken to Lima, Peru, where they endured a harsh imprisonment.\nLife on the island.\nAt first, Selkirk remained along the shoreline of Juan Fern\u00e1ndez. During this time he ate spiny lobsters and scanned the ocean daily for rescue, suffering all the while from loneliness, misery and remorse. Hordes of raucous sea lions, gathered on the beach for the mating season, eventually drove him to the island's interior. Once inland, his way of life took a turn for the better. More foods were available there: feral goats\u2014introduced by earlier sailors\u2014provided him with meat and milk, while wild turnips, the leaves of the indigenous cabbage tree and dried Schinus fruits (pink peppercorns) offered him variety and spice. Rats would attack him at night, but he was able to sleep soundly and in safety by domesticating and living near feral cats.\nSelkirk proved resourceful in using materials that he found on the island: he forged a new knife out of barrel hoops left on the beach, he built two huts out of pepper trees, one of which he used for cooking and the other for sleeping, and he employed his musket to hunt goats and his knife to clean their carcasses. As his gunpowder dwindled, he had to chase prey on foot. During one such chase he was badly injured when he tumbled from a cliff, lying helpless and unable to move for about a day. His prey had cushioned his fall, probably sparing him a broken back.\nChildhood lessons learned from his father, a tanner, now served him well. For example, when his clothes wore out, he made new ones from hair-covered goatskins using a nail for sewing. As his shoes became unusable, he had no need to replace them, since his toughened, calloused feet made protection unnecessary. He sang psalms and read from the Bible, finding it a comfort in his situation and a prop for his English.\nDuring his sojourn on the island, two vessels came to anchor. Unfortunately for Selkirk, both were Spanish. As a Scotsman and a privateer, he would have faced a grim fate if captured and therefore did his best to hide himself. Once, he was spotted and chased by a group of Spanish sailors from one of the ships. His pursuers urinated beneath the tree in which he was hiding but failed to notice him. The would-be captors then gave up and sailed away.\nRescue.\nSelkirk's long-awaited deliverance came on 2 February 1709 by way of \"Duke\", a privateering ship piloted by William Dampier, and its sailing companion \"Duchess\". Thomas Dover led the landing party that met Selkirk. After four years and four months without human company, Selkirk was almost incoherent with joy. The \"Duke\" captain and leader of the expedition was Woodes Rogers, who wryly referred to Selkirk as the governor of the island. The agile castaway caught two or three goats a day and helped restore the health of Rogers' men, who were suffering from scurvy.\nCaptain Rogers was impressed by Selkirk's physical vigour, but also by the peace of mind that he had attained while living on the island, observing: \"One may see that solitude and retirement from the world is not such an insufferable state of life as most men imagine, especially when people are fairly called or thrown into it unavoidably, as this man was.\" He made Selkirk \"Duke\"s second mate, later giving him command of one of their prize ships, \"Increase\", before it was ransomed by the Spanish.\nSelkirk returned to privateering with a vengeance. At Guayaquil in present-day Ecuador, he led a boat crew up the Guayas River where a number of wealthy Spanish ladies had fled, and looted the gold and jewels they had hidden inside their clothing. His part in the hunt for treasure galleons along the coast of Mexico resulted in the capture of \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Encarnaci\u00f3n y Desenga\u00f1o\", renamed \"Bachelor\", on which he served as sailing master under Captain Dover to the Dutch East Indies. Selkirk completed the around-the-world voyage by the Cape of Good Hope as the sailing master of \"Duke\", arriving at the Downs off the English coast on 1 October 1711. He had been away for eight years.\nLater life and influence.\nSelkirk's experience as a castaway aroused a great deal of attention in England. Fellow crewmember Edward Cooke mentioned Selkirk's ordeal in a book chronicling their privateering expedition, \"A Voyage to the South Sea and Round the World\" (1712). A more detailed recounting was published by the expedition's leader, Rogers, within months. The following year, prominent essayist Richard Steele wrote an article about him for \"The Englishman\" newspaper. Selkirk appeared set to enjoy a life of ease and celebrity, claiming his share of \"Duke\"'s plundered wealth\u2014about \u00a3800 (equivalent to \u00a3 today). However, legal disputes made the amount of any payment uncertain.\nAfter a few months in London, he began to seem more like his former self again. In September 1713 he was charged with assaulting a shipwright in Bristol and may have been kept in confinement for two years. He returned to Lower Largo, where he met Sophia Bruce, a young dairymaid. They eloped to London early in 1717 but apparently did not marry. He was soon off to sea again, having enlisted in the Royal Navy. While on a visit to Plymouth in 1720, he married a widowed innkeeper named Frances Candis. He was serving as master's mate on board , engaged in an anti-piracy patrol off the west coast of Africa, when he died on 13 December 1721, succumbing to the yellow fever that plagued the voyage. He was buried at sea.\nWhen Daniel Defoe published \"The Life and Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe\" (1719), few readers could have missed the resemblance to Selkirk. An illustration on the first page of the novel shows \"a rather melancholy-looking man standing on the shore of an island, gazing inland\", in the words of modern explorer Tim Severin. He is dressed in the familiar hirsute goatskins, his feet and shins bare. Yet Crusoe's island is located not in the mid-latitudes of the South Pacific but away in the Caribbean, where the furry attire would hardly be comfortable in the tropical heat. This incongruity supports the popular belief that Selkirk was a model for the fictional character, though most literary scholars now accept that his was \"just one of many survival narratives that Defoe knew about\".\nIn film.\n\"Selkirk, the Real Robinson Crusoe\" is a stop motion film by Walter Tournier based on Selkirk's life. It premi\u00e8red simultaneously in Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay on 2 February 2012, distributed by The Walt Disney Company. It was the first full-length animated feature to be produced in Uruguay.\nCommemoration.\nSelkirk has been memorialised in his Scottish birthplace. Lord Aberdeen delivered a speech on 11 December 1885, after which his wife, Lady Aberdeen, unveiled a bronze statue and plaque in memory of Selkirk outside a house on the site of his original home on the Main Street of Lower Largo. David Gillies of Cardy House, Lower Largo, a descendant of the Selkirks, donated the statue created by Thomas Stuart Burnett.\nThe Scotsman is also remembered in his former island home. In 1869 the crew of placed a bronze tablet at a spot called Selkirk's Lookout on a mountain of M\u00e1s a Tierra, Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands, to mark his stay. On 1 January 1966 Chilean president Eduardo Frei Montalva renamed M\u00e1s a Tierra Robinson Crusoe Island after Defoe's fictional character to attract tourists. The largest of the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands, known as M\u00e1s Afuera, became Alejandro Selkirk Island, although Selkirk probably never saw that island since it is located to the west.\nArchaeological findings.\nAn archaeological expedition to the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands in February 2005 found part of a nautical instrument that likely belonged to Selkirk. It was \"a fragment of copper alloy identified as being from a pair of navigational dividers\" dating from the early 18th (or late 17th) century. Selkirk is the only person known to have been on the island at that time who is likely to have had dividers, and was even said by Rogers to have had such instruments in his possession. The artefact was discovered while excavating a site not far from Selkirk's Lookout where the famous castaway is believed to have lived."}
{"id": "1791", "revid": "37284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1791", "title": "Anti-ballistic missile", "text": "An anti-ballistic missile (ABM) is a surface-to-air missile designed to counter ballistic missiles (missile defense). Ballistic missiles are used to deliver nuclear, chemical, biological, or conventional warheads in a ballistic flight trajectory. The term \"anti-ballistic missile\" is a generic term conveying a system designed to intercept and destroy any type of ballistic threat; however, it is commonly used for systems specifically designed to counter intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).\nCurrent counter-ICBM systems.\nThere are a limited number of systems worldwide that can intercept intercontinental ballistic missiles:\nAmerican plans for Central European site.\nDuring 1993, a symposium was held by western European nations to discuss potential future ballistic missile defence programs. In the end, the council recommended deployment of early warning and surveillance systems as well as regionally controlled defence systems.\nDuring spring 2006 reports about negotiations between the United States and Poland as well as the Czech Republic were published.\nThe plans propose the installation of a latest generation ABM system with a radar site in the Czech Republic and the launch site in Poland. The system was announced to be aimed against ICBMs from Iran and North Korea. This caused harsh comments by Russian President Vladimir Putin at the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) security conference during spring 2007 in Munich. Other European ministers commented that any change of strategic weapons should be negotiated on NATO level and not 'unilaterally' [sic, actually bilaterally] between the U.S. and other states (although most strategic arms reduction treaties were between the Soviet Union and U.S., not NATO). German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier expressed severe concerns about the way in which the U.S. had conveyed its plans to its European partners and criticised the U.S. administration for not having consulted Russia prior to announcing its endeavours to deploy a new missile defence system in Central Europe. As of July 2007, a majority of Poles were opposed to hosting a component of the system in Poland.\nBy 28 July 2016 Missile Defense Agency planning and agreements had clarified enough to give more details about the Aegis Ashore sites in Romania (2014) and Poland (2018).\nCurrent tactical systems.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nHistorical Project 640.\nProject 640 had been the PRC's indigenous effort to develop ABM capability. The Academy of Anti-Ballistic Missile &amp; Anti-Satellite was established from 1969 for the purpose of developing Project 640. The project was to involve at least three elements, including the necessary sensors and guidance/command systems, the Fan Ji (FJ) missile interceptor, and the XianFeng missile-intercepting cannon. The FJ-1 had completed two successful flight tests during 1979, while the low-altitude interceptor FJ-2 completed some successful flight tests using scaled prototypes. A high altitude FJ-3 interceptor was also proposed. Despite the development of missiles, the programme was slowed down due to financial and political reasons. It was finally closed down during 1980 under a new leadership of Deng Xiaoping as it was seemingly deemed unnecessary after the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States and the closure of the US Safeguard ABM system.\nOperational Chinese system.\nIn March 2006, China tested an interceptor system comparable to the U.S. Patriot missiles.\nChina has acquired and is license-producing the S-300PMU-2/S-300PMU-1 series of terminal ABM-capable SAMs. China-produced HQ-9 SAM system may possess terminal ABM capabilities. PRC Navy's operating modern air-defense destroyers known as the Type 052C Destroyer and Type 051C Destroyer are armed with naval HHQ-9 missiles.\nThe HQ-19, similar to the THAAD, was first tested in 2003, and subsequently a few more times, including in November 2015. The HQ-29, a counterpart to the MIM-104F PAC-3, was first tested in 2011.\nSurface-to-air missiles that supposedly have some terminal ABM capability (as opposed to midcourse capability):\nDevelopment of midcourse ABM in China.\nThe technology and experience from the successful anti-satellite test using a ground-launched interceptor during January 2007 was immediately applied to current ABM efforts and development.\nChina carried out a land-based anti-ballistic missile test on 11 January 2010. The test was exoatmospheric and done in midcourse phase and with a kinetic kill vehicle. China is the second country after US that demonstrated intercepting ballistic missile with a kinetic kill vehicle, the interceptor missile was a SC-19. The sources suggest the system is not operationally deployed as of 2010.\nOn 27 January 2013, China did another anti ballistic missile test. According to the Chinese Defence Ministry, the missile launch is defensive in character and is not aimed against any countries. Experts hailed China's technological breakthrough because it is difficult to intercept ballistic missiles that have reached the highest point and speed in the middle of their course. Only two countries, including the US, have successfully conducted such a test in the past decade.\nRumored midcourse missiles:\nFrance, Italy and United Kingdom.\nItaly and France have developed a missile family called Aster (Aster 15 and Aster 30). Aster 30 is capable of ballistic missile defense. On 18 October 2010, France announced a successful tactical ABM test of the Aster 30 missile and on 1 December 2011 a successful interception of a Black Sparrow ballistic target missile. Royal Navy Type 45 destroyers and French Navy and Italian Navy \"Horizon\" -class frigates, and \"FREMM\" -class frigates are armed with PAAMS, using Aster 15 and Aster 30 missiles. It is in developing another version, the Aster 30 block II, which can destroy ballistic missiles at a maximum range of 3000\u00a0km. It will have a Kill Vehicle warhead.\nIndia.\nIndia has an active ABM development effort using indigenously developed and integrated radars, and indigenous missiles. In November 2006, India successfully conducted the PADE (Prithvi Air Defence Exercise) in which an anti-ballistic missile, called the Prithvi Air Defence (PAD), an \"exo-atmospheric\" (outside the atmosphere) interceptor system, intercepted a Prithvi-II ballistic missile. The PAD missile has the secondary stage of the Prithvi missile and can reach altitude of . During the test, the target missile was intercepted at a altitude. India became the fourth nation in the world after United States, Russia, and Israel to acquire such a capability and the third nation to acquire it using in-house research and development. On 6 December 2007, the Advanced Air Defence (AAD) missile system was tested successfully. This missile is an Endo-atmospheric interceptor with an altitude of . In 2009, reports emerged of a new missile named the PDV. The DRDO is developing a new Prithvi interceptor missile code-named PDV. The PDV is designed to take out the target missile at altitudes above . The first PDV was successfully test fired on 27 April 2014. According to scientist V K Saraswat of DRDO, the missiles will work in tandem to ensure a hit probability of 99.8 percent. On 15 May 2016 India successfully launched advanced Defence interceptor missile named Ashvin interceptor missile from Abdul Kalam Island from Odisha coast.\nAs of 8 January 2020, the BMD programme has been completed and the Indian Air Force and the DRDO are awaiting government's final go ahead before the system is deployed to protect New Delhi. India has structured a 5-layer missile shield for Delhi as of 9 June 2019:\nIsrael.\nArrow 2.\nThe Arrow project was begun after the U.S. and Israel agreed to co-fund it on 6 May 1986.\nThe Arrow ABM system was designed and constructed in Israel with financial support by the United States by a multibillion-dollar development program called \"Minhelet Homa\" (Wall Administration) with the participation of companies like Israel Military Industries, Tadiran and Israel Aerospace Industries.\nDuring 1998 the Israeli military conducted a successful test of their Arrow missile. Designed to intercept incoming missiles travelling at up to 2-mile/s (3\u00a0km/s), the Arrow is expected to perform much better than the Patriot did in the Gulf War. On 29 July 2004 Israel and the United States carried out a joint experiment in the US, in which the Arrow was launched against a real Scud missile. The experiment was a success, as the Arrow destroyed the Scud with a direct hit. During December 2005 the system was deployed successfully in a test against a replicated Shahab-3 missile. This feat was repeated on 11 February 2007.\nArrow 3.\nThe Arrow 3 system is capable of exo-atmosphere interception of ballistic missiles, including of ICBMs. It also acts as an anti-satellite weapon.\nLieutenant General Patrick J. O'Reilly, Director of the US Missile Defense Agency, said: \"The design of Arrow 3 promises to be an extremely capable system, more advanced than what we have ever attempted in the U.S. with our programs.\"\nOn 10 December 2015 Arrow 3 scored its first intercept in a complex test designed to validate how the system can detect, identify, track and then discriminate real from decoy targets delivered into space by an improved Silver Sparrow target missile. According to officials, the milestone test paves the way toward low-rate initial production of the Arrow 3.\nDavid\u2019s sling.\nDavid's Sling (Hebrew: \u05e7\u05dc\u05e2 \u05d3\u05d5\u05d3), also sometimes called Magic Wand (Hebrew: \u05e9\u05e8\u05d1\u05d9\u05d8 \u05e7\u05e1\u05de\u05d9\u05dd), is an Israel Defense Forces military system being jointly developed by the Israeli defense contractor Rafael Advanced Defense Systems and the American defense contractor Raytheon, designed to intercept tactical ballistic missiles, as well as medium- to long-range rockets and slower-flying cruise missiles, such as those possessed by Hezbollah, fired at ranges from 40\u00a0km to 300\u00a0km. It is designed with the aim of intercepting the newest generation of tactical ballistic missiles, such as Iskander.\nJapan.\nSince 1998, when North Korea launched a Taepodong-1 missile over northern Japan, the Japanese have been jointly developing a new surface-to-air interceptor known as the Patriot Advanced Capability 3 (PAC-3) with the US. So far tests have been successful, and there are planned 11 locations that the PAC-3 will be installed. A military spokesman said that tests had been done on two sites, one of them a business park in central Tokyo, and Ichigaya \u2013 a site not far from the Imperial Palace.\nAlong with the PAC-3, Japan has installed a US-developed ship-based anti-ballistic missile system, which was tested successfully on 18 December 2007. The missile was launched from a Japanese warship, in partnership with the U.S. Missile Defense Agency and destroyed a mock target launched from the coast.\nSoviet Union/Russian Federation.\nThe Moscow ABM defense system was designed with the aim of being able to intercept the ICBM warheads aimed at Moscow and other important industrial regions, and is based on:\nApart from the main Moscow deployment, Russia has striven actively for intrinsic ABM capabilities of its SAM systems.\nUnited States.\nIn several tests, the U.S. military have demonstrated the feasibility of destroying long and short range ballistic missiles. Combat effectiveness of newer systems against 1950s tactical ballistic missiles seems very high, as the MIM-104 Patriot (PAC-1 and PAC-2) had a 100% success rate in Operation Iraqi Freedom.\nThe U.S. Navy Aegis combat system uses RIM-161 Standard Missile 3, which hit a target going faster than ICBM warheads.\nThese systems, as opposed to U.S. GMD system, are not capable of a mid-course intercept of an ICBM.\nThe U.S. Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system began production in 2008. Its stated range as a short to intermediate ballistic missile interceptor means that it is not designed to hit midcourse ICBMs, which can reach terminal phase speeds of mach 8 or greater. But for terminal phase, a THAAD interceptor's speed can reach mach 8, and THAAD has repeatedly proven it can intercept descending exoatmospheric missiles in a ballistic trajectory.\nThe United States Army released information as early as 2004 about their plans to develop a command system that was intended to replace Raytheon's Patriot missile (SAM) engagement control station (ECS) along with seven other forms of defense command systems. The system, the Integrated Air and Missile Defense Battle Command System (IBCS), is an anti-ballistic missile defense system designed to shoot down short, medium, and intermediate range ballistic missiles in their terminal phase by intercepting with a hit-to-kill approach. Between 2009 and 2020 the Army announced it had spent $2.7 billion on the program.\nA prime contractor was announced in 2010; by May 2015, a first flight test integrated a networked IBCS 280 engagement operations center with radar sensor and interceptor launchers. This test demonstrated a missile kill with the first interceptor. By Army doctrine, two interceptors were launched against that missile. By April 2016, IBCS tests demonstrated sensor fusion from disparate data streams, identification and tracking of targets, selection of appropriate kill vehicles, and interception of the targets, but the \"IBCS software was 'neither mature nor stable'\". On 1 May 2019 an Engagement Operations Center (EOC) for the Integrated Air and Missile Defense (IAMD) Battle Command System (IBCS) was delivered to the Army, at Huntsville, Alabama. By August 2020, a second Limited User Test (LUT) at White Sands Missile Range was able to detect, track, and intercept near-simultaneous low-altitude targets as well as a tactical ballistic missile, over several separate engagements. Army doctrine can now be updated to allow the launch of a single Patriot against a single target.\nKestrel eye is a cubesat swarm designed to produce a picture of a designated ground target, and to relay the picture to the ground Warfighter every 10 minutes.\nTaiwan.\nProcurement of MIM-104 Patriot and indigenous Tien-Kung anti-ballistic missile systems.\nHistory.\n1940s and 1950s.\nThe idea of destroying rockets before they can hit their target dates from the first use of modern missiles in warfare, the German V-1 and V-2 program of World War II.\nBritish fighters destroyed some V-1 \"buzz bombs\" in flight, although concentrated barrages of heavy anti-aircraft artillery had greater success. Under the lend-lease program, 200 US 90 mm AA guns with SCR-584 radars and Western Electric/Bell Labs computers were sent to the UK. These demonstrated a 95% success rate against V-1s that flew into their range.\nThe V-2, the first true ballistic missile, was impossible to destroy in the air. SCR-584's could be used to plot the trajectories of the missiles and provide some warning, but were more useful in backtracking their ballistic trajectory and determining the rough launch locations. The Allies launched Operation Crossbow to find and destroy V-2s before launch, but these operations were largely ineffective. In one instance a Spitfire happened upon a V-2 rising through the trees, and fired on it with no effect. This led to allied efforts to capture launching sites in Belgium and the Netherlands.\nA wartime study by Bell Labs into the task of shooting down ballistic missiles in flight concluded it was not possible. In order to intercept a missile, one needs to be able to steer the attack onto the missile before it hits. A V-2's speed would require guns of effectively instantaneous reaction time, or some sort of weapon with ranges on the order of dozens of miles, neither of which appeared possible. This was, however, just before the emergence of high-speed computing systems. By the mid-1950s, things had changed considerably, and many forces worldwide were considering ABM systems.\nThe American armed forces began experimenting with anti-missile missiles soon after World War II, as the extent of German research into rocketry became clear. Project Wizard began in 1946, with the aim of creating a missile capable of intercepting the V-2.\nBut defences against Soviet long-range bombers took priority until 1957, when the Soviet Union demonstrated its advances in ICBM technology with the launch of Sputnik, the Earth's first artificial satellite. The US Army accelerated development of their LIM-49 Nike Zeus system in response. Zeus was criticized throughout its development program, especially from those within the US Air Force and nuclear weapons establishments who suggested it would be much simpler to build more nuclear warheads and guarantee mutually assured destruction. Zeus was eventually cancelled in 1963.\nIn 1958, the U.S. sought to explore whether airbursting nuclear weapons might be used to ward off ICBMs. It conducted several test explosions of low-yield nuclear weapons \u2013 1.7kt boosted fission W25 warheads \u2013 launched from ships to very high altitudes over the southern Atlantic Ocean. Such an explosion releases a burst of X-rays in the Earth's atmosphere, causing secondary showers of charged particles over an area hundreds of miles across. These can become trapped in the Earth' magnetic field, creating an artificial radiation belt. It was believed that this might be strong enough to damage warheads traveling through the layer. This proved not to be the case, but Argus returned key data about a related effect, the nuclear electromagnetic pulse (NEMP).\nCanada.\nOther countries were also involved in early ABM research. A more advanced project was at CARDE in Canada, which researched the main problems of ABM systems. A key problem with any radar system is that the signal is in the form of a cone, which spreads with distance from the transmitter. For long-distance interceptions like ABM systems, the inherent inaccuracy of the radar makes an interception difficult. CARDE considered using a terminal guidance system to address the accuracy concerns, and developed several advanced infrared detectors for this role. They also studied a number of missile airframe designs, a new and much more powerful solid rocket fuel, and numerous systems for testing it all. After a series of drastic budget reductions during the late 1950s the research ended. One offshoot of the project was Gerald Bull's system for inexpensive high-speed testing, consisting of missile airframes shot from a sabot round, which would later be the basis of Project HARP. Another was the CRV7 and Black Brant rockets, which used the new solid rocket fuel.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet military had requested funding for ABM research as early as 1953, but were only given the go-ahead to begin deployment of such a system on 17 August 1956. Their test system, known simply as System A, was based on the V-1000 missile, which was similar to the early US efforts. The first successful test interception was carried out on 24 November 1960, and the first with a live warhead on 4 March 1961. In this test, a dummy warhead was released by a R-12 ballistic missile launched from the Kapustin Yar, and intercepted by a V-1000 launched from Sary-Shagan. The dummy warhead was destroyed by the impact of 16,000 tungsten-carbide spherical impactors 140 seconds after launch, at an altitude of .\nThe V-1000 missile system was nonetheless considered not reliable enough and abandoned in favour of nuclear-armed ABMs. A much larger missile, the Fakel 5V61 (known in the west as Galosh), was developed to carry the larger warhead and carry it much further from the launch site. Further development continued, and the A-35 anti-ballistic missile system, designed to protect Moscow, became operational in 1971. A-35 was designed for exoatmospheric interceptions, and would have been highly susceptible to a well-arranged attack using multiple warheads and radar black-out techniques.\nA-35 was upgraded during the 1980s to a two-layer system, the A-135. The Gorgon (SH-11/ABM-4) long-range missile was designed to handle intercepts outside the atmosphere, and the Gazelle (SH-08/ABM-3) short-range missile endoatmospheric intercepts that eluded Gorgon. The A-135 system is considered to be technologically equivalent to the United States Safeguard system of 1975.\nAmerican Nike-X and Sentinel.\nNike Zeus failed to be a credible defence in an era of rapidly increasing ICBM counts due to its ability to attack only one target at a time. Additionally, significant concerns about its ability to successfully intercept warheads in the presence of high-altitude nuclear explosions, including its own, lead to the conclusion that the system would simply be too costly for the very low amount of protection it could provide.\nBy the time it was cancelled in 1963, potential upgrades had been explored for some time. Among these were radars capable of scanning much greater volumes of space and able to track many warheads and launch several missiles at once. These, however, did not address the problems identified with radar blackouts caused by high-altitude explosions. To address this need, a new missile with extreme performance was designed to attack incoming warheads at much lower altitudes, as low as 20\u00a0km. The new project encompassing all of these upgrades was launched as Nike-X.\nThe main missile was LIM-49 Spartan\u2014a Nike Zeus upgraded for longer range and a much larger 5 megaton warhead intended to destroy enemy's warheads with a burst of x-rays outside the atmosphere. A second shorter-range missile called Sprint with very high acceleration was added to handle warheads that evaded longer-ranged Spartan. Sprint was a very fast missile (some sources claimed it accelerated to 8,000\u00a0mph (13\u00a0000\u00a0km/h) within 4 seconds of flight\u2014an average acceleration of \"90 g\") and had a smaller W66 enhanced radiation warhead in the 1\u20133 kiloton range for in-atmosphere interceptions.\nThe experimental success of Nike X persuaded the Lyndon B. Johnson administration to propose a thin ABM defense, that could provide almost complete coverage of the United States. In a September 1967 speech, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara referred to it as \"Sentinel\". McNamara, a private ABM opponent because of cost and feasibility (see cost-exchange ratio), claimed that Sentinel would be directed not against the Soviet Union's missiles (since the USSR had more than enough missiles to overwhelm any American defense), but rather against the potential nuclear threat of the People's Republic of China.\nIn the meantime, a public debate over the merit of ABMs began. Difficulties that had already made an ABM system questionable for defending against an all-out attack. One problem was the Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (FOBS) that would give little warning to the defense. Another problem was high altitude EMP (whether from offensive or defensive nuclear warheads) which could degrade defensive radar systems.\nWhen this proved infeasible for economic reasons, a much smaller deployment using the same systems was proposed, namely Safeguard (described later).\nDefense against MIRVs.\nABM systems were developed initially to counter single warheads launched from large intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs). The economics seemed simple enough; since rocket costs increase rapidly with size, the price of the ICBM launching a large warhead should always be greater than the much smaller interceptor missile needed to destroy it. In an arms race the defense would always win.\nIn practice, the price of the interceptor missile was considerable, due to its sophistication. The system had to be guided all the way to an interception, which demanded guidance and control systems that worked within and outside the atmosphere. The Nike Zeus was expected to cost about $1 million, about the same as an ICBM. However, due to their relatively short ranges, an ABM missile would be needed to counter an ICBM wherever it might be aimed. That implies that dozens of interceptors are needed for every ICBM. This led to intense debates about the \"cost-exchange ratio\" between interceptors and warheads.\nConditions changed dramatically in 1970 with the introduction of multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle (MIRV) warheads. Suddenly, each launcher was throwing not one warhead, but several. These would spread out in space, ensuring that a single interceptor would be needed for each warhead. This simply added to the need to have several interceptors for each warhead in order to provide geographical coverage. Now it was clear that an ABM system would always be many times more expensive than the ICBMs they defended against.\nThe Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972.\nTechnical, economic and political problems described resulted in the ABM treaty of 1972, which restricted the deployment of strategic (not tactical) anti-ballistic missiles.\nBy the ABM treaty and a 1974 revision, each country was allowed to deploy a mere 100 ABMs to protect a single, small area. The Soviets retained their Moscow defences. The U.S. designated their ICBM sites near Grand Forks Air Force Base, North Dakota, where Safeguard was already under advanced development. The radar systems and anti-ballistic missiles were approximately 90 miles north/northwest of Grand Forks AFB, near Concrete, North Dakota. The missiles were deactivated in 1975. The main radar site (PARCS) is still used as an early warning ICBM radar, facing relative north. It is located at Cavalier Air Force Station, North Dakota.\nBrief use of Safeguard in 1975/1976.\nThe U.S. Safeguard system, which utilized the nuclear-tipped LIM-49A Spartan and Sprint missiles, in the short operational period of 1975/1976, was the second counter-ICBMs system in the world. Safeguard protected only the main fields of US ICBMs from attack, theoretically ensuring that an attack could be responded to with a US launch, enforcing the mutually assured destruction principle.\nSDI experiments in the 1980s.\nThe Reagan-era Strategic Defense Initiative (often referred to as \"Star Wars\"), along with research into various energy-beam weaponry, brought new interest in the area of ABM technologies.\nSDI was an extremely ambitious program to provide a total shield against a massive Soviet ICBM attack. The initial concept envisioned large sophisticated orbiting laser battle stations, space-based relay mirrors, and nuclear-pumped X-ray laser satellites. Later research indicated that some planned technologies such as X-ray lasers were not feasible with then-current technology. As research continued, SDI evolved through various concepts as designers struggled with the difficulty of such a large complex defense system. SDI remained a research program and was never deployed. Several post-SDI technologies are used by the present Missile Defense Agency (MDA).\nLasers originally developed for the SDI plan are in use for astronomical observations. Used to ionize gas in the upper atmosphere, they provide telescope operators with a target to calibrate their instruments.\nTactical ABMs deployed in 1990s.\nThe Israeli Arrow missile system was tested initially during 1990, before the first Gulf War. The Arrow was supported by the United States throughout the 1990s.\nThe Patriot was the first deployed tactical ABM system, although it was not designed from the outset for that task and consequently had limitations. It was used during the 1991 Gulf War to attempt to intercept Iraqi Scud missiles. Post-war analyses show that the Patriot was much less effective than initially thought because of its radar and control system's inability to discriminate warheads from other objects when the Scud missiles broke up during reentry.\nTesting ABM technology continued during the 1990s with mixed success. After the Gulf War, improvements were made to several U.S. air defense systems. A new Patriot, PAC-3, was developed and tested\u2014a complete redesign of the PAC-2 deployed during the war, including a totally new missile.\nThe improved guidance, radar and missile performance improves the probability of kill over the earlier PAC-2. During Operation Iraqi Freedom, Patriot PAC-3s had a nearly 7% success rate against Iraqi TBMs fired. However, since no longer range Iraqi Scud missiles were used, PAC-3 effectiveness against those was untested. Patriot was involved in three friendly fire incidents: two incidents of Patriot shootings at coalition aircraft and one of U.S. aircraft shooting at a Patriot battery.\nA new version of the Hawk missile was tested during the early to mid-1990s and by the end of 1998 the majority of US Marine Corps Hawk systems were modified to support basic theater anti-ballistic missile capabilities. MIM-23 Hawk missile is not operational in the U.S. service since 2002, but is used by many other countries.\nSoon after the Gulf war, the Aegis combat system was expanded to include ABM capabilities. The Standard missile system was also enhanced and tested for ballistic missile interception. During the late 1990s, SM-2 block IVA missiles were tested in a theater ballistic missile defense function. Standard Missile 3 (SM-3) systems have also been tested for an ABM role. In 2008, an SM-3 missile launched from a \"Ticonderoga\"-class cruiser, the USS Lake Erie, successfully intercepted a non-functioning satellite.\nFrom 1992 to 2000, a demonstration system for the US Army Terminal High Altitude Area Defense was deployed at White Sands Missile Range. Tests were conducted on a regular basis and resulted in early failures, but successful intercepts occurred from 1999 onward. Full fielding of the first THAAD battery began in 2009.\nBrilliant Pebbles concept.\nApproved for acquisition by the Pentagon during 1991 but never realized, Brilliant Pebbles was a proposed space-based anti-ballistic system that was meant to avoid some of the problems of the earlier SDI concepts. Rather than use sophisticated large laser battle stations and nuclear-pumped X-ray laser satellites, Brilliant Pebbles consisted of a thousand very small, intelligent orbiting satellites with kinetic warheads. The system relied on improvements of computer technology, avoided problems with overly centralized command and control and risky, expensive development of large, complicated space defense satellites.\nIt promised to be much less expensive to develop and have less technical development risk.\nThe name Brilliant Pebbles comes from the small size of the satellite interceptors and great computational power enabling more autonomous targeting. Rather than rely exclusively on ground-based control, the many small interceptors would cooperatively communicate among themselves and target a large swarm of ICBM warheads in space or in the late boost phase. Development was discontinued later in favor of a limited ground-based defense.\nTransformation of SDI into MDA, development of NMD/GMD.\nWhile the Reagan era Strategic Defense Initiative was intended to shield against a massive Soviet attack, during the early 1990s, President George H. W. Bush called for a more limited version using rocket-launched interceptors based on the ground at a single site. Such system was developed since 1992, was expected to become operational in 2010 and capable of intercepting small number of incoming ICBMs. First called the National Missile Defense (NMD), since 2002 it was renamed Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD). It was planned to protect all 50 states from a rogue missile attack. The Alaska site provides more protection against North Korean missiles or accidental launches from Russia or China, but is likely less effective against missiles launched from the Middle East. The Alaska interceptors may be augmented later by the naval Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System or by ground-based missiles in other locations.\nDuring 1998, Defense secretary William Cohen proposed spending an additional $6.6 billion on intercontinental ballistic missile defense programs to build a system to protect against attacks from North Korea or accidental launches from Russia or China.\nIn terms of organization, during 1993 SDI was reorganized as the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO). In 2002, it was renamed to Missile Defense Agency (MDA).\n21st century.\nOn 13 June 2002, the United States withdrew from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and recommenced developing missile defense systems that would have formerly been prohibited by the bilateral treaty. The action was stated as needed to defend against the possibility of a missile attack conducted by a rogue state. The next day, the Russian Federation dropped the START II agreement, intended to completely ban MIRVs.\nOn 15 December 2016, the US Army SMDC had a successful test of a U.S. Army Zombie Pathfinder rocket, to be used as a target for exercising various anti-ballistic missile scenarios. The rocket was launched as part of NASA's sounding rocket program, at White Sands Missile Range.\nIn November 2020, the US successfully destroyed a dummy ICBM. The ICBM was launched in the general direction of Hawaii, triggering a satellite warning to a Colorado Air Force base, which then contacted USS \"John Finn\". The ship launched a missile to destroy the US dummy, still outside the atmosphere. Bloomberg Opinion writes that this defense ability \"ends the era of nuclear stability\"."}
{"id": "1793", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1793", "title": "August 29", "text": ""}
{"id": "1794", "revid": "36192893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1794", "title": "August 30", "text": ""}
{"id": "1797", "revid": "26233714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1797", "title": "Acre", "text": "The acre is a unit of land area used in the imperial and US customary systems. It is traditionally defined as the area of one chain by one furlong (66 by 660 feet), which is exactly equal to 10 square chains, of a square mile, or 43,560 square feet, and approximately 4,047\u00a0m2, or about 40% of a hectare. Based upon the International yard and pound agreement of 1959, an acre may be declared as exactly square metres. The acre was sometimes abbreviated ac, but was often spelled out as the word \"acre\".\nTraditionally, in the Middle Ages, an acre was conceived of as the area of land that could be ploughed in one day by a team of eight oxen.\nIt is still a statute measure in the United States. Both the international acre and the US survey acre are in use, but they differ by only two parts per million (see below). The most common use of the acre is to measure tracts of land.\nThe acre is commonly used in a number of current and former British Commonwealth countries by custom only. In a few it continues as a statute measure, although since 2010 not in the UK itself, and not since decades ago in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In many of those where it is not a statute measure, it is still lawful to \"use for trade\" if given as supplementary information and is not used for land registration.\nDescription.\nOne acre equals (0.0015625) square mile, 4,840 square yards, 43,560 square feet, or about (see below). While all modern variants of the acre contain 4,840 square yards, there are alternative definitions of a yard, so the exact size of an acre depends upon the particular yard on which it is based. Originally, an acre was understood as a selion of land sized at forty perches (660\u00a0ft, or 1\u00a0furlong) long and four perches (66\u00a0ft) wide; this may have also been understood as an approximation of the amount of land a yoke of oxen could plough in one day (a furlong being \"a furrow long\"). A square enclosing one acre is approximately 69.57\u00a0yards, or 208\u00a0feet 9\u00a0inches (), on a side. As a unit of measure, an acre has no prescribed shape; any area of 43,560 square feet is an acre.\nUS survey acres.\nIn the international yard and pound agreement of 1959, the United States and five countries of the Commonwealth of Nations defined the international yard to be exactly 0.9144 metre. The US authorities decided that, while the refined definition would apply nationally in all other respects, the US survey foot (and thus the survey acre) would continue 'until such a time as it becomes desirable and expedient to readjust [it]'. By inference, an \"international acre\" may be calculated as exactly square metres but it does not have a basis in any international agreement.\nBoth the international acre and the US survey acre contain of a square mile or 4,840 square yards, but alternative definitions of a yard are used (see survey foot and survey yard), so the exact size of an acre depends upon which yard it is based. The US survey acre is about 4,046.872 square metres; its exact value (\u00a0m2) is based on an inch defined by 1\u00a0metre = 39.37\u00a0inches exactly, as established by the Mendenhall Order of 1922. Surveyors in the United States use both international and survey feet, and consequently, both varieties of acre.\nSince the difference between the US survey acre and international acre (0.016 square metres, 160 square centimetres or 24.8 square inches), is only about a quarter of the size of an A4 sheet or US letter, it is usually not important which one is being discussed. Areas are seldom measured with sufficient accuracy for the different definitions to be detectable.\nIn October 2019, U.S. National Geodetic Survey and National Institute of Standards and Technology announced their joint intent to end the \"temporary\" continuance of the US survey foot, mile and acre units (as permitted by their 1959 decision, above), with effect from the end of 2022.\nSpanish acre.\nThe Puerto Rican \"cuerda\" () is sometimes called the \"Spanish acre\" in the continental United States.\nUse.\nThe acre is commonly used in a number of current and former Commonwealth countries by custom, and in a few it continues as a statute measure. These include Antigua and Barbuda, American Samoa, The Bahamas, Belize, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, the Falkland Islands, Grenada, Ghana, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Jamaica, Montserrat, Samoa, Saint Lucia, St. Helena, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Turks and Caicos, the United Kingdom, the United States and the US Virgin Islands.\nSouth Asia.\nIn India, residential plots are measured in square feet, while agricultural land is measured in acres. In Sri Lanka, the division of an acre into 160\u00a0perches or 4\u00a0roods is common.\nIn Pakistan, residential plots is measured in Kanal (20 marla= 1 Kanal= 500 sq yards) and open/agriculture land measurement is in acres(8 Kanal= 1 Acre or 4 Peli = 1 Acre) and Muraba (25 Acre= 1 Muraba = 200 Kanals), jerib, wiswa and gunta.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIts use as a primary unit for trade in the United Kingdom ceased to be permitted from 1 October 1995, due to the 1994 amendment of the Weights and Measures Act, where it was replaced by the hectare though its use as a supplementary unit continues to be permitted indefinitely. This was with exemption of Land registration, which records the sale and possession of land, in 2010 HM Land Registry ended its exemption. The measure is still used to communicate with the public, and informally (non-contract) by the farming and property industries.\nEquivalence to other units of area.\n1 international acre is equal to the following metric units:\n1 United States survey acre is equal to:\n1 acre (both variants) is equal to the following customary units:\nPerhaps the easiest way for US residents to envision an acre is as a rectangle measuring 88 yards by 55 yards ( of 880 yards by of 880 yards), about the size of a standard American football field. To be more exact, one acre is 90.75% of a 100-yd-long by 53.33-yd-wide American football field (without the end zone). The full field, including the end zones, covers about .\nFor residents of other countries, the acre might be envisioned as rather more than half of a football pitch.\nIt may also be remembered as 1% short of 44,000 square feet.\nHistorical origin.\nThe word \"acre\" is derived from Old English originally meaning \"open field\", cognate with west coast Norwegian , Icelandic , Swedish , German , Dutch , Latin , Sanskrit , and Greek (). In English, it was historically spelled \"aker\".\nAccording to the Act on the Composition of Yards and Perches, dating from around 1300, an acre is \"40 perches [rods] in length and four in breadth\", meaning 220 yards by 22 yards. As detailed in the box on the right, an acre was roughly the amount of land tillable by a yoke of oxen in one day.\nBefore the enactment of the metric system, many countries in Europe used their own official acres. In France, the acre (spelled exactly the same as in English) was used only in Normandy, but its value varied greatly across Normandy, ranging from 3,632 to 9,725 square metres, with 8,172 square metres being the most frequent value. The Normandy \"acre\" was usually divided in 4 \"verg\u00e9es\" (roods) and 160 square \"perches\", like the English acre.\nThe Normandy \"acre\" was equal to 1.6 \"arpents\", the unit of area more commonly used in Northern France outside of Normandy. In Canada, the Paris \"arpent\" used in Quebec before the metric system was adopted is sometimes called \"French acre\" in English, even though the Paris \"arpent\" and the Normandy \"acre\" were two very different units of area in ancient France (the Paris \"arpent\" became the unit of area of French Canada, whereas the Normandy \"acre\" was never used in French Canada).\nThe German word for acre is \"Morgen\". There were many variants of the \"Morgen\", differing between the different German territories:\nStatutory values for the acre were enacted in England, and subsequently the United Kingdom, by acts of:\nHistorically, the size of farms and landed estates in the United Kingdom was usually expressed in acres (or acres, roods, and perches), even if the number of acres was so large that it might conveniently have been expressed in square miles. For example, a certain landowner might have been said to own 32,000 acres of land, not 50 square miles of land.\nThe acre is related to the square mile, with 640 acres making up one square mile. One mile is 5280 feet (1760 yards). In western Canada and the western United States, divisions of land area were typically based on the square mile, and fractions thereof. If the square mile is divided into quarters, each quarter has a side length of mile (880 yards) and is square mile in area, or 160 acres. These subunits would typically then again be divided into quarters, with each side being mile long, and being of a square mile in area, or 40 acres. In the United States, farmland was typically divided as such, and the phrase \"the back 40\" would refer to the 40-acre parcel to the back of the farm. Most of the Canadian Prairie Provinces and the US Midwest are on square-mile grids for surveying purposes."}
{"id": "1799", "revid": "150564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1799", "title": "ATP", "text": "ATP may refer to:"}
{"id": "1800", "revid": "2039422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1800", "title": "Adenosine triphosphate", "text": "Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is an organic compound and hydrotrope that provides energy to drive many processes in living cells, such as muscle contraction, nerve impulse propagation, condensate dissolution, and chemical synthesis. Found in all known forms of life, ATP is often referred to as the \"molecular unit of currency\" of intracellular energy transfer. When consumed in metabolic processes, it converts either to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) or to adenosine monophosphate (AMP). Other processes regenerate ATP so that the human body recycles its own body weight equivalent in ATP each day. It is also a precursor to DNA and RNA, and is used as a coenzyme.\nFrom the perspective of biochemistry, ATP is classified as a nucleoside triphosphate, which indicates that it consists of three components: a nitrogenous base (adenine), the sugar ribose, and the triphosphate.\nStructure.\nATP consists of an adenine attached by the 9-nitrogen atom to the 1\u2032 carbon atom of a sugar (ribose), which in turn is attached at the 5' carbon atom of the sugar to a triphosphate group. In its many reactions related to metabolism, the adenine and sugar groups remain unchanged, but the triphosphate is converted to di- and monophosphate, giving respectively the derivatives ADP and AMP. The three phosphoryl groups are referred to as the alpha (\u03b1), beta (\u03b2), and, for the terminal phosphate, gamma (\u03b3).\nIn neutral solution, ionized ATP exists mostly as ATP4\u2212, with a small proportion of ATP3\u2212.\nBinding of metal cations to ATP.\nBeing polyanionic and featuring a potentially chelatable polyphosphate group, ATP binds metal cations with high affinity. The binding constant for is (). The binding of a divalent cation, almost always magnesium, strongly affects the interaction of ATP with various proteins. Due to the strength of the ATP-Mg2+ interaction, ATP exists in the cell mostly as a complex with bonded to the phosphate oxygen centers.\nA second magnesium ion is critical for ATP binding in the kinase domain. The presence of Mg2+ regulates kinase activity.\nChemical properties.\nSalts of ATP can be isolated as colorless solids.\nATP is stable in aqueous solutions between pH\u00a06.8 and 7.4, in the absence of catalysts. At more extreme pHs, it rapidly hydrolyses to ADP and phosphate. Living cells maintain the ratio of ATP to ADP at a point ten orders of magnitude from equilibrium, with ATP concentrations fivefold higher than the concentration of ADP. In the context of biochemical reactions, the P-O-P bonds are frequently referred to as \"high-energy bonds\".\nThe hydrolysis of ATP into ADP and inorganic phosphate releases 30.5\u00a0kJ/mol of enthalpy, with a change in free energy of 3.4\u00a0kJ/mol. The energy released by cleaving either a phosphate (Pi) or pyrophosphate (PPi) unit from ATP at standard state of 1\u00a0M are:\nThese abbreviated equations can be written more explicitly (R = adenosyl):\nProduction from AMP and ADP.\nProduction, aerobic conditions.\nA typical intracellular concentration of ATP is hard to pin down, however, reports have shown there to be 1\u201310\u00a0 \u03bcmol per gram of tissue in a variety of eukaryotes. The dephosphorylation of ATP and rephosphorylation of ADP and AMP occur repeatedly in the course of aerobic metabolism.\nATP can be produced by a number of distinct cellular processes; the three main pathways in eukaryotes are (1) glycolysis, (2) the citric acid cycle/oxidative phosphorylation, and (3) beta-oxidation. The overall process of oxidizing glucose to carbon dioxide, the combination of pathways 1 and 2, known as cellular respiration, produces about 30 equivalents of ATP from each molecule of glucose.\nATP production by a non-photosynthetic aerobic eukaryote occurs mainly in the mitochondria, which comprise nearly 25% of the volume of a typical cell.\nGlycolysis.\nIn glycolysis, glucose and glycerol are metabolized to pyruvate. Glycolysis generates two equivalents of ATP through substrate phosphorylation catalyzed by two enzymes, PGK and pyruvate kinase. Two equivalents of NADH are also produced, which can be oxidized via the electron transport chain and result in the generation of additional ATP by ATP synthase. The pyruvate generated as an end-product of glycolysis is a substrate for the Krebs Cycle.\nGlycolysis is viewed as consisting of two phases with five steps each. In phase 1, \"the preparatory phase\", glucose is converted to 2 d-glyceraldehyde -3-phosphate (g3p). One ATP is invested in Step 1, and another ATP is invested in Step 3. Steps 1 and 3 of glycolysis are referred to as \"Priming Steps\". In Phase 2, two equivalents of g3p are converted to two pyruvates. In Step 7, two ATP are produced. Also, in Step 10, two further equivalents of ATP are produced. In Steps 7 and 10, ATP is generated from ADP. A net of two ATPs is formed in the glycolysis cycle. The glycolysis pathway is later associated with the Citric Acid Cycle which produces additional equivalents of ATP.\nRegulation.\nIn glycolysis, hexokinase is directly inhibited by its product, glucose-6-phosphate, and pyruvate kinase is inhibited by ATP itself. The main control point for the glycolytic pathway is phosphofructokinase (PFK), which is allosterically inhibited by high concentrations of ATP and activated by high concentrations of AMP. The inhibition of PFK by ATP is unusual since ATP is also a substrate in the reaction catalyzed by PFK; the active form of the enzyme is a tetramer that exists in two conformations, only one of which binds the second substrate fructose-6-phosphate (F6P). The protein has two binding sites for ATP\u00a0\u2013 the active site is accessible in either protein conformation, but ATP binding to the inhibitor site stabilizes the conformation that binds F6P poorly. A number of other small molecules can compensate for the ATP-induced shift in equilibrium conformation and reactivate PFK, including cyclic AMP, ammonium ions, inorganic phosphate, and fructose-1,6- and -2,6-biphosphate.\nCitric acid cycle.\nIn the mitochondrion, pyruvate is oxidized by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex to the acetyl group, which is fully oxidized to carbon dioxide by the citric acid cycle (also known as the Krebs cycle). Every \"turn\" of the citric acid cycle produces two molecules of carbon dioxide, one equivalent of ATP guanosine triphosphate (GTP) through substrate-level phosphorylation catalyzed by succinyl-CoA synthetase, as succinyl- CoA is converted to Succinate, three equivalents of NADH, and one equivalent of FADH2. NADH and FADH2 are recycled (to NAD+ and FAD, respectively), generating additional ATP by oxidative phosphorylation. The oxidation of NADH results in the synthesis of 2\u20133 equivalents of ATP, and the oxidation of one FADH2 yields between 1\u20132 equivalents of ATP. The majority of cellular ATP is generated by this process. Although the citric acid cycle itself does not involve molecular oxygen, it is an obligately aerobic process because O2 is used to recycle the NADH and FADH2 and provides the chemical energy driving the process. In the absence of oxygen, the citric acid cycle ceases.\nThe generation of ATP by the mitochondrion from cytosolic NADH relies on the malate-aspartate shuttle (and to a lesser extent, the glycerol-phosphate shuttle) because the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to NADH and NAD+. Instead of transferring the generated NADH, a malate dehydrogenase enzyme converts oxaloacetate to malate, which is translocated to the mitochondrial matrix. Another malate dehydrogenase-catalyzed reaction occurs in the opposite direction, producing oxaloacetate and NADH from the newly transported malate and the mitochondrion's interior store of NAD+. A transaminase converts the oxaloacetate to aspartate for transport back across the membrane and into the intermembrane space.\nIn oxidative phosphorylation, the passage of electrons from NADH and FADH2 through the electron transport chain releases the chemical energy of O2 to pump protons out of the mitochondrial matrix and into the intermembrane space. This pumping generates a proton motive force that is the net effect of a pH gradient and an electric potential gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Flow of protons down this potential gradient\u00a0\u2013 that is, from the intermembrane space to the matrix\u00a0\u2013 yields ATP by ATP synthase. Three ATP are produced per turn.\nAlthough oxygen consumption appears fundamental for the maintenance of the proton motive force, in the event of oxygen shortage (hypoxia), intracellular acidosis (mediated by enhanced glycolytic rates and ATP hydrolysis), contributes to mitochondrial membrane potential and directly drives ATP synthesis.\nMost of the ATP synthesized in the mitochondria will be used for cellular processes in the cytosol; thus it must be exported from its site of synthesis in the mitochondrial matrix. ATP outward movement is favored by the membrane's electrochemical potential because the cytosol has a relatively positive charge compared to the relatively negative matrix. For every ATP transported out, it costs 1 H+. Producing one ATP costs about 3 H+. Therefore, making and exporting one ATP requires 4H+. The inner membrane contains an antiporter, the ADP/ATP translocase, which is an integral membrane protein used to exchange newly synthesized ATP in the matrix for ADP in the intermembrane space. This translocase is driven by the membrane potential, as it results in the movement of about 4 negative charges out across the mitochondrial membrane in exchange for 3 negative charges moved inside. However, it is also necessary to transport phosphate into the mitochondrion; the phosphate carrier moves a proton in with each phosphate, partially dissipating the proton gradient. After completing glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, the electron transport chain, and oxidative phosphorylation, approximately 30\u201338 ATP molecules are produced per glucose.\nRegulation.\nThe citric acid cycle is regulated mainly by the availability of key substrates, particularly the ratio of NAD+ to NADH and the concentrations of calcium, inorganic phosphate, ATP, ADP, and AMP. Citrate\u00a0\u2013 the ion that gives its name to the cycle\u00a0\u2013 is a feedback inhibitor of citrate synthase and also inhibits PFK, providing a direct link between the regulation of the citric acid cycle and glycolysis.\nBeta oxidation.\nIn the presence of air and various cofactors and enzymes, fatty acids are converted to acetyl-CoA. The pathway is called beta-oxidation. Each cycle of beta-oxidation shortens the fatty acid chain by two carbon atoms and produces one equivalent each of acetyl-CoA, NADH, and FADH2. The acetyl-CoA is metabolized by the citric acid cycle to generate ATP, while the NADH and FADH2 are used by oxidative phosphorylation to generate ATP. Dozens of ATP equivalents are generated by the beta-oxidation of a single long acyl chain.\nRegulation.\nIn oxidative phosphorylation, the key control point is the reaction catalyzed by cytochrome c oxidase, which is regulated by the availability of its substrate\u00a0\u2013 the reduced form of cytochrome c. The amount of reduced cytochrome c available is directly related to the amounts of other substrates:\nwhich directly implies this equation:\nThus, a high ratio of [NADH] to [NAD+] or a high ratio of [ADP][Pi] to [ATP] imply a high amount of reduced cytochrome c and a high level of cytochrome c oxidase activity. An additional level of regulation is introduced by the transport rates of ATP and NADH between the mitochondrial matrix and the cytoplasm.\nKetosis.\nKetone bodies can be used as fuels, yielding 22 ATP and 2 GTP molecules per acetoacetate molecule when oxidized in the mitochondria. Ketone bodies are transported from the liver to other tissues, where acetoacetate and \"beta\"-hydroxybutyrate can be reconverted to acetyl-CoA to produce reducing equivalents (NADH and FADH2), via the citric acid cycle. Ketone bodies cannot be used as fuel by the liver, because the liver lacks the enzyme \u03b2-ketoacyl-CoA transferase, also called thiolase. Acetoacetate in low concentrations is taken up by the liver and undergoes detoxification through the methylglyoxal pathway which ends with lactate. Acetoacetate in high concentrations is absorbed by cells other than those in the liver and enters a different pathway via 1,2-propanediol. Though the pathway follows a different series of steps requiring ATP, 1,2-propanediol can be turned into pyruvate.\nProduction, anaerobic conditions.\nFermentation is the metabolism of organic compounds in the absence of air. It involves substrate-level phosphorylation in the absence of a respiratory electron transport chain. The equation for the oxidation of glucose to lactic acid is:\nAnaerobic respiration is respiration in the absence of . Prokaryotes can utilize a variety of electron acceptors. These include nitrate, sulfate, and carbon dioxide.\nATP replenishment by nucleoside diphosphate kinases.\nATP can also be synthesized through several so-called \"replenishment\" reactions catalyzed by the enzyme families of nucleoside diphosphate kinases (NDKs), which use other nucleoside triphosphates as a high-energy phosphate donor, and the family.\nATP production during photosynthesis.\nIn plants, ATP is synthesized in the thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast. The process is called photophosphorylation. The \"machinery\" is similar to that in mitochondria except that light energy is used to pump protons across a membrane to produce a proton-motive force. ATP synthase then ensues exactly as in oxidative phosphorylation. Some of the ATP produced in the chloroplasts is consumed in the Calvin cycle, which produces triose sugars.\nATP recycling.\nThe total quantity of ATP in the human body is about 0.2\u00a0moles. The majority of ATP is recycled from ADP by the aforementioned processes. Thus, at any given time, the total amount of ATP + ADP remains fairly constant.\nThe energy used by human cells in an adult requires the hydrolysis of 100 to 150\u00a0moles of ATP daily, which is around 50 to 75\u00a0kg. A human will typically use up their body weight of ATP over the course of the day. Each equivalent of ATP is recycled 1000\u20131500 times during a single day ().\nBiochemical functions.\nIntracellular signaling.\nATP is involved in signal transduction by serving as substrate for kinases, enzymes that transfer phosphate groups. Kinases are the most common ATP-binding proteins. They share a small number of common folds. Phosphorylation of a protein by a kinase can activate a cascade such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade.\nATP is also a substrate of adenylate cyclase, most commonly in G protein-coupled receptor signal transduction pathways and is transformed to second messenger, cyclic AMP, which is involved in triggering calcium signals by the release of calcium from intracellular stores. This form of signal transduction is particularly important in brain function, although it is involved in the regulation of a multitude of other cellular processes.\nDNA and RNA synthesis.\nATP is one of four monomers required in the synthesis of RNA. The process is promoted by RNA polymerases. A similar process occurs in the formation of DNA, except that ATP is first converted to the deoxyribonucleotide dATP. Like many condensation reactions in nature, DNA replication and DNA transcription also consume ATP.\nAmino acid activation in protein synthesis.\nAminoacyl-tRNA synthetase enzymes consume ATP in the attachment tRNA to amino acids, forming aminoacyl-tRNA complexes. Aminoacyl transferase binds AMP-amino acid to tRNA. The coupling reaction proceeds in two steps:\nThe amino acid is coupled to the penultimate nucleotide at the 3\u2032-end of the tRNA (the A in the sequence CCA) via an ester bond (roll over in illustration).\nATP binding cassette transporter.\nTransporting chemicals out of a cell against a gradient is often associated with ATP hydrolysis. Transport is mediated by ATP binding cassette transporters. The human genome encodes 48 ABC transporters, that are used for exporting drugs, lipids, and other compounds.\nExtracellular signalling and neurotransmision.\nCells secrete ATP to communicate with other cells in a process called purinergic signalling. ATP serves as a neurotransmitter in many parts of the nervous system, modulates ciliary beating, affects vascular oxygen supply etc. ATP is either secreted directly across the cell membrane through channel proteins or is pumped into vesicles which then fuse with the membrane. Cells detect ATP using the purinergic receptor proteins P2X and P2Y.\nProtein solubility.\nATP has recently been proposed to act as a biological hydrotrope and has been shown to affect proteome-wide solubility.\nATP analogues.\nBiochemistry laboratories often use \"in vitro\" studies to explore ATP-dependent molecular processes. ATP analogs are also used in X-ray crystallography to determine a protein structure in complex with ATP, often together with other substrates.\nEnzyme inhibitors of ATP-dependent enzymes such as kinases are needed to examine the binding sites and transition states involved in ATP-dependent reactions.\nMost useful ATP analogs cannot be hydrolyzed as ATP would be; instead, they trap the enzyme in a structure closely related to the ATP-bound state. Adenosine 5\u2032-(\u03b3-thiotriphosphate) is an extremely common ATP analog in which one of the gamma-phosphate oxygens is replaced by a sulfur atom; this anion is hydrolyzed at a dramatically slower rate than ATP itself and functions as an inhibitor of ATP-dependent processes. In crystallographic studies, hydrolysis transition states are modeled by the bound vanadate ion.\nCaution is warranted in interpreting the results of experiments using ATP analogs, since some enzymes can hydrolyze them at appreciable rates at high concentration.\nMedical use.\nATP is used intravenously for some heart related conditions.\nHistory.\nATP was discovered in 1929 by Karl Lohmann and Jendrassik and, independently, by Cyrus Fiske and Yellapragada Subba Rao of Harvard Medical School, both teams competing against each other to find an assay for phosphorus.\nIt was proposed to be the intermediary between energy-yielding and energy-requiring reactions in cells by Fritz Albert Lipmann in 1941.\nIt was first synthesized in the laboratory by Alexander Todd in 1948.\nThe Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1997 was divided, one half jointly to Paul D. Boyer and John E. Walker \"\"for their elucidation of the enzymatic mechanism underlying the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)\" and the other half to Jens C. Skou \"for the first discovery of an ion-transporting enzyme, Na+, K+ -ATPase\".\""}
{"id": "1802", "revid": "26252035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1802", "title": "\u00c6gir", "text": "\u00c6gir (anglicised as Aegir; Old Norse 'sea'), Hl\u00e9r (Old Norse 'sea'), or Gymir (Old Norse less clearly 'sea, engulfer'), is a j\u00f6tunn and a personification of the sea in Norse mythology. In the Old Norse record, \u00c6gir hosts the gods in his halls and is associated with brewing ale. \u00c6gir is attested as married to a goddess, R\u00e1n, who also personifies the sea, and together the two produced daughters who personify waves, the Nine Daughters of \u00c6gir and R\u00e1n, and \u00c6gir's son is Sn\u00e6r, personified snow. \u00c6gir may also be the father of the beautiful j\u00f6tunn Ger\u00f0r, wife of the god Freyr, or these may be two separate figures who share the same name (see below and Gymir (father of Ger\u00f0r)).\nOne of \u00c6gir's names, \"Hl\u00e9r\", is the namesake of the island L\u00e6s\u00f8 (Old Norse \"Hl\u00e9ysey\" 'Hl\u00e9r's island') and perhaps also Lejre in Denmark. Scholars have long analyzed \u00c6gir's role in the Old Norse corpus, and the concept of the figure has had some influence in modern popular culture.\nNames.\nThe Old Norse name \"\u00c6gir\" ('sea') may stem from Proto-Germanic \"*\u0101gwi-jaz\" ('that of the river/water'), itself a derivative of the root \"*ahw\u014d-\" ('river'; cf. Gothic \"alva\" 'body of water, river', Old English \"\u0113a\" 'stream', Old High German \"aha\" 'river'). Richard Cleasby and Gu\u00f0brandur Vigf\u00fasson saw his name as deriving from an ancient Indo-European root. Guus Kroonen argues that the Germanic root \"*ahw\u014d-\" is probably of Proto-Indo-European (PIE) origin, as it may be cognate with Latin \"aqua\" (via the common form \"*h\u2082ek\u02b7-eh\u2082-\"), and ultimately descend from the PIE root \"*h\u2082ep\"- ('water'; cf. Sanskrit \"\u00e1p-\" 'water' or Tocharian \"\u0101p-\" 'water, river').\nThe name \"\u00c6gir\" is identical to a noun for 'sea' in skaldic poetry, itself a base word in many kennings. For instance, a ship is described as \"\u00c6gir's horse\" and the waves as the \"daughters of \u00c6gir\".\nPoetic kennings in both \"Hversu Noregr bygg\u00f0ist\" ('How Norway Was Settled') and \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" (The Language of Poetry) treat \u00c6gir and the sea-j\u00f6tunn Hl\u00e9r, who lives on the Hl\u00e9sey ('Hl\u00e9r island', modern L\u00e6s\u00f8), as the same figure.\nThe meaning of the Old Norse name \"Gymir\" is unclear. Proposed translations include 'the earthly' (from Old Norse \"gumi\"), 'the wintry one' (from \"gemla\"), or 'the protector', the 'engulfer' (from \"geyma\"). (For more on this topic, see discussion below)\nAttestations.\n\u00c6gir is attested in a variety of Old Norse sources.\n\"Sonatorrek\".\n\u00c6gir and R\u00e1n receive mention in the poem \"Sonatorrek\" attributed to 10th century Icelandic skald Egill Skallagr\u00edmsson. In the poem, Egill laments the death of his son B\u00f6\u00f0var, who drowned at sea during a store. In one difficult stanza, the skald expresses the pain of losing his son by invoking the image of slaying the personified sea, personified as \u00c6gir (Old Norse \"\u01eblsmi\u00f0[r]\" 'ale-smith') and R\u00e1n (\"\u00c6gis man\" '\u00c6gir's wife'):\nThe skald later references \u00c6gir by way of the kenning 'Hl\u00e9r's fire' (\"Hl\u00e9s viti\"), meaning gold.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", \u00c6gir receives mention in the eddic poems \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", \"Hymiskvi\u00f0a\", \"Lokasenna\", and in the prose section of \"Helgakvi\u00f0a Hundingsbana I\". In \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", the disguised god Odin references \u00c6gir's status as a renowned host among the gods:\nIn \"Hymiskvi\u00f0a\", \u00c6gir plays a major role. In the poem, the gods have become thirsty after a successful hunt, and are keen to celebrate with drink. They \"shook the twigs and looked at the augury\" and \"found that at \u00c6gir's was an ample choice of cauldrons\". Odin goes to \u00c6gir, who he finds sitting in good cheer, and tells him he shall \"often prepare a feast for the \u00c6sir\". Referring to \u00c6gir as a j\u00f6tunn, the poem describes how, now annoyed, \u00c6gir hatches a plan: He asks Thor to fetch a particular cauldron, and that with it he could brew ale for them all. The gods are unable to find a cauldron of a size big enough to meet \u00c6gir's request until the god T\u00fdr recommends one he knows of far away, setting the stage for the events of the rest of the poem.\nAccording to the prose introduction to \"Lokasenna\", \"\u00c6gir, who is also called Gymir\", was hosting a feast \"with the great cauldron which has just been told about\", which many of the gods and elves attended. The prose introduction describes the feast as featuring gold that shimmers like fire light and ale that serves itself, and that \"it was a great place of peace\". In attendance also were \u00c6gir's servers, Fimafeng and Eldir. The gods praise the excellence of their service and, hearing this, Loki murders Fimafeng, enraging the gods, who chase them out to the woods before returning to drink.\nIn the poem that follows the prose introduction (and in accompanying prose), Loki returns to the hall and greets Eldir: He says that before Eldir steps forward, he should first tell him what the gods are discussing in the hall. Eldir says that they're discussing weaponry and war, and having nothing good to say about Loki. Loki says that he will enter \u00c6gir's halls and have a look at the feast, and with him bring quarrel and strife. Eldir notifies Loki that if he enters and causes trouble, he can expect them to return it to him. Loki enters the hall and the gods see him and become silent.\nIn \"Helgakvi\u00f0a Hundingsbana I\", a great wave is referred to as \"\u00c6gir's terrible daughter\".\n\"Prose Edda\".\n\u00c6gir receives numerous mentions in the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", where he sits at a banquet and asks the skaldic god Bragi many questions, and Bragi responds with narratives about the gods. The section begins as follows:\nBeyond this section of \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", \u00c6gir receives several other mentions in kennings. Section 25 provides examples for 'sea', including 'visitor of the gods', 'husband of R\u00e1n', 'father of \u00c6gir's daughters', 'land of R\u00e1n and \u00c6gir's daughters'. Kennings cited to skalds in this section include 'the storm-happy daughters of \u00c6gir' meaning 'waves' (Svein) and a kenning in a fragment of a work by the 11th century Icelandic skald Hofgar\u00f0a-Refr Gestsson, where R\u00e1n is referred to as 'Gymir's ... v\u00f6lva':\nThe section's author comments that the stanza \"[implies] that they are all the same, \u00c6gir and Hler and Gymir.\nChapter 33b of \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" discusses why skalds may refer to gold as \"\u00c6gir's fire\". The section traces the kenning to a narrative surrounding \u00c6gir, in which the j\u00f6tunn employs \"glowing gold\" in the center of his hall to light it \"like fire\" (which the narrator compares to flaming swords in Valhalla). The section explains that \"Ran is the name of \u00c6gir's wife, and the names of their nine daughters are as was written above ... Then the \u00c6sir discovered that Ran had a net in which she caught everyone that went to sea ... so this is the story of the origin of gold being called fire or light or brightness of \u00c6gir, Ran or \u00c6gir's daughters, and from such kennings the practice has now developed of calling gold fire of the sea and of all terms for it, since \u00c6gir and Ran's names are also terms for the sea, and hence gold is now called fire of lakes or rivers and of all river-names.\"\nIn chapter 61 provides yet more kennings. Among them the author notes that \"Ran, who, it is said, was \u00c6gir's wife\" and that \"the daughters of \u00c6gir and Ran are nine\". In chapter 75, \u00c6gir occurs in a list of j\u00f6tnar.\nSaga corpus.\nIn what appears to be a Norwegian genealogical tradition, \u00c6gir is portrayed as one of the three elements among the sea, the fire and the wind. The beginning of the \"Orkneyinga saga\" ('Saga of the Orkney Islanders') and \"Hversu Noregr byggdisk\" ('How Norway Was Settled') tell that the j\u00f6tunn king Fornj\u00f3t had three sons: Hl\u00e9r ('sea'), whom he called \u00c6gir, a second named Logi ('fire'), and a third called K\u00e1ri ('wind').\nScholarly reception and interpretation.\nBanquets.\nCarolyne Larrington says that \u00c6gir's role in \"Hymiskvi\u00f0a\" \"may reflect Scandinavian royal practices in which the king enforces his authority on his subordinates by visiting their homes and demanding to be feasted\". According to Andy Orchard, \u00c6gir's role in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", where he attends a banquet rather than hosting it, could be a deliberate inversion of the traditional motif of \u00c6gir as host.\nGymir.\nThe name \"Gymir\" may indicate that \u00c6gir was understood as the father of the beautiful j\u00f6tunn Ger\u00f0r or indicate that two figures by the same name (see Gymir (father of Ger\u00f0r)). Both the prose introduction to \"Lokasenna\" and \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" state that \u00c6gir is also known as \"Gymir\", the father of the j\u00f6tunn Ger\u00f0r. Rudolf Simek argues that, if understood to be two different entities, this may stem from an erroneous interpretation of kennings in which different j\u00f6tunn-names are used interchangeably.\nHl\u00e9r, L\u00e6s\u00f8, Lejre, and Snow.\nAs highlighted above in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", the name of the island L\u00e6s\u00f8 in Denmark references Hl\u00e9r (Old Norse \"Hl\u00e9ysey\" 'Hl\u00e9r's Island'). Simek speculates that Hl\u00e9r may therefore have been seen as something of an ancestor of the island.\nTwo sources list the personified snow, Sn\u00e6r (Old Norse 'snow'), as Hl\u00e9r's son. Book nine of Saxo Grammaticus's 12th century history of Denmark \"Gesta Danorum\" contains mention of a figure by the name of \"Lerus\" (from Old Norse \"Hl\u00e9r\") whose son is \"Snio\" (from Old Norse \"Sn\u00e6r\" 'Snow'). The Danish chronicle of Lejre, \"Chronicon Lethrense\" also connects the two, and the name \"Lejre\" may, like \"L\u00e6s\u00f8\", derive from the j\u00f6tunn.\nJ\u00f6tunn.\nScholars have often discussed \u00c6gir's role as host to the gods and his description as a j\u00f6tunn. Anthony Faulkes observes that \u00c6gir is \"often described by modern writers as god of the sea\" yet that he is nowhere described as a god in the \"Prose Edda\" and appears in a list of j\u00f6tnar in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\". According to John Lindow, since his wife R\u00e1n is listed among the \u00c1synjur (goddesses) in the same part of the \"Prose Edda\", and since he had a close and friendly relationship with the \u00c6sir (gods), \u00c6gir's description as a j\u00f6tunn appears questionable. Andy Orchard argues on the contrary that \u00c6gir's inclusion among the \u00c6sir is probably a late development since his daughters are described as j\u00f6tnar and some sources mention him as the descendant of the j\u00f6tunn Fornj\u00f3t. According to Rudolf Simek, while attested as a j\u00f6tunn, \u00c6gir \"has characteristics\" of a sea god\".\nModern influence.\n\u00c6gir has been the subject of a variety of art pieces These include Nils Blomm\u00e9r's painting \"N\u00e4cken och \u00c4girs d\u00f6ttrar\" (1850), Johan Peter Molin's (d. 1874) fountain relief \"\u00c6gir\", and Emil Doepler's \"\u00c6gir\" (1901).\n\u00c6gir is referenced in a variety of others ways in modern popular culture. For example, he is the namesake of a Norwegian corvette produced in 1967 (\"\u00c6gir\") and of an exoplanet, Epsilon Eridani b."}
{"id": "1805", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1805", "title": "Antibiotic", "text": "An antibiotic is a type of antimicrobial substance active against bacteria. It is the most important type of antibacterial agent for fighting bacterial infections, and antibiotic medications are widely used in the treatment and prevention of such infections. They may either kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria. A limited number of antibiotics also possess antiprotozoal activity. Antibiotics are not effective against viruses such as the common cold or influenza; drugs which inhibit viruses are termed antiviral drugs or antivirals rather than antibiotics.\nSometimes, the term \"antibiotic\"\u2014literally \"opposing life\", from the Greek roots \u1f00\u03bd\u03c4\u03b9 \"anti\", \"against\" and \u03b2\u03af\u03bf\u03c2 \"bios\", \"life\"\u2014is broadly used to refer to any substance used against microbes, but in the usual medical usage, antibiotics (such as penicillin) are those produced naturally (by one microorganism fighting another), whereas nonantibiotic antibacterials (such as sulfonamides and antiseptics) are fully synthetic. However, both classes have the same goal of killing or preventing the growth of microorganisms, and both are included in antimicrobial chemotherapy. \"Antibacterials\" include antiseptic drugs, antibacterial soaps, and chemical disinfectants, whereas antibiotics are an important class of antibacterials used more specifically in medicine and sometimes in livestock feed.\nAntibiotics have been used since ancient times. Many civilizations used topical application of mouldy bread, with many references to its beneficial effects arising from ancient Egypt, Nubia, China, Serbia, Greece, and Rome. The first person to directly document the use of molds to treat infections was John Parkinson (1567\u20131650). Antibiotics revolutionized medicine in the 20th century. Alexander Fleming (1881\u20131955) discovered modern day penicillin in 1928, the widespread use of which proved significantly beneficial during wartime. However, the effectiveness and easy access to antibiotics have also led to their overuse and some bacteria have evolved resistance to them. The World Health Organization has classified antimicrobial resistance as a widespread \"serious threat [that] is no longer a prediction for the future, it is happening right now in every region of the world and has the potential to affect anyone, of any age, in any country\".\nMedical uses.\nAntibiotics are used to treat or prevent bacterial infections, and sometimes protozoan infections. (Metronidazole is effective against a number of parasitic diseases). When an infection is suspected of being responsible for an illness but the responsible pathogen has not been identified, an empiric therapy is adopted. This involves the administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic based on the signs and symptoms presented and is initiated pending laboratory results that can take several days.\nWhen the responsible pathogenic microorganism is already known or has been identified, definitive therapy can be started. This will usually involve the use of a narrow-spectrum antibiotic. The choice of antibiotic given will also be based on its cost. Identification is critically important as it can reduce the cost and toxicity of the antibiotic therapy and also reduce the possibility of the emergence of antimicrobial resistance. To avoid surgery, antibiotics may be given for non-complicated acute appendicitis.\nAntibiotics may be given as a preventive measure and this is usually limited to at-risk populations such as those with a weakened immune system (particularly in HIV cases to prevent pneumonia), those taking immunosuppressive drugs, cancer patients, and those having surgery. Their use in surgical procedures is to help prevent infection of incisions. They have an important role in dental antibiotic prophylaxis where their use may prevent bacteremia and consequent infective endocarditis. Antibiotics are also used to prevent infection in cases of neutropenia particularly cancer-related.\nAdministration.\nThere are many different routes of administration for antibiotic treatment. Antibiotics are usually taken by mouth. In more severe cases, particularly deep-seated systemic infections, antibiotics can be given intravenously or by injection. Where the site of infection is easily accessed, antibiotics may be given topically in the form of eye drops onto the conjunctiva for conjunctivitis or ear drops for ear infections and acute cases of swimmer's ear. Topical use is also one of the treatment options for some skin conditions including acne and cellulitis. Advantages of topical application include achieving high and sustained concentration of antibiotic at the site of infection; reducing the potential for systemic absorption and toxicity, and total volumes of antibiotic required are reduced, thereby also reducing the risk of antibiotic misuse. Topical antibiotics applied over certain types of surgical wounds have been reported to reduce the risk of surgical site infections. However, there are certain general causes for concern with topical administration of antibiotics. Some systemic absorption of the antibiotic may occur; the quantity of antibiotic applied is difficult to accurately dose, and there is also the possibility of local hypersensitivity reactions or contact dermatitis occurring. It is recommended to administer antibiotics as soon as possible, especially in life-threatening infections. Many emergency departments stock antibiotics for this purpose.\nPrevalence.\nAntibiotic consumption varies widely between countries. The WHO report on surveillance of antibiotic consumption\u2019 published in 2018 analysed 2015 data from 65 countries. As measured in defined daily doses per 1,000 inhabitants per day. Mongolia had the highest consumption with a rate of 64.4. Burundi had the lowest at 4.4. Amoxicillin and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid were the most frequently consumed.\nSide effects.\nAntibiotics are screened for any negative effects before their approval for clinical use, and are usually considered safe and well tolerated. However, some antibiotics have been associated with a wide extent of adverse side effects ranging from mild to very severe depending on the type of antibiotic used, the microbes targeted, and the individual patient. Side effects may reflect the pharmacological or toxicological properties of the antibiotic or may involve hypersensitivity or allergic reactions. Adverse effects range from fever and nausea to major allergic reactions, including photodermatitis and anaphylaxis. Safety profiles of newer drugs are often not as well established as for those that have a long history of use.\nCommon side-effects include diarrhea, resulting from disruption of the species composition in the intestinal flora, resulting, for example, in overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria, such as \"Clostridium difficile\". Taking probiotics during the course of antibiotic treatment can help prevent antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Antibacterials can also affect the vaginal flora, and may lead to overgrowth of yeast species of the genus \"Candida\" in the vulvo-vaginal area. Additional side effects can result from interaction with other drugs, such as the possibility of tendon damage from the administration of a quinolone antibiotic with a systemic corticosteroid.\nSome antibiotics may also damage the mitochondrion, a bacteria-derived organelle found in eukaryotic, including human, cells. Mitochondrial damage cause oxidative stress in cells and has been suggested as a mechanism for side effects from fluoroquinolones. They are also known to affect chloroplasts.\nCorrelation with obesity.\nExposure to antibiotics early in life is associated with increased body mass in humans and mouse models. Early life is a critical period for the establishment of the intestinal microbiota and for metabolic development. Mice exposed to subtherapeutic antibiotic treatment \u2013 with either penicillin, vancomycin, or chlortetracycline had altered composition of the gut microbiota as well as its metabolic capabilities. One study has reported that mice given low-dose penicillin (1 \u03bcg/g body weight) around birth and throughout the weaning process had an increased body mass and fat mass, accelerated growth, and increased hepatic expression of genes involved in adipogenesis, compared to control mice. In addition, penicillin in combination with a high-fat diet increased fasting insulin levels in mice. However, it is unclear whether or not antibiotics cause obesity in humans. Studies have found a correlation between early exposure of antibiotics (&lt;6 months) and increased body mass (at 10 and 20 months). Another study found that the type of antibiotic exposure was also significant with the highest risk of being overweight in those given macrolides compared to penicillin and cephalosporin. Therefore, there is correlation between antibiotic exposure in early life and obesity in humans, but whether or not there is a causal relationship remains unclear. Although there is a correlation between antibiotic use in early life and obesity, the effect of antibiotics on obesity in humans needs to be weighed against the beneficial effects of clinically indicated treatment with antibiotics in infancy.\nInteractions.\nBirth control pills.\nThere are few well-controlled studies on whether antibiotic use increases the risk of oral contraceptive failure. The majority of studies indicate antibiotics do not interfere with birth control pills, such as clinical studies that suggest the failure rate of contraceptive pills caused by antibiotics is very low (about 1%). Situations that may increase the risk of oral contraceptive failure include non-compliance (missing taking the pill), vomiting, or diarrhea. Gastrointestinal disorders or interpatient variability in oral contraceptive absorption affecting ethinylestradiol serum levels in the blood. Women with menstrual irregularities may be at higher risk of failure and should be advised to use backup contraception during antibiotic treatment and for one week after its completion. If patient-specific risk factors for reduced oral contraceptive efficacy are suspected, backup contraception is recommended.\nIn cases where antibiotics have been suggested to affect the efficiency of birth control pills, such as for the broad-spectrum antibiotic rifampicin, these cases may be due to an increase in the activities of hepatic liver enzymes' causing increased breakdown of the pill's active ingredients. Effects on the intestinal flora, which might result in reduced absorption of estrogens in the colon, have also been suggested, but such suggestions have been inconclusive and controversial. Clinicians have recommended that extra contraceptive measures be applied during therapies using antibiotics that are suspected to interact with oral contraceptives. More studies on the possible interactions between antibiotics and birth control pills (oral contraceptives) are required as well as careful assessment of patient-specific risk factors for potential oral contractive pill failure prior to dismissing the need for backup contraception.\nAlcohol.\nInteractions between alcohol and certain antibiotics may occur and may cause side effects and decreased effectiveness of antibiotic therapy. While moderate alcohol consumption is unlikely to interfere with many common antibiotics, there are specific types of antibiotics, with which alcohol consumption may cause serious side effects. Therefore, potential risks of side effects and effectiveness depend on the type of antibiotic administered.\nAntibiotics such as metronidazole, tinidazole, cephamandole, latamoxef, cefoperazone, cefmenoxime, and furazolidone, cause a disulfiram-like chemical reaction with alcohol by inhibiting its breakdown by acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, which may result in vomiting, nausea, and shortness of breath. In addition, the efficacy of doxycycline and erythromycin succinate may be reduced by alcohol consumption. Other effects of alcohol on antibiotic activity include altered activity of the liver enzymes that break down the antibiotic compound.\nPharmacodynamics.\nThe successful outcome of antimicrobial therapy with antibacterial compounds depends on several factors. These include host defense mechanisms, the location of infection, and the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of the antibacterial. The bactericidal activity of antibacterials may depend on the bacterial growth phase, and it often requires ongoing metabolic activity and division of bacterial cells. These findings are based on laboratory studies, and in clinical settings have also been shown to eliminate bacterial infection. Since the activity of antibacterials depends frequently on its concentration, \"in vitro\" characterization of antibacterial activity commonly includes the determination of the minimum inhibitory concentration and minimum bactericidal concentration of an antibacterial.\nTo predict clinical outcome, the antimicrobial activity of an antibacterial is usually combined with its pharmacokinetic profile, and several pharmacological parameters are used as markers of drug efficacy.\nCombination therapy.\nIn important infectious diseases, including tuberculosis, combination therapy (i.e., the concurrent application of two or more antibiotics) has been used to delay or prevent the emergence of resistance. In acute bacterial infections, antibiotics as part of combination therapy are prescribed for their synergistic effects to improve treatment outcome as the combined effect of both antibiotics is better than their individual effect. Methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" infections may be treated with a combination therapy of fusidic acid and rifampicin. Antibiotics used in combination may also be antagonistic and the combined effects of the two antibiotics may be less than if one of the antibiotics was given as a monotherapy. For example, chloramphenicol and tetracyclines are antagonists to penicillins. However, this can vary depending on the species of bacteria. In general, combinations of a bacteriostatic antibiotic and bactericidal antibiotic are antagonistic.\nIn addition to combining one antibiotic with another, antibiotics are sometimes co-administered with resistance-modifying agents. For example, \u03b2-lactam antibiotics may be used in combination with \u03b2-lactamase inhibitors, such as clavulanic acid or sulbactam, when a patient is infected with a \u03b2-lactamase-producing strain of bacteria.\nClasses.\nAntibiotics are commonly classified based on their mechanism of action, chemical structure, or spectrum of activity. Most target bacterial functions or growth processes. Those that target the bacterial cell wall (penicillins and cephalosporins) or the cell membrane (polymyxins), or interfere with essential bacterial enzymes (rifamycins, lipiarmycins, quinolones, and sulfonamides) have bactericidal activities. Protein synthesis inhibitors (macrolides, lincosamides, and tetracyclines) are usually bacteriostatic (with the exception of bactericidal aminoglycosides). Further categorization is based on their target specificity. \"Narrow-spectrum\" antibiotics target specific types of bacteria, such as gram-negative or gram-positive, whereas broad-spectrum antibiotics affect a wide range of bacteria. Following a 40-year break in discovering classes of antibacterial compounds, four new classes of antibiotics were introduced to clinical use in the late 2000s and early 2010s: cyclic lipopeptides (such as daptomycin), glycylcyclines (such as tigecycline), oxazolidinones (such as linezolid), and lipiarmycins (such as fidaxomicin).\nProduction.\nWith advances in medicinal chemistry, most modern antibacterials are semisynthetic modifications of various natural compounds. These include, for example, the beta-lactam antibiotics, which include the penicillins (produced by fungi in the genus \"Penicillium\"), the cephalosporins, and the carbapenems. Compounds that are still isolated from living organisms are the aminoglycosides, whereas other antibacterials\u2014for example, the sulfonamides, the quinolones, and the oxazolidinones\u2014are produced solely by chemical synthesis. Many antibacterial compounds are relatively small molecules with a molecular weight of less than 1000 daltons.\nSince the first pioneering efforts of Howard Florey and Chain in 1939, the importance of antibiotics, including antibacterials, to medicine has led to intense research into producing antibacterials at large scales. Following screening of antibacterials against a wide range of bacteria, production of the active compounds is carried out using fermentation, usually in strongly aerobic conditions.\nResistance.\nThe emergence of resistance of bacteria to antibiotics is a common phenomenon. Emergence of resistance often reflects evolutionary processes that take place during antibiotic therapy. The antibiotic treatment may select for bacterial strains with physiologically or genetically enhanced capacity to survive high doses of antibiotics. Under certain conditions, it may result in preferential growth of resistant bacteria, while growth of susceptible bacteria is inhibited by the drug. For example, antibacterial selection for strains having previously acquired antibacterial-resistance genes was demonstrated in 1943 by the Luria\u2013Delbr\u00fcck experiment. Antibiotics such as penicillin and erythromycin, which used to have a high efficacy against many bacterial species and strains, have become less effective, due to the increased resistance of many bacterial strains.\nResistance may take the form of biodegradation of pharmaceuticals, such as sulfamethazine-degrading soil bacteria introduced to sulfamethazine through medicated pig feces.\nThe survival of bacteria often results from an inheritable resistance, but the growth of resistance to antibacterials also occurs through horizontal gene transfer. Horizontal transfer is more likely to happen in locations of frequent antibiotic use.\nAntibacterial resistance may impose a biological cost, thereby reducing fitness of resistant strains, which can limit the spread of antibacterial-resistant bacteria, for example, in the absence of antibacterial compounds. Additional mutations, however, may compensate for this fitness cost and can aid the survival of these bacteria.\nPaleontological data show that both antibiotics and antibiotic resistance are ancient compounds and mechanisms. Useful antibiotic targets are those for which mutations negatively impact bacterial reproduction or viability.\nSeveral molecular mechanisms of antibacterial resistance exist. Intrinsic antibacterial resistance may be part of the genetic makeup of bacterial strains. For example, an antibiotic target may be absent from the bacterial genome. Acquired resistance results from a mutation in the bacterial chromosome or the acquisition of extra-chromosomal DNA. Antibacterial-producing bacteria have evolved resistance mechanisms that have been shown to be similar to, and may have been transferred to, antibacterial-resistant strains. The spread of antibacterial resistance often occurs through vertical transmission of mutations during growth and by genetic recombination of DNA by horizontal genetic exchange. For instance, antibacterial resistance genes can be exchanged between different bacterial strains or species via plasmids that carry these resistance genes. Plasmids that carry several different resistance genes can confer resistance to multiple antibacterials. Cross-resistance to several antibacterials may also occur when a resistance mechanism encoded by a single gene conveys resistance to more than one antibacterial compound.\nAntibacterial-resistant strains and species, sometimes referred to as \"superbugs\", now contribute to the emergence of diseases that were for a while well controlled. For example, emergent bacterial strains causing tuberculosis that are resistant to previously effective antibacterial treatments pose many therapeutic challenges. Every year, nearly half a million new cases of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) are estimated to occur worldwide. For example, NDM-1 is a newly identified enzyme conveying bacterial resistance to a broad range of beta-lactam antibacterials. The United Kingdom's Health Protection Agency has stated that \"most isolates with NDM-1 enzyme are resistant to all standard intravenous antibiotics for treatment of severe infections.\" On 26 May 2016, an \"E. coli\" \"superbug\" was identified in the United States resistant to colistin, \"the last line of defence\" antibiotic.\nMisuse.\nPer \"The ICU Book\" \"The first rule of antibiotics is to try not to use them, and the second rule is try not to use too many of them.\" Inappropriate antibiotic treatment and overuse of antibiotics have contributed to the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Self-prescribing of antibiotics is an example of misuse. Many antibiotics are frequently prescribed to treat symptoms or diseases that do not respond to antibiotics or that are likely to resolve without treatment. Also, incorrect or suboptimal antibiotics are prescribed for certain bacterial infections. The overuse of antibiotics, like penicillin and erythromycin, has been associated with emerging antibiotic resistance since the 1950s. Widespread usage of antibiotics in hospitals has also been associated with increases in bacterial strains and species that no longer respond to treatment with the most common antibiotics.\nCommon forms of antibiotic misuse include excessive use of prophylactic antibiotics in travelers and failure of medical professionals to prescribe the correct dosage of antibiotics on the basis of the patient's weight and history of prior use. Other forms of misuse include failure to take the entire prescribed course of the antibiotic, incorrect dosage and administration, or failure to rest for sufficient recovery. Inappropriate antibiotic treatment, for example, is their prescription to treat viral infections such as the common cold. One study on respiratory tract infections found \"physicians were more likely to prescribe antibiotics to patients who appeared to expect them\". Multifactorial interventions aimed at both physicians and patients can reduce inappropriate prescription of antibiotics. The lack of rapid point of care diagnostic tests, particularly in resource-limited settings is considered as one of the drivers of antibiotic misuse.\nSeveral organizations concerned with antimicrobial resistance are lobbying to eliminate the unnecessary use of antibiotics. The issues of misuse and overuse of antibiotics have been addressed by the formation of the US Interagency Task Force on Antimicrobial Resistance. This task force aims to actively address antimicrobial resistance, and is coordinated by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the National Institutes of Health, as well as other US agencies. A non-governmental organization campaign group is \"Keep Antibiotics Working\". In France, an \"Antibiotics are not automatic\" government campaign started in 2002 and led to a marked reduction of unnecessary antibiotic prescriptions, especially in children.\nThe emergence of antibiotic resistance has prompted restrictions on their use in the UK in 1970 (Swann report 1969), and the European Union has banned the use of antibiotics as growth-promotional agents since 2003. Moreover, several organizations (including the World Health Organization, the National Academy of Sciences, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration) have advocated restricting the amount of antibiotic use in food animal production. However, commonly there are delays in regulatory and legislative actions to limit the use of antibiotics, attributable partly to resistance against such regulation by industries using or selling antibiotics, and to the time required for research to test causal links between their use and resistance to them. Two federal bills (S.742 and H.R. 2562) aimed at phasing out nontherapeutic use of antibiotics in US food animals were proposed, but have not passed. These bills were endorsed by public health and medical organizations, including the American Holistic Nurses' Association, the American Medical Association, and the American Public Health Association.\nDespite pledges by food companies and restaurants to reduce or eliminate meat that comes from animals treated with antibiotics, the purchase of antibiotics for use on farm animals has been increasing every year.\nThere has been extensive use of antibiotics in animal husbandry. In the United States, the question of emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains due to use of antibiotics in livestock was raised by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1977. In March 2012, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, ruling in an action brought by the Natural Resources Defense Council and others, ordered the FDA to revoke approvals for the use of antibiotics in livestock, which violated FDA regulations.\nStudies have shown that common misconceptions about the effectiveness and necessity of antibiotics to treat common mild illnesses contribute to their overuse.\nHistory.\nBefore the early 20th century, treatments for infections were based primarily on medicinal folklore. Mixtures with antimicrobial properties that were used in treatments of infections were described over 2,000 years ago. Many ancient cultures, including the ancient Egyptians and ancient Greeks, used specially selected mold and plant materials to treat infections. Nubian mummies studied in the 1990s were found to contain significant levels of tetracycline. The beer brewed at that time was conjectured to have been the source.\nThe use of antibiotics in modern medicine began with the discovery of synthetic antibiotics derived from dyes.\nSynthetic antibiotics derived from dyes.\nSynthetic antibiotic chemotherapy as a science and development of antibacterials began in Germany with Paul Ehrlich in the late 1880s. Ehrlich noted certain dyes would color human, animal, or bacterial cells, whereas others did not. He then proposed the idea that it might be possible to create chemicals that would act as a selective drug that would bind to and kill bacteria without harming the human host. After screening hundreds of dyes against various organisms, in 1907, he discovered a medicinally useful drug, the first synthetic antibacterial organoarsenic compound salvarsan, now called arsphenamine.\nThis heralded the era of antibacterial treatment that was begun with the discovery of a series of arsenic-derived synthetic antibiotics by both Alfred Bertheim and Ehrlich in 1907. Ehrlich and Bertheim had experimented with various chemicals derived from dyes to treat trypanosomiasis in mice and spirochaeta infection in rabbits. While their early compounds were too toxic, Ehrlich and Sahachiro Hata, a Japanese bacteriologist working with Erlich in the quest for a drug to treat syphilis, achieved success with the 606th compound in their series of experiments. In 1910 Ehrlich and Hata announced their discovery, which they called drug \"606\", at the Congress for Internal Medicine at Wiesbaden. The Hoechst company began to market the compound toward the end of 1910 under the name Salvarsan, now known as arsphenamine. The drug was used to treat syphilis in the first half of the 20th century. In 1908, Ehrlich received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his contributions to immunology. Hata was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 and for the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1912 and 1913.\nThe first sulfonamide and the first systemically active antibacterial drug, Prontosil, was developed by a research team led by Gerhard Domagk in 1932 or 1933 at the Bayer Laboratories of the IG Farben conglomerate in Germany, for which Domagk received the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Sulfanilamide, the active drug of Prontosil, was not patentable as it had already been in use in the dye industry for some years. Prontosil had a relatively broad effect against Gram-positive cocci, but not against enterobacteria. Research was stimulated apace by its success. The discovery and development of this sulfonamide drug opened the era of antibacterials.\nPenicillin and other natural antibiotics.\nObservations about the growth of some microorganisms inhibiting the growth of other microorganisms have been reported since the late 19th century. These observations of antibiosis between microorganisms led to the discovery of natural antibacterials. Louis Pasteur observed, \"if we could intervene in the antagonism observed between some bacteria, it would offer perhaps the greatest hopes for therapeutics\".\nIn 1874, physician Sir William Roberts noted that cultures of the mold \"Penicillium glaucum\" that is used in the making of some types of blue cheese did not display bacterial contamination. In 1876, physicist John Tyndall also contributed to this field. Pasteur conducted research showing that \"Bacillus anthracis\" would not grow in the presence of the related mold \"Penicillium notatum\".\nIn 1895 Vincenzo Tiberio, Italian physician, published a paper on the antibacterial power of some extracts of mold.\nIn 1897, doctoral student Ernest Duchesne submitted a dissertation, \"\" (Contribution to the study of vital competition in micro-organisms: antagonism between molds and microbes), the first known scholarly work to consider the therapeutic capabilities of molds resulting from their anti-microbial activity. In his thesis, Duchesne proposed that bacteria and molds engage in a perpetual battle for survival. Duchesne observed that \"E. coli\" was eliminated by \"Penicillium glaucum\" when they were both grown in the same culture. He also observed that when he inoculated laboratory animals with lethal doses of typhoid bacilli together with \"Penicillium glaucum\", the animals did not contract typhoid. Unfortunately Duchesne's army service after getting his degree prevented him from doing any further research. Duchesne died of tuberculosis, a disease now treated by antibiotics.\nIn 1928, Sir Alexander Fleming postulated the existence of penicillin, a molecule produced by certain molds that kills or stops the growth of certain kinds of bacteria. Fleming was working on a culture of disease-causing bacteria when he noticed the spores of a green mold, \"Penicillium chrysogenum\", in one of his culture plates. He observed that the presence of the mold killed or prevented the growth of the bacteria. Fleming postulated that the mold must secrete an antibacterial substance, which he named penicillin in 1928. Fleming believed that its antibacterial properties could be exploited for chemotherapy. He initially characterized some of its biological properties, and attempted to use a crude preparation to treat some infections, but he was unable to pursue its further development without the aid of trained chemists.\nErnst Chain, Howard Florey and Edward Abraham succeeded in purifying the first penicillin, penicillin G, in 1942, but it did not become widely available outside the Allied military before 1945. Later, Norman Heatley developed the back extraction technique for efficiently purifying penicillin in bulk. The chemical structure of penicillin was first proposed by Abraham in 1942 and then later confirmed by Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin in 1945. Purified penicillin displayed potent antibacterial activity against a wide range of bacteria and had low toxicity in humans. Furthermore, its activity was not inhibited by biological constituents such as pus, unlike the synthetic sulfonamides. (see below) The development of penicillin led to renewed interest in the search for antibiotic compounds with similar efficacy and safety. For their successful development of penicillin, which Fleming had accidentally discovered but could not develop himself, as a therapeutic drug, Chain and Florey shared the 1945 Nobel Prize in Medicine with Fleming.\nFlorey credited Rene Dubos with pioneering the approach of deliberately and systematically searching for antibacterial compounds, which had led to the discovery of gramicidin and had revived Florey's research in penicillin. In 1939, coinciding with the start of World War II, Dubos had reported the discovery of the first naturally derived antibiotic, tyrothricin, a compound of 20% gramicidin and 80% tyrocidine, from \"Bacillus brevis\". It was one of the first commercially manufactured antibiotics and was very effective in treating wounds and ulcers during World War II. Gramicidin, however, could not be used systemically because of toxicity. Tyrocidine also proved too toxic for systemic usage. Research results obtained during that period were not shared between the Axis and the Allied powers during World War II and limited access during the Cold War.\nLate 20th century.\nDuring the mid-20th century, the number of new antibiotic substances introduced for medical use increased significantly. From 1935 to 1968, 12 new classes were launched. However, after this, the number of new classes dropped markedly, with only two new classes introduced between 1969 and 2003.\nEtymology of the words 'antibiotic' and 'antibacterial'.\nThe term 'antibiosis', meaning \"against life\", was introduced by the French bacteriologist Jean Paul Vuillemin as a descriptive name of the phenomenon exhibited by these early antibacterial drugs. Antibiosis was first described in 1877 in bacteria when Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch observed that an airborne bacillus could inhibit the growth of \"Bacillus anthracis\". These drugs were later renamed antibiotics by Selman Waksman, an American microbiologist, in 1942.\nThe term \"antibiotic\" was first used in 1942 by Selman Waksman and his collaborators in journal articles to describe any substance produced by a microorganism that is antagonistic to the growth of other microorganisms in high dilution. This definition excluded substances that kill bacteria but that are not produced by microorganisms (such as gastric juices and hydrogen peroxide). It also excluded synthetic antibacterial compounds such as the sulfonamides. In current usage, the term \"antibiotic\" is applied to any medication that kills bacteria or inhibits their growth, regardless of whether that medication is produced by a microorganism or not.\nThe term \"antibiotic\" derives from \"anti\" + \u03b2\u03b9\u03c9\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 (\"bi\u014dtikos\"), \"fit for life, lively\", which comes from \u03b2\u03af\u03c9\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (\"bi\u014dsis\"), \"way of life\", and that from \u03b2\u03af\u03bf\u03c2 (\"bios\"), \"life\". The term \"antibacterial\" derives from Greek \u1f00\u03bd\u03c4\u03af (\"anti\"), \"against\" + \u03b2\u03b1\u03ba\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd (\"bakt\u0113rion\"), diminutive of \u03b2\u03b1\u03ba\u03c4\u03b7\u03c1\u03af\u03b1 (\"bakt\u0113ria\"), \"staff, cane\", because the first bacteria to be discovered were rod.\nAntibiotic pipeline.\nBoth the WHO and the Infectious Disease Society of America report that the weak antibiotic pipeline does not match bacteria's increasing ability to develop resistance. The Infectious Disease Society of America report noted that the number of new antibiotics approved for marketing per year had been declining and identified seven antibiotics against the Gram-negative bacilli currently in phase 2 or phase 3 clinical trials. However, these drugs did not address the entire spectrum of resistance of Gram-negative bacilli. According to the WHO fifty one new therapeutic entities - antibiotics (including combinations), are in phase 1-3 clinical trials as of May 2017. Antibiotics targeting multidrug-resistant Gram-positive pathogens remains a high priority.\nA few antibiotics have received marketing authorization in the last seven years. The cephalosporin ceftaroline and the lipoglycopeptides oritavancin and telavancin for the treatment of acute bacterial skin and skin structure infection and community-acquired bacterial pneumonia. The lipoglycopeptide dalbavancin and the oxazolidinone tedizolid has also been approved for use for the treatment of acute bacterial skin and skin structure infection. The first in a new class of narrow spectrum macrocyclic antibiotics, fidaxomicin, has been approved for the treatment of \"C. difficile\" colitis. New cephalosporin-lactamase inhibitor combinations also approved include ceftazidime-avibactam and ceftolozane-avibactam for complicated urinary tract infection and intra-abdominal infection.\nPossible improvements include clarification of clinical trial regulations by FDA. Furthermore, appropriate economic incentives could persuade pharmaceutical companies to invest in this endeavor. In the US, the Antibiotic Development to Advance Patient Treatment (ADAPT) Act was introduced with the aim of fast tracking the drug development of antibiotics to combat the growing threat of 'superbugs'. Under this Act, FDA can approve antibiotics and antifungals treating life-threatening infections based on smaller clinical trials. The CDC will monitor the use of antibiotics and the emerging resistance, and publish the data. The FDA antibiotics labeling process, 'Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Microbial Organisms' or 'breakpoints', will provide accurate data to healthcare professionals. According to Allan Coukell, senior director for health programs at The Pew Charitable Trusts, \"By allowing drug developers to rely on smaller datasets, and clarifying FDA's authority to tolerate a higher level of uncertainty for these drugs when making a risk/benefit calculation, ADAPT would make the clinical trials more feasible.\"\nReplenishing the antibiotic pipeline and developing other new therapies.\nBecause antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains continue to emerge and spread, there is a constant need to develop new antibacterial treatments. Current strategies include traditional chemistry-based approaches such as natural product-based drug discovery, newer chemistry-based approaches such as drug design, traditional biology-based approaches such as immunoglobulin therapy, and experimental biology-based approaches such as phage therapy, fecal microbiota transplants, antisense RNA-based treatments, and CRISPR-Cas9-based treatments.\nNatural product-based antibiotic discovery.\nMost of the antibiotics in current use are natural products or natural product derivatives, and bacterial, fungal, plant and animal extracts are being screened in the search for new antibiotics. Organisms may be selected for testing based on ecological, ethnomedical, genomic or historical rationales. Medicinal plants, for example, are screened on the basis that they are used by traditional healers to prevent or cure infection and may therefore contain antibacterial compounds. Also, soil bacteria are screened on the basis that, historically, they have been a very rich source of antibiotics (with 70 to 80% of antibiotics in current use derived from the actinomycetes).\nIn addition to screening natural products for direct antibacterial activity, they are sometimes screened for the ability to suppress antibiotic resistance and antibiotic tolerance. For example, some secondary metabolites inhibit drug efflux pumps, thereby increasing the concentration of antibiotic able to reach its cellular target and decreasing bacterial resistance to the antibiotic. Natural products known to inhibit bacterial efflux pumps include the alkaloid lysergol, the carotenoids capsanthin and capsorubin, and the flavonoids rotenone and chrysin. Other natural products, this time primary metabolites rather than secondary metabolites, have been shown to eradicate antibiotic tolerance. For example, glucose, mannitol, and fructose reduce antibiotic tolerance in \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Staphylococcus aureus\", rendering them more susceptible to killing by aminoglycoside antibiotics.\nNatural products may be screened for the ability to suppress bacterial virulence factors too. Virulence factors are molecules, cellular structures and regulatory systems that enable bacteria to evade the body\u2019s immune defenses (e.g. urease, staphyloxanthin), move towards, attach to, and/or invade human cells (e.g. type IV pili, adhesins, internalins), coordinate the activation of virulence genes (e.g. quorum sensing), and cause disease (e.g. exotoxins). Examples of natural products with antivirulence activity include the flavonoid epigallocatechin gallate (which inhibits listeriolysin O), the quinone tetrangomycin (which inhibits staphyloxanthin), and the sesquiterpene zerumbone (which inhibits \"Acinetobacter baumannii\" motility).\nImmunoglobulin therapy.\nAntibodies (anti-tetanus immunoglobulin) have been used in the treatment and prevention of tetanus since the 1910s, and this approach continues to be a useful way of controlling bacterial disease. The monoclonal antibody bezlotoxumab, for example, has been approved by the US FDA and EMA for recurrent \"Clostridium difficile\" infection, and other monoclonal antibodies are in development (e.g. AR-301 for the adjunctive treatment of \"S. aureus\" ventilator-associated pneumonia). Antibody treatments act by binding to and neutralizing bacterial exotoxins and other virulence factors.\nPhage therapy.\nPhage therapy is under investigation as a method of treating antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria. Phage therapy involves infecting bacterial pathogens with viruses. Bacteriophages and their host ranges are extremely specific for certain bacteria, thus, unlike antibiotics, they do not disturb the host organism\u2019s intestinal microbiota. Bacteriophages, also known simply as phages, infect and kill bacteria primarily during lytic cycles. Phages insert their DNA into the bacterium, where it is transcribed and used to make new phages, after which the cell will lyse, releasing new phage that are able to infect and destroy further bacteria of the same strain. The high specificity of phage protects \"good\" bacteria from destruction.\nSome disadvantages to the use of bacteriophages also exist, however. Bacteriophages may harbour virulence factors or toxic genes in their genomes and, prior to use, it may be prudent to identify genes with similarity to known virulence factors or toxins by genomic sequencing. In addition, the oral and IV administration of phages for the eradication of bacterial infections poses a much higher safety risk than topical application. Also, there is the additional concern of uncertain immune responses to these large antigenic cocktails.\nThere are considerable regulatory hurdles that must be cleared for such therapies. Despite numerous challenges, the use of bacteriophages as a replacement for antimicrobial agents against MDR pathogens that no longer respond to conventional antibiotics, remains an attractive option.\nFecal microbiota transplants.\nFecal microbiota transplants involve transferring the full intestinal microbiota from a healthy human donor (in the form of stool) to patients with \"C. difficile\" infection. Although this procedure has not been officially approved by the US FDA, its use is permitted under some conditions in patients with antibiotic-resistant \"C. difficile\" infection. Cure rates are around 90%, and work is underway to develop stool banks, standardized products, and methods of oral delivery.\nAntisense RNA-based treatments.\nAntisense RNA-based treatment (also known as gene silencing therapy) involves (a) identifying bacterial genes that encode essential proteins (e.g. the \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" genes \"acpP\", \"lpxC\", and \"rpsJ\"), (b) synthesizing single stranded RNA that is complementary to the mRNA encoding these essential proteins, and (c) delivering the single stranded RNA to the infection site using cell-penetrating peptides or liposomes. The antisense RNA then hybridizes with the bacterial mRNA and blocks its translation into the essential protein. Antisense RNA-based treatment has been shown to be effective in \"in vivo\" models of \"P. aeruginosa\" pneumonia.\nIn addition to silencing essential bacterial genes, antisense RNA can be used to silence bacterial genes responsible for antibiotic resistance. For example, antisense RNA has been developed that silences the \"S. aureus\" \"mecA\" gene (the gene that encodes modified penicillin-binding protein 2a and renders \"S. aureus\" strains methicillin-resistant). Antisense RNA targeting \"mecA\" mRNA has been shown to restore the susceptibility of methicillin-resistant staphylococci to oxacillin in both \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\" studies.\nCRISPR-Cas9-based treatments.\nIn the early 2000s, a system was discovered that enables bacteria to defend themselves against invading viruses. The system, known as CRISPR-Cas9, consists of (a) an enzyme that destroys DNA (the nuclease Cas9) and (b) the DNA sequences of previously encountered viral invaders (CRISPR). These viral DNA sequences enable the nuclease to target foreign (viral) rather than self (bacterial) DNA.\nAlthough the function of CRISPR-Cas9 in nature is to protect bacteria, the DNA sequences in the CRISPR component of the system can be modified so that the Cas9 nuclease targets bacterial resistance genes or bacterial virulence genes instead of viral genes. The modified CRISPR-Cas9 system can then be administered to bacterial pathogens using plasmids or bacteriophages. This approach has successfully been used to silence antibiotic resistance and reduce the virulence of enterohemorrhagic \"E. coli\" in an \"in vivo\" model of infection.\nReducing the selection pressure for antibiotic resistance.\nIn addition to developing new antibacterial treatments, it is important to reduce the selection pressure for the emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance. Strategies to accomplish this include well-established infection control measures such as infrastructure improvement (e.g. less crowded housing), better sanitation (e.g. safe drinking water and food) and vaccine development, other approaches such as antibiotic stewardship, and experimental approaches such as the use of prebiotics and probiotics to prevent infection.\nVaccines.\nVaccines rely on immune modulation or augmentation. Vaccination either excites or reinforces the immune competence of a host to ward off infection, leading to the activation of macrophages, the production of antibodies, inflammation, and other classic immune reactions. Antibacterial vaccines have been responsible for a drastic reduction in global bacterial diseases. Vaccines made from attenuated whole cells or lysates have been replaced largely by less reactogenic, cell-free vaccines consisting of purified components, including capsular polysaccharides and their conjugates, to protein carriers, as well as inactivated toxins (toxoids) and proteins."}
{"id": "1806", "revid": "13568690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1806", "title": "Arnold Schwarzenegger", "text": "Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger (; ; born July 30, 1947) is an Austrian-American actor, businessman, retired bodybuilder, and former politician who served as the 38th governor of California from 2003 to 2011. As of , he is the most recent Republican governor of California.\nSchwarzenegger began lifting weights at the age of 15 and went on to win the Mr. Universe title at age 20, subsequently winning the Mr. Olympia contest seven times; he remains a prominent figure in bodybuilding, and has written many books and articles on it. The Arnold Sports Festival, considered the second-most important bodybuilding event after Mr. Olympia, is named after him. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest bodybuilders of all time, if not the greatest, as well as the sport's most charismatic and famous ambassador.\nAfter retiring from bodybuilding, Schwarzenegger gained worldwide fame as a Hollywood action film star. Having previously appeared in the bodybuilding documentary \"Pumping Iron\" (1977), his breakthrough film was the sword-and-sorcery epic \"Conan the Barbarian\" (1982), a box-office hit that resulted in a sequel in 1984. He then appeared as the title character in the critically and commercially successful sci-fi film \"The Terminator\" (1984), and subsequently played similar characters in the sequels ' (1991), ' (2003), \"Terminator Genisys\" (2015), and \"\" (2019). He also starred in other successful action films such as \"Commando\" (1985), \"The Running Man\" (1987), \"Predator\" (1987), \"Total Recall\" (1990), and \"True Lies\" (1994), in addition to comedy films such as \"Twins\" (1988), \"Kindergarten Cop\" (1990), \"Junior\" (1994), and \"Jingle All the Way\" (1996), and one mixed action/thriller-based comedy, \"Red Heat\" (1988). He is the founder of the film production company Oak Productions.\nAs a Republican candidate, Schwarzenegger was first elected on October 7, 2003, in a special recall election to replace then-Governor Gray Davis. He received 48.6% of the vote, 17 points ahead of Democrat runner-up Cruz Bustamante. He was sworn in on November 17 to serve the remainder of Davis' term, and was re-elected in the 2006 California gubernatorial election with an increased vote share of 55.9% to serve a full term as governor. In 2011, he reached his term limit as Governor and returned to his career in acting.\nSchwarzenegger was nicknamed the \"Austrian Oak\" in his bodybuilding days, \"Arnie\" or \"Schwarzy\" during his acting career, and \"The Governator\" (a blend of \"Governor\" and \"Terminator\") during his political career. He married Maria Shriver, the niece of President John F. Kennedy, in 1986. They separated in 2011 after he admitted to having fathered a child with their housemaid in 1997, and their divorce was finalized in 2017.\nEarly life.\nArnold Alois Schwarzenegger was born in Thal, Austria on July 30, 1947, the second son of Aurelia (n\u00e9e Jadrny) and Gustav Schwarzenegger. His mother was of Czech descent, while his paternal great-grandfather, Wenzel Mach, was also Czech and came from the village of Chocov near Mlad\u00e1 Vo\u017eice. Wenzel had a child out of wedlock with Kunigunde Schwarzenegger, and the child (Schwarzenegger's paternal grandfather) was originally named Carl Mach but later adopted his mother's surname Schwarzenegger. \nSchwarzenegger's father was the local chief of police and had served in World War II as a \"Hauptfeldwebel\" after voluntarily joining the Nazi Party in 1938. He was wounded in the Battle of Stalingrad, but was discharged in 1943 following a bout of malaria. He married Aurelia on October 20, 1945; he was 38 and she was 23. Later in his life, Schwarzenegger commissioned the Jewish activist group Simon Wiesenthal Center to research his father's wartime record, which came up with no evidence of Gustav being involved in war crimes during his service in the Nazi Party and Sturmabteilung (SA). Gustav's background received wide press attention during the 2003 California gubernatorial recall election in which Schwarzenegger was elected governor.\nAccording to Schwarzenegger, his parents were very strict: \"Back then in Austria it was a very different world [...] if we did something bad or we disobeyed our parents, the rod was not spared.\" He grew up in a Catholic family who attended Mass every Sunday. Gustav had a preference for his elder son, Meinhard, over Arnold. His favoritism was \"strong and blatant\", which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that Arnold was not his biological child. Schwarzenegger has said that his father had \"no patience for listening or understanding your problems\". He had a good relationship with his mother, with whom he kept in touch until her death.\nEarly education and bodybuilding beginnings.\nAt school, Schwarzenegger was reportedly academically average, but stood out for his \"cheerful, good-humored, and exuberant\" character. Money was a problem in their household; Schwarzenegger recalled that one of the highlights of his youth was when the family bought a refrigerator. Schwarzenegger's father Gustav was an athlete, and wished for his sons to become a champion in Bavarian curling. Influenced by his father, Schwarzenegger played several sports as a boy. \nSchwarzenegger began weight training in 1960 when his soccer coach took his team to a local gym. At the age of 14, he chose bodybuilding over soccer as a career. He later said, \"I actually started weight training when I was 15, but I'd been participating in sports, like soccer, for years, so I felt that although I was slim, I was well-developed, at least enough so that I could start going to the gym and start Olympic lifting.\" However, his official website biography claims that \"at 14, he started an intensive training program with Dan Farmer, studied psychology at 15 (to learn more about the power of mind over body) and at 17, officially started his competitive career.\" During a speech in 2001, he said, \"My own plan formed when I was 14 years old. My father had wanted me to be a police officer like he was. My mother wanted me to go to trade school.\"\nSchwarzenegger took to visiting a gym in Graz, where he also frequented the local movie theaters to see bodybuilding idols such as Reg Park, Steve Reeves, and Johnny Weissmuller on the big screen. When Reeves died in 2000, Schwarzenegger fondly remembered him: \"As a teenager, I grew up with Steve Reeves. His remarkable accomplishments allowed me a sense of what was possible when others around me didn't always understand my dreams. Steve Reeves has been part of everything I've ever been fortunate enough to achieve.\" In 1961, Schwarzenegger met former Mr. Austria Kurt Marnul, who invited him to train at the gym in Graz. He was so dedicated as a youngster that he broke into the local gym on weekends in order to train even when it was closed. \"It would make me sick to miss a workout... I knew I couldn't look at myself in the mirror the next morning if I didn't do it.\" When Schwarzenegger was asked about his first cinema experience as a boy, he replied: \"I was very young, but I remember my father taking me to the Austrian theaters and seeing some newsreels. The first real movie I saw, that I distinctly remember, was a John Wayne movie.\" In Graz, Schwarzenegger was mentored by Alfred Gerstl, who had Jewish ancestry and later became president of the Federal Council, and befriended his son Karl.\nSchwarzenegger's brother, Meinhard, died in a car crash on May 20, 1971. He was driving drunk and died instantly. Schwarzenegger did not attend his funeral. Meinhard was engaged to Erika Knapp, and they had a three-year-old son named Patrick. Schwarzenegger paid for Patrick's education and helped him to move to the U.S. Gustav died of a stroke on December 13, 1972. In \"Pumping Iron\", Schwarzenegger claimed that he did not attend his father's funeral because he was training for a bodybuilding contest. Later, he and the film's producer said this story was taken from another bodybuilder to show the extremes some would go to for their sport and to make Schwarzenegger's image colder to create controversy for the film. However, Barbara Baker, his first serious girlfriend, recalled that he informed her of his father's death without emotion and that he never spoke of his brother. Over time, he has given at least three versions of why he was absent from his father's funeral.\nIn an interview with \"Fortune\" in 2004, Schwarzenegger told how he suffered what \"would now be called child abuse\" at the hands of his father: \"My hair was pulled. I was hit with belts. So was the kid next door. It was just the way it was. Many of the children I've seen were broken by their parents, which was the German-Austrian mentality. They didn't want to create an individual. It was all about conforming. I was one who did not conform, and whose will could not be broken. Therefore, I became a rebel. Every time I got hit, and every time someone said, 'You can't do this,' I said, 'This is not going to be for much longer because I'm going to move out of here. I want to be rich. I want to be somebody.'\"\nSchwarzenegger served in the Austrian Army in 1965 to fulfill the one year of service required at the time of all 18-year-old Austrian males. During his army service, he won the Junior Mr. Europe contest. He went AWOL during basic training so he could take part in the competition and then spent a week in military prison: \"Participating in the competition meant so much to me that I didn't carefully think through the consequences.\" He entered another bodybuilding contest in Graz, at Steirerhof Hotel, where he placed second. He was voted \"best-built man of Europe\", which made him famous in bodybuilding circles. \"The Mr. Universe title was my ticket to America\u2014the land of opportunity, where I could become a star and get rich.\" Schwarzenegger made his first plane trip in 1966, attending the NABBA Mr. Universe competition in London. He placed second in the Mr. Universe competition, not having the muscle definition of American winner Chester Yorton.\nCharles \"Wag\" Bennett, one of the judges at the 1966 competition, was impressed with Schwarzenegger and he offered to coach him. As Schwarzenegger had little money, Bennett invited him to stay in his crowded family home above one of his two gyms in Forest Gate, London. Yorton's leg definition had been judged superior, and Schwarzenegger, under a training program devised by Bennett, concentrated on improving the muscle definition and power in his legs. Staying in the East End of London helped Schwarzenegger improve his rudimentary grasp of the English language. Living with the Bennetts also changed him as a person: \"Being with them made me so much more sophisticated. When you're the age I was then, you're always looking for approval, for love, for attention and also for guidance. At the time, I wasn't really aware of that. But now, looking back, I see that the Bennett family fulfilled all those needs. Especially my need to be the best in the world. To be recognized and to feel unique and special. They saw that I needed that care and attention and love.\"\nAlso in 1966, while at Bennett's home, Schwarzenegger had the opportunity to meet childhood idol Reg Park, who became his friend and mentor. The training paid off and, in 1967, Schwarzenegger won the title for the first time, becoming the youngest ever Mr. Universe at the age of 20. He would go on to win the title a further three times. Schwarzenegger then flew back to Munich, where he attended a business school and worked in a health club (Rolf Putziger's gym, where he worked and trained from 1966 to 1968), returning in 1968 to London to win his next Mr. Universe title. He frequently told Roger C. Field, his English coach and friend in Munich at that time, \"I'm going to become the greatest actor!\"\nSchwarzenegger, who dreamed of moving to the U.S. since the age of 10, and saw bodybuilding as the avenue through which to do so, realized his dream by moving to the United States in October 1968 at the age of 21, speaking little English. There he trained at Gold's Gym in Venice, Los Angeles, California, under Joe Weider's supervision. From 1970 to 1974, one of Schwarzenegger's weight training partners was Ric Drasin, a professional wrestler who designed the original Gold's Gym logo in 1973. Schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler Superstar Billy Graham. In 1970, at age 23, he captured his first Mr. Olympia title in New York, and would go on to win the title a total of seven times.\nThe immigration law firm Siskind &amp; Susser has stated that Schwarzenegger may have been an illegal immigrant at some point in the late 1960s or early 1970s because of violations in the terms of his visa. \"LA Weekly\" would later say in 2002 that Schwarzenegger is the most famous immigrant in America, who \"overcame a thick Austrian accent and transcended the unlikely background of bodybuilding to become the biggest movie star in the world in the 1990s\".\nIn 1977, Schwarzenegger's autobiography/weight-training guide \"Arnold: The Education of a Bodybuilder\" became a huge success. In 1977, he posed for the gay magazine \"After Dark\". Due to taking an assortment of courses at Santa Monica College in California (including English classes), as well as further upper division classes at the University of California, Los Angeles as part of UCLA's extension program, Schwarzenegger had by then accumulated enough credits so as to be \"within striking distance\" of graduation. In 1979, he enrolled in the University of Wisconsin\u2013Superior as a distance education student, completing most of his coursework by correspondence and flying out to Superior to meet professors and take final exams. In May 1980, he formally graduated and received his bachelor's degree in business administration and marketing. He got his United States citizenship in 1983.\nSchwarzenegger said that during this time he encountered a friend who told him he was teaching Transcendental Meditation (TM), which prompted Schwarzenegger to reveal that he had been struggling with anxiety for the first time in his life: \"Even today, I still benefit from [the year of TM] because I don't merge and bring things together and see everything as one big problem.\"\nBodybuilding career.\n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \n \nSchwarzenegger is considered among the most important figures in the history of bodybuilding, and his legacy is commemorated in the Arnold Classic annual bodybuilding competition. He has remained a prominent face in bodybuilding long after his retirement, in part because of his ownership of gyms and fitness magazines. He has presided over numerous contests and awards shows.\nFor many years, he wrote a monthly column for the bodybuilding magazines \"Muscle &amp; Fitness\" and \"Flex\". Shortly after being elected governor, he was appointed the executive editor of both magazines, in a largely symbolic capacity. The magazines agreed to donate $250,000 a year to the Governor's various physical fitness initiatives. When the deal, including the contract that gave Schwarzenegger at least $1\u00a0million a year, was made public in 2005, many criticized it as being a conflict of interest since the governor's office made decisions concerning regulation of dietary supplements in California. Consequently, Schwarzenegger relinquished the executive editor role in 2005. American Media Inc., which owns \"Muscle &amp; Fitness\" and \"Flex\", announced in March 2013 that Schwarzenegger had accepted their renewed offer to be executive editor of the magazines.\nOne of the first competitions he won was the Junior Mr. Europe contest in 1965. He won Mr. Europe the following year, at age 19. He would go on to compete in many bodybuilding contests, and win most of them. His bodybuilding victories included five Mr. Universe wins (4\u00a0\u2013 NABBA [England], 1\u00a0\u2013 IFBB [USA]), and seven Mr. Olympia wins, a record which would stand until Lee Haney won his eighth consecutive Mr. Olympia title in 1991.\nSchwarzenegger continues to work out. When asked about his personal training during the 2011 Arnold Classic he said that he was still working out a half an hour with weights every day.\nPowerlifting/weightlifting.\nDuring Schwarzenegger's early years in bodybuilding, he also competed in several Olympic weightlifting and powerlifting contests. Schwarzenegger's first professional competition was in 1963 and he won two weightlifting contests in 1964 and 1965, as well as two powerlifting contests in 1966 and 1968.\nIn 1967, Schwarzenegger won the Munich stone-lifting contest, in which a stone weighing 508 German pounds (254\u00a0kg / 560\u00a0lb) is lifted between the legs while standing on two footrests.\nMr. Olympia.\nSchwarzenegger's goal was to become the greatest bodybuilder in the world, which meant becoming Mr. Olympia. His first attempt was in 1969, when he lost to three-time champion Sergio Oliva. However, Schwarzenegger came back in 1970 and won the competition, making him the youngest ever Mr. Olympia at the age of 23, a record he still holds to this day.\nHe continued his winning streak in the 1971\u201374 competitions. He also toured different countries selling vitamins, as in Helsinki, Finland in 1972, when he lived at the YMCA Hotel Hospiz (nowadays Hotel Arthur) on Vuorikatu and presented vitamin pills at the Stockmann shopping center. In 1975, Schwarzenegger was once again in top form, and won the title for the sixth consecutive time, beating Franco Columbu. After the 1975 Mr. Olympia contest, Schwarzenegger announced his retirement from professional bodybuilding.\nMonths before the 1975 Mr. Olympia contest, filmmakers George Butler and Robert Fiore persuaded Schwarzenegger to compete and film his training in the bodybuilding documentary called \"Pumping Iron.\" Schwarzenegger had only three months to prepare for the competition, after losing significant weight to appear in the film \"Stay Hungry\" with Jeff Bridges. Although significantly taller and heavier, Lou Ferrigno proved not to be a threat, and a lighter-than-usual Schwarzenegger convincingly won the 1975 Mr. Olympia.\nSchwarzenegger came out of retirement, however, to compete in the 1980 Mr. Olympia. Schwarzenegger was training for his role in \"Conan\", and he got into such good shape because of the running, horseback riding and sword training, that he decided he wanted to win the Mr. Olympia contest one last time. He kept this plan a secret in the event that a training accident would prevent his entry and cause him to lose face. Schwarzenegger had been hired to provide color commentary for network television when he announced at the eleventh hour that, while he was there, \"Why not compete?\" Schwarzenegger ended up winning the event with only seven weeks of preparation. Having been declared Mr. Olympia for a seventh time, Schwarzenegger then officially retired from competition. This victory (subject of the documentary \"The Comeback\") was highly controversial, though, as fellow competitors and many observers felt that his lack of muscle mass (especially in his thighs) and subpar conditioning shouldn't have allowed him to go ahead of a very competitive lineup that year; Mike Mentzer, in particular, felt cheated and withdrew from competitive bodybuilding after that contest.\nSteroid use.\nSchwarzenegger has acknowledged using performance-enhancing anabolic steroids while they were legal, writing in 1977 that \"steroids were helpful to me in maintaining muscle size while on a strict diet in preparation for a contest. I did not use them for muscle growth, but rather for muscle maintenance when cutting up.\" He has called the drugs \"tissue building\".\nIn 1999, Schwarzenegger sued Willi Heepe, a German doctor who publicly predicted his early death on the basis of a link between his steroid use and later heart problems. Since the doctor never examined him personally, Schwarzenegger collected a US$10,000 libel judgment against him in a German court. In 1999, Schwarzenegger also sued and settled with \"Globe\", a U.S. tabloid which had made similar predictions about the bodybuilder's future health.\nActing career.\nEarly roles.\nSchwarzenegger wanted to move from bodybuilding into acting, finally achieving it when he was chosen to play the title role in \"Hercules in New York\" (1970). Credited under the stage name \"Arnold Strong\", his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production. His second film appearance was as a deaf-mute mob hitman in \"The Long Goodbye\" (1973), which was followed by a much more significant part in the film \"Stay Hungry\" (1976), for which he won the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year \u2013 Actor. Schwarzenegger has discussed his early struggles in developing his acting career: \"It was very difficult for me in the beginning\u00a0\u2013 I was told by agents and casting people that my body was 'too weird', that I had a funny accent, and that my name was too long. You name it, and they told me I had to change it. Basically, everywhere I turned, I was told that I had no chance.\"\nSchwarzenegger drew attention and boosted his profile in the bodybuilding film \"Pumping Iron\" (1977), elements of which were dramatized. In 1991, he purchased the rights to the film, its outtakes, and associated still photography. In 1977, he made guest appearances in single episodes of the ABC sitcom \"The San Pedro Beach Bums\" and the ABC police procedural \"The Streets of San Francisco\". Schwarzenegger auditioned for the title role of \"The Incredible Hulk\", but did not win the role because of his height. Later, Lou Ferrigno got the part of Dr. David Banner's alter ego. Schwarzenegger appeared with Kirk Douglas and Ann-Margret in the 1979 comedy \"The Villain\". In 1980, he starred in a biographical film of the 1950s actress Jayne Mansfield as Mansfield's husband, Mickey Hargitay.\nAction superstar.\nSchwarzenegger's breakthrough film was the sword-and-sorcery epic \"Conan the Barbarian\" in 1982, which was a box-office hit. This was followed by a sequel, \"Conan the Destroyer\", in 1984, although it was not as successful as its predecessor. In 1983, Schwarzenegger starred in the promotional video, \"Carnival in Rio\". In 1984, he made his first appearance as the eponymous character, and what some would say was his acting career's signature role, in James Cameron's science fiction thriller film \"The Terminator\". Following this, Schwarzenegger made \"Red Sonja\" in 1985. During the 1980s, audiences had an appetite for action films, with both Schwarzenegger and Sylvester Stallone becoming international stars. The two rivals attacked each other in the press, and tried to surpass the other with more on-screen killings and larger weapons. Schwarzenegger's roles reflected his sense of humor, separating him from more serious action hero films. He made a number of successful action films in the 1980s, such as \"Commando\" (1985), \"Raw Deal\" (1986), \"The Running Man\" (1987), \"Predator\" (1987), and \"Red Heat\" (1988).\n\"Twins\" (1988), a comedy with Danny DeVito, also proved successful. \"Total Recall\" (1990) netted Schwarzenegger $10\u00a0million (equivalent to $ million today) and 15% of the film's gross. A science fiction script, the film was based on the Philip K. Dick short story \"We Can Remember It for You Wholesale\". \"Kindergarten Cop\" (1990) reunited him with director Ivan Reitman, who directed him in \"Twins\". Schwarzenegger had a brief foray into directing, first with a 1990 episode of the TV series \"Tales from the Crypt\", entitled \"The Switch\", and then with the 1992 telemovie \"Christmas in Connecticut\". He has not directed since.\nSchwarzenegger's commercial peak was his return as the title character in 1991's \"\", which was the highest-grossing film of 1991. In 1993, the National Association of Theatre Owners named him the \"International Star of the Decade\". His next film project, the 1993 self-aware action comedy spoof \"Last Action Hero\", was released opposite \"Jurassic Park\", and did not do well at the box office. His next film, the comedy drama \"True Lies\" (1994), was a popular spy film and saw Schwarzenegger reunited with James Cameron.\nThat same year, the comedy \"Junior\" was released, the last of Schwarzenegger's three collaborations with Ivan Reitman and again co-starring Danny DeVito. This film brought him his second Golden Globe nomination, this time for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. It was followed by the action thriller \"Eraser\" (1996), the Christmas comedy \"Jingle All The Way\" (1996), and the comic book-based \"Batman &amp; Robin\" (1997), in which he played the villain Mr. Freeze. This was his final film before taking time to recuperate from a back injury. Following the critical failure of \"Batman &amp; Robin\", his film career and box office prominence went into decline. He returned with the supernatural thriller \"End of Days\" (1999), later followed by the action films \"The 6th Day\" (2000) and \"Collateral Damage\" (2002), both of which failed to do well at the box office. In 2003, he made his third appearance as the title character in \"\", which went on to earn over $150\u00a0million domestically (equivalent to $ million today).\nIn tribute to Schwarzenegger in 2002, Forum Stadtpark, a local cultural association, proposed plans to build a \"Terminator\" statue in a park in central Graz. Schwarzenegger reportedly said he was flattered, but thought the money would be better spent on social projects and the Special Olympics.\nRetirement.\nHis film appearances after becoming Governor of California included a three-second cameo appearance in \"The Rundown\" and the 2004 remake of \"Around the World in 80 Days\". In 2005, he appeared as himself in the film \"The Kid &amp; I\". He voiced Baron von Steuben in the \"Liberty's Kids\" episode \"Valley Forge\". He had been rumored to be appearing in \"Terminator Salvation\" as the original T-800; he denied his involvement, but he ultimately did appear briefly via his image being inserted into the movie from stock footage of the first \"Terminator\" movie. Schwarzenegger appeared in Sylvester Stallone's \"The Expendables\", where he made a cameo appearance.\nReturn to acting.\nIn January 2011, just weeks after leaving office in California, Schwarzenegger announced that he was reading several new scripts for future films, one of them being the World War II action drama \"With Wings as Eagles\", written by Randall Wallace, based on a true story.\nOn March 6, 2011, at the Arnold Seminar of the Arnold Classic, Schwarzenegger revealed that he was being considered for several films, including sequels to \"The Terminator\" and remakes of \"Predator\" and \"The Running Man\", and that he was \"packaging\" a comic book character. The character was later revealed to be the Governator, star of the comic book and animated series of the same name. Schwarzenegger inspired the character and co-developed it with Stan Lee, who would have produced the series. Schwarzenegger would have voiced the Governator.\nOn May 20, 2011, Schwarzenegger's entertainment counsel announced that all film projects currently in development were being halted: \"Schwarzenegger is focusing on personal matters and is not willing to commit to any production schedules or timelines.\" On July 11, 2011, it was announced that Schwarzenegger was considering a comeback film, despite legal problems related to his divorce. He appeared in \"The Expendables 2\" (2012), and starred in \"The Last Stand\" (2013), his first leading role in 10 years, and \"Escape Plan\" (2013), his first co-starring role alongside Sylvester Stallone. He starred in \"Sabotage\", released in March 2014, and appeared in \"The Expendables 3\", released in August 2014. He starred in the fifth Terminator film \"Terminator Genisys\" in 2015, and would reprise his role as Conan the Barbarian in \"The Legend of Conan\", later renamed \"Conan the Conqueror.\" However, in April 2017, producer Chris Morgan stated that Universal had dropped the project, although there was a possibility of a TV show. The story of the film was supposed to be set 30 years after the first, with some inspiration from Clint Eastwood's \"Unforgiven\".\nIn August 2016, his filming of action-comedy \"Why We're Killing Gunther\" was temporarily interrupted by bank robbers near the filming location in Surrey, British Columbia. He was announced to star and produce in a film about the ruins of Sanxingdui called \"The Guest of Sanxingdui\" as an ambassador.\nOn February 6, 2018, Amazon Studios announced they were working with Schwarzenegger to develop a new series entitled \"Outrider\" in which he will star and executive produce. The western-drama set in the Oklahoma Indian Territory in the late 19th century will follow a deputy (portrayed by Schwarzenegger) who is tasked with apprehending a legendary outlaw in the wilderness, but is forced to partner with a ruthless Federal Marshal to make sure justice is properly served. The series will also mark as Schwarzenegger's first major scripted TV role.\nSchwarzenegger returned to the \"Terminator\" franchise with \"\", which was released on November 1, 2019. It was produced by the series' co-creator James Cameron, who directed him previously in the first two films in the series and in \"True Lies\". It was shot in Almer\u00eda, Hungary and the US.\n\"The Celebrity Apprentice\".\nIn September 2015, the media announced that Schwarzenegger was to replace Donald Trump as host of \"The New Celebrity Apprentice\". This show, the 15th season of \"The Apprentice\", aired during the 2016\u20132017 TV season. In the show, he used the phrases \"you're terminated\" and \"get to the choppa\", which are quotes from some of his famous roles (\"The Terminator\" and \"Predator\", respectively), when firing the contestants.\nIn March 2017, following repeated criticisms from Trump, Schwarzenegger announced that he would not return for another season on the show. He also reacted to Trump's remarks in January 2017 via Instagram: \"Hey, Donald, I have a great idea. Why don't we switch jobs? You take over TV because you're such an expert in ratings, and I take over your job, and then people can finally sleep comfortably again.\"\nPolitical career.\nEarly politics.\nSchwarzenegger has been a registered Republican for many years. When he was an actor, his political views were always well known as they contrasted with those of many other prominent Hollywood stars, who are generally considered to be a liberal and Democratic-leaning community. At the 2004 Republican National Convention, Schwarzenegger gave a speech and explained he was a Republican because the Democrats of the 1960s sounded too much like Austrian socialists.\nIn 1985, Schwarzenegger appeared in \"Stop the Madness\", an anti-drug music video sponsored by the Reagan administration. He first came to wide public notice as a Republican during the 1988 presidential election, accompanying then\u2013Vice President George H. W. Bush at a campaign rally.\nSchwarzenegger's first political appointment was as chairman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, on which he served from 1990 to 1993. He was nominated by the now-President Bush, who dubbed him \"Conan the Republican\". He later served as chairman for the California Governor's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports under Governor Pete Wilson.\nBetween 1993 and 1994, Schwarzenegger was a Red Cross ambassador (a ceremonial role fulfilled by celebrities), recording several television and radio public service announcements to donate blood.\nIn an interview with \"Talk\" magazine in late 1999, Schwarzenegger was asked if he thought of running for office. He replied, \"I think about it many times. The possibility is there because I feel it inside.\" \"The Hollywood Reporter\" claimed shortly after that Schwarzenegger sought to end speculation that he might run for governor of California. Following his initial comments, Schwarzenegger said, \"I'm in show business\u00a0\u2013 I am in the middle of my career. Why would I go away from that and jump into something else?\"\nGovernor of California.\nSchwarzenegger announced his candidacy in the 2003 California recall election for Governor of California on the August 6, 2003 episode of \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\". Schwarzenegger had the most name recognition in a crowded field of candidates, but he had never held public office and his political views were unknown to most Californians. His candidacy immediately became national and international news, with media outlets dubbing him the \"Governator\" (referring to \"The Terminator\" movies, see above) and \"The Running Man\" (the name of another one of his films), and calling the recall election \"Total Recall\" (yet another movie starring Schwarzenegger). Schwarzenegger declined to participate in several debates with other recall replacement candidates, and appeared in only one debate on September 24, 2003.\nOn October 7, 2003, the recall election resulted in Governor Gray Davis being removed from office with 55.4% of the \"Yes\" vote in favor of a recall. Schwarzenegger was elected Governor of California under the second question on the ballot with 48.6% of the vote to choose a successor to Davis. Schwarzenegger defeated Democrat Cruz Bustamante, fellow Republican Tom McClintock, and others. His nearest rival, Bustamante, received 31% of the vote. In total, Schwarzenegger won the election by about 1.3\u00a0million votes. Under the regulations of the California Constitution, no runoff election was required. Schwarzenegger was the second foreign-born governor of California after Irish-born Governor John G. Downey in 1862.\nSchwarzenegger is a moderate Republican. He says he is fiscally conservative and socially liberal. On the issue of abortion, he describes himself as pro-choice, but supports parental notification for minors and a ban on partial-birth abortion. He has supported gay rights, such as domestic partnerships, and he performed a same-sex marriage as Governor. However, Schwarzenegger vetoed bills that would have legalized same-sex marriage in California in 2005 and 2007.\nSchwarzenegger was entrenched in what he considered to be his mandate in cleaning up political gridlock. Building on a catchphrase from the sketch \"Hans and Franz\" from \"Saturday Night Live\" (which partly parodied his bodybuilding career), Schwarzenegger called the Democratic State politicians \"girlie men\".\nSchwarzenegger's early victories included repealing an unpopular increase in the vehicle registration fee as well as preventing driver's licenses from being given out to illegal immigrants, but later he began to feel the backlash when powerful state unions began to oppose his various initiatives. Key among his reckoning with political realities was a special election he called in November 2005, in which four ballot measures he sponsored were defeated. Schwarzenegger accepted personal responsibility for the defeats and vowed to continue to seek consensus for the people of California. He would later comment that \"no one could win if the opposition raised 160\u00a0million dollars to defeat you\". The U.S. Supreme Court later found the public employee unions' use of compulsory fundraising during the campaign had been illegal in \"Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000\".\nSchwarzenegger, against the advice of fellow Republican strategists, appointed a Democrat, Susan Kennedy, as his Chief of Staff. He gradually moved towards a more politically moderate position, determined to build a winning legacy with only a short time to go until the next gubernatorial election.\nSchwarzenegger ran for re-election against Democrat Phil Angelides, the California State Treasurer, in the 2006 elections, held on November 7, 2006. Despite a poor year nationally for the Republican party, Schwarzenegger won re-election with 56.0% of the vote compared with 38.9% for Angelides, a margin of well over 1 million votes. Around this time, many commentators saw Schwarzenegger as moving away from the right and towards the center of the political spectrum. After hearing a speech by Schwarzenegger at the 2006 Martin Luther King Jr. Day breakfast, in which Schwarzenegger said, in part \"How wrong I was when I said everyone has an equal opportunity to make it in America [...] the state of California does not provide (equal) education for all of our children\", San Francisco mayor &amp; future governor of California Gavin Newsom said that \"[H]e's becoming a Democrat [... H]e's running back, not even to the center. I would say center-left\".\nSome speculated that Schwarzenegger might run for the United States Senate in 2010, as his governorship would be term-limited by that time. Such rumors turned out to be false.\nWendy Leigh, who wrote an unofficial biography on Schwarzenegger, claims he plotted his political rise from an early age using the movie business and bodybuilding as the means to escape a depressing home. Leigh portrays Schwarzenegger as obsessed with power and quotes him as saying, \"I wanted to be part of the small percentage of people who were leaders, not the large mass of followers. I think it is because I saw leaders use 100% of their potential\u00a0\u2013 I was always fascinated by people in control of other people.\" Schwarzenegger has said that it was never his intention to enter politics, but he says, \"I married into a political family. You get together with them and you hear about policy, about reaching out to help people. I was exposed to the idea of being a public servant and Eunice and Sargent Shriver became my heroes.\" Eunice Kennedy Shriver was the sister of John F. Kennedy, and mother-in-law to Schwarzenegger; Sargent Shriver is husband to Eunice and father-in-law to Schwarzenegger.\nSchwarzenegger cannot run for U.S. president as he is not a natural-born citizen of the United States. Schwarzenegger is a dual Austrian and United States citizen. He has held Austrian citizenship since birth and U.S. citizenship since becoming naturalized in 1983. Being Austrian and thus European, he was able to win the 2007 European Voice campaigner of the year award for taking action against climate change with the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 and plans to introduce an emissions trading scheme with other US states and possibly with the EU.\nBecause of his personal wealth from his acting career, Schwarzenegger did not accept his governor's salary of $175,000 per year.\nSchwarzenegger's endorsement in the Republican primary of the 2008 U.S. presidential election was highly sought; despite being good friends with candidates Rudy Giuliani and Senator John McCain, Schwarzenegger remained neutral throughout 2007 and early 2008. Giuliani dropped out of the presidential race on January 30, 2008, largely because of a poor showing in Florida, and endorsed McCain. Later that night, Schwarzenegger was in the audience at a Republican debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in California. The following day, he endorsed McCain, joking, \"It's Rudy's fault!\" (in reference to his friendships with both candidates and that he could not make up his mind). Schwarzenegger's endorsement was thought to be a boost for Senator McCain's campaign; both spoke about their concerns for the environment and economy.\nIn its April 2010 report, Progressive ethics watchdog group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington named Schwarzenegger one of 11 \"worst governors\" in the United States because of various ethics issues throughout Schwarzenegger's term as governor.\nGovernor Schwarzenegger played a significant role in opposing Proposition 66, a proposed amendment of the Californian Three Strikes Law, in November 2004. This amendment would have required the third felony to be either violent or serious to mandate a 25-years-to-life sentence. In the last week before the ballot, Schwarzenegger launched an intensive campaign against Proposition 66. He stated that \"it would release 26,000 dangerous criminals and rapists\".\nAlthough he began his tenure as governor with record high approval ratings (as high as 65% in May 2004), he left office with a record low 23%, only one percent higher than that of Gray Davis, when he was recalled in October 2003.\nDeath of Louis Santos.\nIn May 2010, Esteban N\u00fa\u00f1ez pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter and was sentenced to 16 years in prison for the death of Louis Santos. N\u00fa\u00f1ez is the son of Fabian N\u00fa\u00f1ez, then California Assembly Speaker of the House and a close friend and staunch political ally of then governor Schwarzenegger.\nAs a personal favor to \"a friend\", just hours before he left office, and as one of his last official acts, Schwarzenegger commuted N\u00fa\u00f1ez's sentence by more than half, to seven years. Against protocol, Schwarzenegger did not inform Santos' family or the San Diego County prosecutors about the commutation. They learned about it in a call from a reporter.\nThe Santos family, along with the San Diego district attorney, sued to stop the commutation, claiming that it violated Marsy's Law. In September 2012, Sacramento County superior court judge Lloyd Connelly stated, \"Based on the evidentiary records before this court involving this case, there was an abuse of discretion...This was a distasteful commutation. It was repugnant to the bulk of the citizenry of this state.\" However, Connelly ruled that Schwarzenegger remained within his executive powers as governor. Subsequently, as a direct result of the way the commutation was handled, Governor Jerry Brown signed a bipartisan bill that allows offenders' victims and their families to be notified at least 10 days before any commutations. N\u00fa\u00f1ez was released from prison after serving less than six years.\nDrug use and allegations of sexual misconduct.\nDuring his initial campaign for governor in 2003, allegations of sexual and personal misconduct were raised against Schwarzenegger. Within the last five days before the election, news reports appeared in the \"Los Angeles Times\" recounting decades old allegations of sexual misconduct from six individual women. Schwarzenegger responded to the allegations in 2004 admitting that he has \"behaved badly sometimes\" and apologized, but also stated that \"a lot of [what] you see in the stories is not true\". One of the women who came forward was British television personality Anna Richardson, who settled a libel lawsuit in August 2006 against Schwarzenegger; his top aide, Sean Walsh; and his publicist, Sheryl Main. A joint statement read: \"The parties are content to put this matter behind them and are pleased that this legal dispute has now been settled.\"\nDuring this time a 1977 interview in adult magazine \"Oui\" gained attention, in which Schwarzenegger discussed using substances such as marijuana. Schwarzenegger is shown smoking a marijuana joint after winning Mr. Olympia in 1975 in the documentary film \"Pumping Iron\" (1977). In an interview with \"GQ\" magazine in October 2007, Schwarzenegger said, \"[Marijuana] is not a drug. It's a leaf. My drug was pumping iron, trust me.\" His spokesperson later said the comment was meant to be a joke.\nCitizenship.\nSchwarzenegger became a naturalized U.S. citizen on September 17, 1983. Shortly before he gained his citizenship, he asked the Austrian authorities for the right to keep his Austrian citizenship, as Austria does not usually allow dual citizenship. His request was granted, and he retained his Austrian citizenship. In 2005, Peter Pilz, a member of the Austrian Parliament from the Austrian Green Party, unsuccessfully advocated for Parliament to revoke Schwarzenegger's Austrian citizenship due to his decision not to prevent the executions of Donald Beardslee and Stanley Williams. Pilz argued that Schwarzenegger caused damage to Austria's reputation in the international community because Austria abolished the death penalty in 1968. Pilz based his argument on Article 33 of the Austrian Citizenship Act, which states: \"A citizen, who is in the public service of a foreign country, shall be deprived of his citizenship if he heavily damages the reputation or the interests of the Austrian Republic.\" Pilz claimed that Schwarzenegger's actions in support of the death penalty (prohibited in Austria under Protocol 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights) had damaged Austria's reputation. Schwarzenegger explained his actions by pointing out that his only duty as Governor of California with respect to the death penalty was to correct an error by the justice system by pardon or clemency if such an error had occurred.\nEnvironmental record.\nOn September 27, 2006, Schwarzenegger signed the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, creating the nation's first cap on greenhouse gas emissions. The law set new regulations on the amount of emissions utilities, refineries, and manufacturing plants are allowed to release into the atmosphere. Schwarzenegger also signed a second global warming bill that prohibits large utilities and corporations in California from making long-term contracts with suppliers who do not meet the state's greenhouse gas emission standards. The two bills are part of a plan to reduce California's emissions by 25 percent to 1990s levels by 2020. In 2005, Schwarzenegger issued an executive order calling to reduce greenhouse gases to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.\nSchwarzenegger signed another executive order on October 17, 2006, allowing California to work with the Northeast's Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. They plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by issuing a limited amount of carbon credits to each power plant in participating states. Any power plants that exceed emissions for the number of carbon credits will have to purchase more credits to cover the difference. The plan took effect in 2009. In addition to using his political power to fight global warming, the governor has taken steps at his home to reduce his personal carbon footprint. Schwarzenegger has adapted one of his Hummers to run on hydrogen and another to run on biofuels. He has also installed solar panels to heat his home.\nIn respect for his contribution to the direction of the US motor industry, Schwarzenegger was invited to open the 2009 SAE World Congress in Detroit on April 20, 2009.\nIn 2011, Schwarzenegger founded the R20 Regions of Climate Action to develop a sustainable, low-carbon economy. In 2017, he joined French President Emmanuel Macron in calling for the adoption of a Global Pact for the Environment.\nPresidential ambitions.\nThe Equal Opportunity to Govern Amendment in 2003 was widely accredited as the \"Amend for Arnold\" bill, which would have added an amendment to the U.S. Constitution allowing his run, as he was not a natural born citizen. In 2004, the \"Amend for Arnold\" campaign was launched, featuring a website and TV advertising promotion.\nIn June 2007, Schwarzenegger was featured on the cover of \"TIME\" magazine with Michael Bloomberg, and subsequently, the two joked about a Presidential ticket together.\nIn October 2013, the \"New York Post\" reported that Schwarzenegger was exploring a future run for president. The former California governor would have faced a constitutional hurdle; Article II, Section I, Clause V prevents individuals who are not natural-born citizens of the United States from assuming the office. At the time he had reportedly been lobbying legislators about a possible constitutional change, or filing a legal challenge to the provision. Columbia University law professor Michael Dorf observed that Schwarzenegger's possible lawsuit could ultimately win him the right to run for the office, noting, \"The law is very clear, but it's not 100 percent clear that the courts would enforce that law rather than leave it to the political process.\"\nBusiness career.\nSchwarzenegger has had a highly successful business career. Following his move to the United States, Schwarzenegger became a \"prolific goal setter\" and would write his objectives at the start of the year on index cards, like starting a mail order business or buying a new car\u00a0\u2013 and succeed in doing so. By the age of 30, Schwarzenegger was a millionaire, well before his career in Hollywood. His financial independence came from his success as a budding entrepreneur with a series of lucrative business ventures and investments.\nBricklaying business.\nIn 1968, Schwarzenegger and fellow bodybuilder Franco Columbu started a bricklaying business. The business flourished thanks to the pair's marketing savvy and an increased demand following the 1971 San Fernando earthquake. Schwarzenegger and Columbu used profits from their bricklaying venture to start a mail-order business, selling bodybuilding and fitness-related equipment and instructional tapes.\nInvestments.\nSchwarzenegger transferred profits from the mail-order business and his bodybuilding-competition winnings into his first real estate investment venture: an apartment building he purchased for $10,000. He would later go on to invest in a number of real estate holding companies.\nStallone and Schwarzenegger ended their longtime rivalry by both investing in the Planet Hollywood chain of international theme restaurants (modeled after the Hard Rock Cafe) along with Bruce Willis and Demi Moore. Schwarzenegger severed his financial ties with the business in early 2000. Schwarzenegger said the company did not have the success he had hoped for, claiming he wanted to focus his attention on \"new US global business ventures\" and his movie career.\nHe also invested in a shopping mall in Columbus, Ohio. He has talked about some of those who have helped him over the years in business: \"I couldn't have learned about business without a parade of teachers guiding me... from Milton Friedman to Donald Trump... and now, Les Wexner and Warren Buffett. I even learned a thing or two from Planet Hollywood, such as when to get out! And I did!\" He has significant ownership in Dimensional Fund Advisors, an investment firm. Schwarzenegger is also the owner of Arnold's Sports Festival, which he started in 1989 and is held annually in Columbus, Ohio. It is a festival that hosts thousands of international health and fitness professionals which has also expanded into a three-day expo. He also owns a movie production company called Oak Productions, Inc. and Fitness Publications, a joint publishing venture with Simon &amp; Schuster.\nIn 2018, Schwarzenegger partnered with LeBron James to found Ladder, a company that developed nutritional supplements to help athletes with severe cramps. The duo sold Ladder to Openfit for an undisclosed amount in 2020 after reporting more than $4 million in sales for that year.\nRestaurant.\nIn 1992, Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called \"Schatzi On Main\". \"Schatzi\" literally means \"little treasure,\" and colloquially \"honey\" or \"darling\" in German. In 1998, he sold his restaurant.\nWealth.\nSchwarzenegger's net worth had been conservatively estimated at $100\u00a0million to $200\u00a0million. After separating from his wife, Maria Shriver, in 2011, it was estimated that his net worth had been approximately $400\u00a0million, and even as high as $800\u00a0million, based on tax returns he filed in 2006. Over the years, he invested his bodybuilding and film earnings in an array of stocks, bonds, privately controlled companies, and real estate holdings worldwide, making his net worth as an accurate estimation difficult to calculate, particularly in light of declining real estate values owing to economic recessions in the U.S. and Europe since the late 2000s. In June 1997, he spent $38\u00a0million of his own money on a private Gulfstream jet. He once quipped, \"Money doesn't make you happy. I now have $50\u00a0million, but I was just as happy when I had $48\u00a0million.\"\nCommercial advertisements.\nHe appears in a series of commercials for the Machine Zone game \"Mobile Strike\" as a military commander and spokesman.\nPersonal life.\nEarly relationships.\nIn 1969, Schwarzenegger met Barbara Outland (later Barbara Outland Baker), an English teacher with whom he lived until 1974. Schwarzenegger said of Baker in his 1977 memoir, \"Basically it came down to this: she was a well-balanced woman who wanted an ordinary, solid life, and I was not a well-balanced man, and hated the very idea of ordinary life.\" Baker has described Schwarzenegger as a \"joyful personality, totally charismatic, adventurous, and athletic\" but claims that towards the end of the relationship he became \"insufferable\u2014classically conceited\u2014the world revolved around him\". Baker published her memoir in 2006, entitled \"Arnold and Me: In the Shadow of the Austrian Oak\". Although Baker painted an unflattering portrait of her former lover at times, Schwarzenegger actually contributed to the tell-all book with a foreword, and also met with Baker for three hours.\nBaker claims that she only learned of his being unfaithful after they split, and talks of a turbulent and passionate love life. Schwarzenegger has made it clear that their respective recollection of events can differ. The couple first met six to eight months after his arrival in the U.S. Their first date was watching the first Apollo Moon landing on television. They shared an apartment in Santa Monica, California for three and a half years, and having little money, they would visit the beach all day or have barbecues in the back yard. Although Baker claims that when she first met Schwarzenegger, he had \"little understanding of polite society\" and she found him a turn-off, she says, \"He's as much a self-made man as it's possible to be\u2014he never got encouragement from his parents, his family, his brother. He just had this huge determination to prove himself, and that was very attractive ... I'll go to my grave knowing Arnold loved me.\"\nSchwarzenegger met his next lover, Beverly Hills hairdresser's assistant Sue Moray, on Venice Beach in July 1977. According to Moray, the couple led an open relationship: \"We were faithful when we were both in LA... but when he was out of town, we were free to do whatever we wanted.\" Schwarzenegger met television journalist Maria Shriver, niece of President John F. Kennedy, at the Robert F. Kennedy Tennis Tournament in August 1977. He went on to have a relationship with both Moray and Shriver until August 1978 when Moray (who knew of his relationship with Shriver) issued an ultimatum.\nMarriage and family.\nOn April 26, 1986, Schwarzenegger married Shriver in Hyannis, Massachusetts. The\u00a0Rev.\u00a0John\u00a0Baptist\u00a0Riordan performed the ceremony at St. Francis Xavier Catholic Church. They have four children: Katherine Eunice Schwarzenegger (born December 13, 1989), Christina Maria Aurelia Schwarzenegger (born July 23, 1991), Patrick Arnold Shriver Schwarzenegger (born September 18, 1993), and Christopher Sargent Shriver Schwarzenegger (born September 27, 1997). All of their children were born in Los Angeles. The family lived in an home in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, California, with vacation homes in Sun Valley, Idaho, and Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. They attended St. Monica's Catholic Church.\nDivorce.\nOn May 9, 2011, Shriver and Schwarzenegger ended their relationship after 25 years of marriage with Shriver moving out of their Brentwood mansion. On May 16, 2011, the \"Los Angeles Times\" revealed that Schwarzenegger had fathered a son more than 14 years earlier with an employee in their household, Mildred Patricia \"Patty\" Baena. \"After leaving the governor's office I told my wife about this event, which occurred over a decade ago,\" Schwarzenegger said issued to \"The Times\". In the statement, Schwarzenegger did not mention that he had confessed to his wife only after she had confronted him with the information, which she had done after confirming with the housekeeper what she had suspected about the child.\nBaena is of Guatemalan origin. She was employed by the family for 20 years and retired in January 2011. The pregnant Baena was working in the home while Shriver was pregnant with the youngest of the couple's four children. Baena's son with Schwarzenegger, Joseph, was born on October 2, 1997, and Shriver gave birth to Christopher a few days before on September 27, 1997. Schwarzenegger says it took seven or eight years before he found out that he had fathered a child with his housekeeper. It was not until the boy \"started looking like [him] ... that [he] put things together\". Schwarzenegger has taken financial responsibility for the child \"from the start and continued to provide support\". KNX 1070 radio reported that in 2010 he bought a new four-bedroom house with a pool for Baena and their son in Bakersfield, California. Baena separated from her husband, Rogelio, a few months after Joseph's birth. She filed for divorce in 2008. Rogelio said that the child's birth certificate was falsified and that he planned to sue Schwarzenegger for engaging in conspiracy to falsify a public document, a serious crime in California.\nPursuant to the divorce judgment, Schwarzenegger kept the Brentwood home, while Shriver purchased a new home nearby so that the children could travel between their parents' homes. They shared custody of the two youngest children. Schwarzenegger came under fire after the initial petition did not include spousal support and a reimbursement of attorney's fees. However, he claims this was not intentional and that he signed the initial documents without having properly read them. He filed amended divorce papers remedying this. Schwarzenegger and Shriver finalized their divorce in 2017, six years after separating.\nAfter the scandal, Danish-Italian actress Brigitte Nielsen came forward and stated that she too had an affair with Schwarzenegger during the production of \"Red Sonja\", while he had just started his relationship with Shriver, saying, \"Maybe I wouldn't have got into it if he said 'I'm going to marry Maria' and this is deadly serious, but he didn't, and our affair carried on.\" When asked in January 2014, \"Of all the things you are famous for ... which are you least proud of?\" Schwarzenegger replied, \"I'm least proud of the mistakes I made that caused my family pain and split us up.\"\n, Schwarzenegger was dating physical therapist Heather Milligan, 27 years his junior.\nAccidents, injuries, and other health problems.\nSchwarzenegger was born with a bicuspid aortic valve, an aortic valve with only two leaflets (a normal aortic valve has three leaflets). He opted in 1997 for a replacement heart valve made of his own transplanted tissue (from his pulmonic valve, which itself is replaced with a cadaveric pulmonic valve, in a Ross procedure); medical experts predicted he would require heart valve replacement surgery in the following two to eight years as his valve would progressively degrade. Schwarzenegger apparently opted against a mechanical valve, the only permanent solution available at the time of his surgery, because it would have sharply limited his physical activity and capacity to exercise.\nOn March 29, 2018, Schwarzenegger underwent emergency open-heart surgery for replacement of his replacement pulmonic valve. He said about his recovery: \"I underwent open-heart surgery this spring, I had to use a walker. I had to do breathing exercises five times a day to retrain my lungs. I was frustrated and angry, and in my worst moments, I couldn't see the way back to my old self.\"\nOn December 9, 2001, he broke six ribs and was hospitalized for four days after a motorcycle crash in Los Angeles.\nSchwarzenegger saved a drowning man's life in 2004 while on vacation in Hawaii by swimming out and bringing him back to shore.\nOn January 8, 2006, while Schwarzenegger was riding his Harley Davidson motorcycle in Los Angeles with his son Patrick in the sidecar, another driver backed into the street he was riding on, causing him and his son to collide with the car at a low speed. While his son and the other driver were unharmed, Schwarzenegger sustained a minor injury to his lip, requiring 15 stitches. \"No citations were issued,\" said Officer Jason Lee, a Los Angeles Police Department spokesman. Schwarzenegger did not obtain his motorcycle license until July 3, 2006.\nSchwarzenegger tripped over his ski pole and broke his right femur while skiing in Sun Valley, Idaho, with his family on December 23, 2006. On December 26, he underwent a 90-minute operation in which cables and screws were used to wire the broken bone back together. He was released from St. John's Health Center on December 30, 2006.\nSchwarzenegger's private jet made an emergency landing at Van Nuys Airport on June 19, 2009, after the pilot reported smoke coming from the cockpit, according to a statement released by his press secretary. No one was harmed in the incident.\nOn May 18, 2019, while on a visit to South Africa, Schwarzenegger was attacked and drop-kicked from behind by an unknown malefactor while giving autographs to his fans at one of the local schools. Despite the surprise and unprovoked nature of the attack, he reportedly suffered no injuries and continued to interact with fans. The attacker was apprehended and Schwarzenegger declined to press charges against him.\nHeight.\nSchwarzenegger's official height of has been brought into question by several articles. In his bodybuilding days in the late 1960s, he was measured to be , a height confirmed by his fellow bodybuilders. However, in 1988, both the \"Daily Mail\" and \"Time Out\" magazine mentioned that Schwarzenegger appeared noticeably shorter. Prior to running for governor, Schwarzenegger's height was once again questioned in an article by the \"Chicago Reader\". As governor, Schwarzenegger engaged in a light-hearted exchange with Assemblyman Herb Wesson over their heights. At one point, Wesson made an unsuccessful attempt to, in his own words, \"settle this once and for all and find out how tall he is\" by using a tailor's tape measure on the Governor. Schwarzenegger retaliated by placing a pillow stitched with the words \"Need a lift?\" on the Wesson's chair before a negotiating session in his office. Bob Mulholland also claimed Schwarzenegger was and that he wore risers in his boots. In 1999, \"Men's Health\" magazine stated his height was .\nAutobiography.\nSchwarzenegger's autobiography, \"Total Recall\", was released in October 2012. He devotes one chapter called \"The Secret\" to his extramarital affair. The majority of his book is about his successes in the three major chapters in his life: bodybuilder, actor, and Governor of California.\nVehicles.\nGrowing up during the Allied occupation of Austria, Schwarzenegger commonly saw heavy military vehicles such as tanks as a child. As a result, he paid $20,000 to bring his Austrian Army M47 Patton tank (331) to the United States, which he previously operated during his mandatory service in 1965. However, he later obtained his vehicle in 1991/2, during his tenure as the Chairmen of the President's Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, and now uses it to support his charity. His first car ever was an Opel Kadett in 1969 after serving in the Austrian army, then he rode a Harley-Davidson Fat Boy in 1991.\nMoreover, he came to develop an interest in large vehicles and became the first civilian in the U.S. to purchase a Humvee. He was so enamored by the vehicle that he lobbied the Humvee's manufacturer, AM General, to produce a street-legal, civilian version, which they did in 1992; the first two Hummer H1s they sold were also purchased by Schwarzenegger. In 2010, he had one regular and three running on non-fossil power sources; one for hydrogen, one for vegetable oil, and one for biodiesel. Schwarzenegger was in the news in 2014 for buying a rare Bugatti Veyron Grand Sport Vitesse. He was spotted and filmed in 2015 in his car, painted silver with bright aluminum forged wheels. His Bugatti has its interior adorned in dark brown leather. In 2017, Schwarzenegger acquired a Mercedes G-Class modified for all-electric drive.\nThe Hummers that Schwarzenegger bought in 1992 are so large\u2014each weighs and is wide\u2014that they are classified as large trucks, and U.S. fuel economy regulations do not apply to them. During the gubernatorial recall campaign, he announced that he would convert one of his Hummers to burn hydrogen. The conversion was reported to have cost about $21,000. After the election, he signed an executive order to jump-start the building of hydrogen refueling plants called the California Hydrogen Highway Network, and gained a U.S. Department of Energy grant to help pay for its projected US$91,000,000 cost. California took delivery of the first H2H (Hydrogen Hummer) in October 2004.\nPublic image.\nSchwarzenegger has been involved with the Special Olympics for many years after they were founded by his ex-mother-in-law Eunice Kennedy Shriver. In 2007, Schwarzenegger was the official spokesperson for the Special Olympics held in Shanghai, China. Schwarzenegger believes that quality school opportunities should be made available to children who might not normally be able to access them. In 1995, he founded the Inner City Games Foundation (ICG) which provides cultural, educational and community enrichment programming to youth. ICG is active in 15 cities around the country and serves over 250,000 children in over 400 schools countrywide. He has also been involved with After-School All-Stars and founded the Los Angeles branch in 2002. ASAS is an after school program provider, educating youth about health, fitness and nutrition.\nOn February 12, 2010, Schwarzenegger took part in the Vancouver Olympic Torch relay. He handed off the flame to the next runner, Sebastian Coe.\nSchwarzenegger had a collection of Marxist busts, which he requested from Russian friends at the Dissolution of the Soviet Union, as they were being destroyed. In 2011, he revealed that his wife had requested their removal, but he kept the one of Vladimir Lenin present, since \"he was the first\". In 2015, he said he kept the Lenin bust to \"show losers\".\nSchwarzenegger is a supporter of Israel, and has participated in a Los Angeles pro-Israel rally among other similar events. In 2004, Schwarzenegger visited Israel to break ground on Simon Wiesenthal Center's Museum of Tolerance Jerusalem, and to lay a wreath at the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial, he also met with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and President Moshe Katsav. In 2011, at the Independence Day celebration hosted by Israeli Consulate General in Los Angeles, Schwarzenegger said: \"I love Israel. When I became governor, Israel was the first country that I visited. When I had the chance to sign a bill calling on California pension funds to divest their money from companies that do business with Iran, I immediately signed that bill\", then he added, \"I knew that we could not send money to these crazy dictators who hate us and threaten Israel any time they have a bad day.\"\nSchwarzenegger supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Schwarzenegger also expressed support for the 2011 military intervention in Libya. Schwarzenegger released a video message supporting protests against Ukraine's pro-Russian President Victor Yanukovych.\nSchwarzenegger, who played football as a boy, grew up watching Bayern Munich and Sturm Graz. He also expressed his admiration of J\u00fcrgen Klopp's Liverpool in October 2019.\nSchwarzenegger inspired many actors to become action heroes, including Dwayne Johnson, Matt McColm, Christian Boeving, Vidyut Jamwal, and Daniel Greene. Boeving's character in the 2003 action film \"When Eagles Strike\" was based on Schwarzenegger's image from the late 1980s: mostly on Major \"Dutch\" Schaefer from \"Predator\" (1987) and Colonel John Matrix from \"Commando\" (1985).\nSchwarzenegger Institute for State and Global Policy.\nIn 2012, Schwarzenegger helped to found the Schwarzenegger Institute for State and Global Policy, which is a part of the USC Price School of Public Policy at the University of Southern California. The institute's mission is to \"[advance] post-partisanship, where leaders put people over political parties and work together to find the best ideas and solutions to benefit the people they serve\" and to \"seek to influence public policy and public debate in finding solutions to the serious challenges we face\". Schwarzenegger serves as chairman of the institute.\nGlobal warming.\nAt a 2015 security conference, Schwarzenegger called climate change the issue of our time. He also urged politicians to stop treating climate change as a political issue.\n2016 presidential election.\nFor the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries, Schwarzenegger endorsed fellow Republican John Kasich. However, he announced in October that he would not vote for the Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump in that year's United States presidential election, with this being the first time he did not vote for the Republican candidate since becoming a citizen in 1983.\nPost-2016.\nIn recent years, Schwarzenegger has been advocating for eating less meat, and he is an executive producer alongside James Cameron et al. behind the documentary \"The Game Changers\", that documents the explosive rise of plant-based eating in professional sports, in which he is also featured.\nIn 2017, Schwarzenegger condemned white supremacists who were seen carrying Nazi and Confederate flags by calling their heroes \"losers\".\nIn 2019, while at the \"Arnold Classic Africa\" sports competition as an official, Schwarzenegger was attacked by an assailant in a flying kick. The assailant was arrested.\nFollowing the January 6 2021 storming of the United States Capitol by supporters of President Donald Trump, Schwarzenegger posted a video address on social media in which he likened the insurrection to Nazi Germany's Kristallnacht, which he described as \"a night of rampage against the Jews carried out [by] the Nazi equivalent of the Proud Boys\". He spoke of his father's alcoholism, domestic violence and abuse, and how it was typical of other former Nazis and collaborators in the post-war era, and described Trump as \"a failed leader. He will go down in history as the worst president ever.\""}
{"id": "1807", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1807", "title": "ASA", "text": "ASA as an abbreviation or initialism may refer to:"}
{"id": "1809", "revid": "2924091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1809", "title": "Aquinas", "text": ""}
{"id": "1810", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1810", "title": "Actium", "text": "Actium or Aktion () was a town on a promontory in ancient Acarnania at the entrance of the Ambraciot Gulf off which Octavian gained his celebrated victory, the Battle of Actium, over Antony and Cleopatra, on September 2, 31\u00a0BCE.\nHistory.\nActium belonged originally to the Corinthian colonists of Anactorium, who probably founded the sanctuary of Apollo Actius. This temple was of great antiquity. In the 3rd century\u00a0BCE it fell to the Acarnanians, who subsequently held their religious summits there.\nThere was also an ancient festival named Actia, celebrated here in honour of the god. Augustus after his victory enlarged the temple, and revived the ancient festival, which was henceforth celebrated once in five years (\u03c0\u03b5\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b5\u03c4\u03b7\u03c1\u03af\u03c2, ludi quinquennales), with musical and gymnastic contests, and horse races. We learn from a Greek inscription found on the site of Actium, and which is probably prior to the time of Augustus, that the chief priest of the temple was called \u1f39\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03c0\u03cc\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2, and that his name was employed in official documents, like that of the first Archon at Athens, to mark the date. Strabo says that the temple was situated on an eminence, and that below was a plain with a grove of trees, and a dock-yard; and in another passage he describes the harbour as situated outside of the gulf. On the opposite coast of Epirus, Augustus founded the city of Nicopolis in honour of his victory. After the foundation of Nicopolis, a few buildings sprang up around the temple, and it served as a kind of suburb to Nicopolis.\nArchaeology.\nOn October 8, 1980, the Greek Ministry of Transport and Communications reported that shipwrecks from the Battle of Actium had been located at Actium near the entrance to the Ambracian Gulf.\nIn Summer 2009, archaeologists discovered the ruins of the Temple of Apollo and found two statue heads, one of Apollo, one of Artemis (Diana)."}
{"id": "1811", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1811", "title": "Amide hydrolysis", "text": ""}
{"id": "1812", "revid": "735741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1812", "title": "Amway", "text": "Amway (short for \"American Way\") is an American multi-level marketing (MLM) company that sells health, beauty, and home care products. The company was founded in 1959 by Jay Van Andel and Richard DeVos and is based in Ada, Michigan. Amway and its sister companies under Alticor reported sales of $8.4 billion in 2019. It conducts business through a number of affiliated companies in more than a hundred countries and territories.\nAmway has been investigated in various countries and by institutions such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) for alleged pyramid scheme practices, but it has never been found guilty, though it has paid tens of millions of dollars to settle these suits.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nJay Van Andel and Richard DeVos had been friends since school days and business partners in various endeavors, including a hamburger stand, an air charter service, and a sailing business. In 1949, they were introduced to the Nutrilite Products Corporation by Van Andel's second cousin Neil Maaskant. DeVos and Van Andel signed up to become distributors for Nutrilite food supplements in August. They sold their first box the next day for $19.50, but lost interest for the next two weeks. They traveled to Chicago to attend a Nutrilite seminar soon afterward, at the urging of Maaskant, who had become their sponsor. They watched promotional filmstrips and listened to talks by company representatives and successful distributors, then they decided to pursue the Nutrilite business. They sold their second box of supplements on their return trip to Michigan, and rapidly proceeded to develop the business further.\nEarlier in 1949, DeVos and Van Andel had formed the Ja-Ri Corporation (abbreviated from their respective first names) to import wooden goods from South American countries. After the Chicago seminar, they turned Ja-Ri into a Nutrilite distributorship instead. In addition to profits on each product sold, Nutrilite offered commissions on sales made by new distributors introduced to the company by existing distributors\u2014a system known as multi-level marketing or network marketing. By 1958, DeVos and Van Andel had built an organization of more than 5,000 distributors. However, they and some of their top distributors formed the American Way Association, or Amway, in April 1959 in response to concerns about the stability of Nutrilite and in order to represent the distributors and look for additional products to market.\nTheir first product was called Frisk, a concentrated organic cleaner developed by a scientist in Ohio. DeVos and Van Andel bought the rights to manufacture and distribute Frisk, and later changed the name to LOC (Liquid Organic Cleaner). They subsequently formed the Amway Sales Corporation to procure and inventory products and to handle sales and marketing plans, and the Amway Services Corporation to handle insurance and other benefits for distributors. In 1960, they purchased a 50% share in Atco Manufacturing Company in Detroit, the original manufacturers of LOC, and changed its name to Amway Manufacturing Corporation. In 1964, the Amway Sales Corporation, Amway Services Corporation, and Amway Manufacturing Corporation merged to form the Amway Corporation.\nAmway bought a controlling interest in Nutrilite in 1972 and full ownership in 1994.\nInternational expansion.\nAmway expanded to Australia in 1971, to parts of Europe in 1973, to parts of Asia in 1974, to Japan in 1979, to Latin America in 1985, to Thailand in 1987, to China in 1995, to Africa in 1997, to India and Scandinavia in 1998, to Ukraine in 2003, to Russia in 2005, and to Vietnam in 2008.\nIn 2014, a Russian loyalty card program called \"Alfa-Amway\" was created when Amway joined with Alfa-Bank.\nAmway was ranked by \"Forbes\" as the 42nd-largest privately held company in the United States in 2018, and as the number one largest company on the \"Direct Selling News\" Global 100 list in 2018.\nQuixtar.\nThe founders of the Amway corporation established a new holding company in 1999, named Alticor, and launched three new companies: a sister (and separate) Internet-focused company named Quixtar, Access Business Group, and Pyxis Innovations. Pyxis, later replaced by Fulton Innovation, pursued research and development and Access Business Group handled manufacturing and logistics for Amway, Quixtar, and third-party clients.\nThe main difference was that all \"Independent Business Owners\" (IBO) could order directly from Amway on the Internet, rather than from their upline \"direct distributor\", and have products shipped directly to their home. The Amway name continued being used in the rest of the world. After virtually all Amway distributors in North America switched to Quixtar, Alticor elected to close Amway North America after 2001. In June 2007 it was announced that the Quixtar brand would be phased out over an 18-to-24-month period in favor of a unified Amway brand (Amway Global) worldwide.\nIn 2006, Quixtar published \"The Quixtar Independent Business Owner Compensation Plan\", in which the company reported that the average monthly gross income for \"Active\" IBOs was $115.\nGlobal markets.\nAccording to the Amway website, the company operated in over 100 countries and territories, organized into regional markets: the Americas, Europe, greater China, Japan and Korea, and SE Asia/Australia. Amway's top ten markets are China, Korea, the United States, Japan, Thailand, Taiwan, India, Russia, Malaysia and Italy.\nIn 2008, Alticor announced that two-thirds of the company's 58 markets reported sales increases, including strong growth in the China, Russia, Ukraine and India markets.\nAmway China.\nAmway China launched in 1995. In 1998, after abuses of illegal pyramid schemes led to riots, the Chinese government enacted a ban on all direct selling companies, including Amway. After the negotiations, some companies like Amway, Avon, and Mary Kay continued to operate through a network of retail stores promoted by an independent sales force. China introduced new direct selling laws in December 2005, and in December 2006, Amway was one of the first companies to receive a license to resume direct sales. However, the law forbids teachers, doctors, and civil servants from becoming direct sales agents for the company and, unlike in the United States, salespeople in China are ineligible to receive commissions from sales made by the distributors they recruit.\nIn 2006, Amway China had a reported 180,000 sales representatives, 140 stores, and $2\u00a0billion in annual sales. In 2007, Amway Greater China and South-east Asia Chief Executive Eva Cheng was ranked no. 88 by \"Forbes\" magazine in its list of the World's Most Powerful Women. In 2008, China was Amway's largest market, reporting 28% growth and sales of 17\u00a0billion yuan (US$2.5 billion). According to a report in \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" in April 2010, Amway had 237 retail shops in China, 160,000 direct sales agents, and $3\u00a0billion in revenue.\nBrands.\nAmway's product line grew from LOC, with the laundry detergent SA8 added in 1960, and later the hair care product Satinique (1965) and the cosmetics line Artistry (1968). Today Amway manufactures over 450 products, with manufacturing facilities in China, India and the US, as well as Nutrilite organic farms in Brazil, Mexico and the US (California and Washington state). Amway brands include Artistry, Atmosphere, Body Blends, Bodykey, Body Works, Clear Now, eSpring, Glister, iCook, Legacy of Clean, Nutrilite, Peter Island, Perfect Empowered Drinking Water, Personal Accents, Ribbon, Satinique, Artistry Men and XS.\nIn 2018, nutrition and wellness products were 52% of total sales, and beauty and personal care products were 26% of total sales.\nHousehold cleaners.\nAmway is best known in North America for its original multi-purpose cleaning product LOC, SA8 laundry detergent, and Dish Drops dishwashing liquid. In the January 2007 issue of \"Consumer Reports\", SA8 with Bioquest was rated the best-performing laundry detergent. \"Consumer Reports\" did, however, criticize SA8's pricing, a situation which was disputed by Amway. Consumer Reports conducted blind testing of detergents in 2010 and ranked versions of Amway's Legacy of Clean detergents 9th and 18th of 20 detergents tested. \"Consumer Reports\" program manager Pat Slaven recommended against buying the products because consumers can \"go to the grocery store and get something that performs a whole lot better for a whole lot less money\".\nHealth and beauty.\nAmway's health and beauty brands include Artistry, Satinique, Hymm, Body Series, Glister, Moiskin (South America), Nutrilite, Nutriway (Scandinavia and Australia/New Zealand), Attitude (India), eSpring, Atmosphere and iCook as well as XL and XS Energy drinks. Other Amway brands that were discontinued or replaced include Tolsom, Eddie Funkhouser New York, or beautycycle (Eastern Europe).\nArtistry.\nAmway's Artistry products include skin care, cosmetics, and anti-aging creams and serums. In 2011, Artistry brand reached sales of $2.8 billion.\nNutrilite.\nAmway's largest-selling brand is the Nutrilite range of health supplements (marketed as Nutriway in some countries), and in 2008 Nutrilite sales exceeded $3 billion globally. In 2001, NSF International issued its first five dietary supplement certifications to Nutrilite.\nIn 2011, Nutrilite brand of vitamins and dietary supplements led Amway's sales, totaling almost $4.7 billion. According to Euromonitor International, in 2014, Nutrilite was the world's No. 1 selling vitamins and dietary supplements brand. In 2015, it was reported that according to Euromonitor International, Amway was the largest vitamin and dietary supplement vendor in China, with 11% of a market that generated 100 billion yuan ($15.6 billion) in annual sales. In 2015, it was reported that according to China Confidential consumer brands survey, Amway Nutrilite was the most popular vitamin and dietary supplement brand in China.\nIn January 2009, Amway announced a voluntary recall of Nutrilite and XS Energy Bars after learning that they had possibly been manufactured with Salmonella-contaminated ingredients from Peanut Corporation of America. The company indicated that it had not received any reports of illness in connection with the products.\nIn 2012, the Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI), accused Amway of making unsubstantiated and illegal claims about Nutrilite Fruits &amp; Vegetables 2GO Twist Tubes and threatened to launch a class action lawsuit against the company unless it took remedial action. Amway responded that the claims made about the products were properly substantiated and that they did not plan to change the product's labeling but nevertheless would review the statements that CSPI has questioned. CSPI later reported that Amway had agreed to changing product labels by the end of 2014.\neSpring.\nAmway's eSpring water filter was introduced in 2000. According to Amway, it was the first system to combine a carbon block filter and ultraviolet light with electronic-monitoring technology in the filter cartridge and it became the first home system to achieve certification for ANSI/NSF Standards 42, 53, and 55. According to Amway, eSpring was the first water treatment system to receive certification for all fifteen NSF/ANSI 401 contaminants which include pharmaceuticals, pesticides and herbicides. The company also claims that, in addition to these 15 contaminants, eSpring is certified for more than 145 potential contaminants, including lead and mercury.\neSpring was the first commercial product which employed Fulton Innovation's eCoupled wireless power induction technology. In December 2006, Amway sister company, Fulton Innovations, announced that it would introduce eCoupled technology in other consumer electronic products at the 2007 Consumer Electronics Show. Companies licensing this technology include Visteon, Herman Miller, Motorola and Mobility Electronics. Fulton was a founding member of the Wireless Power Consortium which developed the Qi (inductive power standard).\nIn 2007 eSpring was ranked fifth out of 27 brands in a comparison of water filters by \"Consumer Reports\". In 2012, eSpring scored 94 points (out of a possible 100 points) \u2013 best among countertop models and third out of 18 brands in a comparison by \"Consumer Reports\".\nIn 2013, eSpring was one of the Reader's Digest Trusted Brands Award winners in the water purifiers category in Malaysia. In 2015, Amway was recognized for the sixth consecutive year by Frost &amp; Sullivan as Asia Pacific Water Filtration company of the year. According to an Amway commissioned study of global sales conducted by marketing research firm Verify Markets, eSpring was the world's largest selling brand of kitchen water treatment systems and home water treatment systems in 2014.\nXS.\nOn January 14, 2015, Amway announced that it had acquired XS Energy, a California-based brand of energy drinks and snacks. The XS Energy brand has been sold as an Amway product since 2003. As of January 2015, it has been distributed in 38 countries, generating annual sales of $150 million.\nAccording to Euromonitor International, the XS Energy was the first exclusively sugar-free energy drink brand sold globally.\nDitto Delivery.\nDitto Delivery is Alticor's automatic, monthly replenishment program that fills orders based on customers' predetermined needs. As of May 2001, Ditto Delivery accounted for 30% of Quixtar's North American sales.\nBusiness model.\nAmway combines direct selling with a multi-level marketing strategy. Amway distributors, referred to as \"independent business owners\" (IBOs), may market products directly to potential customers and may also sponsor and mentor other people to become IBOs. IBOs may earn income both from the retail markup on any products they sell personally, plus a performance bonus based on the sales volume they and their downline (IBOs they have sponsored) have generated. People may also register as IBOs to buy products at discounted prices. Harvard Business School, which described Amway as \"one of the most profitable direct selling companies in the world\", noted that Amway founders Van Andel and DeVos \"accomplished their success through the use of an elaborate pyramid-like distribution system in which independent distributors of Amway products received a percentage of the merchandise they sold and also a percentage of the merchandise sold by recruited distributors\".\nCommercial sponsorships.\nIn December 2006, Alticor secured the naming rights for the Orlando Magic's home basketball arena in Orlando, Florida. The Orlando Magic are owned by the DeVos family. The arena, formerly known as the TD Waterhouse Centre, was renamed the Amway Arena. Its successor, the Amway Center, was opened in 2010, and the older arena was demolished in 2012.\nIn 2009, Amway Global signed a three-year deal with the San Jose Earthquakes Major League Soccer team to become the jersey sponsor.\nIn March 2009, Amway Global signed a multi-year deal to become the presenting partner of the Los Angeles Sol of Women's Professional Soccer. The deal, however, would last only one year, as the Sol folded in 2010.\nIn 2011, Amway signed a three-year deal to be the presenting sponsor of the National Hockey League's Detroit Red Wings.\nSince 2012, Amway has been the title sponsor of the Canadian Championship, an annual soccer tournament.\nPolitics and culture.\nPolitical contributions.\nIn the 1990s, the Amway organization was a major contributor to the Republican Party (GOP) and to the election campaigns of various GOP candidates. Amway and its sales force contributed a substantial amount (up to half) of the total funds ($669,525) for the 1994 political campaign of Republican congresswoman and Amway distributor Sue Myrick (N.C.). According to two reports by \"Mother Jones\" magazine, Amway distributor Dexter Yager \"used the company's extensive voice-mail system to rally hundreds of Amway distributors into giving a total of $295,871\" to Myrick's campaign. According to a campaign staffer quoted by the magazine, Myrick had appeared regularly on the Amway circuit, speaking at hundreds of rallies and selling $5 and $10 audiotapes. Following the 1994 election, Myrick maintained \"close ties to Amway and Yager\", and raised $100,000 from Amway sources, \"most notably through fundraisers at the homes of big distributors\", in the 1997\u201398 election cycle.\nIn October 1994, Amway gave the biggest corporate contribution recorded to that date to a political party for a single election, $2.5\u00a0million to the Republican National Committee (RNC), and was the number one corporate political donor in the United States. In the 2004 election cycle, the organization contributed a total of $4 million to a conservative 527 group, Progress for America.\nIn July 1996, Amway co-founder Richard DeVos was honored at a $3\u00a0million fundraiser for the Republican Party, and a week later, it was reported that Amway had tried to donate $1.3\u00a0million to pay for Republican \"infomercials\" and televising of the GOP convention on Pat Robertson's Family Channel, but backed off when Democrats criticized the donation as a ploy to avoid campaign-finance restrictions.\nIn April 1997, Richard DeVos and his wife, Helen, gave $1\u00a0million to the RNC, which, at the time, was the second-largest soft-money donation ever, behind Amway's 1994 gift of $2.5\u00a0million to the RNC. In July 1997, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott and House Speaker Newt Gingrich slipped a last-minute provision into a hotly contested compromise tax bill that granted Amway and four other companies a tax break on their Asian branches that totaled $19\u00a0million.\nIn a column published in the \"Fort Worth Star-Telegram\" newspaper in August 1997, reporter Molly Ivins wrote that Amway had \"its own caucus in Congress...Five Republican House members are also Amway distributors: Reps. Sue Myrick of North Carolina, Jon Christensen of Nebraska, Dick Chrysler of Michigan, Richard Pombo of California, and John Ensign of Nevada. Their informal caucus meets several times a year with Amway bigwigs to discuss policy matters affecting the company, including China's trade status.\"\nA 1998 analysis of campaign contributions conducted by \"Businessweek\" found that Amway, along with the founding families and some top distributors, had donated at least $7\u00a0million to GOP causes in the preceding decade. Political candidates who received campaign funding from Amway in 1998 included Representatives Bill Redmond (R\u2013N.M.), Heather Wilson (R\u2013N.M.), and Jon Christensen (R\u2013Neb).\nAccording to a report by the Center for Public Integrity, in the 2004 election cycle, members of the Van Andel and DeVos families were the second, third and fifth largest donors to the Republican party.\nDick DeVos, son of Amway founder Richard DeVos and past president of the company, served as Finance Chairman of the Republican National Committee, and his wife Betsy DeVos served as chair of the Michigan Republican Party from 1996 to 2000 and 2003 to 2005.\nIn May 2005, Dick DeVos ran against incumbent Governor Jennifer Granholm in Michigan's 2006 gubernatorial election. DeVos was defeated by Granholm, who won 56% of the popular vote to his 42%.\nIn August 2012, gay rights activist Fred Karger began a movement to boycott Amway in protest of the contribution from a private foundation of Amway President Doug DeVos to the National Organization for Marriage, a political organization which opposes legalization of same-sex marriage in the United States.\nOn February 7, 2017, Betsy DeVos was confirmed by the Senate as the 11th Secretary of Education.\nReligion.\nSeveral sources have commented on the promotion of Christian conservative ideology within the Amway organization. \"Mother Jones\" magazine described the Amway distributor force as \"heavily influenced by the company's dual themes of Christian morality and free enterprise\" and operating \"like a private political army\". In \"The Cult of Free Enterprise\", Stephen Butterfield, who spent time in the Yager group within Amway, wrote \"[Amway] sells a marketing and motivational system, a cause, a way of life, in a fervid emotional atmosphere of rallies and political religious revivalism.\" \"Philadelphia City Paper\" correspondent Maryam Henein stated that \"The language used in motivational tools for Amway frequently echoes or directly quotes the Bible, with the unstated assumption of a shared Christian perspective.\"\n\"Businessweek\" correspondents Bill Vlasic and Beth Regan characterized the founding families of Amway as \"fervently conservative, fervently Christian, and hugely influential in the Republican Party\", noting that \"Rich DeVos charged up the troops with a message of Christian beliefs and rock-ribbed conservatism.\"\nHigh-ranking Amway leaders such as Richard DeVos and Dexter Yager were owners and members of the board of Gospel Films, a producer of movies and books geared toward conservative Christians, as well as co-owners (along with Salem Communications) of a right-wing, Christian nonprofit called Gospel Communications International. Yager, interviewed on \"60 Minutes\" in 1983, admitted that he promotes Christianity through his Amway group, but stated that this might not be the case in other Amway groups.\n\"Rolling Stone's\" Bob Moser reported that former Amway CEO and co-founder Richard DeVos is connected with the Dominionist political movement in the United States. Moser states that DeVos was a supporter of the late D. James Kennedy, giving more than $5\u00a0million to Kennedy's Coral Ridge Ministries. DeVos was also a founding member and two-time president of the Council for National Policy, a right-wing Christian organization.\nSociologist David G. Bromley calls Amway a \"quasi-religious corporation\" having sectarian characteristics. Bromley and Anson Shupe view Amway as preaching the gospel of prosperity. Patralekha Bhattacharya and Krishna Kumar Mehta, of the consulting firm Thinkalytics, LLC, reasoned that although some critics have referred to organizations such as Amway as \"cults\" and have speculated that they engage in \"mind control\", there are other explanations that could account for the behavior of distributors. Namely, continued involvement of distributors despite minimal economic return may result from social satisfaction compensating for diminished economic satisfaction.\nChamber of commerce.\nAmway co-founder Jay Van Andel (in 1980), and later his son Steve Van Andel (in 2001), were elected by the board of directors of the United States Chamber of Commerce to be the chairman of the private American lobbying organization.\nAccreditation program.\nIn 2006, Amway (then Quixtar in North America) introduced its \"Professional Development Accreditation Program\" in response to concerns surrounding business support materials (BSM), including books, tapes and meetings. In 2010 this was superseded by its \"Accreditation Plus\" program to ensure that all BSM content is consistent with Amway's quality assurance standards, which approved providers of BSM must abide by. The quality assurance standards state that\nPyramid scheme accusations.\nRobert Carroll, of the \"Skeptic's Dictionary\", has described Amway as a \"legal pyramid scheme\", and has said that the quasi-religious devotion of its affiliates is used by the company to conceal poor performance rates by distributors.\nFTC investigation.\nIn a 1979 ruling, the Federal Trade Commission found that Amway did not fit the definition of a pyramid scheme because (a) distributors were not paid to recruit people, (b) it did not require distributors to buy a large stock of unmoving inventory, (c) distributors were required to maintain retail sales (at least 10 per month), and (d) the company and all distributors were required to accept returns of excess inventory from down-level distributors.\nThe FTC did, however, find Amway \"guilty of price-fixing and making exaggerated income claims\"; the company was ordered to stop retail price fixing and allocating customers among distributors and was prohibited from misrepresenting the amount of profit, earnings or sales its distributors are likely to achieve with the business. Amway was ordered to accompany any such statements with the actual averages per distributor, pointing out that more than half of the distributors do not make any money, with the average distributor making less than $100 per month. The order was violated with a 1986 ad campaign, resulting in a $100,000 fine.\nStudies of independent consumer watchdog agencies have shown that between 990 and 999 of 1000 participants in MLMs that use Amway-type pay plans in fact lose money. According to The Skeptic's Dictionary, \"In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission requires Amway to label its products with the message that 54% of Amway recruits make nothing and the rest earn on average $65 a month.\"\nAmway India.\nIn September 2006, following a public complaint, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana state police (CID) initiated raids and seizures against Amway distributors in the state, and submitted a petition against them, claiming the company violated the Prize Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act. They shut down all corporate offices associated with the Amway organization including the offices of some Amway distributors. The enforcement said that the business model of the company is illegal. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had notified the police that Amway in India may be violating certain laws regarding a \"money circulation scheme\" and the \"IB Times\" article writes that \"some say ... Amway is really more about making money from recruiting people to become distributors, as opposed to selling products\". In 2008, the state government of Andhra Pradesh enacted a ban on Amway media advertisements.\nOn August 6, 2011, Kerala Police sealed the offices of Amway at Kozhikode, Kannur, Kochi, Kottayam, Thrissur, Kollam and Thiruvananthapuram following complaints. In November 2012, the Economic Offences Wing of Kerala Police conducted searches at the offices of Amway at Kozhikode, Thrissur and Kannur as part of its crackdown on money chain activities and closed down the firm's warehouses at these centres. Products valued at 21.4 million rupees (about US$400,000 at the time) were also seized. Later, Area manager of Amway, P. M. Rajkumar, who was arrested following searches was remanded in judicial custody for 14 days.\nOn May 27, 2013, Crime Branch officials of Kerala Police arrested William S. Pinckney, Managing Director &amp; CEO of Amway India Enterprises along with two other directors of the company from Kozhikode. The three were arrested on charges of running a pyramid scheme. They were granted bail the next day and the business was unaffected. On June 8, 2013, Kozhikode Court lifted the freeze on Amway offices in Kerala. On May 26, 2014, Pinckney was arrested by Andhra Pradesh police on the basis of a consumer complaint that alleged unethical circulation of money by Amway. He was subsequently arrested in other criminal cases registered against him in the state on allegations of financial irregularities by the company. Pinckney was jailed for two months until being released on bail.\nIn 2017, a Chandigarh court framed charges, under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code and the Prize Chits and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) Act, against two directors of Amway India, William Scot Pinckney and Prithvai Raj Bijlani. This was based on a cheating case filed by eight complainants in 2002, following which the Economic Offences Wing had filed chargesheet in 2012. A revision plea moved by the two Amway officials against the framed charges was dismissed in 2018.\nU.S. class action settlement.\nOn November 3, 2010, Amway announced that it had agreed to pay $56\u00a0million\u2014$34\u00a0million in cash and $22\u00a0million in products\u2014to settle a class action that had been filed in Federal District Court in California in 2007. The class action, which had been brought against Quixtar and several of its top-level distributors, alleged fraud, racketeering, and that the defendants operated as an illegal pyramid scheme.\nAmway, while noting that the settlement is not an admission of wrongdoing or liability, acknowledged that it had made changes to its business operations as a result of the lawsuit. The settlement is subject to approval by the court, which was expected in early 2011. The economic value of the settlement, including the changes Amway made to its business model, totals $100\u00a0million.\nClass action in Canada.\nA 2009 class action case lodged in Canada was rejected by the Federal Court and confirmed on appeal by the Federal Court of Appeal, with costs awarded to Amway and the plaintiffs directed to arbitration.\nLobbying for deregulation.\nThe DeVoses supported an amendment to the US House of Representatives' omnibus Financial Services and General Government Appropriations bill for fiscal year 2018 by US Representative John Moolenaar that would have limited the ability of the FTC to investigate whether MLMs are pyramid schemes. The amendment would have barred the Treasury Department, the Justice Department, the Small Business Administration, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the FTC, or any other agencies from using any monies to take enforcement actions against pyramid operations for the fiscal year. It also adopted provisions from H.R. 3409, the so-called \"Anti-Pyramid Scheme Promotion Act of 2016\", which would blur the lines between legitimate MLM activity and pyramid schemes established under the original 1979 FTC case by deeming sales made to people inside the company as sales to an \u201cultimate user,\u201d thus erasing the key distinction made in the ruling between sales to actual consumers of a product and sales made to members of the MLM network as part of recruitment of members or to qualify for commissions. The amendment was opposed by a coalition of consumer interest groups including Consumer Action, the Consumer Federation of America, Consumers Union (the publisher of \"Consumer Reports\" magazine), Consumer Watchdog, the National Consumers League, and the United States Public Interest Research Group (US PIRG), as well as Truth in Advertising (TINA.org) in its original incarnation.\nOther legal actions.\nCanadian tax fraud case.\nIn 1982, Amway co-founders, Richard M. DeVos and Jay Van Andel, along with Amway's executive vice president for corporate services, William J. Mr. Discher Jr., were indicted in Canada on several criminal charges, including allegations that they underreported the value of goods brought into the country and had defrauded the Canadian government of more than $28 million from 1965 to 1980. The charges were dropped in 1983 after Amway and its Canadian subsidiary pleaded guilty to criminal customs fraud charges. The companies paid a fine of $25\u00a0million CAD, the largest fine ever imposed in Canada at the time. In 1989 the company settled the outstanding customs duties for $45\u00a0million CAD. In a 1994 article authored by DeVos, he stated that the guilty plea was entered for technical reasons, despite believing they were innocent of the charges, and that he believed that the case had been motivated by \"political reasons\".\nRIAA lawsuit.\nThe Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), as part of its anti-piracy efforts, sued Amway and several distributors in 1996, alleging that copyrighted music was used on \"highly profitable\" training videotapes. Amway denied wrongdoing, blaming the case on a misunderstanding by distributors, and settled the case out of court for $9\u00a0million. In a related lawsuit initiated by the distributors involved, the Court established that Mahaleel Lee Luster, who had been contracted to make the videotapes, had violated copyright without the knowledge of three of the five of those distributors.\nAmway UK.\nIn 2007, Amway's operations were halted in the United Kingdom and Ireland following a yearlong investigation by the UK Department of Trade and Industry, which moved to have Amway banned on the basis that the company had employed deceptive marketing, presented inflated earnings estimates, and lured distributors into buying bogus \"motivation and training\" tools. In 2008, a UK judge dismissed government claims against Amway's operations, saying major reforms in the prior year (which included banning non-Amway-approved motivational events and materials) had fixed company faults that favoured selling training materials over products and misrepresented earnings. However, the judge also expressed his belief that Amway allowed \"misrepresentations\" of its business by independent sellers in years past and failed to act decisively against the misrepresentations.\n\"Welcome to Life\" (Poland).\nIn 1997, Amway Poland and Network TwentyOne separately sued the makers of a Polish film, \"Welcome to Life\" (), for defamation and copyright violations. Henryk Dederko (the director) and producer were later acquitted on the charge of disseminating false information. The film, banned for 12 years, was one of the highly anticipated movies of 2009's Warsaw Film Festival and was dubbed by the promoters as a \"scary movie about brainwashing\" It was said to depict hard-sell \"pep rallies\", and to include statements from distributors that meetings had a similar tone to meetings of the Communist Party before it lost power in Poland. Methods of recruitment that confusingly resembled those of a sect were also described. A bestseller on the local video black market, the film was banned while the suit proceeded.\nIn 2001 a regional court ruled in favor of Network 21; however, in 2004 the Warsaw Regional Court dismissed Amway's civil lawsuit. On appeal Amway won the case and the producers were ordered to pay a fine to a children's charity and publish a public apology. the film was still banned due to an ongoing case brought by \"private individuals\" ridiculed in the film.\nOn December 18, 2012, the court ruled that film can be screened, but the makers have to remove \"untrue information\", as the screen near the end of the movie stated that 30% of company income is generated by sales of training materials and that the vast majority of its profits are shared only by the tiny fraction of top distributors. This is not the only court case, so the film is still banned on other grounds.\nDr. Phil and Shape Up.\nIn March 2004, TV personality Phil McGraw (a.k.a. Dr. Phil) pulled his \"Shape Up\" line of supplements off the market in the face of an investigation by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The supplements were manufactured by CSA Nutraceuticals, a subsidiary of Alticor's Access Business Group. The FTC later dropped the probe, but in October 2005 a class-action lawsuit was filed against McGraw by several people who used the products and claimed that the supplements, which cost $120 per month, did not stimulate weight loss. In September 2006, a $10.5\u00a0million settlement was reached, in which Alticor agreed to provide $4.5\u00a0million in cash and $6\u00a0million in Nutrilite products to disgruntled users of Shape Up.\nProcter &amp; Gamble.\nSome Amway distributors distributed an urban legend that the (old) Procter &amp; Gamble service mark was in fact a Satanic symbol or that the CEO of P&amp;G is himself a practicing Satanist. (In some variants of the story, it is also claimed that the CEO of Procter &amp; Gamble donated \"satanic tithes\" to the Church of Satan.) Procter &amp; Gamble alleged that several Amway distributors were behind a resurgence of the story in the 1990s and sued several independent Amway distributors and the company for defamation and slander. The distributors had used Amway's Amvox voice messaging service to send the rumor to their downline distributors in April 1995. By 2003, after more than a decade of lawsuits in multiple states, all allegations against Amway and Amway distributors had been dismissed. In October 2005, a Utah appeals court reversed part of the decision dismissing the case against the four Amway distributors, and remanded it to the lower court for further proceedings. In the lawsuit against the four former Amway distributors, Procter &amp; Gamble was awarded $19.25 million by a U.S. District Court jury in Salt Lake City on March 20, 2007. On November 24, 2008, the case was officially settled. \"It's hard to imagine they'd pursue it this long, especially after all the retractions we put out,\" said distributor Randy Haugen, a 53-year-old Ogden, Utah, businessman who maintained P&amp;G was never able to show how it was harmed by the rumors. \"We are stunned. All of us.\"\nRegulatory violations in Vietnam.\nIn January 2017, the Vietnam Ministry of Industry and Trade determined that Amway Vietnam had violated federal regulations by engaging in unauthorized multi-level marketing.\nOther issues.\nCultism.\nSome Amway distributor groups have been accused of using \"cult-like\" tactics to attract new distributors and keep them involved and committed. Allegations include resemblance to a Big Brother organization with a paranoid attitude toward insiders critical of the organization, seminars and rallies resembling religious revival meetings, and enormous involvement of distributors despite minimal incomes. An examination of the 1979\u20131980 tax records in the state of Wisconsin showed that the Direct Distributors reported a net loss of $918 on average.\n\"Dateline NBC\".\nIn 2004, \"Dateline NBC\" featured a critical report based on a yearlong undercover investigation of business practices of Quixtar. The report noted that the average distributor makes only about $1,400 per year and that many of the \"high level distributors singing the praises of Quixtar\" are actually \"making most of their money by selling motivational books, tapes and seminars; not Quixtar's cosmetics, soaps, and electronics\".\n\"In fact, about twenty high level distributors are part of an exclusive club; one that those hundreds of thousands of other distributors don't get to join. For years only a privileged few, including Bill Britt, have run hugely profitable businesses selling all those books, tapes and seminars; things the rank and file distributors can't sell themselves but, are told over and over again, they need to buy in order to succeed.\"\nThe program said that a Quixtar recruiter featured in the report made misleading and inconsistent statements about Quixtar earnings during a recruitment meeting and had an outstanding arrest warrant for cocaine possession from the mid-90s.\nIn a response to the \"Dateline\" report, Quixtar published a \"Dateline Quixtar Response\" on its official website. In its response, Quixtar stated:\n\"We learned that two Dateline producers had registered as IBOs and for months had been conducting undercover research for the story, which included using a hidden camera to videotape meetings and conversations with IBOs. The producers did not identify themselves as working for Dateline, instead feigning interest in building a business powered by Quixtar.\"\nThe site also stated that:\n\"Dateline's story on Quixtar boiled down to the complaints of three former Independent Business Owners (IBOs) \u2013 one of whom is a competitor \u2013 and ignored the hundreds of thousands of IBOs powered by Quixtar who are achieving their goals.\""}
